 The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available for this publication . For more information, visit www.rand.org/t/RR1498 .
 RAND Make a tax-deductible charitable contribution at www.rand.org/giving/contribute . This report is the third in a series about the impact and implications of the Ukraine crisis on European security .
 This report examines covert and conventional operations in Crimea in February and March 2014 . It also examines the origins of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine, its phases of escalation, and the series of events that led to the outbreak of limited conventional war between Russia and Ukraine .
 These operations offer important insights into Russian approaches and objectives in the conflict . The operations offerimportant insights into Russia's approach to the conflict.
 This report should be of interest to those concerned with Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine .
 Research was sponsored by the Army Quadrennial Defense Review Office . Research was conducted within RAND Arroyo Center’s Strategy, Doctrine, and Resources Program .
3.1.3. 3.3 . 3.2 . 3 . 2.2.1 . 2 . 3%. 3.5 . 4.4 .
 This report examines two overlapping operations to understand the Russian campaign in Ukraine in early 2014 .
 Russia executed a covert operation using both its naval infantry forces and special forces . The operation took place after the February 22, 2014, ouster of Yanukovych .
 Russia disguised troop movements with a snap exercise, which also deployed a distraction force near Ukrainian borders . The exercise was part of a Russian military exercise near Ukraine .
 Russian troops quickly seized control of the peninsula . The peninsula is a small-unit level of the Russian peninsula .
 The circumstances of the Crimean annexation presented Russia with substantial advantages, which have only partial analogues elsewhere in former Soviet republics . Russia has substantial advantages.
 The peninsula's proximity to Russia and its existence as a separate political unit within Ukraine. These factors included the confined geography of the peninsula, its proximity to Russian, and the existence of its separate political units .
 Russia not only had forces in place at its Black Sea Fleet, but legitimate transit arrangements . Russia could be leveraged for a covert operation and the introduction of key military capabilities .
 The invading force benefited from such practical advantages, as well as from the historical legitimacy of Russian military presence in the peninsula . The invasion force also benefited from a commonality of language and culture, along with other social ties .
 The Russian information campaign accompanying its military movements was no more than a minor contributor to what proved to be a conventional takeover of Russia .
 Ukraine’s interim government was the result of an illegitimate coup. This effort was principally a by-product of the general information campaign to convince the Russian domestic audience that Ukraine's interim government had been illegitimate .
 Moscow capitalized on several political errors of the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government has been accused of political errors .
 Ukrainian Parliament vote repealed official status of the Russian language . It leveraged the vote to argue that the ethnic Russian population in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine was in imminent danger .
 The combination of Ukrainian government errors and facilitating circumstances enabled a rapid and well-coordinated deployment of Russian forces .
 Moscow deployed elite and special components of its force that are not representative of overall capabilities . Moscow deploys elite andspecial components of the force that aren't representative of the overall capabilities.
 Ukraine's overall superior forces on the peninsula offered no resistance . Ukraine’s overall superior force on the Peninsula offered no Resistance .
 It is difficult to gauge the effectiveness of the information campaign, if any, of the campaign . It is also hard to gauge how effective it is.
 Russia appeared unprepared to manage the political dimensions of the annexation of the peninsula . The information campaign consisted of a series of loosely connected messages rather than a carefully considered narrative .
 This suggests that the decision to annex Crimea was not made well in advance . The decision was made in advance, according to a report by the Russian government .
 Operations in Crimea did involve a preplanned covert action, which enabled a conventional invasion . However, operations in Crimea were preplanned .
 The effort owed its success as much to the operating environment and structural factors, including the politically unstable situation in Ukraine, as to the Russian military’s execution .
 Russia's operations in Eastern Ukraine were based on a decidedly different approach and not intended to replicate the seizure of Crimea . Russia’s operations in eastern Ukraine are based on an entirely different approach .
 Russia fostered an antigovernment movement in the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, along with several major cities in other regions . Immediately following Yanukovych’s ouster, Russia fosters an anti-government movement .
 Moscow launched a political-warfare campaign to subvert the authority of the interim government . Moscow launched special operations forces to enable a conventional invasion .
 The objective was to destabilize the situation and convince the new Ukrainian authorities to accept a federalization scheme that would reduce their power nationwide . Russia would have substantial influence over individual regions .
 Moscow sought to foster this movement in Ukraine through oligarchic connections and intertwined circles of powerful regional business interests, combined with local criminal elements .
 The tactics appeared to be improvised, employing a diversity of individuals with little in common other than their opposition to Ukraine’s new government .
 Russia fostered this subversion with a supporting cast of intelligence operatives, its own citizens, and local security forces who turned against Ukraine’s government .
 Ukrainian authorities responded by arresting the protest movement leaders . When they were arrested, the effort switched to direct action .
 The conflict quickly escalated, arguably beyond Moscow’s ability to control events, in April 2014 . Russian paramilitaries switched to using force in pursuit of a separatist agenda .
 The confrontation went from a protest movement to irregular warfare within a few months . Russia has introduced conventional capabilities by Russia as part of a steady vertical escalation of the war .
 Oligarchs and other nonstate actors helped shape the course of conflict, both facilitating and defending the Russian effort to destabilize Ukraine .
Russia was unable to gain the leverage necessary to force Ukraine’s leaders into major political concessions without resorting to a conventional invasion with regular units . The invasion took place in late August 2014, with regular troops in place .
 Russia’s efforts in Eastern Ukraine proved to be a series of improvisations inresponsetoresistanceandfrictionwhentheinitialpoliticalwarfare effort foundered . Russia's efforts in eastern Ukraine were foundered.
 A mix of actors with their own agendas and sponsors reduced operational cost and political consequences for Moscow but at the price of control, coherency, and effectiveness .
 Eastern Ukraine shows limits of low-cost asymmetrical approaches even against a relatively weak and vulnerable state . The lessons of Eastern Ukraine are rather mixed, says Peter Bergen .
 Russian leaders are likely to consider Crimea an operation that could not be easily repeated elsewhere and Eastern Ukraine to be a strategic success . In the end, Russian leaders may consider Crimea a strategic operation.
 Russia achieved its primary objectives but at a much higher cost than desired and through a fitful cycle of adaptation . Russia achieved the primary objectives and achieved its main objectives at a high cost .
 The authors would like to thank Timothy Muchmore for initiating and supporting this project . Acknowledgment is acknowledgment .
We also thank Bryan Frederick, Nikolas K Gvosdev, and Stephen Watts for their helpful comments . We also thank them for their help .
 Olga Oliker, James Dobbins, and Stephanie Pezard also helped. A number of other people may have helped makethisstudypossible .
 Our thanks go to Andriy Bega, Scott Boston, Roger McDermott, and Gerard Toal . We also thank Clifford Grammich, Thomas Browne, Stephanie Lonsinger, Linda Theung, and Natalie Ziegler .
 The protest movement turned violent, resulting in the ousting of then-Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych . Eventually this protest movement, and the government response, turned violent .
 A pro-Western coalition of political forces took control in the capital, organizing an interim government . Many of the ruling elites fled the country to Russia .
 The consequence was a sudden loss of influence for Russia in one of its most important neighbors . Russia's leadership likely viewed as a major geopolitical defeat for Moscow .
 Russian leaders sought to re-exert Moscow's influence over Ukraine and retain the ability to control the country’s strategic orientation .
 The Russian response took shape in the form of two separate and concurrent military operations . The Russian military response took place in the same way as the Russian response .
 First, Moscow chose to invade and annex Crimea in late February through early March 2014 . First, Russia chose to annex and invade Crimea in February through late March 2014.
 At the same time, Russia fomentedapoliticalprotest movement that quickly transformed into a violent insurgency in Eastern Ukraine between February and May of that year .
 This report seeks to address these questions by assessing the two campaigns waged by Russia in Ukraine . It will also examine the two covert and conventional operations by Russia .
 Chapter Two examines the balance of Ukrainian and Russian forces before the conflict . The sequence of events during the invasion and annexation of Crimea, along with successes and shortcomings of the operation .
 The report charts the course of conflict in Eastern Ukraine and its phases of escalation from political warfare to a hybrid approach . The eventual outbreak of a conventional war between Russia and Ukraine by summer 2014 will be in summer 2014 .
 These critical months are not only less understood than later periods of the war but offer important insights into Russian approaches and possible objectives .
 Chapter Four presents our conclusions and derived implications from this analysis . The conclusion is based on the analysis of our analysis of the study .
Political warfare is used to describe the employment of political, economic, diplomatic, and information instruments of power in both overt and covert ways to influence another country . We use the term political warfare.
 Political-warfare tactics range from psychological warfare, propaganda, and incitement of the populace to the support of friendly elements inside the state .
 George F Kennan on Organizing Political Warfare: April 30, 1948 . The Kennan's book was published in 1948 .
 The chapter provides a concise chronology of the events that took place during the Russian invasion . It then delves into analysis of the Russian successes and failures during the operation .
 What follows is an exploration and an effort to discern what broader takeaways can be made from Ukrainian experience for other countries .
Russia’s invasion of the peninsula. We discuss the important factors that enabled the invasion . We also discuss the key factors that allowed the invasion.
 The annexation of Crimea should be considered as a potential model for Russian military action elsewhere, we write . We address whether the annexation should be seen as a possible model for Russia’s military action .
 At the onset of its conflict with Russia, Ukraine kept a force of roughly 18,800 personnel stationed in Crimea . Most of which were in its navy, according to a credible source .
 In February, Ukraine’s interimdefenseministerassessed thisnumberascloserto15,000troops .
 The Russian language version of Ukraine’s declassified National Security Council meeting on February 28, 2014, is the Russianlanguage version of the meeting . The meeting is to discuss the response to Russian military activity in Crimea .
 The navy's coastal defense troops included a missile artillery brigade, two independent marine battalions, and a coastal defense brigade . The navy’s coastal defense forces included a missiles artillery brigade and two independent marines .
 Of the 45 MiG-29 fighters at Belbek airbase near Sevastopol in southwest Crimea, only four to six were operational .
Ukrainian air defenses included Buk-M1 and S-300 surface-to-air missile systems . The systems were at questionable readiness levels but could still be potent deterrents .
 A contingent of 2,500 Ministry of the Interior troops was also present, although they perhaps had little defense value .
 Ukraine’s minister of defense considered approximately 1,500–2,000 troops as dependable and willing to follow if ordered to fight the Russian military .
 Russia had roughly 12,000 military personnel in the Black Sea Fleet at the time . The only infantry unit of which was the 810th Independent Naval Infantry Brigade .
 The Russian Naval Infantry was staffed by contract troops, who are better trained, paid, and equipped than typical conscript units . The Russian Navy was equipped with contract troops .
 Ukraine's forces were inferior to Ukraine’s units in Crimea, lacking infantry fighting vehicles, armor, or artillery . In terms of numbers and available firepower, these forces were weaker than Ukraine's units in Ukraine .
 Russia's basing agreement with Ukraine offered substantial leeway to transfer in units from the mainland if needed . However, the terms of Russia’s basing deal with Ukraine offer large upload capacity .
 A Chronology of Events Ukrainian and Russian units went on alert on February 20, 2014, as Maidanprotests inKyivescalated into violentclashes with government security forces .
 Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, Minneapolis, Minn.: Eastview Press, 2014 .
 The Annexation of Crimea 7 February 22 and 23, as battalions of Spetsnaz units and Vozdushno-Desantnye Voyska left their bases . Others were airlifted close to the strait separating Russia from Crimea .
 The city council in Sevastopol installed a Russian citizen as mayor on February 24 . Several units from the 810th Naval Infantry arrived in armored personnel carriers in the city square .
 This was the first tangible sign that Russia had decided to intervene militarily to change the political order on the peninsula . This is the first time Russia has intervened militarily in the region .
 Sevastopol Installs Pro-Russian Mayor as Separatism Fears Grow,’s February 25, 2014 .
 Yanukovych may have later evacuated Yanukovych . In addition to bringing specialoperations forces units that would subsequently be used in the covert takeover of Crimea, it also may have evacuated Yanukovych.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered a snap inspection involving 150,000 troops from parts of the Western and Central Military District . On February 26, Putin ordered the snap inspection.
 The new minister of defense, Sergei Shoigu, had been frequently ordering large snap readiness checks and simultaneous drills since 2013 . The new defense minister had been often ordering large snaps readiness checks .
 This exercise, however, was used specifically as a diversion and cover for troop movements . This exercise was also used to cover troop movements.
 The exercise was not focused on Ukraine's borders but to move VDV and Spetsnaz troops northward in Russia .
 Roughly 40 Ilyushin Il-76 military transports left Ulyanovsk airbase in Russia . A large portion of these moving units to Anapa, a staging area just east of Crimea .
 50 special-forces operators from the KSO unit pretending to be a local “self-defense militia” seized the Crimean Parliament on February 27 .
 Another large landingship with 300 Russiansoldiersarrived following properborder procedures to enter Ukraine but without advance notice to Ukrainian authorities as stipulated in agreements .
 This is a small unit modeled closer to Delta Force in the United States, designed to operate independently and abroad . The unit is based in the U.S. and operates independently and overseas .
 The Spetsnaz are military reconnaissance and saboteur units intended to operate alongside conventional formations and more representative of elite infantry . By contrast, the SpetsNaz is military reconnaissance.
 Russian Special Forces Seize Parliament Building in Crimea, Ukraine,” August 16, 2014 .
The Annexation of Crimea 9 diers without markings surrounded Belbek Air Base . The Annexation is part of the Crimea 9- diers in the Crimea region .
 A convoy of three Mi-8 transport helicopters and eight Mi-35M attack helicopters crossed into Ukraine without permission . Russia has the ability to neutralize Ukrainian armor and operate at night .
 Ukraine scrambled fighters, deterring further helicopter units from transferring . Mi-35s already operating openly over Crimea and supporting Russian forces on ground .
 Russian forces seized Simferopol airport, canceled all flights, and began airlifting VDV units into Crimea . On February 28, Russian forces also seized Simfopol airport .
 Russia brought reinforcements by heavy landing ships on March 1–2 . Still at a distinct numerical disadvantage, Russia still had a numerical disadvantage .
These units spread across the peninsula without much resistance, quickly encircling or taking over bases and military facilities . These units spread around the peninsula with little resistance .
 Russian units had little firepower but high mobility . Armed with light utility vehicles and APCs, the Russian units were armed with light Utility vehicles .
 Thecommander of its navy, Denis Berezovsky, defected to Russia . Ukrainesaw its docked fleetblockaded by Russianships .
 Russian forces made ad hoc arrangements with trapped Ukrainian troops at bases across the peninsula to maintain the siege without violence . Instead, Russian forces make ad hoc arrangement with trapped Ukraine troops .
 Russian troops applied heavy psychological pressure, propaganda, and promises to get them to defect . After the annexation in March, Russia's troops applied psychological pressure and propaganda to Ukrainian commanders .
 Russia began a conventional troop buildup over the Kerch ferry crossing in eastern Crimea in March . From March 6 on, Russia began to begin a conventional troops buildup .
 Ukraine's only major surface combatant, a Krivak-class frigate, was away at the time and not in the Black Sea . Ukraine’s only majorsurface combatant was a Kribak- class frigate .
Highprofile commanders and unit members managed to escape Crimea with their equipment but subsequently returned . These included some highprofile commanders, unit members who managed to leave Crimea .
 The Russian military also began to mass units on Ukraine’s eastern border as a threat and diversion . The military also started to mass troops on the eastern border .
 Russian forces sealed Crimea off from mainland Ukraine at its northern crossing points . Russian forces seal Crimea off at its north crossing points.
 cellphone signals were jammed, possibly from ship-based equipment . They severed landline communications between the Ukrainian mainland and bases on Crimea .
 Russian soldiers cut electricity to some bases to apply pressure on the besieged Ukrainian troops within . Russian soldiers also cut electricity at some bases.
 In brief, Ukraine had lost effective command and control over its units on the peninsula roughly one week into the operation .
 Russian intelligence also used this time to organize self-defense units, 14 Cossacks, and former special police called Berkut .
 Russian airborne troops also donned police uniforms to help keep order among the population under the pretense of being local security forces .
 Crimea's local leadership likely did not coordinate with the Kremlin, and the lack of integration was evident in the scheduling of a plebiscite on Crimea’s fate .
 Crimean Parliament initially declared a referendum on independence for May 25, then moved it to March 30, before finally deciding on March 6 to hold the vote on March 16 . The Crimean Parliament is expected to decide on the independence referendum on March 15 .
 Moscow sought an earlier referendum date, moving up the timetables for annexation . The likelihood of its operation’s success increased, without any apparent resistance or evidence of counterattack by Ukrainian forces .
 Igor “Strelkov” Girkin, who would help lead the insurgency in Eastern Ukraine, later recounted that local officials were not 13 Shane Harris, “Hack Attack,” Foreign Policy, March 3, 2014 .
 Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine, Fort Leavenworth, Kan.: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2015 .
 They were responsible for much of the fighting on the Maidan and, allegedly, for deaths among civilians . They are accused of killing many civilians .
 The interim government disbanded Berkut . Many former “Berkuts’s’ then came to Crimea and the Donbas to join the separatist cause .
 The Annexation of Crimea had to be rounded up by paramilitaries to hold the official vote on accession to Russia . 11 enthusiastic participants in the events were included in the annexation .
 The political process to hold a referendum appeared to be hastily organized and improvised . The politicalprocess to hold the vote appeared to have been hastily organized, improvised .
 Russia may have considered turning Crimea into a frozen conflict (i.e. Crimea) before the Crimean Parliament voted to secede .
 The March 16 referendum would become the political instrument to annex the peninsula . The process concluded on March 18 .
 There were perhaps six associated deaths, including from interactions among opposing groups . On March 19, a Ukrainian warrant officer and a Russian Cossack were shot outside a base .
 From March 19to March 25, Russian forces seized Ukrainian bases in Crimea . Most of which offered no resistance, most of which offer no resistance .
 Moscow promised to honor the rank of and provide better pay and benefits to any Crimea-based Ukrainian soldiers who defected and accepted Russian citizenship .
 Most were stationed near families and homes on the peninsula . Most did so, in large part because they were stationed close to families .
 Ukraine’s defense minister was forced to resign . Out of 18,000 soldiers and families, only 6,500 chose to leave for Ukraine .
 Ukraine lacked the apartments and funds to address the displaced . More than likely, any officer that left Crimea could expect to have housing difficulty .
 Russia’s Information Campaign preceded, accompanied, and followed Russian military operations in Crimea . Russia's Information Campaign was followed, followed, by Russian military operation in Crimea.
 Crimean residents as a secondary consideration . The main audience was the Russian public at home, with Crimean residents being considered .
 The Russian media always maintained some coverage on events in Crimea for its own domestic public . This intensified as clashes between pro-government forces and protesters in Kyiv grew more violent .
 Russia's campaign included subsuming or pushing to the margins the few remaining domestic independent media outlets . The campaign included gaining further control and power to shape views in Russia of the events in Ukraine .
Existing government outlets, such as RIA Novosti and Voice of Russia, were consolidated into Russia Today . At the time, most of Eastern Ukraine and Crimea watched Russian television and, typical of the former Soviet space, watched Russian TV .
 Russia did return a large portion of Ukraine’s aviation and naval assets because most of it was not serviceable . However, Russia returned a large part of Ukraine's aviation and Naval assets .
 Russia did keep a handful of operational ships, adding them to its Black Sea Fleet . Russia did not keep any operational ships .
 A Reassessment, Santa Monica, California: RAND Corporation, PE-144-A.
 Ukraine had largely ceded Russian-language information to Russian-based outlets since its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . Ukraine had mostly ceded information to Russia-based media since 1991 .
 Russian media markets were so much larger than Russian-language markets in Ukraine that their information and entertainment channels were dominant among Russian-speaking Ukrainians . Moscow did not officially promote Russian media in Ukraine .
 Russian forces turned off nine Ukrainian television channels on March 9, leaving access to Russian channels only .
 When the Yanukovych government collapsed in early 2014, Russian rhetoric on the events in Ukraine became more severe .
 On February 26, Russia began aggressively promoting its message that regime change in Ukraine was illegitimate .
 That day was one day prior to the Russian military takeover of government buildings in Crimea . The Crimea government buildings were taken over by the Russian government .
 Russia 24 news channel, 25 and Ramzan Kadyrov, head of the Chechen Republic, 26, said Russia needed to act to secure their safety in Crimea . This message was advanced by several Russian figures and elites .
 Russia Will Not Give Ukraine into the Hands of the Bandits . Russia will not give Ukraine to Ukraine .
 North Atlantic Treaty lations in Crimea were • Ukraine’s president Organization under imminent ultrawas overthrown in and containing nationalist threat . An illegitimate coup Russia was an illegitimate Coup Russia.
 The pro-European to impose sanctions dum on independence population of against Russia and is legitimate, demonUkraine are ideologithe driving force of a strating will of the cal descendants of policy of containment people of Crimea .
 Based on RAND research into the Russian information campaign led by one of the authors in 2015 . Based on research into Russian information campaigns led by an author .
 Such claims were part of the official campaign of public denial . This was intended to be a covert takeover, after all, according to the government .
 Russia Must Protect Russians in Crimea, Russia must protect Russians, Russia says . Russia must not give Ukraine into the Hands of the Bandits, says Kadyrov .
 The Annexation of Crimea 15 critical and if Crimea were to return to Russia, it would not violate any norms or create new precedents . If Crimea returned to Russia would not be violating any norms .
 Putin claimed that Russia was not planning to invade Ukraine . Putin further claimed that the country might be forced to intervene if the situation in Ukraine worsened .
 Russian forces arrayed near Ukrainian borders near Ukraine borders . This was a veiled threat, given the large amount of Russian forces near Ukrainian border .
 He also claimed that snap military exercises on Ukraine’s border were planned long ago and had nothing to do with the ongoing events .
 A grassroots mobilization campaign in Crimea to counter the Maidan movement also played a role in Russia’s strategic communications . In addition to traditional media, a seemingly grassroots mobilization Campaign in Crimea also played an important role .
 This campaign originated from the Russian-speaking population of Crimea . Some alleged the Russian government was behind it .
 The messages used by the anti-Maidan activists in Crimea resonated with Russian-media statements depicting Maidan protests as foreign organized and Maidan participants as fascist extremists .
 The movement also used direct calls 28 “Anti-Constitutional Coup and Seizure of Power’s’.
 Aleksandra Dvoretskaya, the traitor of Crimea, supports criminal Maidan . Her neighbor, Alekandra, supports Maidan.
 The Crimean Operation Russian operations in Crimea represented, by all accounts, an efficient seizure of territory from another state executed with speed and competency . Characteristics of the Crimean operation in Crimea represent an efficient seizing of territory .
 Ukrainian side's lack of resistance on Ukrainian side presents important caveats to that assessment . However, the lack of opposition on the Ukrainian side present important caveats .
 The next section discusses structural conditions, decisions, and variables that enabled Russian success or became a hindrance . The next part discusses noteworthy structural conditions.
 Ukrainian authorities made decisions during the crisis during the Ukraine crisis . We consider such aspects as history, geography, language, and social factors, along with existing military agreements .
 Russian-Crimean History Invasion and annexation are significantly easier if the invading force is perceived to be friendly and legitimate . The invasion of Russia is more likely to be more friendly than the invasion of Ukraine .
 Russia’s Black Sea Fleet was historically based in Crimea . Much of the population viewed its personnel as a friendly force .
 Crimea was distinct in that militaries belonging to two different states were based there . Crimea was different from Crimea in that state .
 Both were viewed as legitimate by the population, but not by the public . Both were seen as valid by the community .
Nikita Khrushchev and the Supreme Council of the Soviet Union transferred Crimea from under the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1954 .
 The move was largely symbolic and of little practical consequence . As both republics were part of the Soviet Union, the move was mostly symbolic .
 Crimea’s large Russian population has remained very important, 31 and Russia's military on the peninsula represented a bond to Russians on the mainland and was perceived as an important part of the economy .
 A Gift to Ukraine Becomes a Political Flash Point, a political flash point . "A Gift to the Ukraine Become a political Flash Point," says NPR .
 The Annexation of Crimea 17 ries, and pensions, were substantially higher in Russia than in Ukraine . The annexation was part of the Crimea annexation .
 World Bank: Ukraine's gross domestic product per capita in 2014 was $3,082.50, compared with $12,735.90 in Russia . World Bank says Ukraine's GDP per capita was $4,000 in 2014 .
 The history, identity, and economic links of Crimea to Russia were structural factors, reducing the likelihood of popular resistance and contributing to the ease of Russia’s operation .
 Russian troops and intelligence operatives shared the language, culture, and ethnicity of most Crimeans . Russia and Crimea share the language and culture, giving them advantages as an invading force .
 Russian agents were able to blend readily among Crimeans to organize or coordinate self-defense units . Russian agents can blend readily with Crimeans.
 Paratroopers could pretend to be police or interior troops and conduct riot control against protesters . Paratrooper could be police, interior troops, or interior soldiers .
 The common language and culture allowed Russian forces to rapidly insert themselves into the operating environment and take control of the peninsula .
 The Russian military could readily communicate with sympathetic elements of the population to facilitate the takeover . The military could also communicate with the population.
 Crimea was easy to seal from the mainland with its geography as a peninsula . Crimea is a peninsula in Crimea .
 A rather low number of nodes was required for control, and it was relatively simple to defend from counterattack . It was relatively easy to defend against counterattack.
 Russia was able to sever communications between Crimea and the mainland . Russia was also easily able to severed communications between the Crimea and mainland .
 Crimea was a well-defined administrative entity, with its own polity and history, including some degree of political autonomy . Crimea was an annexed territory, allowing it to be neatly separated from Ukraine .
 Crimea was closest to Russia’s Southern Military District, which had the highest state of readiness among Russian forces, according to some estimates . Crimea was close to Russia's Southern military district, which was manned at 90 percent .
 Circumstances conspired against Ukraine because the Southern Military District was already on high readiness given that Russia was hosting the Olympic Games in Sochi in February and March 2014 .
 The proximity of Crimea to Crimea to a well-staffed and high-readiness concentration of Russian forces allowed for a rapid military buildup .
 Ukraine lost all prospects for a counterattack when regular ground units began pouring into the peninsula . Ukraine effectively lost all chances for acounterattack when ground units started pouring in .
 Crimea’s small size relative to Ukraine made the Russian annexation much more feasible . Crimea's small size made it more feasible for Russia to take over Crimea .
 Russia's 810th Naval Infantry Brigade was a leading and supporting asset for the operation . Russia’s Force Posture and Transit Arrangements with Ukraine's 8 10th Naval Brigade was the leading and support asset .
 The naval base at Sevastopol allowed Russian military units to deploy early in operations . The base provided the logistics for inserting special forces and reinforcements .
 Russia also maintains several bases in Syria . Most prominent are the Tartus naval facility and Hmeymim Air Base near Latakia .
 Russia had transit agreements with Ukraine that allowed it to deploy personnel and materiel to Crimea before and during the military operation . Russia had agreed to send personnel to Crimea in the past and during military operations .
There was a sizeable troop limit in the basing agreement . It gave Russia capacity to increase its military presence while still being within the terms of its deal with Ukraine .
 Russia took control of roughly 2 million people with just a few thousand troops . The crisis began early in the week .
Retaining control of 3. million in Eastern Ukraine would prove far more difficult . Retaining control would prove more difficult for Ukraine .
 The Annexation of Crimea 19 Ukraine’s interim government was surprised to discover its relative helplessness at preventing Russian reinforcements from arriving .
 This permitted Russia to insert special forces without initially drawing alarm and introduce the necessary capabilities to conduct the operation . This allowed Russia to Insert Special Forces without drawing alarm .
 Russia has agreements for military forces to transit to its exclave in Kaliningrad through Lithuania .
 Kyiv unilaterally canceled this deal on May 21, 2015 . It also had a transit agreement through Ukraine for its forces in Transnistria .
 Target of Opportunity Ukraine’s government was in transition following the ouster of Yanukovych .
 Russia's task was made relatively easy by the confusion and chaos that generally follows an uprising, such as what happened in Kyiv .
 Moscow capitalized on the tensions and uncertainty in Crimea, as well as the inexperience of Ukraine’s provisional government .
 Meeting notes reveal a great deal of anxiety, uncertainty, and unwillingness to take action for fear of escalation . Meeting notes of the discussion among Ukrainian leadership show a great amount of anxiety .
 It is unclear if any action would have been successful, as Ukraine’s head of intelligence services said .
 Kyiv navy stationed in Crimea believed to be in danger of defecting . The situation was particularly dire among the navy stationed there .
 There is a host of former Soviet republics surrounding Russia today with aging autocratic leaders .
 Each of these is set for an uncertain transition in the near to medium term . Others, such as Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, have experienced political instability and crisis in their recent past .
 Ukraine's political leadership made several important errors following the victory of the Maidan revolution in Kyiv . These errors also provide lessons for understanding where Russia will be able to capitalize in its operations .
 The Rada pursued nationalist projects following the ouster of Yanukovych . The first error occurred when the Ukrainian Parliament pursued nationalists .
 The Rada repealed legislation that had given the Russian language official status and protection . The legislation was repealed on February 23 .
 The Russian-speaking public saw it as the hallmark of an anti-Russian agenda . The anti-Russia agenda was seen as an anti Russian agenda .
 Interior Minister Arseny Avakov assessed in closed-door discussions that majority of Crimeans were taking the Russian side against Ukraine’s national government .
 Language Controversy One of Fundamental Conflicts in Ukraine,” International Business Times, March 3, 2014 .
 The Annexation of Crimea 21. The second error occurred on February 24, when Igor Mosiichuk publicly threatened to bring paramilitary fighters to Crimea . He was a leader of Right Sector.
 Russian-language media used Mosiichuk’s statements to convey a sense of imminent danger for those living in Crimea .
 Crimean Berkut riot-police officers, reinforced with Kuban Cossacks, set up checkpoints under guise of responding to a potential right-wing threat .
 Clashes between Crimean Tatars and Russian nationalists, protests for secession from Ukraine, led to a general state of chaos and disorganization .
 The inability of the government to control postrevolutionary forces played into Russia's narrative that locals were in imminent danger . Right Sector did not, per se, speak for the government .
 This validated the need for Russian help in Crimea and the legitimacy of Russia’s intervention to its domestic audience . In effect, this validated the needs for Russian assistance in Crimea .
 The third error occurred on February 25, when Ukraine’s minister of interior disbanded the Crimean Berkut riot police returning to Sevastopol after suppressing protests .
 The central government first sent the unit back to Crimea and then disbanded it .
 Security forces believed they were carrying out their duties as ordered, and forced them to search for new employment . This was a humiliation for the security forces, which thought they were doing their duties .
 The units were greeted as heroes by the people and issued Russian passports by Moscow . They were issued by Moscow.
 Russia was short on manpower. They defected to the Russian side . They provided auxiliary units in early operations .
 Some left Crimea for the Donbas region of Eastern Ukraine to fight on behalf of Russian government . Some participated in further operations in paramilitary units .
 The decision to fire the Russian-speaking Berkut continues to haunt Ukraine’s government . Many continue to fight with the separatists .
 The first two of these errors sowed fear and discord among 43 Alec Luhn, “Pro-Russian Occupiers of Ukrainian Security Service Building Voice Defiance,’s’.
 Russia chose to use only elements of professional contract troops with high levels of training . Russia's Operational Successes Force Composition Russia used only elements.
 It began by leveraging its naval infantry in place and special forces, followed by Spetsnaz, airborne, and, eventually, regular infantry . It started by leveraging naval infantry, special forces and other forces .
 Most of its reinforcements were VDV contract soldiers, who went on to fight extensively in Eastern Ukraine . Most of the reinforcements were contract soldiers .
 The operation succeeded because Moscow deployed its best-trained, best-paid, and most professional forces . The operation was successful because Moscow deploys best- trained and best- paid forces .
 It was able to surround a numerically superior force equipped with heavy firepower at a speed that surpassed the decisionmaking capability of its adversary . It was also able to beat a numerally superior force with heavy weaponry at a faster speed .
 Russia was able to retain control over its forces and encountered no unexpected crises or incidents that could have turned the population against it . Russia's forces were able to keep control of its forces .
 On the contrary, Russian troops got the moniker the “polite people’s” The moniker is a euphemism for the heavily armed and unidentified soldiers thattook overCrimea .
 This depiction was a stark contrast from previous military operations, which showed a lack of discipline within the force, such as the Second Chechen War .
 Russia has declared the complete reorganization of the MVD and other internal security components into the National Guard . The National Guard will be roughly 400,000 strong .
 Ukrainian airport security chief had “politely asked his staff to leave. He reported on how he had ‘politely’ asked the Ukrainian airport Security chief to leave .
 The Annexation of Crimea 23 Mobility Russia’s military demonstrated it could put national leadership decisions into effect almost immediately . It could implement operational planning quickly.
 snap exercises tested readiness of personnel and equipment . It was able to move the necessary forces thanks to numerous snap exercises .
Air and sea transportation is essential logistics for seizing a foreign peninsula . Air and sea transport is crucial for seizing the peninsula .
 Russia's forces are likely to be on the ground relatively quick in a contingency, allowing Moscow to seize the initiative against any adversary slower to respond . This suggests that in a conflict near its borders, Russia’s forces are probably to be relatively quick .
 Russia’s armed forces proved more nimble than in previous conflicts, prizing mobility over conventional firepower and speed of action .
 The Crimean operation does not represent a case of hybrid warfare,48 . Use of Deception at the Tactical and Strategic Levels is a fairly traditional covert operation to shape the battlefield .
 Russia practiced tactical, operational, and strategic deception, deceiving the local population, the Ukrainian leadership, and the West . In launching its operations, Russia practicedTactical, Operational, and Strategic deception .
Maskirovka is an ancient operational art of concealment and camouflage in the conduct of conventional operations .
 At the tactical level, Russian soldiers were successful in making the local population believe they were either native self-defense forces or indigenous police units .
 The locals convinced the locals that they were not a hostile force, according to the locals .
 At the operational level, they confused Ukraine's leadership as to Russia’s true intentions and delayed a Ukrainian response . Ukraine's response was delayed by the Russian government, according to reports .
 The Ukrainian government understood that there were Russian forces in Crimea but could not discern their ultimate intent and therefore chose restraint for fear of escalation .
 prominent figures feared any action would be used by Russia as the premise to legitimize an invasion . The 2008 war between Russia and Geor48 Hoffman, 2009, was the case of the 2008 war .
Almost none of the cabinet ministers and party leaders who gathered to discuss the situation were willing to commit to a military response .
 At the strategic level, the West mistook Russian tactics aimed to create plausible deniability as signs of a political settlement and then de-escalate, rather than annexing the peninsula .
 Western officials urged caution and sought to freeze conflict, thinking that Moscow might be seeking an off-ramp to the crisis . Western officials have urged caution.
 The deception afforded Russia multiple points for disengagement and plausible deniability should the operation have gone awry . The deception also afforded Russia several points to disengagement .
 Ukraine and the West responded slowly and cautiously during the first week when Russian forces seized Crimea . Moscow is likely to use this tactic in the future.
 Use of Conventional Exercises as Cover A covert invasion requires “cover,’ in other words, a plausible reason for unusual redeployments or noticeable troop movements .
 Moscow effectively used a pattern of unannounced readiness checks and snap exercises to move forces around, eventually deploying them to Ukraine’s borders .
 A small element was being mobilized for the invasion of Crimea . The force was conducting readiness checks and drilling .
 Russia began a mass deployment of forces near the Ukrainian border to threaten escalation and stymie Ukraine’s response . Later into the annexation, Russia started a mass Deployment of forces close to the border .
 Russia's sequence of movements was to launch a diversion to cover troop movements, then deploy a large force near Ukraine's borders . Russia’s sequences of movements were to cover troops and then deploy large force .
 Russia built up more than 40,000 troops on the border by April 2014 as part of the same exercise and snap-readiness check initially employed to shift units toward Crimea . Eventually, Russia built-up more than 30,000 soldiers on the Russian border by 2014 .
 Likely both were planned maneuvers, one to distract and the other to intimidate Ukraine’s leadership and impinge upon national-level decisionmaking . Likely both planned maneuvers were intended to intimidate and intimidate Ukraine's leadership .
 The Annexation of Crimea 25 Privileging Speed, Agility, and Communications over Firepower Russian forces relied on BTR-80/82 APCs, troop trucks, and Tigr light-utility vehicles to isolate Ukraine's units .
 Russia supplemented its forces with air-attack and air-lift capabilities, proceeding with the operation without waiting for tanks and mechanized infantry . Russia supplemented these forces with Air-attack, air-lifted capabilities .
 Moscow risked that its forces would be heavily outgunned. Since the covert operation would effectively decide matters prior to an occupation by conventional forces, Moscow risked being outguned .
 Without secure communications at the small-unit level, Russia could not have deployed such a force . Russia relied on it to conduct a sensitive operation, and counted on its responsiveness to decisions in Moscow .
 Russia denied communications to the opposition while demonstrating that it had the ability to command a light, mobile, and responsive force . Russia denied it had any communications with the opposition .
 Preparing for Counterattack Russian forces were prepared for Ukrainian resistance and counterattack .
 The 50 special-forces personnel seized the Crimean Parliament were equipped with body armor and night-vision devices . They were armed with sniper rifles, machine guns, and heavy rocket-propelled grenades .
 These units were capable of repelling an initial Ukrainian response and were supported by additional naval infantry units on the peninsula . The units were able to repelled an initial Ukraine response .
 When Russia seized the Kerch Strait ferry crossing, its units moved to defend Crimea from the Ukrainian mainland .
 Moscow quickly committed its long-range anti-access and area-denial capabilities . Moscow also committed its anti- Access capabilities . The Russian capital is also known for its long range anti-Access capabilities .
 Artillery was deployed to the north to guard against any approaches from the mainland .
Ukrainian forces failed to induce Ukrainian forces to defect, including failure to induce them to defect . Failure to plan for nonviolent resistance, incoherent political management of local elites, and information operations of little influence were also cited .
 It is unknown whether the Russian military expected a significant number of Ukrainian units to prove disloyal to the government .
 Ukraine’s SBU intelligence service appears to have held such expectations . Ukraine's SBU appears to be holding such expectations.
 The Berkut and local police turned almost immediately to Russia . But efforts to encourage defections throughout the Ukrainian garrison on the peninsula failed .
 The rest of the Ukrainian navy did not follow him . The commander of the navy may have been on the Russian payroll before March 2014 .
 Kyiv's interim leadership chose to promote him to this position in the first place . Even this important defection was in part serendipitous, since it was the interim Ukrainian leadership in Kyiv .
 In effect, this was another unforced error on the part of Kyiv authorities that contributed to the overall Russian success . The error was a result of an error that led to the success of Russian authorities .
High-level defections did occur after Crimea's annexation, including the commander of the Ukraine’s flagship, the Hetman Sahaydachniy, and a number of the ship's crew .
 Psychological Operations Russia’s efforts to get Ukrainian forces to surrender their bases willingly met with mixed results .
 Despite heavy psychological pressure to coerce them, many chose to remain at least to maintain the appearance 52 eagle-rost .
 Russian troops were unable to achieve surrender either through conciliatory overtures or punitive measures, such as electricity cutoff . Russian troops could not achieve surrender through punitive measures .
 Many units were isolated. They were not able to bribe or cajole many of the units they had initially isolated . The units had been isolated .
 Naval Aviation regiment successfully evacuated its functioning aircraft and helicopters rather than surrender them . One in particular, the Naval Aviation Regiment, successfully evacuated the aircraft .
 Russia expected corruptibility and low morale to be a vulnerability of Ukrainian forces . It failed to capitalize on these in a substantive way during the annexation .
 Planning for Nonviolent Resistance to maintain a friendly force and avoid critical media coverage . An invading force must manage nonviolent resistance .
 The Russian troops who fired into the air and called back for orders were surprised by the Ukrainian commanders’ initiative . Ukrainian commanders were visibly not in control of the situation .
 Units were given rules of engagement but likely were untrained for managing nonviolent resistance or handling media coverage . Units were not trained to handle media coverage.
 Political Management of Local Elites Moscow also appeared unprepared for interaction with local Crimean politicians on what should happen once it seized the peninsula .
 Russia’s back and forth with the Crimean Parliament suggests Moscow did not fully plan out the sequence of political events that would follow the invasion to effect an annexation .
 The movement of the referendum date forward and back suggests the plan had changed several times as part of an iterative process . The referendum is expected to take place in the coming weeks .
 It is unclear if annexation was Russia’s original goal or became so only after Moscow saw it had seized Crimea without fighting .
 The most important factor was the popularity of the invasion at home . The invasion was the most popular factor in the invasion .
 It is possible Russian leaders first waited for the domestic and international response to the invasion of Crimea prior to deciding whether to proceed with annexation .
 One analysis of Russia’s information operations in the Ukrainian conflict found five elements of its propaganda campaign .
 Putin used Russian media to great effect in presenting historical and emotional arguments about why Crimea belongs to Russia in March 2014 speech .
 Russians overwhelmingly supported Putin’s attempt to unite Crimea and Russia, which they perceived as a just cause despite it breaking international law . One analyst suggests that Russians place greater emphasis on ‘justice’ than on the legal system .
 The Crimean Operation, A Case Study, is a case study by Poland's Centre for Eastern Studies .
 Nikolai Zlobin Discusses Russian National Idea at Kennan Institute,’s interview at Center on Global Interests, Washington, D.C.
 The Annexation of Crimea 29 consideration in the question of whether Putin was justified in seizing or occupying Crimea . The annexation is part of the question about whether Putin's actions were justified in Crimea .
 It is difficult to discern any tangible advantages Russia gained from its information campaign during the Crimean annexation .
Opinionpollsindicate moregenerally that Crimeans were perhaps a more distinct polity than many Ukrainians .
 Russian agents and their auxiliaries, rather than the information campaign, were the organizing force behind mobilization . On the ground, Russian agents were the organizers of mobilization .
 The information campaign had a polarizing effect on the population, but its key turning points resulted from Ukrainian mistakes rather than Russian successes .
 Moscow used errors to achieve greater mobilization and internal discord, but the information war was a sideshow to the operation itself . Moscow used these errors to achieved greater mobilization, internal discord .
 Russian television programming focused more on its domestic audience than on influencing Ukrainian public opinion within or outside Crimea .
 Russia didn't create special agencies, tools, or media to engage Ukrainians in Crimea . Russia did not create special agency, tools or media for Ukrainians in Ukraine .
 Information operations aimed at Ukrainian citizens were aimed at managing its own domestic opinion .
 During the annexation, Russian forces sought to shut down access to Ukrainian media, forcing the population to rely on news sources controlled by Moscow .
 Most Crimeans received their information from Russian television to begin with, and still do today . However, surveys suggest that most Crimeans are still receiving information today .
 Given Crimea’s proximity to Russia, this approach was sufficient and effective . It could be reproduced elsewhere along Russia's borders .
There are indicators that the invasion of Crimea was a contingency Russia had been preparing for since Ukraine’s Orange Revolution in 2004 . This point continues to be debated and contested today .
60 Russia's military was able to quickly and effectively put plans into action in response to a decision made by the national leadership . The initial actions were conducted with special-forces units that were only formed in 2012 .
 Ukraine did not resist militarily, and therefore this operation cannot be analyzed for lessons on how Russia intends to fight war or as a model for any Russian doctrine . The operation is not considered a Russian doctrine.
 It's hard to judge whether or not they were of substantive value relative to conventional forces . Yes, but it is hard to Judge whether they had substantive value .
 Crimea stands as a singular operation against a particular target and at a distinct time of opportunity when Ukraine was vulnerable . Crimea is a singular attack against a specific target .
 It provides evidence of the restoration of competence, professionalism, and effectiveness to a very select component within the Russian armed forces .
 59 Yekaterina Kravtsova, “Observers Say Russia Had Crimea Plan for Years,’s Moscow Times, March 27, 2014 .
 The Annexation of Crimea 31 tells us little about the warfighting ability of Russia’s armed forces against a conventional opponent .
 Current Russian operations in Syria offer precisely such lessons, which are sorely missing from the case of Crimea .
 It is difficult to determine what conclusions Russia made from the Crimean annexation for its campaign in Eastern Ukraine . The Crimean annexation began almost simultaneously .
 Not only were these concurrent rather than sequential efforts, but they also differed starkly in execution . They were also different from sequential efforts .
 events in Crimea may have strengthened long-held Russian views about the Ukrainian state, experts say . That said, events may have strengthen long- held Russian views of Ukraine .
Ukrainian leaders made substantial errors during the early days following the Maidan and at the outset of the Russian invasion . Ukrainian leaders made significant errors in early days after Maidan .
 Kyiv’s national decisionmaking certainly did not discourage Russian military activity . Kyiv's national decision making certainly didn't discourage Russian activity .
 The Crimean experience likely made military escalation in Eastern Ukraine an enticing proposition . Moscow’s preferred approach there was to attempt classical political warfare and subversion .
 The Rada voted to repeal the official status of the Russian language on February 23, stoking fear and anger in the east, where most citizens spoke Russian .
 This measure, coupled with Russia’s operation in Crimea, encouraged the mobilization of both leftist and right-wing organizations in Eastern Ukraine . This measure was combined with Russia's operation.
 The opening events of political turmoil in Eastern Ukraine closely followed the popular appointment of a Russian citizen as mayor in Sevastopol, Crimea, on February 24 .
 The protesters portrayed their actions as spontaneous and selfinitiated, driven by public anxiety about the future after the victory of the Maidan movement .
 The Ukrainian government dismissed the outbreak of protests as provocations by proRussian agitators and intelligence operators . The protests were organized by pro Russian agitator and intelligence operatives .
 Russian intelligence may have played a role in fomenting discontent, but the public agitation and outcry appeared genuine and not disconnected from the country's political divisions .
 Ukraine's leaders are dismayed by his overthrow and uncertain about Ukraine’s political direction . They were dismayed. They were worried about his overthrow .
 An initial surge of activity took place in early March with a series of large demonstrations by mostly unarmed pro-Russian protesters .
 Protesters seized buildings in Kharkiv and Donetsk. On March 1, while the Crimean operation was already unfolding, protesters seized buildings .
 On March 9, protesters took over the regional administration building in Luhansk . They demanded a referendum be held on annexing theLuhansk Oblast to Russia .
 For a short while, one group of protesting men defended the police . The group was sober and sober, but projecting toughness .
 When there was a briefly chaotic rush for the building’s side door, these men, seeming to take instructions by cellphone, intervened .
 Protesters ordered the crowd back to 36 Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine protesters to temporarily take over government buildings . The protesters will soon depart, officials say .
 The protesters’ official causes included a referendum on federalization, recognition of Russian as the second official state language, and a Customs Union with Russia .
 The call for a referendum was apparently a bid to pressure the Ukrainian government for devolution of more autonomy to the regions . The call was apparently aimed at pressuring the government for more autonomy .
 Pavel Gubarev, a member of the neofascist organization Russian National Unity, did the same in Donetsk .
 Vladimir Varshavskiy, a car mechanic and a blogger, was proclaimed popular mayor at a public rally .
 Vacheslav Ponamorev, a Slovyansk mayor, emerged as popular mayor with unknown backers . He is the owner of a small business in the city of Bransk .
 These individuals could be described as pro-Russian and certainly anti-Maidan oriented . But they were also obscure figures of little-to-no political significance in the country or the region .
 A riot shield that protesters wrested from one police officer was returned with an apology . The police officer who wrested the shield from the protester was also given an apology.
 A woman among the protesters came forward and wiped tears from another police officer's face . He allowed her to reach up under his plexiglass face shield .
 A few dozen protesters stormed the government buildings, including one young man recording on his iPad . Police offered little resistance, apparently intent on avoiding clashes .
 PSPU leader Nataliya Vetrenko: Neo-Nazis Intimidate People . Aleksey Sochnev: “The International Community Must Help Us to Free Ourselves from the Neo-Nazi [Mirovoye Soobshchestvo Doljno Pom
 Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine. 37 erly characterized as local and regional political outsiders .
 What little is known of their biographies reveals local criminals, small businessmen, and ideological extremists colored by Russian nationalism .
 Denis Pushilin was the first leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic . He spent his time selling shares in a Russian pyramid scheme .
Theirmeteoric rises seem improbable without external backing . Vyacheslav Ponomarev, the aforementioned mayor of Slovyansk, had supposedly moved from one business venture to another .
Russian intelligence figures' backgrounds are dubious, says CNN's John Sutter . They were the pillars of a longplanned Russian intelligence operation, he says .
 If so, these individuals appeared, and subsequently proved to be, poorly adapted to the task . If so they appeared, they would have been better adapted to their job .
 The period of political mobilization to demand for federalization and greater regional autonomy was short-lived . The time of political mobilization to demand federalization wasshort-lived, according to a report .
 Regional law enforcement cracked down on these people’s governors and, by removing them, inadvertently paved the way for a different set of leadership to take over the movements .
 Valeriy Bolotov replaced Kharitonov as the new people’s governor of Luhansk after his arrest . He was replaced by the former governor of the city of Lhansk .
 Bolotov was a retired paratrooper, a veteran of several conflicts, and the head of the Paratroopers Veteran Union . He was also a member of the Veteran Union.
 He had been a representative of Oleksandr Yefremov, a former governor, businessman, and prominent member of Yanukovych’s party . He was a former president, businessman and former governor of Ukraine .
 Yanukovych and many of his associates fled to Russia, making it likely that Moscow could tap their patronage connections and business networks .
 Some of the political agitators who were arrested were replaced with or backed by the business circles of local elites . As a result, some of them were arrested .
 Griff Witte, “Pro-Russian Separatists in Eastern Ukraine Were ‘Nobodies’ —Until Now,’ Washington Post, April 30, 2014 .
 Kharkov Headed Smith and Lohansk Paratrooper, a Luhansk Desantnik, have been working together for years . The pair have been involved in a major military operation in the past .
 In Kharkiv, interior minister Avakov stated that 70 separatists were arrested in the clearing of the state administration building . The interior minister said the arrests were made in the cleared building .
 Street clashes between pro and anti-Maidan protesters continued for several days in major cities .
Interim Ukrainian government appoints oligarchs as new governors . They are expected to use their patronage networks to retain control and defend their own economic interests .
 Ihor Kolomoisky was appointed as governor of Dnipropetrovsk in March . He already had substantial economic influence and vested interests .
 Ukrainian authorities removed the local political figureheads of the protest movement . They were replaced by individuals with ties to Russian security services, military experience, and associations with business interests in Russia .
 Many were either local to the Donbas region or came from Crimea . Many were likely at the behest of Russian intelligence in early March .
 The new leaders were more interested in mounting direct action and had the military experience to command a paramilitary force . The new leader was more interested than the previous leaders .
 Aleskandr Boroday, a Russian citizen and editor of the conservative newspaper Zavtra, replaced Gubarev as people’s governor after his arrest . He was arrested in Donetsk, Russia, on Monday .
In Slovyansk, Boroday’s close associate, Strelkov, sacked Ponamorev and proclaimed himself as the people's mayor of Slovakia . In Slovyans, St Relkov's close associate Ponamoresv was sacked and declared himself a
 Strelkov, a veteran of conflicts in Transnistria, Serbia, and Chechen wars, would become an important figure in this conflict .
 The change in leadership marks the true beginning of 8 “Ukraine Authorities Clear Kharkiv Building, Arrest Scores of Separatists,” Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
 commanders such as Strelkov and Igor Bezler stormed the buildings of the local administration and proclaimed the territories under their control .
 It is unknown if he operated under Russian command or independently . His actions prevented a restoration of order by Ukrainian authorities as occurred in Odessa and Kharkiv .
 Strelkov shifted the cause from federalization to outright secession from Ukraine . The Donetsk Republic was always his personal intention .
 The separatists employed groups of armed men to capture and hold the administration buildings that were lost by pro-Russian civilian demonstrators in early March .
It is unclear whether these assaults were coordinated with Russian authorities . It is unclear if these assaults are coordinated with Russia .
 Separatists seized the main administrative building in Donetsk on April 6 . They overran an Interior Ministry rapid-response force at the Luhansk.
 Malaysia Airlines flight 17 was shot down in July 2014 . His name is most prominently associated with an audio recording when the plane was shotdown .
 Julia Ioffe: “I Met Igor Bezler, the Russian Rebel Who Said ‘We Have Just Shot Down a Plane’’ New Republic, July 18, 2014, is July 18.
 Protests in Odessa resulted in 42 deaths of pro-Russian activists on May 2 . The tragedy led to disengagement among the warring protesters .
 At this stage of the movement, the demands vacillated between autonomy within a federalized Ukraine and secession in order to join Russia .
 The proclamation by Strelkov of the DNR on April 7 marked a more concerted attempt to unify effort and command among the separatists behind a political structure .
 Pro-Russian separatists would declare a Luhansk People’s Republic a few weeks later . Pro- Russian separatists would declared a LuHansk People's Republic .
 Strelkov took overall command and control of a large group of fighters called the South-East Army . He became leading political figure of the separatist movement .
 Strelkov was unable to monopolize the use of force in the area . He was able to attract members of some pro-Russian organizations, including the East Front and Donbas People's Movement .
 Local elites, who formed their own battalions, preferred to maintain their autonomy . Local elites formed their Own battalions .
 Vostok Battalion in Donetsk and Zarya in Luhansk acted independently of Strelkov’s South-East Army . Such units are headed by a former commander of Ukrainian Alfa special forces .
Ukrainian army and Interior Ministry forces mounted efforts to respond to separatists . From April 15 to 23, Ukrainian army and interior ministry forces mounted attempts to respond .
 Most of the deployed units in the east were halted outside the captured cities by a handful of crude checkpoints and pro-Russian civilian mobs .
 At the time, the Ukrainian army existed largely on paper . Only 6,000 15 Ukraine’s ministry stated the objective of this attack was the firearms .
 separatist attacks on security buildings and police stations would become emblematic of the separatist attacks . This would be an attempt to seize arms and equip a paramilitary force in order to seize weapons .
Second, Ukrainian army commanders spoke Russian and were disinclined to fight against fellow Russian speakers or order troops into civilian areas . Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine has 41 combat-capable troops available .
 As a whole, the Ukrainian military was completely unprepared for the launch of combat operations . The Ukrainian military is completely unprepared.
 The local police in Donetsk, Luhansk, Slovyansk, and Kramatorsk were either intimidated by the separatists or defected to them .
 By August 2015, Ukraine’s chief military prosecutor would report that some 5,000 police and 3,000 servicemen had defected to separatist cause .
 Ukrainian soldiers and their commanders were confused by the situation on the ground . They did not know how to deal with the separatist forces that were accompanied by civilian mobs .
 Six Ukrainian airborne vehicles from the 25th Airborne Brigade were captured by separatists and local civilians without a fight .
 One of the armored columns stopped when a crowd of men drinking beer and women yelling taunts and insults gathered on the road . Later in the day its commander agreed to hand over the soldiers’ assault rifles to the very separatists they were sent to fight .
 The 25th Dnipropropetrovsk paratrooper brigade surrendered its weapons and armored vehicles . The vehicles were placed under a Russian flag in a central square in Moscow .
 The Ukrainian army mounted a more deliberate campaign to contain the pro-Russian rebellion . From late April to late May, the Ukrainian Army mounted aMore deliberate campaign .
 The objective of this strategy was to position the military for a decisive offensive against the rebel enclave . Ukraine's national mobilization, including the May 1 reintroduction of mass conscription for men, had been completed .
 Ukraine’s army planned to isolate and besiege Donetsk and Luhansk . After taking outlying cities, Ukraine's army plans to besiege two cities .
 The separatists obtained short-range air-defense weaponry, presumably from Russia or possibly from stocks in Ukraine .
 In late April and May, several Ukrainian military helicopters and fixedwing transport aircraft were shot down in the Donbas region .
 Russia apparently supplied the rebels with shoulder-fired and self-propelled Strela-10M short-range systems . The rebels are believed to have been armed with a shoulder- fired and self.
 Russian forces massing on Ukraine's borders grew beyond 40,000, diverting Ukraine’s deployments to its borders . The threat of large-scale invasion was the reason for the increase .
 In the last week of April, the Ukrainian army made probing attacks against Slovyansk .
 On May 2, a Ukrainian offensive made gains, seizing part of the city, with casualties on both 21 . On July 7, 2014, Ukraine says Forces Retake Two More Rebel Cities .
 It is worth noting that merely operating and sustaining some of these systems, let alone successfully employing them, requires a degree of expertise beyond that present in typical armed groups .
 Ukrainian aircraft were shot down with some frequency throughout this period . The first shoot-down of a fixed-wing aircraft at medium altitude took place on July 15 .
 "Shooting down of Ukrainian Military Aircraft at Cruising Altitude Reflects Ongoing Escalation Risk and Possible Russian Support," Jane’s Online Country Risk Daily Report .
Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 43 sides and at the cost of losing two helicopters . Separatism, Aggression is a major problem in Ukraine's eastern Ukraine .
Fighting spread to other towns in Donetsk, Slovyansk, and Mariupol .
 Separatist leaders organized a referendum on May 11, without any discernible legal basis . 89 percent of participants supposedly voted in favor of self-rule .
 Violence continued until the May 25 presidential election, with several attacks by separatist forces possibly aiming to disrupt the election .
 The First Battle of Donetsk Airport broke out shortly after the elections . More than 50 separatists reported killed, marking a transition point.
 The attack was the first featuring a large group of volunteers from Russia . But it proved a military disaster for the separatist fighters .
 Vostok Battalion confused them for Ukrainian units, perhaps emblematic of the lack of communication among the disparate separatist forces . Scores were killed at the airport and on the way back to the city .
 It is difficult to identify the point at which significant numbers of Russian soldiers become involved in this conflict under the guise of volunteers .
 Russian citizens took command of the separatist movement in midApril . They had Russian volunteers with them .
Two Ukrainian Gunship Helicopters shot down by Maenads in Eastern Ukraine . The Aviationist, May 2, 2014.
 This episode was considered one of the single worst losses for the separatists throughout the history of the conflict . This episode is considered oneof the single best losses for separatists during the conflict.
 El_Murid: "Three Weeks ago, I Spoke with People Who Were Directly Involved in One of the Most Unsuccessful Operations of Donetsk Militia" He says he was involved in one of the most unsuccessful operations of the Militia .
 The battle for Donetsk airport and Ukraine’s subsequent offensive operations escalated the conflict vertically for Russia . The conflict escalated into conventional warfare .
 From June until the end of August, Russia trickled in mechanized equipment, armor, and advanced munitions to the separatist forces . Russia's own units operated by its own units .
 By mid-August, Ukraine had lost so much tactical and transport aviation that its air force was unable to participate in the conflict because of the presence of strong air defense .
 The AntiTerrorist Operation was essentially a siege-warfare campaign, leveraging Ukraine’s vastly superior numbers, artillery, and air power to steadily encircle and push out the separatists .
Ukraine’s military ateaway at separatist territory, a fitful campaign replete with setbacks, minor defeats, and costly mistakes for Russia .
 In August 2014, Ukraine edged closer to regaining control of the border and encircling them completely . The situation became critical for the separatists in August 2014 .
 A wedge was being driven between Donetsk and Luhansk, threatening to separate the two putative breakaway republics .
 On August 24, Russia abandoned an effort to mix in conventional weaponry, such as tanks and air defense, in support of the separatist forces .
 Ukraine's military defeated Ukraine’s military at the Battle of Ilovaisk . Instead, it switched to conventional operations, invading with perhaps 4,000 regular troops .
 With the Minsk I ceasefire signed in early September, Russia began a more robust train-and-equip mission . The mission is designed to turn the separatists into more capable conventional force .
 Both sides took a break 28. This is the weapon system widely believed responsible for the downing of Malaysian Airlines MH17 in July 2014 .
 Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 45 to rearm, train, and consolidate between September 5, 2014, and January 13, 2015, when Russia launched a second offensive . Russia launched the second offensive in Ukraine in September 2014 .
 Ukraine signed the Minsk II ceasefire on February 12, 2015, with terms highly favorable for Moscow . Following a second encirclement and defeat at Debaltseve, Ukraine signed a second ceasefire .
 The terms of the Minsk II deal obliged Ukraine to grant the separatist regions special status . Ukraine to amend its constitution for greater decentralization, and reintegrate them .
 Ukraine began taking the political steps necessary to implement its obligations under that agreement . By mid-July 2015, Ukraine has begun taking steps to implement that agreement, albeit at a glacial pace .
 The deal may give Moscow a strategic hook in Ukraine . It may make the separatist republics of Donetsk and Luhansk technically Ukrainian territory .
 Russia may have denied Ukraine a path to NATO or EU membership . If the agreements are not implemented, Russia still has a useful means for destabilization, says Peter Bergen .
 separatist force continues to undergo consolidation and conversion into a conventional army . Russian troops serve as a quick reaction force .
 The conflict intensity is cyclical, largely quiet in fall 2015 with a ceasefire, then experiencing a strong uptick in artillery skirmishes and fighting in winter and spring 2016 .
 Russia has achieved some of its political objectives in Ukraine . It will lock in further gains if Ukrainian leaders implement political concessions they accepted under the Minsk II accord .
 Ukraine’s government experienced a political crisis in winter 2015–2016, with a spate of infighting among ruling elites and corruption scandals . The Donbas has been plagued by corruption scandals that delayed any prospects for constitutional reform or reintegration .
 At the time of the writing of this report, the conflict remains unsettled and unfrozen . The conflict is unsettled.
Russian Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine ing political warfare and subversion . The insurgency spiraled out into a fullblown insurgency in Eastern Ukraine, eventually leading to a conventional war .
 Moscow could have secured a strategic victory if it could bend the interim government in Kyiv to accept federalization . The process would devolve power and neutralize its ability to strategically reorient Ukraine in a Western direction .
 Russia orchestrated a secession movement in the eastern regions as leverage to force Ukraine into accepting federalization . We argue that Russia orchestrated the movement as leverage .
 These are important assumptions in the analysis of the Russian objectives throughout the evolution of this conflict, says the author .
 Russia had ample military opportunity to invade Ukraine, defeat its forces, and conquer any eastern region if it so chose. First, as the chronology indicates, Russia had an ample military chance to invade the Ukraine . Second, as it appears, Russia could conquer any other region.
 Ukraine was still soundly defeated in August 2014 and February 2015 at the battles of Illovaisk and Debaltseve . In fact, even after considerable time to organize, arm, and prepare, Ukraine was not defeated .
 The report assumes that the initial demands for devolution of power, federalization, and the protection of the Russian language were representative of Moscow’s objectives .
 This was the core purpose of the political-warfare campaign and the followon separatist movement . That is, this was the key to the separatist movement, the leader of the group says .
 The origins of the protests were discussed earlier in the chronology of events provided in this chapter . The origins and evolution of the protest protests were also discussed .
 Russian official statements throughout this conflict support Moscow's official policy and desired plan for Ukraine . Russian president to cabinet ministers support this was Moscow’s official policy .
 Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine. 47 view to start constitutional reform, which would include each and every political power and regions with an equal voting right .
 Each region has broad authority in the area of economics, finance, culture, language, education, education and cultural ties with neighboring countries or regions .
 Ukrainian foreign ministry reply to us that Russian propositions are a provocation and interference into domestic affairs . They propose ideas incompatible with the foundations of the Ukrainian national identity .
 I do not know why they are incompatible with foundations of Ukrainian national identity . I don't know why these are incompatible.
 Sergei Lavrov’s statement would become an oft-repeated Russian position regarding the need for Ukrainian constitutional reform .
 The Minsk II agreement requires Ukraine to vote in amendments to the constitution . Such provisions are eventually included in the Minsk agreement .
 Minsk II ceasefire agreement is governing document for cessation of hostilities in Ukraine . A year later, many demands would be integrated into the agreement . The agreement is a governing document.
 The document is the only agreed-upon roadmap for ending the conflict . Even its early provisions are yet to be implemented, but the document is not yet implemented .
 The Ukrainian Context To understand how Russia fostered an insurgency in Eastern Ukraine, we must account for the powerful nonstate actors in Ukraine, an analytical lens often neglected .
 authority was centralized in Kyiv, Kyiv . National leadership typically used its powers for corruption and redistribution of resources .
 Ukraine was, and arguably remains, an oligarchy, run by powerful and wealthy individuals who control slices of the economy, own national media channels and major state enterprises . Ukraine has politicians on retainer.
 In effect, a small number of individuals own and control large parts of the Ukrainian economy and political system .
 Ukrainian leaders represented whichever oligarchic faction was on top, perhaps with the exception of Yanukovych . Yanukovych enriched his own family clan at the expense of all others .
 In early 2014, the state was an outer shell under which the structure consisted of oligarchs and their political patronage networks . The state was a state that was formed in early 2014 .
 Oligarchs profited immensely from ownership of state enterprises and converted that wealth into political influence . Oligarch's wealth was converted into political power .
 Political parties served as instruments to secure the interests of oligarchs, while corruption was considered the norm in all aspects of life . Political parties were used as instruments for securing interests of the oligarchs .
 Oligarchs still remain a pow34 ‘Russian President Putin Says Ukraine Needs Federalization to Settle Conflict,’ TASS said .
 The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, February 4, 2016, will be held in Ukraine .
 Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 49 erful force in Ukrainian politics today . Ministers struggle against vested interests and corruption schemes .
 Since independence, groups of oligarchs have competed for power in the capital . They have been fighting each other for control of key industries .
Ukraine was a country with political and economic divisions borne of its history and Soviet inheritance . Before 2014, Ukraine was a nation with political, economic divisions .
 42 percent of Ukrainians favored closer relations with the EU, while 31 percent preferred the Russian-led Customs Union . An April 2013 survey found 42% of Ukrainians favor closer relations.
 76 percent of those in Western Ukraine thought EU association would be good for the economy . 53 percent in Eastern Ukraine saw the Russian Customs Union as more beneficial .
 Eastern Ukraine was heavily integrated into the Russian economy, while Western Ukraine had strong ties with Europe . At the time, exports to Russia and the EU were roughly equal in value .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions that hosted the separatist movement were an industrial zone with a population of roughly 6.5 million . Most of the region is Russian speaking .
 The Russian economy was heavily integrated with the Russian economy . Their economy was based on mining and manufacturing and exporting ores, metals, and chemicals .
 The people and local business elites there felt they had the most to lose from a turn toward the EU because of their strong links with Russia . The people in the region felt they were most likely to lose.
 A population that viewed Russia favorably and an assortment of local elites with 36 Julia Mostovaya . "Behind the Screen" will be released on February 5, 2016 .
 Card 10 of “Everything You Need to Know About the Ukraine Crisis’s’ Card 10 is part of ‘Everything You need to know about the Ukraine crisis’
 Several information campaigns were waged over Eastern Ukraine, along with sporadic cyberattacks . The Information Campaign was waged over the region .
 Even before Yanukovych’s ouster, Euro-Maidan in Kharkiv suffered a major distributed denial of service attack .
 The initial attacks were not very disruptive, but hackers in October 2014 were able to disable the electronic system for compiling Rada election results . They forced manual tallying of ballots and delaying reporting of results .
 VKontakte and Odnoklassniki were hosted on Russian servers . Russian authorities were able to block pro-Maidan pages and force service providers to share personal information about those who "liked them"
 Pavel Durov sold his remaining 40 “The Site of the Kharkov Euromaidan Movement Experiences Powerful Hacker Attack,’ Gordonua.com, January 9, 2014 .
 "Large-Scale Cyberwar Conducted Against Ukraine’s Ukraine” “Large-scale Cyberwar conducted against Ukraine"
 The rekindling of the term Novorossiya was a significant element of the Russian information campaign . The Russian government is trying to rekindle the term.
 Putin mentioned this concept in a speech on April 17, 2014, recalling that Eastern and Southern Ukraine were historically parts of the Russian Empire . Eastern andSouthern Ukraine, including the regions that are predominantly Russian speaking, were historically part of the Empire .
 Putin’s rendition of history of Novorossiya was self-serving, as term existed only on the margins of Russian body politic since 1990 . Some state officials imagined it as a potential lever against Ukraine should it turn sharply West .
 The use of this term raised concerns in the Westin that it implied that Russia intended todismemberUkraine inpursuitof alargerirredentist .
 Ukraine Rebels Find a Gathering Place on VKontakte,” Globe and Mail, July 18, 2014 .
 This was formed into a province in the 18th century, comprising lands from the Hetmanate and those gained from the Ottoman Empire . The province was formed in the late 1800s and was formed from lands gained from Ottoman Empire.
 The region has its own distinct history and changed hands several times in the early 20th century during the Russian Revolution and the anti-Bolshevik White Movement .
 A Fraternal Rivalry, Washington, D.C.: United States Institute for Peace, 1999 . The U.S. Institute of Peace was founded in 1999 .
 The term, with its historical overtones, helped Moscow appeal to imperialist nationalists . It helped Moscow rekindling memories of when large swaths of Ukraine belonged to Russia .
 Russian leaders foster the cause among leaders in Eastern Ukraine . It gave a grand concept and idea to the separatist movement and a reason for Russian volunteers to join .
 In May 2014, the self-proclaimed Luhansk and Donetsk republics formed the confederation of Novorossiya and the United Armed Forces of Novorsiya . The self- proclaimed Luhansi republics were formed in May 2014 .
 Novorossiya is a rallying cry for separatists and a unifying term for various groups in the breakaway republics .
 Putin may have only mentioned it a few times, but the frame was used to glue together the political ideology behind the separatist military effort .
 The project had been abandoned by the Kremlin because it was incompatible with schemes to reintegrate the Donbas with Ukraine . By the time of the September 2014 Minsk accords, the project was effectively abandoned .
 The United Armed Forces of Novorossiya technically lives on in separatist imaginings, for Russia . The information mechanism lost utility by the beginning of summer 2014 .
 A study concluded that this project “was abandoned in Moscow either due to 49 Adrian A Basora and Aleskandr Fisher, “Putin’s ‘Greater Novorossiya’—The Dismemberment of Ukraine’ — the Dismemberments
 "Post-Soviet Affairs, 2016. Examining Support for a Separatist Geopolitical Imaginary in Southeast Ukraine,’s Post-Soviet affairs, 2016 .
 List based on research conducted by Roger McDermott of the Jamestown Foundation and Michael Kofman of the CNA Corporation in addition to known data about the various separatist groups that participated in the conflict .
 Great Host of Don Cossacks, Independent LPR forces, and Prizrak ‘Ghost’ Brigade are not part of the same group . They are different groups fighting for the same cause .
 The Russian leadership's attempt to advance Novorossiya as a political and information project was unsuccessful .
 Russia sought to conjure an imaginary country to trade it for political concessions from the Ukrainian government . Russia wanted to trade the imaginary country for political concession from Ukraine .
 Russia’s information campaign was more successful at agitating the West than at delivering tangible results in Ukraine . Russia's information campaign is more successful in agitating West than in Ukraine, says CNN .
 Studies using survey data and technical analysis of the penetration of Russian broadcasting signals found that the impact of the campaign was grossly overestimated .
 The message proved polarizing rather than mobilizing, even where Russian television signals had the most coverage and viewership . The message was polarizing, instead of mobilizing .
 The campaign increased hostility toward and distrust of the Ukrainian national government . But it did little to mobilize public support of separatism .
 Ukraine banned Russian broadcasts to the extent it could in the rest of the country . National viewership of Russian news and other media drastically declined .
 In the Donbas, support for the national government and the separatist cause was equally tepid . In theDonbas, the support for a separatist cause is equally tepsid .
 Russian-backed separatists had to resort to force because the information campaign failed to rally an indigenous uprising that could sweep Eastern Ukraine .
 Far from being an integral element, the information campaign remained a sideshow throughout the conflict . The information campaign remains an integral part.
 Russia invested in the effort, it is often assumed that activity translated into achievement . In characterizing the importance of the information campaign.
 Despite the ineffectiveness of the central government, Ukraine never had a power vacuum . The “Separatists’’s’
 The protest-movement leaders were likely backed by some of the oligarchs and local power brokers . Indeed, like the central government, even the protesters were backed by the government .
 The separatists and the vested interests behind them were intertwined in a complex game . The separatist and vested interests were intertwined.
Pro-Russian opportunists and ideologues hoped that they could ride the wave of public outrage into power . Russian imperialists expected that Moscow would intervene militarily in Eastern Ukraine as it did in Crimea .
 These individuals were not interested in devolution of power or preservation of the Russian language . They hoped military action would spur a Russian intervention .
 At the point of inception, the separatist movement seized on the mobilization of the ‘anti-Maidan’ sentiments emanating foremost from Crimea .
 The separatist movement was an evolution of the earlier effort to support political agitation in Eastern Ukraine . It was an attempt to force national-level concessions from the central government .
 If Kyiv lost control of eastern regions to separatists, it would let Russia press for the federalization of Ukraine .
 In the most optimistic scenario for Russia, Southern Ukraine would join these separatist movements as well . In the other scenario, Russia would join the separatist movements .
 The separatist movement underwent a significant transition in March 2014 . The initial protest leaders were arrested, making space for figures like Strelkov to take charge .
 He was a well-known ideologue and Russian nationalist who participated in the annexation of Crimea as a paramilitary fighter . His adventure in Ukraine may have been sanctioned by the Russian authorities, but a variety of sources have reported that he was acting in the interests of Konstantin V Malof
 Strelkov was joined by Alexander Borodai, another right-wing nationalist, who became prime minister of the DNR in May 2014 .
 Borodai was the political strategist brought to help glue together the concept of the separatist republics .
 Borodai knew Girkin from the Transnistrian conflict in the early 1990s . He worked for the ultranationalist newspaper Zavtra .
 Like Girkin, Borodai is alleged to have links to Malofeev . He was also involved in the annexation of Crimea as a political consultant .
 By August, it was clear the separatists were on the precipice of failure . A negotiated settlement with Ukraine would prove difficult for Alexander Mercouris .
 The Russian Billionaire Linking Moscow to the Rebels, the Financial Times says .
 Transnistria remains a largely unrecognized country which sought to break away from Moldova . Russian forces still stationed in the region, with Russian forces in the area .
 Several of the prominent separatist leaders, like Borodai and Girkin, allegedly participated in pro-Russian protests during this conflict .
 Harriet Salem, “Who’s Who in the Donetsk People's Republic,’ July 1,2014. Harriet Salem: “ Who’'s Who in The Donetsk People’�s Republic.’
 The facade of a locally inspired rebellion became pointless . In effect, the facade of the local rebellion was pointless .
 The two separatist leaders were compelled to give up leadership in mid-August 2014 . Borodai was replaced as head of the DNR by Alexander Zaharchenko .
 Strelkov has been banned from appearing in the media despite being considered the hero of the insurgency . He only gives interviews to fringe media outlets .
 Moscow sought entry into Ukraine through existing informal networks and linkages among elites . Employment of an informal network of fighters in post-Soviet republics as well as of individuals such as Strelkov with shady business and intelligence connections indicates Moscow sought Entry into Ukraine .
 The use of nationalist-minded fighters suggests that Russia was engaged in an ad hoc effort using available auxiliaries and ideologues with extensive military experience .
 Separatist commanders in Eastern Ukraine shared common traits and history . Some had fought in Transnitria, the Chechen Wars, and a series of post-Soviet conflicts .
 Individuals such as Strelkov engaged in historical reenactments between conflicts, dreamed of restoring the Russian Empire, and craved an opportunity to fight in any war on Russia's periphery .
 At the heart of this approach were flexibility, opportunism, and an economy of resources, which came at the price of cohesion, control, and eventually would result in problems for Moscow .
 Strelkov’s fighters were one of the major elements in the overall separatist force . The separatist force may have been funded by Malofeev .
 The Man Who Started the War in Ukraine,” Spiegel Online International, March 18, 2015, .
 Early volunteers from Russia constituted the backbone of these small units, supported by local Ukrainian Berkut and Alfa units .
 There is an abundance of information in Russian sources about international fighters traveling to fight with the separatists and the recruitment of volunteers to fight in Ukraine .
 Strelkov’s so-called South-East Army would encompass a ragtag group of volunteers, criminals, and misfits .
 Vostok battalion represented real firepower and military experience for the movement . Other military units, such as the Vostoks, represented the real firepower.
 Vostok, formed in 1999, was originally a Chechen battalion during the Second Chechen War . The battalion was formed during the second Chechen war .
 The unit in Ukraine was probably formed around a core of veteran fighters from the original Chechen unit . Dagestanis, Abkhazians, and South Ossetians, were also involved .
 The chain of control probably consisted of Chechen fighters who were present with the permission of 65 “These Are Our People’s People,’ vz.ru, April 12, 2014 .
 ToCrush the Ukrainian Army, It Is Necessary to Fight, it is the Ukrainian army's motto .
 59 Chechen president Ramzan Kadyrov, 69, is fiercely loyal to Putin . He is a former Russian president . He has been in charge of Ukraine since 2007 .
 The Ukrainian unit was being armed and funded by Russian elites to maintain plausible deniability . The Ukrainian units were being funded by the Russian elites .
 Vostok was led by Alexander Khodakovsky, the commander of an Ukrainian Alfa unit who defected before taking VostOK’s lead .
 Vostokwaspossibly theenforcingunitwithintheseparatistmovement, deployed to impose Moscow’s control over some of the disparate elements involved in this conflict .
 In May 2014, it raided the headquarters of the Donetsk Republic as part of an effort to clean up the criminality and institute discipline among separatists .
 There were numerous personality conflicts, with commanders such as Khodakovsky openly criticizing the political leadership of the separatist republics .
 Different elements of the Russian government may have been responsible for the political and military aspects of this operation .
 Eastern Ukraine seems to have posed a far greater military and political coordination challenge for Moscow . While the political process of annexing Crimea did not go smoothly, Eastern Ukraine has posed a much greater challenge for the Kremlin .
 Another prominent battalion, Oplot, was also under his partial 72 control . Oplot was under the control of another battalion .
 This unit formed as a more militant anti-Maidan movement in Kharkiv . It would later become the armored spearhead of the separatists, who fought alongside Vostok .
 The overall force represented a diffuse Russian effort, with nationalists leading a group of motivated volunteers and a professional mercenary unit . The Kremlin could retain some semblance of a guiding hand .
 Russia allowed Strelkov to figurehead the overall effort because he proved 69 Alice Speri, “Yes, There Are Chechen Fighters in Ukraine, and Nobody Knows Who Sent them There,’s who sent them there.
 The Vostok Battalion Looms Large in War with Kiev, Ukraine, is the latest in a series of battles between Kiev and Kiev .
 The Powerful Nonstate Actors Behind Each Camp Oligarchs were as important as Russian or Ukrainian decisionmakers in the early phases of the conflict . The powerful nonstate actors behind each camp were Russian or Ukraine decisionmakers .
 A complete analysis requires considering the roleofsurrogates and powerfulnonstate actors in theconflict .
 Konstantin Malofeev, a Russian billionaire vested in Orthodox Christian causes, was readily able to fund Strelkov’s campaign and the entire movement .
 Strelkov and Borodai, both early leaders of the separatist movement, were former employees . Sergey Aksyonov, who organized the Crimean referendum, was his former employee .
 Strelkov had complained that he had no official status or support from local authorities in Crimea . He was only able to operate on the basis of his personal relationship with Aksyonov .
 It is not known if Malofeev acted as a conduit for Moscow’s interests or if he acted independently .
 Russia uses private networks of individuals to achieve its objectives while maintaining deniability . It made sense for Russia to use private networks and connections to achieve objectives .
 Ukrainian oligarchs did not start with a single agenda or unified command . Elements within the separatist movement likely received support from Ukrainian elites, former Yanukovych associates .
 Kolomoisky sent squads to round up and dispose of any pro-Russian agitators . He was made governor of Dnipropetrovsk .
 He funded and equipped volunteer battalions, namely Dnipro-1, along with others, and sent them to Mariupol in Eastern Ukraine . He funded, equipped and equipped the battalions .
 This force was improvised, but it stopped the separatist advance in the city . It was the major source of resistance that Strelkov's forces encountered in the early phases .
 61 elites in Ukraine had strong nationalist sentiments and were willing to defend the country . Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine was strong in Ukraine's eastern regions .
 He was the largest employer in the Donbas, with more than 280,000 workers . He was also the de facto ruler of Mariupol .
 He is still the richest man in Ukraine, valued at $12. billion . He is several times more than other oligarchs, according to reports .
Fighting broke out in Mariupol between separatists and volunteer militias in April 2014 . Akhmetov sent thousands of steelworkers from his companies Metinvest and DTEK to take control of the streets and establish order . This was a self-interested action, but it halted fighting in
 Akhmetov may have played a critical yet subtle role in the conflict . He had the potential to be the most powerful Ukrainian powerbroker .
 Akhmetov saw Russia’sattempt to push forfederalization as a welcomeopportunity . He hoped this would leave him in charge of Donetsk but with a stronger hand relative to the national government .
 Akhmetov was sidelined by Russian separatist leaders . He was forced to enter into a sort of cooperation with them . Those ambitions quickly evaporated .
 He controlled the industrial enterprises responsible for much of the economy . separatists were politically and militarily in charge of the region . Neither side could live without the other .
 Russia’s Possible Lessons Learned in this section . We explore the Russian experience in Ukraine and the lessons Moscow may draw on as a result of this operation .
 These include proportionality of investments versus desired benefits, knowing the target, working with nonstate entities, attracting fighters, and timing of operations . These include the timing of operation and the amount of investments .
 The separatist movement in Eastern Ukraine seemed to be an improvised effort . Russia executed a quick and successful operation .
 Russian efforts in Eastern Ukraine met resistance from the outset and resulted in a sequence of adaptations . Unlike Crimea, Russia's efforts in eastern Ukraine have met resistance .
 Russia wished to avoid a vertical escalation of the conflict, as it would result in a conventional war and necessitate its direct participation . These led to a verticalescalation, which, by all appearances, Russia wanted to avoid, and led to the conflict .
 Eventhe early phases did not involve the concentrated use of Russia’s intelligence and military assets . Eventhe. early phases didn't involve the concentration of Russia's intelligence.
 Russia sought to use an economy of force effort, leveraging private networks, businessinterests, and operatives . Russia sought the use of private networks and business interests to leverage its influence .
 While this had the advantage of low cost and deniability, its drawbacks were in effectiveness and predictability . The drawback was in effectiveness, predictability, according to the author .
 Russia succeeded in destabilizing Ukraine, but the process was fitful and challenging to control . The process was a challenge for Russia, but it was fitly and challenging .
First, starting an insurgency in a politically and militarily weak state is not difficult, and, second, suchan insurgency doesn'tnecessarily translate intonationallevel concessions . First, starting a insurgency in politically and politically and physically weak neighboring states is not hard .
 The Owner of Donbass, Rinat Akhmetov Survived the War and is Preparing to Return to Politics .
 Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 63 Ukraine was well beyond the scope of the resources it devoted to the insurgency . The insurgency is well beyond what the government has devoted to .
 The strategy behind Russia’s evolving approach focused on minimizing political and geopolitical costs . The strategy is focused on reducing political and political costs .
 Russia could have started with conventional war, a quick invasion, and victory over Ukraine’s military . But that would have been exercising force far in excess to that required for its objective of destabilizing Ukraine .
 A military invasion of the Donbas would have profound ramifications for Russia’s relationship with the West and an unpredictable domestic reception among Russians . Russia's relationship with West would have significant ramifications for the country .
 Russia mounted a conventional invasion after trying lower-cost options . However, Russia precisely mounted a traditional invasion after tried lower- cost options .
 Russia wanted the Donbas as leverage to gain control over Ukraine’s strategic orientation, not to sever it . Russia wanted to pay the lowest price possible to accomplish this .
 Russia’s effort at political warfare was based on poor assumptions about Ukraine. Political Warfare Requires Knowing Your Target Russia's effort.
 Moscow leveraged the help of some oligarchs for its cause, but other nonstate actors blocked Russian efforts .
 Kyiv eventually proved willing to fight, first at the civil society and eventually at the national leadership level . Kyiv is a former member of the Ukrainian government .
 Russia seized upon a large degree of internal instability in Ukraine . It was a time of strong nationalist sentiment in Ukraine following a popular movement .
 Russia found Ukrainian support for a national identity stronger than expected . The prevalence of pro-Russian or separatist sentiments to be much weaker .
 In Ukraine, this approach lent itself to sowing instability, but proved incapable of forcing major concessions from the national leadership without escalating to conventional warfare . In Ukraine.
Political warfare would have greater impact in another former Soviet Republic . Perhaps in a different set of structural and operational conditions, political warfare would be greater impact .
 Russia was able to deny Ukraine control of the eastern regions for several months . But this campaign was not able to deliver national-level concessions . For several months, Russia was unable to deliver concessions .
 Moscow did not get the deal it wanted until several conventional battles were won, with the last in February 2015 . Moscow didn't get the deals it wanted for several months before the battle began .
 Moscow may eschew an indirect approach in favor of a conventional operation . In the case of Syria, this has yielded demonstrable results .
 The conventional operation, however, lacks some of the advantages of political warfare, which is comparably cheaper, less risky, and deniable, and less risky . The traditional operation is less risky and more expensive .
 Russia had too few of its own operatives in Ukraine at the onset of the conflict, especially given the size of the geography .
 It was not able to control the leaders and irregulars that it had sponsored . powerful personalities with their own ideology and interpersonal conflicts . It had sponsored powerful personalities with its own ideology .
 Russia may avoid covert action in favor of covert action, backedbyconventional forces, whichworkedinCrimea . Russia invested in a mess instead of a constructive means to achieve political objectives, says Peter Bergen .
 Despite several prominent assassinations and dismissals, the conglomeration of personalities and agendas continues to plague the present-day separatist republics .
 Nonstate Actors Matter Oligarchies are based on the rule of a few elites . The most powerful actors may not be government officials .
 In oligarchies, taking on the state is not enough to achieve a political change within it, says the author .
 Oligarchs are independent actors who need to be co-opted or neutralized for politicalwarfare to besuccessful . Oligarchs need to have their own political power.
 Russia incorrectly focused on the central government in Ukraine, which was weak, and failed Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 65 to account for its actions .
 The oligarchs helped Ukraine take action against the insurgency and formed a bulwark against rapid expansion of separatist control . The oligarch's actions were not for their own rather than the state's interests .
 Russia's periphery is replete with countries with weak national governments and without functioning institutions but with strong networks ofundemocratic elites who could offer surprising resistance .
 Former Soviet Republics have an Ample Pool of Available Fighters . Frozen conflicts in the former Soviet Union provide pools of fighters from which Russia may draw .
Russia can hire combat groupings from these regions, where each conflict generates more fighters . Russia can hire groups from each conflict to generate more fighters.
 The annexation of Crimea helped create volunteers to fight in the Donbas . Thousands of enlisted locals, armed Russian volunteers, and other trained fighters have been trained .
 Russia may not have as many fighters available in the Middle East or Central Asia . But it now has a growing manpower resource for use in future wars .
Conventional Forces are only a Temporary Deterrent Russia deployed a large number of military personnel on Ukraine’s borders . This conventional threat lost effectiveness as a deterrent over time .
 A Royal United Services Institute report in April 2014 estimated that 48,500 troops in maneuver units alone were positioned near the Ukrainian border . The report also estimated that perhaps 94,000 if counting support units .
66 Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine Kyiv. This was a consideration that would weigh heavily on Ukrainian decisionmakers .
 The Russian Parliament revoked the authorization to use force by end of June . By May, it was increasingly doubtful that Russia had the intention to conduct a large-scale conventional invasion .
 That decision ended the utility of conventional forces for intimidation . The decision was made by the Supreme Court of the United States .
 Russia’s large military deployment was a diffusion of Ukrainian defense efforts . In summer 2014, this effort failed to discourage the launch of the Anti-Terrorist Operation to retake separatist-held cities .
 Ukraine hastily shifted units from the west to the east, but not necessarily to the combat zone . In early March and April 2014, Ukraine's military units were shifted from west to east .
 Ukraine has built miles of trench lines along its border to the north, far from the Donbas orany place of fighting . Still fearing Russian invasion, Ukraine is building miles of trenches along the border .
 Overall, the threat of an invasion worked for Russia in Crimea, but not in Eastern Ukraine . The threat of a Russian invasion in Crimea is not the same as in Ukraine .
 Moscow likely walked away with an understanding that the window of time for using its conventional force to distract and deter a military response is quite narrow . Moscow may walk away with the understanding that it's not the best time to use conventional force .
 It has potent coercive power, but the effect dissipates quickly if the force is not used . It has powerful coercive power but it can be used quickly if not.
 Political Timing is Important AgovernmentturnoverinKyivresultedinpublicoutrage,anxiety, and protests in the east . Political Timed is important for the East .
 Russia sought to act before the Ukrainian state could politically consolidate itself after the Maidan demonstrations . Russia seeks to act in the wake of Maidan protests .
 Moscow saw Ukraine as vulnerable and likely did not wish to allow political cohesion to take place . It may have been prudent for Russian leaders to wait and see, taking time to plan their actions .
 This unusual situation may recur in any of Russia’sautocratic neighbors should there be a poorly managed political transition .
 Donbas Defense Construction Set for April, March 27 .
 The Ukrainian experience suggests Moscow seized the advantage during a time of national vulnerability for Ukraine . Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 67 toeffectchangeincountriesthatotherwise would havebeenstable .
 Russia's Operational Shortcomings illustrated numerous operational shortcomings for Russia . Russia achieved its overarching goal of destabilizing Ukraine and imposing a peace settlement that is favorable to Moscow's position .
 It failed to achieve the leverage necessary without resorting to conventional war and outright invasion, while its strategic impact remains inconclusive, as the conflict is still unsettled .
 In the next section, we review some of the operational mistakes that hindered the campaign’s success . The campaign was successful in the first half of the campaign .
 Russia Struggled to Control Political Warfare. Russia's intelligence apparatus struggled to manage the various moving pieces within its political-warfare campaign .
 Russia thought it could maintain control over the disparate elements but struggled to manage the groups, their leaders, and competing agendas . Russia's leaders and leaders struggled to control the groups and their agendas .
 Moscow appeared to be sponsoring more than controlling the movement . The grip was challenged by the existence of other actors in some instances .
 Russia would intervene militarily as it did in Crimea. Strelkov, for example, expected that, once his fighters seized Slovyansk in mid-April, Russia would do so .
 The expectation of a Crimea scenario is a common thread that runs through expectations on both sides of the conflict . The expectations of a Crimean scenario are similar to that of both sides.
 Moscow clearly had other plans and sought to avoid an overt military invasion . Moscow had also tried to avoid a military invasion.
 Russia would later make major changes to reassert control over separatists in late May and again in July by removing Strelkov and Borodai . Russia would then make changes in May and July to remove the separatists .
 From Plan ‘A’to Plan’s ‘B’ (Крана ‘А’к плану ‘ от    ‘Б’,   ‘
 Rinat Akhmetov has reemerged as still the strongest nonseparatist powerbroker in the region . He sought to play both sides, but was sidelined by both sides . He has now emerged as a strong nonseparateist power broker .
 Ukraine indicates it may be unable to control the course of such a war, particularly in the short term . Moscow is, no doubt, capable of launching a gray-zone or ambiguous conflict, but Ukraine indicates that it may not be able to control it .
 It is impossible to say if Russian leaders will conclude that the attempts at political warfare and irregular warfare in Ukraine were ill-conceived or poorly executed .
 If the purpose was to avoid escalation to a conventional war, then the operation failed . The operation failed, according to the British Foreign Office .
Moscow may conclude that repeating such an operation is too fraught with risk and unpredictability . Moscow may conclude it is too risky to repeat such operations .
 Russia more likely to use lessons from Ukraine to refine how it goes about political warfare, particularly where use of conventional force is prohibitive . However, Russia will more likely use the lessons to refine its tactics .
 The separatist movement, bannered as Novorossiya, did not gain traction with the population . Russia was ineffective at Inspiring Separatism, unlike calls for federalization.
 Ukrainian public remain unenthusiastic. Despite efforts to brand it and to infuse it with historical legitimacy, the Ukrainian public remained unentusiastic .
 The information campaign was most effective on the Russian population . Instead, the information campaign focused on the mission of the separatists .
 As the separatist movement encountered resistance, Russia found itself without good options other than steady escalation .
 Russia found it easier to enlist those among its population who were ideologically inclined to fight in Ukraine . Instead of convince Ukrainian citizens to embark on what would effectively be a civil war, Russia decided to fight .
 Moscow's Strategy Moscow’s approach appeared to be based on several false assumptions founded in historical views of Ukraine . Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine has been successful in Ukraine's success .
 The annexation of Crimea was an easy operation for Russia but also, as noted, likely an experience that could be difficult to repeat . The annexation was a difficult operation for the Russian government .
 Russia's campaign in Eastern Ukraine was one of adaptation and perpetual adjustments . By contrast, Russia’s campaign in eastern Ukraine was a one of adapts and adjustments .
 Some Western analysts characterized the campaign in Eastern Ukraine as a hybrid war . This perspective is incorrect. Hybrid War was a Brief Adaptation in This Conflict .
 There are no indicators that Russia intended to conduct a hybrid war, despite arguments in some circles that such a doctrine and approach exists .
 Little about the early days of the conflict in Ukraine is indicative of the supervision and involvement of the General Staff .
 Russia’s selection of tactics was not doctrinally driven, rather, it was a series of improvised responses to Ukrainian resistance . Russia's selection of Tactics was not  doctrinally driven, but it was an improvised response .
 Russia employed a hybrid approach to the conflict from May 26 to August 24 in 2014 . The conflict was the first Battle of Donetsk Airport .
 The integration of irregular fighters, conventional capabilities, and regular Russian units in summer 2014 seems to have been an effort to bridge the desire for vertical escalation with low costs and deniability . The integration has been an attempt to bridge a desire for high costs and low costs .
 By late August 2014, these attempts visibly had failed, resulting in a conventional inva70 Lessons from Russia's Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine sion by regular Russian units .
 Russia chose to turn the separatist forces into a conventional army mirrored on Russia’s own force . Russia's own force can be read as Moscow's verdict on the utility of hybrid approaches in Ukraine .
 Hybrid approaches did not disappear from the battlefield, just as information warfare did not cease to be employed . But they became relatively inconsequential to the large presence of conventional forces engaged in whatbecame classical positionand maneuver warfare .
 Ukraine is a case study not in pioneering new nonlinear approaches but in the failure of hybrid warfare to deliver the desired political ends for Russia .
 Russian leaders sought to pay the lowest price possible for destabilizing Ukraine and gaining concessions from the interim government during a time of crisis .
 The cycle of escalation reflects an attempt to bid low in an effort to insert instability, and then press for a federalization scheme . The cycle is a bid to try and insert instability and then push for federalization .
 Russia seems to have acted on ill-formed assumptions and in doing so, underestimated the costs and instigated a chaotic campaign of warfare with the intention of staying below the conventional threshold .
 The policy imperatives in Ukraine were such that Russian leaders proved eventually willing to pay high political, economic, and military price .
 Russia remains unable to freeze the conflict on the terms it achieved in Minsk II . In many respects, this effort proved effective in establishing a point of influence over Ukraine’s domestic and international affairs .
 It is difficult to deny the importance of this unsettled conflict in Eastern Ukraine. It is hard to deny that this is the reason for the conflict.
 Russia has galvanized Ukrainian public opinion and political discourse in a decidedly Western direction . Some would argue that, as a consequence of the conflict, Russia has been galvanized by the conflict .
 The geopolitical implications of a Western shift are uncertain . This assertion could be correct, but the geopolitical implications are uncertain. This is not the first time this has happened .
 Ukraine was Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 71 allegedly on such a path following the Orange Revolution in 2004 .
 The Orange Revolution eventually resulted in the election of Yanukovych, the same president who was forced to flee after the Maidan protests of 2013–2014 .
 Ukrainian political forces and even the same individuals who participated in that movement’s collapse ten years ago are still very much involved in Ukrainian politics today .
 The future of Russian influence depends on how, and if, the Minsk agreements are implemented . Ukraine's political leadership is able to reform the country and break with its oligarchic past .
 As part of the research into Russian operations, we looked at tactics, intentions, and important factors that contributed or detracted from Russian operations .
 We also investigated the relevance of information warfare and the important social, historical, and political contexts in which it evolved .
 This report attempted to draw lessons and conclusions about what Russian military and political leaders may have learned from the successes and failures of operations in Crimea and Ukraine .
Russia has refrained from drawing wider conclusions about a Russian model or doctrine of warfighting . At the same time, a variety of nonsystemic factors contributed to Russia's decisionmaking on Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia’s operation to annex Crimea represented decisive and competent use of military force in pursuit of political ends. Russia's operation to annexed Crimea represented decisive and decisionary use of military force .
 Russia was able to seize the territory of a neighboring state with speed and mobility, deploying a nimble and professional force . Russia was using its conventional superiority as an operational distraction .
 The political maneuvering on the peninsula during the invasion suggests that it may have been launched without a predetermined political outcome in mind .
 Russia likely sought to seize Crimea, and then evaluated its political options . Russia likely tried to seize the Crimea, but then evaluated the political options depending on how it was received .
 Information operations and influence on Russian-speaking Crimeans were a by-product of the domestic campaign being waged inside Russia to manage public opinion and ensure approval .
 In Crimea, both the information war and the operation as a whole benefited greatly from several missteps by Ukrainian leadership . The information war also benefited from the ouster of Yanukovych .
 Russia took advantage of these sentiments, fueling public fears of rightwing violence . Russia has been accused of using these sentiments in a predatory manner .
 Russia’s operations in Crimea also benefited from a series of highly favorable circumstances . Russia's operations in the Crimea also benefit from a number of favorable circumstances, including political, historical, geographical, and military .
 Many unknowns remain about Russia’s military capabilities after the reforms and modernization program launched in 2009 .
 Ukraine did not resist and only a small, distinctly capable slice of the Russian force was used . It is impossible to make broader assumptions about the state of the Russia army based on this episode .
 Moscow did demonstrate effectiveness in using deception and surprise, but its greatest success was capitalizing on Ukrainian weakness, missteps, and slow or ineffectual decisionmaking . Moscow did not use deception or surprise in its decision making .
 There is little basis for generalization from Crimean operations about Russia’s doctrine or preferred method of waging war .
Despite limitations in analysis, we can infer a good deal about the performance of elite or special forces . Despite limitations, there are some positives for elite forces, including mobility, lift, and communications .
 The integration of national decisionmaking with the deployment of the military and the speed of that command chain is noteworthy . The integration with the military is noteworthy.
 Some of the political and societal conditions and economic factors that were present during the events in Ukraine may be found elsewhere in the former Soviet Union . But certainly not all were present in Ukraine .
 It is difficult to envision the same combination of political, military, and geographical circumstances intersecting to create another similar situation .
 The unanswered question is whether or not all such conditions are required for Russia to pursue a similar outcome elsewhere . Russia has a similar situation in the U.S. It is not clear if Russia will seek similar conditions elsewhere .
 The experience in Conclusion 75 Eastern Ukraine lends credence to the notion that, when offered resistance and when less suitable conditions prevail, operations become more iterative, escalatory, and far less surgical . The experience lends credENCE to the idea that, if offered resistance,
 In Crimea, Russia achieved quick success through direct application of military power, while in Eastern Ukraine, its leadership took an entirely different approach .
 Russia sought to negate the strategic impact of a pro-Western uprising in the capital and retain influence in Ukrainian regions by engaging in political warfare . There, Russia sought a strategic impact on the victory of the pro- Western uprising.
 Moscow hoped a grassroots anti-Maidan movement could force the new government in Kyiv to devolve power to the regions and federalize the country . Moscow hoped the movement would force new government to devolved power to regions .
 Oligarchs and vested interests provided networks for access to Ukraine and served as enablers for such an approach . Oligarch and vested interest provided networks.
 Russia sought Ukraine’s destabilization and hoped to force a federalization scheme on the country . Ultimately, Russia sought the destabilization of Ukraine and tried to force the country into a federalized scheme .
 Moscow leveraged private networks, some with their own agents, in the hopes of accomplishing this goal at low cost and with plausibledeniability .
 As sponsored political upheavals met resistance, Russia undertook more direct action in hopes of inspiring a broader insurgency in Ukraine . Russia's actions were aimed at inspiring a wider insurgency in the Ukraine .
 These events began concurrently with the annexation of Crimea but followed an entirely different scheme . These events started concurrently with Crimea's annexation.
 Russian leadership did not appear to seek the annexation of the Donbas . Russia could have pursued a conventional invasion, but instead Russian leadership didn't appear to want it .
 separatist leaders assumed Russia intended to replicate the Crimean annexation on a larger scale . This surprised the separatist leaders, who assumed that Russia had hoped for such an outcome . The separatist leaders were surprised by the outcome .
 There was to be no replication of the Crimean approach to Eastern Ukraine. There was no replicated of the Crimea approach to Ukraine .
 Moscow attempted to spread the insurgency but kept its objectives limited to instability and undermining the interim Ukrainian government . Moscow tried to spread it but kept it limited to stability and instability .
 It did not seek to annex the Donbas because the region was useful to Russia primarily if it remained an unstable part of Ukraine that Russia controlled . Russia did not want to annex it because it was useful for Russia primarily to Russia .
 If Russia annexed it, then it would assume all the financial responsibility for it and sacrifice the region’s strategic value to influence Ukraine .
 Donbas may de facto be fully under Russian control today, for Russia . Donbas is 76 Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
 The Minsk II agreement remains the only framework for settling the conflict . The Donbas and its associated costs will be returned to Ukraine .
 Attempts to seize control were ultimately a tactic in a strategic bargaining game . Attempts are ultimately a tactics in a Strategic bargaining game.
 The entire Russian effort in Eastern Ukraine could be characterized as an ineffectually implemented, and perhaps ill conceived . The whole Russian effort is to gain leverage over the central government and the country's strategic orientation .
 Russia’s information war in Eastern Ukraine polarized the population, but ultimately Ukraine proved infertile ground for separatism .
 Moscow’s information campaign achieved partial success in conjuring a historical and justifiable cause for the separatist movement (Novorossiya) that would attract Russian volunteers at home .
 Moscow abandoned Ukraine's leaders and was promptly abandoned by Moscow . But this too was a failure, since it did not scare Ukraine’s leaders .
 Russia’s efforts in Eastern Ukraine may have failed in part because of false notions about Ukrainian society, along with poor planning for dealing with nonstate actors, according to CNN .
 Russia was not able to effectively control the disparate elements involved in its efforts . Russia was unable to effectively manage its efforts to win back the support of the opposition .
 Moscow devoted an increasing amount of resources to the conflict, ultimately escalating it to a conventional war with its own regular units in the lead . Moscow spent an increasing number of resources on the conflict .
 It is difficult to say what the Russian leaders and national security establishment took away from the Ukrainian experience .
 Russian leaders likely walked away from Crimea seeing it as a highly effective operation, but one that could not be easily repeated elsewhere . The operation was a highly successful operation .
 Eastern Ukraine achieved some strategic objectives but was marred with operational failures . It is highly doubtful Moscow would want to reproduce the situation elsewhere .
 Russia still stands to achieve its primary objectives, but at a much higher cost than desired and through a painful cycle of adaptation . Russia is still trying to achieve the primary objectives of Russia .
 Russia may seek to use an adapted version of its approach in Ukraine . If Russia seeks to spread instability to other neighboring states, then it may seek a similar approach .
Valery Gerasimov wrote in 2013 that each conflict requires the formulation of its own logic . The current head of the General Staff wrote in his famous 2013 article that every conflict requires a new logic .
 Russian military establishment is likely to persist in Russia's military establishment. That frame of mind will likely persist in the military establishment .
 Gerasimov’s article commented on the modern nature of warfare, rather than outlining a particular doctrine or institutional approach .
 There is nothing here to suggest that the Russian military sees the utility of a Crimea or Eastern Ukraine–type approach against a NATO member .
 There is undoubtedly some broader applicability to other former Soviet Republics with Russian-speaking populations . There is certainly some broader application to other ex-Soviet Republics .
 Moscow may feel it has a larger stake in Belarus or Kazakhstan . In these regions, such as Belarus and Kazakhstan, Moscow may have a bigger stake .
 Russian interests in its near abroad may compel a similar or modified intervention in the event of a political crisis or overturn of friendly leadership . Russian interests are at least partially present elsewhere in the former Soviet Union .
 Russia’sseizure of Crimea and invasion of Eastern Ukraine may have instigated preparations among its neighbors . Such operations would render such operations more complex to conduct in the future .
 If Russia draws lessons from its experience in Ukraine, other countries will become more wary and implement reforms to reduce their chances of suffering a similar fate . Russia will be more wary of other countries on its periphery.
 APPENDIX A Information Campaign provides an outline of Russian messaging during both campaigns .
 It offers further details about the content of Russian messages, tools or mechanisms used for propagation, and other notable aspects of the information warfare component to these operations .
 Weakening Ukraine as a State. Ukraine is an economically failed state . Ukraine is a failed state, says Ukraine's president . Ukraine's economy is an economic failed state.
 The Ukrainian government acts in the interests of the U.S. and other foreign powers . Vilifying Ukraine as a State is part of the Ukrainian government's plan to become a state .
 Glorifying Russia is a unique approach to human rights and development trajectory . Russian history and tradition necessitate its own Russian Path. Glorify Russia.
 The fall of the Soviet Union was a disaster of global proportions, says Information Campaign 81 .
 The morality of the Western world fundamentally differs from the morality of Russian people . Weakening the West is the result of the West's "weakening"
 Western countries, and especially the United States, are the core orchestrators of the events in Ukraine. Vilifying the West is a key part of the Ukraine crisis .
 The U.S. and Europe are among the world's top politicians and experts in Ukraine . Russia's Vladimir Putin, Sergei Lavrov and other Russian politicians are among those who speak out .
 General Tone and Methods: Undermining legitimacy of Ukraine’s government . Overimplifying the reality—“one big dividing line in Ukraine” – Creating ambiguity .
 Almost absolute media control in Russia. Harassment of journalists during events in Ukraine . “Trolling of alternative media or opinions.’s” of alternativemedia or opinions .
 The agreement stipulates that early presidential elections will take place in December 2014 . Protesters contest the agreement and demand immediate snap presidential elections . Yanukovych and a large number of his party members flee to Russia through Eastern Ukraine .
 Thousands of pro-Russian protestors rally in Sevastopol in favor of greater autonomy from Ukraine and closer ties to Russia . Pro-Russian businessman Alexei Chaliy is “appointed’s as mayor of the city .
 Russian forces occupy strategic facilities in Crimea and carry out the blockade of the Ukrainian army and fleet, roads, and airports .
 Ukraine’s General Prosecutor Office immediately stated that the decisions of the new Crimean government were unconstitutional and illegal . As a result, the decision was made by the new government .
 Acting Ukraine President Turchynov vetoes Parliament repeal of 2012 law on the principles of the state language policy . Russian language retains its status as regional language .
Ukrainian authorities refuse to share voters list . The “referendum’s’ referendum uses an ad-hoc voters list.
Ukrainian Ministry of Defense authorizes the use of deadly force by the Ukrainian military in cases of self-defense .
 Ukrainian Rear Admiral Gaiduk is detained as hostage and released later that day after Ukraine's Acting President’s ultimatum . Ukrainian military personnel leave the base while Ukrainian Rear Admirals are detained as hostages .
 The EU expands its sanctions against Russian officials and U.S. President Barack Obama announces additional sanctions . The EU is expanding its sanctions on Russia and the United States .
 Gazprom announces that it will end the 2010 gas discount agreement with Ukraine . The price increase will be $485 per 1,000 cubic meters .
 Ukraine's interim Prime Minister Yatsenyuk rejects Russia's gas price hike . He blames Moscow for “economic aggression,” resulting in a new ‘gas war’ between Ukraine and Russia .
 In Donetsk, pro-Russian activists storm the regional government building . In Luhansk, separatists surround the regional SBU, break into an armory room, and seize guns .
 Pro-Russian activists in Donetsk proclaim the region’s independence from Ukraine . They set May 11 for a ‘referendum’ that would allow the region to become part of the Russian Federation .
 Ukrainian forces conduct an “antiterrorist’ operation by in the eastern city of Kharkiv . Pro-Russian protestors seized a local government building in the city ofKharkiv.
 The separatists retake the seat of the regional administration, and arrest approximately 70 separatists, seizing their weapons . They retake the region's seat and arrest about 70 separatists .
 Pro-Russian forces take control of security facilities and weapons in Slovyansk, Kramatorsk, and Druzhivka . An additional attack is turned back in Krasnyi Lyman, while unrest in Donetsk continues .
 Pro-Russian protesters seize the police headquarters in the Eastern Ukrainian city of Horlivka . They raise the Russian flag and seize police headquarters .
 The Ukrainian military and special police forces begin “antiterrorist operations’ in Eastern Ukraine . Pro-Russian forces are occupying government buildings and security facilities .
 Kyiv authorities suspend “antiterrorist operations’ during the Easter holiday . Kyiv Authorities suspend ‘antiterRORist operations' during the holiday .
 The U.S. announces a $50 million assistance package for Ukraine . The United States announces the aid package .
 Bodies of two men found outside of Slovyansk show signs of torture . Interim Ukrainian President Turchynov calls for resumption of antiterrorist operations by Ukrainian forces .
 Pro-Russian forces seize a group of seven international observers tied to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . Five Ukrainian army personnel and their driver are among the observers .
 Pro-Russian separatists open fire on a police station in Luhansk . They gain control of the regional prosecutor’s office and television headquarters .
 Pro-Russian separatists retreat to the Trade Unions house, which is lit on fire, resulting in 42 deaths . In the ensuing battle, the house is set on fire .
 Eastern rebel-held regions held a referendum to vote on whether or not these provinces should be given more autonomy . The referendum was held to decide whether these regions should be granted more autonomy.
 separatists hold meeting against Ukrainian presidential elections . In Antratsyt, separatists hold meetings against Ukrainian elections .
 ‘8 Thousand Ukrainian Officers have Defected to the Separatists,’ meduza.io, August 14, 2015, says .
 Gessen, Masha, ‘Most Russians Believe the Crimea Is Theirs’ Gessen: “Most Russians believe the Crimea is Theirs.’
 To Crush the Ukrainian Army, It Is Necessary to Fight, says RIA Novosti .
 Russia Beyond the Headlines, June 20, 2013, is a special operation for Russia's Special Operation Forces . It's the first time Russia has been involved in a major military operation in Russia .
 Mercouris, Alexander, ‘Insight and Limitations of Russia’s Most Popular Military Hero’ is Russia Insider .
 Kharkov Headed Smith and Lohansk Paratrooper. Komsomolskaya Pravda, April 23, 2014 .
 The International Community Must Help Us to Free Ourselves from the Neo-Nazis. Sochnev, Aleksey, “The International Community must help us to Free ourselves’
 It examines Russia's approach, draws inferences from Moscow’s intentions, and evaluates the likelihood of such methods being used again elsewhere . It looks at Russia’'s approach and evaluates its methods .
 Two distinct campaigns overlap somewhat but offer different lessons for participants and observers . These two distinct campaigns offer different Lessons for participants, observers .
 Russia’s operation to annex Crimea represented a decisive and competent use of military force in pursuit of political ends, report says .
 Russia’s operations in Crimea beneﬁ ted from highly favorable circumstances . Russia's operations in the Crimea are limited by political, historical, geographical, and military .
 Analysis of the operation underscores that there are many remaining unknowns about Russia’s military capabilities . Russia's military reforms and modernization program.
 The report also ﬁ nds that the campaign in Eastern Ukraine was an ineffectually implemented . The campaign was an attempt to achieve political fragmentation of Ukraine via federalization .
 Russia achieved its primary objectives but at a much higher cost than desired and through a ﬁ tful cycle of adaptation . Russia achieved the primary objectives and achieved its main objectives .
 Study questions the desirability for Moscow to replicate course of events similar to the campaign in Eastern Ukraine .
 The operation to annex Crimea was a highly successful employment of select elements within Russia’s armed forces . But the structural and operation factors contributing to its success raise doubts whether it can be repeated elsewhere .