 Russia added salt to the list of foods prohibited from import into its territory as part of a food embargo . On Tuesday, September 13, Russian authorities added salt.
 The relevant resolution of the Russian government was published on the legal information portal of Russian Federation . The resolution was published by the Russian Federation's legal Information portal .
 The restrictions take effect on November 1, 2016, and apply to Ukraine as well . The restrictions will also apply to the Ukraine and Ukraine .
 Ukrainian company Artyomsol was a major supplier of Russia’s salt .
 The import of its products into the Russian Federation was previously banned from January 2015 to May 2016 .
 In May and July 2016 it exported 329,000 tons of salt to Russia . 16,000 tonnes of salt was edible salt .
 Russia introduced the food embargo on August 7, 2014, in response to Western sanctions imposed on the country after the annexation of Crimea .
 The embargo applies to meat, fish, milk, fruits, vegetables and some other products . The embargo also applies to other products including fish, fish and vegetables .
 United States, Australia, Norway, Canada, Canada and Albania, Albania, Montenegro, Iceland, Liechtenstein and EU member states . United States and Australia, Australia and Norway, Norway and Canada .
 Alexander Khodakovsky has reported that Russia will not be incorporating the Donbas into its territory . He said that this issue is no longer relevant in Russian society .
 The commander is also known as being at the forefront of the uprising of the new government in 2014 .
 Their interest in us only rises if something significant is happening here. Their interest only rises in us if something is significant .
 It is impossible to keep their attention at a consistently high level as this situation has been dragging on for years . It is difficult to keep the attention at an extremely high level .
 When the escalation in conflict happened in Syria, their attention turned towards Syria, they turned to Syria .
 The results of the referendum will be recognized by Russia and if it will then be agreed to by them and accepted by us . However, this will only make sense if the results are recognized by the Russia .
 Russia is not ready for this so it will be useless for us to carry on any activities,’ Khodakovsky explained .
 70% of the residents of the militia-controlled territory want to join Russia. According to him, 70% want to leave Russia .
 This means that the people no longer believe in the prospect of the self-proclaimed republic surviving by itself . This means the people are no longer believing in the possibility of a self- proclaimed republic .
 The commander of the Vostok battalion voiced a criticism addressed to the leader of the separatists, Alexander Zakharchenko . In addition, the commander also voiced a complaint to the separatists leader.
 Zakharchenko’s team, such as the DPR ministers, originate mainly from criminal circles and are engaged in plundering activities of the occupied territories . He said that people from ZakhARChenko's team are from the criminal circles .
 If we look at each of them, we would see that only few of them continue in the same old spirit .
 They would have a deep note of regret in their voices while carrying out their functions and duties, without hiding their disappointment in colleagues .
 These colleagues today use all of their energy to find a way to make money in this poor environment . These colleagues use all their energy. They use it to promote their interests .
 Khodakovsky: "Once the ministers begin, for example, to organize illegal vodka production in garages, then it is very bad"
 At the same time, the commander said that the Donbas cannot be a part of Ukraine at this moment .
 Ukraine confirmed its readiness to cooperate with Thailand in armored vehicles production . Ukraine confirmed it was ready to cooperate in the transfer of technology for BTR-3E1 armored personnel carriers .
 The Thai representatives expressed interest in continuing cooperation and considered Ukraine a reliable, long-term partner with significant potential in the defense industrial sector .
 Gladkovsky mentioned Ukraine’s unconditional fulfillment of the current agreement to supply Oplot main battle tanks . Gladkovski mentioned Ukraine's unconditional fulfillment.
 The Thai delegation visited the State Enterprise Malyshev Plant, Kharkiv Morozov Machine Building Design Bureau and the Kiev Armor Repair Plant .
 The Oplot battle tank was created by KMDB and commissioned by the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine . It was adopted by the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
 In 2011, a $200-million contract was negotiated to supply 49 new generation Ukrainian Oplot main battle tanks to Thailand . In April 2012, State Enterprise Malyshev Plant started the realization of the contract .
 The mass production of Oplot battle tanks, according to the plant, cost $30 million . Launching the mass production, the plant says, costs $30million .
 The Thai contract is set to be completed before the end of 2016, according to sources in the defense sector .
 No external pressure was exerted upon Ukraine in the process of the change of government in 2014, President of the United States Barack Obama said .
 "They took to the streets because their leadership was for sale and they had no recourse," Obama said . "After all, the people of Ukraine did not take to the street because of some plot imposed from abroad"
 The Russia Federation accused the United States and the European Union of setting up a “coup’ in February 2014 . UNIAN reported earlier, the Russia Federation had repeatedly accused the U.S. and the EU of setting a ‘coup'
 The Russian Federation held its elections for the seventh convocation of the State Duma on Sunday . It is the Russian Federation's lower house of parliament .
 A few places were also secured by single-seat constituency from other political parties . Their parties failed to secure any 'party-list proportional representation' seats .
 Meduza gives you the rundown of the most important things to know . The most important thing to know is to keep a close eye on.
 Less than half of Russia's registered voters turned up at polling station in this election . The new Duma was chosen by less than 50 percent of Russians .
 In some regions, less than one third of registered voters participated in some regions . In some areas, fewer than a third of voters participated .
 According to preliminary data, turnout in Moscow, the Moscow Region, and St. Petersburg were among the highest .
 In the Moscow region, this figure stood at 21.73 percent and at 17 percent in St. Petersburg . In Moscow, the figure was 21. 73 percent .
Other political parties could not get past the five percent threshold required to secure seats . Other political parties couldn't get past that threshold to secure a seat .
 The new Duma will also have one representative from the Rodina political party and one from the Grazhdanskaya platforma political party, as well as one independent member . The Duma is the first in the country to have a political party .
 United Russia was the leader in the 2016 Duma elections, achieving stunning results . United Russia won the election in Russia's first ever election .
 United Russia won just over half the votes with its 54.23 percent victory . In terms of party list seats, United Russia wins 54. 23 percent .
 United Russia has now won the right to amend Russia's constitution without the help of opposing political parties . United Russia now has a constitutional majority .
 Almost no one voted for liberal non-parliamentary parties . None of them were able to move beyond the five percent threshold necessary to gain seats through the proportional representation system .
 Yabloko won only 1. percent of the vote and Parnas less than one percent . Yablok won only one per cent of the votes .
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky's Open Russia win a single seat in the new Duma . The new Russian Open Russia is the first time the Russian Open has been held in a major tournament .
Russian President Putin signed a degree reducing the maximum number of law enforcement officials to 904,881 individuals . The current 1.068 million officers will be transferred to the country's National Guard .
 Russia's National Guard was formed in April 2016 as a result of another decree signed by Putin . The Russian National Guard has been formed since April 2016 .
 The agency is composed of Interior Ministry troops, riot police, SWAT teams, and personal security personnel . The agency also includes riot police and SWAT teams .
 It is headed by Viktor Zolotov, who was formerly in charge of Putin's protection . He is now the head of the Kremlin's protection agency .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin signs decree reducing the country's maximum number of law enforcement employees . Those in the Interior Ministry are among those in the central office of the interior ministry .
 The decree sets the number of personnel allowed to work in central agencies of the Ministry of Interior at 6,714 . The current 7,475 people are allowed to be employed in the ministry .
 The previous presidential decree limiting the number of full-time Internal Ministry employees was passed on July 7, 2016 . In addition, the decree stipulates that the head of the Interior Ministry is allowed to have six deputies .
 In April 2016, the Federal Drug Control Service and the Federal Migration Service were disbanded . The Ministry of Internal Affairs set the limit at about 1.068 million people .
 Some employees of the abolished agencies went to work in law enforcement bodies . Some of the agencies were abolished .
 Two residents of the Trans-Baikal city of Borzi had offered the CIA secret Russian military information that was false, Russia's security service says .
 A man had written the CIA a letter in 2015 with an offer to sell military information . He had written a letter to the CIA in 2015.
 The CIA expressed interest in the proposal, but did not hold discussions in regards to payment . The CIA, FSB noted, expressed interest, but didn't discuss payment .
 The man asked a friend serving in the military to create a report for the CIA claiming that Ukraine had received missiles from Russia that it intended to aim at the U.S. The man subsequently asked a fellow military member to create the report .
 In reality, the men had no access to any sensitive information and had invented the story in its entirety . The men were not aware of the story.
Russia has not initiated a criminal case against the men as they had not actually revealed any secret information . Russia has not yet initiated a case against them .
 FSB officials were surprised that the CIA would express interest in information coming from such dubious sources . The CIA was reportedly interested in information from such questionable sources .
 Russia's Investigative Committee is looking into the commercial activities of pro-Russian Ukrainian leader and head of public organization Oplot Yevgeny Zilin as the main motive behind his murder in Moscow .
 The Investigative Committee has not ruled out the possibility that the motive could have been a hostile relationship . The committee has prioritized investigating the business-related hypothesis .
 -Zhilin and plot played an active role in the events in Kiev in the winter 2013-2014 . The killer left almost no evidence; even shells could not be found at the scene of the crime .
 In his own words, he kept to quell the ""invasion of nationalists from the west of the country" through the use of violence, among other tactics .
 -Zhilin was wanted in Ukraine. He was also involved in the conflict in eastern Ukraine on the side of separatists .
 Yashin focuses on party members who have already been prosecuted for various crimes . He suspects members he suspects are involved in illegal activities .
 Yashin's report relies on open sources, without any new investigative work . The report is based on open source sources .
 Vyacheslav Gayzer, the governor of the Republic of Komi, was head of an organized crime group . Gayzer led the region starting in 2010, until five years later when it suddenly turned out he was the head of the group .
 In autumn 2015, nearly two dozen people were arrested along with Gayzer . Several senior officials were arrested, including several senior officials .
 Alexander Khoroshavin presided over the region of Sakhalin for eight years until spring 2015, when he was arrested for bribery . Next comes Alexander Kh oroshavin, who presided over Sakhina for eight year until spring2015, who was arrested.
 Nikolai Denin was sentenced to four years in prison in autumn 2015 . He had served as the governor of Bryansk for nearly ten years .
 The report also mentions the head of the Pskov region, Andrey Turchak, and his alleged involvement in the attack on journalist Oleg Kashin in 2010 .
 Kashin was severely beaten by the guards of a factory supervised by the Turchak family . After an argument online, Kashin had an argument with the guards .
 Yashin accuses Skrynnik of signing fraudulent leasing agreements in which she earned $35,000, which she allegedly spent on a purse . She says she spent the money on her purse .
 Skrynnik was questioned on charges of embezzlement at the Ministry of Agriculture . Today, she lives abroad, though she did travel to Russia for questioning .
 Yashin says Serdyukov was involved in a corruption scandal at the Ministry of Defense . He says he was also involved in an alleged corruption scandal .
 In 2012, Serdyukov was dismissed and prosecuted only for negligence, and later pardoned . The agency sold property at reduced prices .
 The main defendant in the criminal case was the head of the Department of Property Relations of Russia's Defense Ministry . Evgenia Vasilyeva had a close relationship with Serdyukov .
 Yashin suspects Duma member Vladislav Reznik of being involved in money laundering operations with the Russian mafia in Spain . YASHin suspects Reznik was involved in a money laundering operation with the Russians .
 Spanish police believe Reznik lobbied the interests of Gennady Petrov, who is part of a criminal organization founded by former wrestler Aleksandr Malyshevsky . Spanish police also believe that Reznik lobbying the interest of Petrov .
 Adam Delimkhanov is a close associate of Chechen ruler Ramzan Kadyrov . He is a member of the Duma.
 The report says Delimkhanov is believed to be the "executioner" behind the killings of Boris Nemtsov, Movladi Baisarov, and the Yamadayev brothers .
 Russian authorities have made no official accusations against either Reznik or Delimkhanov . Both of them are members of United Russia .
 Sergei Tsapok is the leader of Kuban-based Kushchevsky criminal organization . He was also a member of United Russia and attended the presidential inauguration of Dmitry Medvedev in 2008 .
 Makhachkala Mayor Said Amirov was undisputedly a member of United Russia . He was also a United Russia member .
 He ruled the city starting in 1998 and was arrested in 2013 for a terrorist attack and ordering the murder of an investigator . He was also arrested for ordering a murder of a police officer in 2013 .
 Yashin also mentions Yuri Lastochkin from Rybinsk, who is rumored to have become the focus of a criminal investigation . The mayor of Vladivostok Igor Pushkarev was arrested on charges of abusing his authority and accepting bribes .
 Gury Kornilyev, a young botanist from Yalta, recently lost his job after two years of harassment over his rejection of Russian citizenship .
 He knows of two other colleagues who were dismissed or demoted for their pro-Ukrainian position . He also knows of another colleague who was demoted.
 Crimean Human Rights Group has come upon of discrimination and pressure put on people unwilling to accept Russian citizenship . Kornilyev's case is just one of many that the Crimean Human rights group has come on of discrimination .
 Kornilyev, who holds a PhD in Botany, was officially made redundant on Aug 8 . Botanical Gardens that he had worked for since 2005 removed his post .
 Russian passport rejected back in March 2014 after 2 years of warnings from management . He says he was told to take back his formal rejection of a Russian passport back in April 2014 .
 One colleague without Russian citizenship was also made redundant, while another lost his managerial post, and resigned . One other colleague with Russian citizenship also lost his post and resigned, and another resigned .
 Kornilyev has had no success in finding another post . He assumes that prospective employers decide against him after finding out from his ex-employers .
 A firm promised to consider his application, but later 'discovered' that they didn't have any vacancies .
 Kornilyev’s elderly mother lives in Crimea and he does not want to leave, but is increasingly feeling that he has no choice .
 The young botanist made his opposition to Russia’s occupation clear from the outset .
 Crimean Human Rights Group says Russian military intervention is underway . He tells them that he has written to colleagues due to attend an international conference .
 There were no grounds, he wrote, for believing that Crimean Russian speakers needed Putin’s ‘protection’ or to be taken away from Ukraine .
 He is convinced that had the de facto authorities not deliberately made it so difficult, far more Crimeans would have formally rejected Russian passports . He says he is convinced. He is also convinced that, if the authorities had not made it harder, more would have rejected the passports
Crimeans were given one month during which they had to turn up in person at only three offices throughout all of Crimea . Crimeans had to formally register their rejection of Russian citizenship .
 Kornilyev says that there were huge queues which the guards were not allowing into the buildings . Kornlyev says there were large queues which were not allowed into the building .
 You also needed to produce a Ukrainian passport in which a ‘residence permit’ would be stamped . You also need to produce an Ukrainian passport.
 This was yet another deterrent since by no means everybody had a current passport . This was the latest deterrent since no means everyone had a passport .
 All those Crimeans who did not go through this ‘automatically’ received Russian citizenship . All those crimeans who didn't go through the process were Russian citizens .
 Russia referred to the fact that they had not formally declared that they were remaining Ukrainian citizens . Oleg Sentsov and Oleksandr Kolchenko were accused of trying to foist unwanted Russian citizenship .
 The lack of sufficient offices was probably only part of the issue, according to the report .
 There was very little publicity about the mechanisms, and many would have objected on principle to having to ‘apply’ to retain what was their fundamental right .
 Kolchenko’s lawyer has applied to the European Court of Human Rights on his behalf over the manner in which he was denied his own citizenship . Kolchenko was denied citizenship by the Russian government in 2008 .
 Russia appears to have accepted defeat over Sentsov and Kolchenko’s citizenship . Most Crimean political prisoners have faced similar attempts to deny them their citizenship .
 Many people serving prison sentences when Russia invaded and annexed Crimea have since been taken against their will to Russia . Russian citizenship there also forcibly imposed .
 Kornilyev did get through all the queues back in March 2014 and affirmed that he wanted only Ukrainian citizenship . He said he wanted to stay in Ukraine.
 He was asked several times at his work to take back his formal rejection . He was told several times that he was not allowed to return his rejection .
 The person in charge of young scientists even asserted that since he had taken such an “anti-Russian position, he did not have the moral right to work at what the man called “a Russian enterprise’s” and should leave for mainland Ukraine .
 Kornilyev says the colleague who also rejected Russian citizenship had the same experience . He says that the colleague also rejected Russia had a similar experience .
 Director of Botanical Gardens said he would have to explain to bosses why he had 'a foreign national' on his team .
 Crimean Human Rights Group points out that Ukrainian nationals have become a vulnerable ‘group’ in Crimea .
 They need to get a ‘residence permit’ to live in the place that many will have lived in all their life .
 They suffer discrimination at work, receiving social benefits, medical care, banking services, etc. They also suffer discrimination in the workplace .
 Such treatment of them as ‘foreign citizens’ is designed to push Crimeans with a pro-Ukrainian position out of Crimea .
 Two fake stories debunked this week are two fake stories concerning the OSCE . We look at claims of ridiculously high Russian beer exports to Ukraine .
 Ukraine has been defending itself against Russia's military invasion since the spring of 2014 . The EuroMaidan Revolution toppled Kremlin-backed President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Russia seized Ukraine's Crimean peninsula and continues to occupy it . Its soldiers and proxies have waged war in the eastern Donbas, occupying the easternmost cities of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 In Europe, the progress of those countries in the former Soviet bloc that embraced democracy stand in clear contrast to those that did not .
People of Ukraine did not take to the streets because of some plot imposed from abroad . After all, the people of Ukraine didn't take to streets because some plot was imposed from overseas .
 They took to the streets because their leadership was for sale and they had no recourse . They took the streets to protest the sale of their leadership .
 Russia is trying to recover lost glory through force, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russia is a world that left the age of empire behind .
If Russia continues to interfere in the affairs of its neighbors, it may be popular at home, but over time it is also going to diminish its stature .
 Obama's final address as president to the 71st session of the U.N. General Assembly . Obama's speech is the first time he has been to the United States president .
 Residents of Russia believe that international situation around Russia will be solved by itself . Residents believe that the world will accept occupation of Crimea and invasion to Ukraine .
 Only quarter of Russians are expecting a new round of the Cold War after the current conflict over Ukraine and Crimea .
 Almost two thirds of respondents say Russia should reestablish relations with the U.S. and other countries . Nearly two thirds say Russia must reestablish ties with the United States .
 A Russian journalist known for his anti-Kremlin stance has left Russia, saying he feared for his life . The journalist has been known for being a critic of the Kremlin .
 Aleksandr Sotnik said he had received threats in a telephone call . In a video posted on YouTube on September 20, he said he was threatened in a phone call .
 Sotnik said that he would temporarily stay in Georgia, from where he plans to continue his online video channel . SOTnik said he will continue his video channel in Georgia . He plans to stay in the state for a few weeks .
 The channel, called Sotnik-TV, has been available on YouTube for five years . The channel has been on the site for more than a decade .
 President Vladimir Putin has expressed support for Ukraine in its fight against Russia-backed separatists . He has criticized the Russian leadership, including Putin, and expressed support to Ukraine .