 Boris Nemtsov was assassinated on February 27, 2015, in Moscow, Russia .
 Vladimir Kara-Murza was a friend and fellow activist of the slain leader . He was a member of the anti-government group that killed President Barack Obama .
 Boris Nemtsov was a maverick, a “white crow,’ as we say in Russian, always choosing principles over political expediency . As governor, he shepherded his Nizhny Novgorod region onto the path of liberal and free market reforms
 Vladimir Putin's rise to power was the solidification of his authoritarian regime . Nemtsov was almost unique among Russian politicians . He quickly adapted to new political realities, accepting lush positions in government and state corporations .
 Putin's arrival in the Kremlin in December 1999 coincided with Nemtsov’s election to parliament in what was the last genuinely competitive election for the Russian Duma .
 From the very start, Nemtsov was suspicious of the motives of the former KGB operative . He voted instead for Grigory Yavlinsky in the 2000 presidential election .
 Nemtsov quickly emerged as a leader of the parliamentary opposition in the Duma . He vocally challenged Putin's Kremlin on issues such as reinstatement of the Soviet national anthem .
 Nemtsov found himself in a new role as a leading dissident in Russia's increasingly repressive and intolerant system .
 He did not shun this role, accepting it as necessary for upholding his views and his aspirations for a democratic Russia against an emerging dictatorship . He said it was necessary for him to uphold his views.
 Nemtsov used what avenues he could to deliver his message . The parliamentary and electoral route closed, and television off-limits to him because of a blacklist .
 He became a regular participant in street protests after taking part in a peaceful rally in support of the freedom of assembly . He was frequently arrested and thrown in detention cells, once spending Christmas holidays in police detention .
 A firm believer that political and civic enlightenment will break down the barriers of dictatorship, he published reports detailing the corruption and abuse of power by the Putin regime .
 A poll taken by the Levada Center in 2015 showed that 11 percent of Russians were aware of the substance of Nemtsov’s exposés .
 He could as easily communicate with high-ranking foreign dignitaries as with a pensioner babushka or a local market salesman . He could also be able to communicate with the likes of a pensioners or a market salesman.
 Nemtsov did not shy away from handing out leaflets in the streets and in metro stations . The former governor, parliamentary leader, and deputy prime minister was once an heir apparent to the Russian presidency .
 He was planning to run for the State Duma in Yaroslavl in 2016, and his chances of success were not insignificant . He has not played a level playing field since the end of last year .
 The return of Nemtsov to the Russian parliament was surely not a welcome prospect for the Kremlin .
 The last year of Nemtsov’s life was marked by opposition to the war the Kremlin had unleashed on Ukraine after mass protests .
 Nemtsov was firm and persistent in his criticism of Putin’s annexation of Crimea and his proxy war in the Donbas region . He was firm in his criticisms of Putin's annexation of the Crimea.
 In September 2014, Nemtsov led a 50,000-strong Peace March through the streets of central Moscow . The march took place in the capital city of Moscow .
 Another antiwar rally was planned for March 1, 2015 . Nemtsov also began work on a new report on Putin’s war against Ukraine .
 The Russian people deserved to know the truth, he said . As always, he believed that the Russian people deserve to know.
 Putin believed that for all the repression and propaganda, Putin’s regime would eventually succumb to the forces of history . He also believed that Russia would return to a democratic path .
 Nemtsov said in his last interview on Ekho Moskvy radio, hours before he was assassinated in front of the Kremlin . ‘This is why... we are not allowed on television,’ he said .
 Just as Nemtsov believed, one day Russia will be free from authoritarian rule, Russia will become free from dictatorship .
 His contribution to Russian democracy will have been one of the most important, he says . He has not lived to see that day .
 Vladimir Kara-Murza is the chairman of the Boris Nemtsov Foundation for Freedom and vice chairman of Open Russia . He is also the vice-chairman of the Open Russia.