 Kharkiv and Krivoy rig do not want to pay for repairs to the occuppied territories . Kharkv and Krijoy rig are not interested in paying for repairs .
 Crimea is signifiant to Russia as a strategic Black Sea naval base . We know the Crimea is a strategic naval base.
 The lawmaker also accused Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko of not being interested in ending the war in the Donbass . He said he was using Russia as an excuse to scapegoat his critics .
 Russia says it will never return Crimea to Ukraine, making the idea of leasing it to Moscow improbable . Many people in Ukraine oppose voluntarily granting Russia any form of control over the peninsula .
 Mr Poroshenko warned the West against “appeasement’ of Russia . American experts say offering Russia any alternative to a two-year-old international agreement on Ukraine would be a mistake .
 The Trump administration has sent mixed signals about the conflict in Ukraine .
 John Herbst, a former American ambassador to Ukraine, said he feared the new president might be too eager to mend relations with Russia at Ukraine's expense .
 The Loews Regency is a luxury hotel on Park Avenue in Manhattan . Business deals are made in a lobby furnished with leather couches, over martinis at the restaurant bar and in private conference rooms .
 A lawyer who joined the Trump Organization in 2007 as special counsel. He has worked on many deals, including a Trump-branded tower in Georgia and a short-lived mixed martial arts venture starring a Russian fighter .
 He is considered a loyal lieutenant whom Mr Trump trusts to fix difficult problems . Mr Trump has a close relationship with Mr Trump.
 He is married to a Ukrainian woman and once worked with relatives in Ukraine to establish an ethanol business . He is also married to the woman he worked with.
 Mr Artemenko, tall and burly, arrived at the Manhattan hotel between visits to Washington .
 He had attended the inauguration and visited Congress, posting on Facebook his admiration for Mr Trump and talking up his peace plan .
 Mr Artemenko said he saw in Mr Trump an opportunity to advocate a plan for peace in Ukraine .
 His plan would require the withdrawal of all Russian forces from eastern Ukraine .
 Andriy Artemenko's plan to resolve the three-year-old conflict in Ukraine reportedly wound up on the desk of then U.S. national security adviser Michael Flynn . He has been stripped of his citizenship by presidential decree, State Migration Service says .
 President Petro Poroshenko terminated Artemenko's Ukrainian citizenship over the lawmaker's voluntary acceptance of foreign citizenship . The migration service said in a statement on May 5 that President Poroshenko had terminated Artemanko’s citizenship .
Artemenko had previously acknowledged that he holds Canadian citizenship . Artemenko has previously acknowledged he holds Canada citizenship .
 This entry was posted in Uncategorized and tagged artemenko, cohen, flynn, Poroshenko, russia, ukraine. This entry is posted in uncategorized.