 Ukraine’s Maidan Revolution was a complex progression of populist protest, community gathering, and deadly serious revolution that cost people their lives .
 Counting Sheep, the interactive “guerrilla folk opera,’ brilliantly portrays Ukrainians’ hopes for a better future as they stand up against their corrupt president . The Berkut begin using deadly force against them.
 As a lover of Ukraine, I know more than the average American about the Maidan Revolution . I'm not a fan of the revolution, but I'm a fan.
 I followed Ukrainian news sources daily during the Revolution, networked with friends on the scene, and participated in local protests . I followed news sourcesdaily during the revolution, and joined protests in Ukraine .
 I visited Maidan for myself in the fall of 2014, walking along the wall of memorials for the Heavenly Hundred . I was accompanied by a friend who told me stories about the people who'd been killed .
 The performance takes place against a back drop of actual video footage of the Maidan Revolution . The performance took place against the back drop.
 Counting Sheep was created by Maidan veterans Mark and Marichka Marczyk and performed by Lemon Bucket Orkestra . But after seeing and participating in Counting sheep, I understand Maidan even more .
 In a small way, I feel like I was there in the middle of the revolution, says the author . "I feel like he was there," he says of his time in the revolution .
 Most of the media coverage focused more on Molotov cocktails, overturned buses, and walls of fire from burning tires . "I better understand the moments of joy and community that existed in Maidan," he says .
 A Berkut slaps a baton in front of us and we’re forced to flee as a battle breaks out . We’s forced to fled as a fight breaks out.
 I joined in building the barricades, frantically passing tires from one person to the next to create a protective shield between us and the guns of the Berkut . The Berkut is a U.S. military force that has been involved in several incidents in the past .
 The security of having the barricades in place brings a respite and a wedding celebration . The barricades have been put in place for the first time .
 I swallow my last bite of vareniki and toss my plate away as I’m flung into a wild wedding dance . Then the shots ring out and we flee again, we flee.
 The most poignant point was that moment of realization when it became clear that all the protesters’ idealistic hopes, all their joy, had resulted in death by sniper fire . Peace and joy had turned to war and mourning.
 The performance ends as we walk in funeral procession for those killed at Maidan . The remaining “sheep’s’ take up arms to defend their country from Russian invaders .
 Ukrainians have long been an enduring people—war, famine, Soviet oppression. Ukrainians have also been a victims of war, famine and Soviet oppression .
 Maybe their very need to endure has been the reason that they seize joy so fiercely .
 Maidan turned long-suffering endurance to a hardened resoluteness to fight for freedom . But Maidan turns long- Suffering endurance into a hard-working resolutess .
 The deaths at Maidan may have been a loss of idealistic hopes, but they became the birth of a determination to let dictators and corruption rule their lives .
 Counting Sheep helps you experience the joy and the terror of revolution . Counting sheep is the most popular way to watch the revolution .
 Playing in Toronto through June 5, and in Edinburgh, Scotland, in August . playing in Toronto, Toronto, Edinburgh, and Toronto .
 Ukraine's Maidan Revolution started in November 2013 when then-President Yanukovych refused to pursue an association agreement with the European Union .
 Yanukovych fled the country and an interim president was installed until elections could be held . Within days, Yanukovych had fled the nation .
 In March 2014, Russia illegally annexed Crimea and invaded the Donbas under the guise of a Ukrainian separatist movement . Russia illegally invaded Crimea in March 2014 .
 The government, under a newly elected president and Parliament, stumbles toward reform . The government is under a new president and parliament . The new president is expected to be sworn in .