 The drama of the transition is over, and the new president's team is largely in place . The drama is over. The new President's team was largely in charge .
 Turkey's Recep Tayyip Erdogan may soon have the executive presidency he has long sought, page 41 . If baby girls are safer, thank urbanisation, economics and soap operas .
 China's aircraft-carrier programme says a lot about its ambitions, page 26 .
Schumpeter, page 57 Science and technology 65 Modelling brains does not compute 66 Panda genetics . Schumpeter: "Panda genetics doesn't compute"
 Published every week, except for a year-end double issue, by The Economist Newspaper Limited .
 Britain’s prime minister set out a position for quitting the eu that includes leaving the single market and customs union .
 Mrs May said she would seek the best possible trade terms with Europe . But she said no deal would be better than a bad deal for Britain .
 Donald Trump held out the promise of a trade agreement with America . Trump praised Britain’s decision to leave the UK for the UK in 2016 .
 Angela Merkel vows to block any British “cherrypicking’s’ in negotiations .
 Under his leadership, the parliament will have the final say on approving the UK's decision .
 The avalanche was apparently triggered by one of three earthquakes that struck the region this week .
 German states submitted a petition to ban it in 2013, citing its racist, anti-Semitic platform . The petition was submitted in 2013 .
 The court found that although the party “pursues aims contrary to the constitution’s constitution, it does not pose a threat to democracy .
 Xi Jinping defended globalisation at the World Economic Forum in Davos . He said trade wars produced no winners in a speech .
Donald Trump has threatened to impose huge tariffs on Chinese products . His remarks appeared to be aimed at Donald Trump, who has threatened huge tariffs .
 Debris from the plane has washed up in Africa, but the crash site has never been located . The crash site is located in Africa .
 Hun Sen, the prime minister of Cambodia, launched a lawsuit against Sam Rainsy, an exiled opposition leader, for defamation . The lawsuit was filed by Hun Sen.
 Mr Sam Rainsy claims that Mr Hun Sen is trying to destroy his party to prevent it winning elections scheduled for next year .
 Rodrigo Duterte mulled imposing martial law if necessary to advance his homicidal campaign against drugs . The president of the Philippines mulls imposing a martial law in the Philippines .
 Barack Obama ended the 22-year-old's “wet foot, dry foot’s policy, under which Cubans who landed on American soil were permitted to stay .
 Cubans who try to get into the U.S. will now be treated like other migrants. Cubans trying to enter the United States will be treated as other migrants .
 Obama’s decision is in keeping with his policy of normalising relations with the communist government of Cuba .
 The wave of violence in Brazil’s prisons continued with the deaths of at least 30 people at a jail .
 Colombia will begin peace negotiations in February with the eln, the country’s second largest guerrilla group . The eln is the country's secondlargest guerrilla group.
 Italian court sentenced in absentia eight former officials of South American military regimes to life in prison for their role in disappearance of 23 Italians during the 1970s and 1980s .
 The officials participated in Operation Condor, a campaign of persecution and murder by half a dozen governments against their leftist opponents . Officials participated inOperation Condor .
 Yahya Jammeh missed a deadline to step down as president of the Gambia to make way for his successor, Adama Barrow . The president of Gambia lost an election in an election .
 Senegal moved troops towards its border in preparation for a possible intervention . Senegal has moved troops to its border to prepare for an intervention .
 In Nigeria an air-force jet operating against Boko Haram mistakenly bombed a refugee camp . At least 76 people were killed in the attack .
 Two people were killed in clashes between police and residents of a Bedouin village that the authorities are trying to demolish . Police and residents are fighting over demolish the village .
 A high court in Egypt upheld ruling that prevented the government from handing sovereignty of two islands in the Red Sea to Saudi Arabia .
 The proposal to hand the uninhabited islands to the Saudis sparked street protests last year . The Saudis had asked Egypt to protect them in the 1950s .
 Barack Obama commuted the sentence handed down to Chelsea Manning, a former intelligence analyst, for passing secret documents to WikiLeaks . The sentence was one of his final actions as president .
 In 2013 Ms Manning (Bradley Manning as she was known then) was sentenced to 35 years .
 Supporters praise her as a whistle-blower, but critics insist she put American and allied lives at risk . Supporters say she put U.S. and allies at risk.
 Last year was the hottest since data started to be collected in 1880 . It was the third consecutive year of record global warming .
 The average temperature over land and sea was 58.69°F . 0.07°F above 2015’s average .
 Donald Trump prepared for his inauguration on January 20th as America’s 45th president .
 Mr Trump told a newspaper that because of the celebrations he would take the weekend off and Day One of his administration would start on Monday January 23rd .
 Reynolds is based in the American market, which is looking alluring after years of costly litigation and falling demand .
 The volume of cigarettes sold in America has fallen sharply in the past decade . Overall retail sales in the industry have risen thanks to population growth and new products, such as e-cigarettes .
 Luxottica, an Italian maker of fashionable eyeware, agreed to merge with Essilor, a French company that produces lenses . The company, which produces lenses, is a French firm that makes lenses .
 The €46bn transaction is one of the biggest crossborder deals in the eu to date . The deal is part of the largest crossborder deal in the country's history .
 The merger had long been resisted by Luxottica’s founder, Leonardo Del Vecchio, who built his firm up into a global behemoth .
 Rolls-Royce settled claims dating from 1989 to 2013 that it had bribed officials in various countries in order to win contracts .
 The engineering company will pay penalties totalling £67im to regulators in America, Brazil and Britain . The company will also pay penalties in America and Britain.
 The sfo pushed for a deferred prosecution agreement, still a novel concept under British law . Most of that goes to the sfo, which pushed for the deferred prosecution deal .
 Fiat Chrysler Automobiles’ share price was left bruised by an allegation from the Environmental Protection Agency that it had used software in 104,000 diesel cars to let them exceed legal limits .
 Consumer prices in Britain rose by 1.6% in December, a big bounce from 1.2% in November . The highest figure for two years was the highest in two years .
 Lee Jae-yong is the vice-chairman of Samsung Electronics . He is accused of bribery related to an influence-peddling scandal that has rocked the country .
 Prosecutors allege money paid by Mr Lee to a friend of South Korea’s president was intended as a bribe to win a merger of two Samsung affiliates .
 America’s Federal Trade Commission lodged an antitrust lawsuit against Qualcomm . It accuses the company of abusing its commanding position in the semiconductor market .
 The academic publisher is facing a decline in demand for its textbooks in America . It is partly because of the rise of services that let students rent the books .
 Company reports a surge in trading after the election of Donald Trump helped America’s big banks reap big profits .
 Many investors adjusted their portfolios when Mr Trump’s victory heightened expectations of interest-rate rise and of cuts in regulations and taxes .
 SpaceX sent its first rocket into orbit since an explosion on a launch pad last September . SpaceX grounded its fleet last September after the explosion on the launch pad .
 The government has accepted the company’s report on the accident, allowing it to start clearing its backlog of satellite launches for fee-paying customers .
 ExxonMobil agrees to pay $6.6bn for several oil firms owned by the Bass family in Fort Worth . The deal is the latest in a flurry of deals to snap up energy assets in Texas .
 Saudi Arabia will soon start accepting tenders for an expansion of solar and wind power in the country that will cost up to $5obn. Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia said it would soon start accept tenders.
 The collapse of the oil price two years ago tore a hole in the kingdom’s finances . The collapse in the oil prices tore the kingdom's finances .
 China’s footballing authorities capped the number of foreign players that clubs can field in a match to three per team . It is part of a series of measures to foster the development of local Chinese talent .
 Xi Jinping extolled the virtues of globalisation at the annual gabfest at Davos . The news came as Xi Jinping, China's president.
 David Runciman, a British academic, argues politics matters little to most people . He argues that politics is a matter of the time .
 Donald Trump's term as America’s 45th president is due to begin with the inauguration on January 20th .
 It is extraordinary how little American voters and the world at large feel they know about what Mr Trump intends . It isextraordinary how little Americans know about Mr Trump's plans .
 Those who back him are awaiting the biggest shake-up in Washington, dc, in half a century-old Washington .
 Those who oppose him are convinced there will be chaos and ruin on an epoch-changing scale . But their despair is guesswork, they say .
 Mr Trump promises to be an entirely new sort of American president . All that just about everyone can agree on is that he will be a new president .
 Inside the West Wig You may be tempted to conclude that it is simply too soon to tell .
 Mr Trump has been a property developer and entertainer for years . But there is enough information-from the campaign to take a view of what he means to fill the office first occupied by George Washington .
 Some suggest that you must always shut out what the president says and wait to see what he does . But that does not mean, as some suggest, that you need to wait to hear what he says .
When a president speaks, no easy distinction is to be made between word and deed . When a president talks, there are no easy distinctions between words and deeds .
 Trump says that nato is obsolete, as he did to two European journalists last week . He makes its obsolescence more likely, even if he takes no action .
 Mr Trump has long held certain beliefs and attitudes that sketch out the lines of a possible presidency .
 Trumpian optimism on display among American businesspeople deserves to be tempered by fears about trade protection and geopolitics, according to experts . They suggest that the almost boundless Trumpian optimistic on display should be tempered.
 Since November’s election the S&P500 index is up by 6%, to reach record highs . The index has risen by 6% since the election .
 Both reflect hopes that Mr Trump will cut corporate taxes, leading companies to bring foreign profits back home . Both reflect hope that he will cut taxes, both reflect hopes of cutting corporate taxes .
 A boom in domestic spending should follow which, combined with investment in infrastructure and a programme of deregulation, will lift the economy and boost wages, says economist .
Tax reform would confer lasting benefits, says John Sutter . Sutter says it would be a thoughtful and carefully designed programme of infrastructure investment and deregulation .
 There is the risk of a sugar-rush as capital chases opportunities do little to enhance the productive potential of the economy . But if such programmes are poorly executed, there is the chance of a Sugar-rush .
 If prices start to rise faster, pressure will mount on the Federal Reserve to increase interest rates .
 The dollar will soar and countries that have amassed large dollar debts, many of them emerging markets, may well buckle . Many emerging markets may also buckle .
One way or another, any resulting instability will blow back into America . One way or other, the instability willblow back into U.S.
 If the Trump administration reacts to widening trade deficits with extra tariffs and non-tariff barriers, then the instability will only be exacerbated .
 Mr Trump would do grave harm to the global regime that America created after the second world war .
 Mr Trump underestimates the fragility of the global economic system, so too does he misread geopolitics .
 Even before taking office, Mr Trump has hacked away at the decadesold, largely bipartisan cloth of American foreign policy .
 He has casually disparaged the value of the European Union, which his predecessors always nurtured as a source of stability . He has also disparaged the European Union.
 He has compared Angela Merkel to Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president and an old foe . He has been compared to Angela Merkel, Germany's chancellor and the closest of allies .
 He has savaged Mexico, whose prosperity and goodwill matter greatly to America’s southern states .
 China-imperilling the most important bilateral relationship of all. Most recklessly, he has begun to pull apart America's dealings with the rising superpower .
 The idea running through Mr Trump's diplomacy is that relations between states follow the art of the deal .
 Mr Trump acts as if he can get what he wants from sovereign states by picking fights that he is then willing to settle-at a price . Mr Trump has a history of picking fights he is willing to pick .
 America cannot walk away from China in search of another superpower to deal with over the South China Sea . In fact, America can't walk away.
 Doubts that have been sown cannot be uprooted, as if the game had all along been a harmless exercise in price discovery .
 Dealings between sovereign states tend towards anarchy . There is no global government to impose order and no means of coercion but war .
 Mr Trump is unravelling the order that America created, and from which it gains so much, he is getting his country a terrible deal . For as long as Mr Trump has unravelled the order he created, the order is a bad deal .
 Hair Force One. So troubling is this prospect that it raises one further question about hair Force One .
 Mike Pence, the vice-president, Mike Pence and the chief of staff, Reince Priebus are party stalwarts . Paul Ryan, Mitch McConnell and Paul Ryan are the top Republicans in the House .
 Steve Bannon, Peter Navarro and Michael Flynn are the agitators-particularly Steve Bannon . Michael Flynn is the other agitator.
 The titanic struggle between normal politics and insurgency, mediated by Mr Trump’s daughter, Ivanka, and Jared Kushner, will determine just how revolutionary this presidency is .
 The African Union is outdoing its European counterpart, I N MANY. Bad idea I N Many is a bad idea, he says .
 Cairo to Cape Town could walk without meeting anyone who complains about overweening bossiness of the African superstate .
 The au, unlike the eu, is irrelevant to most people’s lives . But this is largely because the au is irrelevant. But it is because it's irrelevant to many people's lives .
 Before 2002, when it was called the Organisation of African Unity, it was dismissed as a talking-shop for dictators . It was dismissed in 2002 as a talk-shop to dictators .
 For the next decade, it was led by diplomats from small countries . They were picked by member states precisely because they had so little clout .
 Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma is a veteran of the anti-apartheid struggle . She was expected to inject more vigour and ambition into the au.Zuma .
 Africa's forum for tackling regional problems needs to work better. First, because Africa’s forum for dealing with regional problems must work better, says CNN .
 Dlamini-Zuma apparently wants to be the next president of South Africa . Second, because she wants to become president of the country .
 Her experience at the au, supporters claim, makes her the best-qualified successor to President Jacob Zuma . She happens to be her ex-husband, who is her former husband .
 Running the ill-funded au is hard, but even so, nothing she has achieved there suggests she deserves to run her country .
 Her flagship policy, Agenda 2063, is like a balloon ride over the Serengeti, powered by hot air . She is also known for her hot air policy .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma has called for a shared currency, a central bank and a ‘continental government’ to tie together states that barely trade with one another .
 She also wants to introduce a single African passport letting citizens move freely across the continent by 2018 . She wants to also introduce asingle African passport.
 A splendid idea, but for now the au issues them only to heads of state and senior au officials . The idea is a splendid idea.
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma has failed to grapple with Africa’s conflicts, au troops have done a creditable job in Somalia . But promises from au members to send troops to quell fighting or repression in Burundi and South Sudan remain unkept .
Under Ms Dlamini-Zuma, the au has condemned blatant coups . But its monitors have approved elections that were far from free and fair .
 African leaders find the International Criminal Court too muscular, she backs an African alternative that explicitly grants immunity to incumbent rulers .
 From the Union to the Union Buildings this is the opposite of what South Africa needs . This is the same as what South African needs .
 Ruling party bigwigs dole out contracts to each other and demand slices of businesses built by others . Ruling-party bigwig dole-out contracts.
 Investors are scared, growth is slow and public services, especially schools, are woeful . Investors are worried about growth, growth, and schools are poor, say experts .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma's family ties and time at the au suggest she is the last person to help Africa’s most advanced economy fulfil its potential .
 Britons have learned what they voted for. H AFF a year after choosing Brexit, Britons have voted for the EU .
 Theresa May at last acknowledged that leaving the eu would involve trade-offs . May indicated some of the choices she would make .
 She will take Britain out of the eu’s single market in order to reclaim control of immiI Exchange rate $ per £ \ BREXIT VOTE 1 1 1 H J J J A S 0 N D J 2016 2017 gration and shake off authority of the
 As negotiations drag on, it will become clear that her vision is riven with tensions and unresolved choices . But it will be clear that she's not happy with the situation .
 Mrs May’s speech was substantial and direct-welcome after months in which her statements on Brexit had been Delphic to the point of evasion .
 Only one in five employees self-identifies as curious, our study found .
 It's the curious ones who engage with progress in science and technology . It's a curious one who engage in progress in technology and science .
 The government will consider making some payments into the eu budget, but the “vast contributions of the past will end. The government is considering some payments.
 Mrs May would like a trade agreement with the eu to be wrapped up within two years . She suggests a phasing-in period, which could vary by sector .
 Parliament will get a vote on the final deal, though by then it will be too late for it to change much .
 Mrs May must overcome several obstacles, not least her own contradictory impulses . For her plan to succeed, she must overcome many obstacles .
 The essential task will be to get the eu to agree to the sort of deal she set out this week . The eu is expected to set out a new deal this week.
 The eu has never concluded a trade agreement in two years, let alone a deep one . And the eu hasn't concluded a deal in two months .
 Mrs May would retort that Britain will get a good deal because its negotiating position is strong . She would also say that Britain's negotiating position was strong .
 The eu would be committing ‘an act of calamitous self-harm’ if it tried to punish Britain with a bad deal, she said .
 Europeans would miss London's financial markets; they might also lose access to British intelligence . British intelligence has ‘already saved countless lives’ across the continent .
Everyone will lose if there is no agreement, but nobody will lose as much as Britain . Everyone will lose, but no one will lose more than Britain .
 The country is in no position to bully its way to a cushy deal and eu leaders are in no mood to offer one . The country's leaders are not in the mood to bully their way to an easy deal .
 Mrs May’s way for Britain to come out on top is for the country to open itself up to the world, she said .
 Britain can become a sort of Singapore-on-Thames, free of the dead hand of an over-regulated eu .
Long touted by some liberal Brexiteers, the idea has a certain devil-may-care appeal . The idea is thought to be long touted by many of the Brexites .
 Mrs May is to turn Britain into a freewheeling, laissezfaire economy . But she will have to sacrifice some of her own convictions .
She has interpreted the vote as a roar by those left behind by globalisation . She has interpreted it as a 'c roar' by the left behind .
On their behalf, she has railed against employers who break the “social contract’ by hiring foreigners rather than training locals . She has also criticized employers who hire foreigners to train locals .
 Under Mrs May, Britain's beacon for investment risks becoming less attractive to foreigners, not more .
 Mrs May put continued restrictions on student visas before a trade deal . Mrs May was forced to choose on a visit to India .
 If Britain has to leave the single market and customs union, we would urge the globalising side of Mrs May to prevail over the side that would put up barriers .
 Mrs May will have to abandon views to which she has long held firm . But for this, Mrs May has to abandon the views she has held for years .
 The chances are that it will be a poorer, more inward-looking place-its drawbridge up, its influence diminished . But the chances are still that it'll be a better place to live in .
 Rolls-Royce, an engineering firm, was fined for bribery-see page 54 . Too many cases are settled rather than thrashed out in court .
 Europe's flaccid approach to the emissions scandal that engulfed Volkswagen in 2015 and now threatens others . To see why, look at Europe’s flaccids approach to Volkswagen's emissions scandal in 2015 .
 The extra cost of making engines compliant, and the adverse impact that this has on performance and fuel efficiency, tempt carmakers to flout the rules . But the extra cost and adverse impact on performance has on fuel efficiency .
 Europe is easier to get away with in Europe than in the U.S. than in America, where regulations are tighter and enforcement more rigorous .
 U.S. agencies were the ones to uncover vw’s use of a “defeat device” that reduced NOx emissions when its cars were being tested .
 The German carmaker faces a bill of over $2obn in penalties and costs . Six of its executives were indicted by the Department of Justice this month .
 Fiat Chrysler Automobiles is the latest carmaker to fall foul of U.S. enforcers .
 Environmental Protection Agency accused firm of using software to manipulate NOx emissions on 104,000 vehicles . The firm's chairman is a director of The Economist's parent company .
 A gargantuan grey area of life is much easier in Europe, where regulations are pliable .
 The gentle motoring required in official emissions tests is far removed from the revving and braking of real driving . The gentle driving is not required in real driving.
 Tests are also conducted at high temperatures, at which cars perform better .
 On the road, emission controls in some cars turn off at temperatures of i7°C and below, ostensibly to protect the engine from the chill .
 Some cars spew up to 15 times more noxious gases on the road than under test conditions . The gases are more than 15 times higher than under conditions under conditions .
 Damningly, vw felt able to conclude that, under the European emissions regime, it had done nothing wrong .
 Diesel-engined vehicles make up around half the traffic on the continent’s roads . European carmakers are struggling with the financial health of many carmakers .
 National agencies conduct tests for reasons to look the other way . That gives the national agencies a reason to look other way.
 Another incentive lies in the battle against climate change, because complying with N Ox emissions regulation adds to costs . Another incentive is to comply with the N Ox regulation, which adds to the costs .
 In the hugely competitive market for small cars, a higher price can steer consumers towards petrol cars, which are less efficient than diesel engines and produce more carbon dioxide .
 NOx emissions cause the premature deaths of an estimated 72,000 Europeans a year .
 Oslo used new powers to ban diesel cars temporarily in order to improve air quality . This week the city of Oslo banned diesel cars for a week .
 The falling cost of battery-powered cars may offer a greener alternative to battery- powered cars .
 A new test that better mirrors driving conditions on real roads will start to be rolled out later this year . The new test will be available in the fall .
Regulators will examine vehicles on the road as well as under test conditions . To reduce the risk of manipulated results, regulators will examine cars on the roads .
 eu member states have already won an exemption, meaning that NOx emissions will be allowed to exceed the official test limit for years . But eu members have already been able to exceed that limit by years .
In China, north India and other parts of Asia, ever more girls were being destroyed by their parents . In China, North India, and other areas, even more girls are being destroyed.
 Many were detected in utero by ultrasound scans and aborted . Others died young as a result of neglect; some were murdered .
 In 2010 this newspaper put a pair of empty pink shoes on the cover and called it gendercide . In 2010, this newspaper called it 'gendercide'
 Gendercide happens where families are small and the desire for sons is overwhelming . The desire for boys is overwhelming, says the author .
 In places where women are expected to move out of their parents’ homes upon marriage and into their husbands’ households, raising a girl can seem like an act of pure charity .
 By one careful estimate, at least 130m girls and women are missing worldwide . So many parents have avoided it that.
 It is as if the entire female population of Britain, France, Germany and Spain had been wiped out . It's as if it was as if all the female population in the UK, France and Germany were wiped out.
 Parents see girls as more valuable than before to earn good money . Now that women are more likely to earn more money, parents see girls more valuable .
 imbalance between girls and boys at birth is diminishing in several countries, including China and India .
 This is wonderful news, and it will be still more wonderful if the progress continues, says CNN's John Sutter . The news is wonderful, he says .
 Ending the war on baby girls would not only cut abortions, it would also cut medical complications, especially in poor countries . It would not be the only way to end the war, which is controversial in themselves and can entail medical complications .
 Today’s problem is a shortage of girls; tomorrow’'s will bean excess of young men . The problem of girls is a problem for young men.
 As cohort after cohort of young Asians reach marriageable age, all of them contain too few women . Many of them will struggle to find partners.
 Some will import foreign brides, thereby unbalancing the sex ratio in other, poorer countries . Some will bring in brides.
Young, single, sex-starved men are dangerous. But the consequences are bad for societies as a whole, says the author .
 Some studies suggest that more unattached men means more crime, more rape and more chance of political violence . Some studies also suggest that unattached people are more prone to violence .
 The worst-affected districts will be poor, rural ones, because eligible women will leave them to find husbands in the cities . The worst areas will be rural ones.
 Historians note that rulers used to deal with surpluses of young men by sending them off to war . Such a cure would obviously be worse than the disease, they say .
 Prostitution is often lawless and exploitative, but it would be less so if governments legalised and regulated it .
 In the most unbalanced areas something like this may happen, regardless of the law . The law may not be able to prevent this from happening .
 governments should be cautious and humble. Don’t just do something Above all, governments should just be cautious .
 China’s one-child policy, though recently relaxed, has aggravated the national sex imbalance-and been coercive, brutal and less effective than its admirers claim . China's one- child policy has been coercive.
 Without it, the birth rate in China would have fallen too quickly . Without it.
 Asian societies to deal with excess male lump they have created. It will be for Asian societies. It would be for them to deal.
Whatever policymakers do now, sex imbalance will cause trouble for decades . But whatever policymakers do, it will cause problems for decades, experts say .
We are reluctant to recognise all those second-term Thatcherite chickens that have come home to roost . If so much of our political horizon looks unfamiliar it is because we are unwilling to recognise them .
 The shift from manufacturing to services, the indifference of central government towards the regions, and the creation of an unemployable underclass that generates demand for a resented migrant workforce to fill the skills gap . The failure of education to consider how knowledge advances in the wider world, the neglect of
 Thoughtful Conservatives know that the seeds of these malaises were sown by their party 30 years ago .
Not one of these issues has a root cause in Britain’s membership of the eu. They know that not one of them has aRoot cause in the UK .
 Harold Wilson was brilliant at manipulating his rivals and manoeuvring them into impotence . The best comparison would be to Harold Wilson, a consummate politician .
 Many of the most important j obs in the land were put into the hands of total incompetents . The unfortunate consequence of this was that many of the best j obs were put in the hand of total incompetence .
 Wilson was so occupied with clever party politics that he had little time to govern the country . Wilson was too busy with party politics to be able to govern country .
 The Economist has advocated evidence-based inquiry and intellectual freedom since 1843 . The Economist is the most prominent advocate of evidence- based inquiry and inquiry .
 The need for clarity should overrule superstitious dread of the split infinitive. The need to be clear is needed for clarity, says author .
 The experience is so accomplished that the visitor has no time for reflection, or to consider the remarkable infrastructure underground where employees change into their costumes .
 The seamless gradient change in music and aesthetics make the transition from Tomorrowland to Mickey’s To onto wn Fair not just easy, but almost natural .
 Pyongyang is closer to Berlin than San Francisco. But as the missile flies, Pyongyang is close to San Francisco .
 Chinese steel imports into America are “really so terrible’ if they benefit U.S. firms that consume steel .
 In recent years China faced with chronic overcapacity in steel because of stagnating demand at home, pushed steel exports to around 120m tonnes .
 China's exports were sold at a significant loss, of $25bn on an annual basis, according to data from the China Iron and Steel Association .
 The collapse in the price of steel caused American steelmakers to curb their capacity to produce it . This prompted the collapse of the steel industry, causing it to be reduced .
 In this context the industry rightly sought trade actions to protect itself from unfairtrade practices . The industry should have sought action against unfair trade practices.
 exporting unsustainable losses to harm the sustainability of the same industry in another country is not free or fair trade . But exporting unsustainable domestic losses is not a free trade.
 Apple has been criticized for not selling smartphones in the U.S. for a price below cost . Apple's new iPhone 5 is expected to be released in September .
Flashman was a looming presence among the old British muskets, swords and maps . When he stayed at the Gandamack Lodge in Kabul, Flashman was the looming presence .
 The Afghan government closed this haunt for journalists, diplomats, fixers and shady characters a few years ago .
Virginia William Boot was an amiable eccentric who succeeded in spite of himself . His satire on newspapers and British imperial politics during the grubby 1930s was his satire .
 Boot is more endearing than Boot, and successfully ran a counter-revolution . Flashman may have been closer to the reality of the empire than Boot .
 Christopher Hitchens once said on discovering a friend of his had also fallen for Harry Flashman, one can recognise a confirmed addict .
 It is my belief that your correspondent is a terminal case. As someone who also likes to re-read Flashmans in the places they are set, it is his belief that he is aterminal case .
 TradeMark East Africa is funded by a range of development agencies with the aim of growing prosperity in East Africa through trade .
 The first phase of TMEA runs to mld-2017 and we expect this to be followed by a second phase horn 2QT7 to 2024 . The second phase will run from 2017 to 2024.
 TMEA has its headquarters in Nairobi with branches in Arusha, Bujumbura, Dares Salaam, Juba, Kampala and Kigali .
We are looking for an exceptional professional to loin our team in the position below . We are looking to find a professional to join our team.
 The Director, IMPACT and Research will manage our innovative impact-level forecasting and monitoring economic model . He will oversee our activities to generate, analyse and manage knowledge .
 The ideal candidate will possess a Master's degree in economics, statistics, impact measurement or other fields relevant to TMEA^ core focus .
 A relevant PhD, and emphasis on quantitative data management and economic modelling are a distinct advantage, says the author .
 S/he must possess a minimum of ten years' experience in research and advanced data analysis . Some of which ideally will have been gained in Southern and/or East African countries .
 Demonstrable experience of attribution, aggregation, evaluation, impact measurement systems, analysis and communication of impact data, is required .
 This position is available on a two year contract with the possibility of renewal . This position could be available on two year deal with possibility of renewing .
 Please apply online through hm/i/ymW.traderTWke^m^ Fnday, 3 February 2017 .
 You need to attach your detailed CV, including details of your qualifications, experience and present position .
 Your application should also include working e-mail address, daytime telephone contacts, and names arid contact details of three referees . Your application will also include a working email address.
We will only consider applications received on-line through the link provided above . Please note that we will only Consider applications received via the link below .
 TradeMarh Eail Attica ii an npial opportunity nnpfaycr and n cormwlled to open and taansfunnl recrurtmeril procnsci .
 The incumbent will lead and coordinate a team of economists analysing economic developments in Luxembourg and the euro area . He will conduct research on topics pertaining to central banking, including monetary policy and public finances .
 His/her responsibilities will also include representing the Bank in high level national and international meetings .
 French or German will be considered as an advantage . Ability to communicate with peers, managers and policymakers . Strong sense of efficiency, organization and time management .
 To apply, please email your cv and motivation letter to app8@egonzehnder.com before February 15, 2017 . To apply for a letter, please send it to the app8.com .
 Executive Director of the International Grains Council will fall vacant on 1 February 2018 . Applications are invited for the post.
 The Executive Director is the chief administrative officer and head of the International Grains Council . He is also the chief of the Secretariat of the international Grains council .
 Its multinational Secretariat administers the Grains Trade Convention, 1995 and the Food Assistance Convention . The Secretariat is based in London .
 The IGC is an independent source of information and analysis of world market developments in grains, rice and oilseeds . Its activities are primarily focused on providing for the benefit of member governments and subscribers .
 The Council monitors changes in national grain policies, conducts surveys of the international grains industry and fosters co-operation between governments and the industry . The Council also monitors changes to national grain policy .
Candidates should have a solid knowledge of the world grain economy as well as international agricultural and food policy issues . Candidates should also have sound capabilities in the area of market and economic analysis .
 Applicants must be citizens of a country which is a member* of the International Grains Council . Applicants are required to be a member of the world's most important council .
 Interested individuals should apply directly to the email address below . The email address should be used to send a message to the public .
 Applicants should indicate whether the application is being sponsored by their government . Applicants must indicate if the application was sponsored by the government .
 Remuneration will be in line with the U.N. Under Secretary-General level applicable in London .
 The closing date for applications is 10 March 2017 . Members of IGC are: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Canada, Canada and Cote d’Ivoire .
Over a 5-year period, you will lead the Institute to world-class levels of research, teaching and industry connect . Over a 5 year period, the Institute will be at the top of the world.
 You will have a free hand to achieve this goal through recruitment, investment and upgradation . You will be able to achieve it through recruitment and investment .
 You will lead the strategy to achieve the goal, as well as its execution . You will be able to lead a team to achieve a goal and achieve its goal .
TAPMI is part of the Manipal Education and Medical Group of institutions . TAPMI has been in charge of education and medical services for 20 years .
 The Group will lend all support to your efforts through its network and its experience in creating highcaliber institutions . The Group has a history of creating high caliber institutions .
 The SELECTED CANDIDATE will have demonstrated leadership at management institutes of high repute . The selection will be based on the experience of a senior manager .
 You will have the ability to network with, and draw support from leaders of industry and social organizations . You will be able to connect with and support from industry leaders and social groups .
 The best and brightest among faculty and students will want to work with you . The best of the faculty will be working with you, and you will be the best of them .
 You will have earned the respect of your peers across the globe by your academic and industry work . You will be respected for all the disciplines of management, not just your own .
High energy levels, commitment to excellence, and excellent values are, of course, necessary to achieve these goals and lead a diverse faculty and body .
 The drama of the transition is over, and the new president's team is largely in place . Interested candidates may send their resume to pmdel@gtaglobal.com The Economist .
 Mr Trump won 4% of the vote on November 8th . The mood in Washington was apathy and disdain for his upcoming jamboree .
 Even scalpers were unhappy, having reportedly overestimated people’s willingness to shell out to see Mr Trump sworn in as the 45th president .
 Mr Trump’s post-election behaviour has been every bit as belligerent as it was during the campaign .
 In his victory speech he said it was time to “bind the wounds of division’s wounds. He has ever since been insulting and threatening people on Twitter, at a rate of roughly one attack every two days .
 His targets have included Meryl Streep, Boeing, Toyota and Toyota . His job will be to hold his administration to account .
 He enters the White House as by far the most unpopular new president of recent times . He is the most popular new president in recent times.
 The transition to President Trump has been chugging along fairly smoothly . But amid the protests, the launch of a Senate investigation into Russia’s hacking and nerves jangling in the U.S.
 The markets are exploring record highs in expectation of tax cuts and deregulation . The markets have responded with a 'Trump bump'
 Mr Trump has named most of his senior team, including cabinet secretaries and top White House aides . Senate confirmation hearings are well under way, and Senate hearings are under way .
 Harry Reid's change to Senate rules allows cabinet appointments to be approved by a simple majority . Reid was instigated by a former Democratic senator, Harry Reid .
 Republicans control both congressional houses, even Mr Trump’s most divisive nominees . Jeff Sessions from Alabama is his choice for attorney-general .
 Tom Price is a doctor and congressman from Georgia who is Mr Trump's pick for health secretary . He is in trouble over legislation he proposed that would have benefited a medical-kit firm in which he owned shares .
 Democrats mainly dislike Dr Price because he is the putative assassin of Barack Obama’s health-care reform . Republicans like him for the same reason, and he will probably get a pass .
 Mr Trump's cabinet picks have been solidly conservative, with a strong strain of small-governmentism .
 At least three of his nominees appear to have mixed feelings about whether their future departments should exist .
 Rick Perry pledged to abolish the Department of Energy when campaigning for the presidency in 2011 .
Oklahoma Scott Pruitt has sued the epa 14 times, partly in an attempt to foil the Clean Power Plan .
 Climate of opinion that all three are climate-change sceptics is no coincidence . All three are sceptics, says Climate of the opinion .
 Mr Trump’s dishevelled chief strategist, Steve Bannon, a self-described nationalist populist, has similar views with a twist .
 Mr Pruitt's brief will be to carry on doing what he was doing with the power of the federal government behind him .
 The disavowal of climate science reflects a wider disdain for expert opinion . It reflects a broader disdain for experts' opinions .
 Mr Trump has discussed appointing Robert F Kennedy junior, a lawyer and proponent of a bogus theory linking vaccines and autism, to chair a vaccine-safety commission . A small illustration of this, with potentially large consequences for U.S. children, is that Mr Trump is talking
 The team is dominated by bankers and businessmen, including two Goldman Sachs alumni, Steven Mnuchin, and Gary Cohn .
 Mr Trump has picked Wilbur Ross, a billionaire businessman who is also a protectionist . Ross has made a fortune by buying and turning around stricken American steel and textiles mills .
 Around half his appointees are non-politicians, including Mr Bannon and Mr Trump’s other main adviser, Jared Kushner, his son-in-law .
 Ivanka is expected to take on many of the usual duties of a White House consort . He is married to Mr Trump’s daughter, Ivanka, and is as ruthless.
 The fact that many of Mr Trump's picks are plutocrats reflects his preference for pragmatists over pointy-heads, as well as his belief that moneymaking is a transferable skill .
 James Mattis and John Kelly are both former marines . Michael Flynn, his national-security adviser, is also a former marine .
 Mr Trump's nominees' ability to look the part, Holly wood-style, is said to be an important consideration .
 Mr Kelly and Mr Mattis-whose nickname, “Mad Dog,’s nickname, appears to have worked out well, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Mr Mattis owes his moniker to his combat record and fondness for scandalising civilians . He told a crowd in San Diego that it's ‘fun to shoot some people’
 The commander's reputation is due to his thoughtfulness, interest in history and concern for his soldiers . But he still owes his reputation as a commander to his concern for soldiers .
 Mr Kelly is respected for the understanding of America’s southern neighbours . He developed while heading the us Southern Command .
 Mr Mattis had to obtain a waiver of a rule restricting former soldiers from becoming defence secretary .
 Messrs Mattis and Kelly have been welcomed on Capitol Hill by Republicans and Democrats . But they have been warned that it will take a tough guy to stand up to Trump .
 The highest-ranking officer to have lost a child fighting in Iraq or Afghanistan, he is unlikely to be bullied . He is likely to be the most senior officer in the world to lose a child .
Rex Tillerson has been tapped to be secretary of state . He was the former boss of Exxon Mobil .
 This was at first denounced as further evidence of Mr Trump's strange crush on Vladimir Putin’s regime . Mr Tillerson has done a lot of business, as well as his climate-change scepticism .
 Mr Tillerson called for better relations with Russia and was vague about what steps he would take to counter global warming . In his confirmation hearing, Mr Tillerson was vague on what he would do .
 Mr Trump's other advisers, including Mr Bannon and Mr Flynn, want to forge an alliance with Russia to fight Islamist militancy .
 Mr Tillerson denounced Russia’s invasion of Ukraine as an ‘illegal action’ and spoke up for nato . He said he looked forward to working with the Senate “particularly on the construct of new sanctions’ against Russia .
 Mr Tillerson appears to have the authority and judgment necessary to steer Mr Trump’s belligerent instincts into the realm of realism .
 Mr Trump has assembled a group of successful people who appear to have at least some of the requisite qualities to run the government .
 Betsy DeVos is a billionaire Republican benefactor and advocate for school choice . The results of her experiments in Michigan are not all that impressive .
 Defence Intelligence Agency head was sacked in 2014 for poor management skills .
 Mr Flynn was already critical of the president’s approach to fighting Islamist militancy . He proceeded to get mad.
 He horrified former comrades last year by launching several eye-pop The Economist . Colin Powell put it, “right-wing nutty-attacks on Mr Obama, Mrs Clinton and Muslims.
 Mr Flynn would be a concern if paired with a more emotionally stable commander-in-chief, he says .
 The biggest uncertainty surrounding Mr Trump's cabinet concerns less the calibre of its members than the agenda they will pursue .
 It is hard to exaggerate how divided his team is on the big policy questions . It's hard to say how divided he is on big policy issues .
 Some members of the economic team, including Mr Mnuchin, will be busy with Mr Trump’s promised tax cuts . Mr Cohn, who will play a coordinating and shaping role, are broadly in favour of free trade .
 Mr Ross, Mr Bannon and Mr Navarro are economic nationalists, according to Mr Trump’s trade policy .
 Mattis and Mr Tillerson appear to hold mainstream conservative views . Both say it behoves the U.S. to uphold international rules by working through traditional alliances such as nato .
 Mr Tillerson also said that America should not quit the UN’s Paris accord on climate change . Mr Trump has both vowed to ‘cancel’ the agreement .
 Even those familiar with Mr Trump’s thinking cannot say how he means to govern .
 Deciphering Donald One is a House Republican tax proposal . It could indicate how protectionist Mr Trump is .
 House Republican tax plan is intended to boost exports by scrapping tax on foreign sales . Firms would lose the right to deduct the cost of imports from their profits from their profit .
 Some of its proponents suggest that border adjustabil, some of them suggest, is that border adjustsabil.
 Touch Bionics puts the user's need for better functionality first . Touch Bionic arms are smarter, faster, stronger and smaller bionic arms .
 The world's first multi-articulating bionic hand helps people do those everyday tasks we take for granted . The hand is the first of its kind.
 UK's 5. million companies can offer your business. It's just one example of the innovation that the country's 5 million businesses can offer .
 The head of Donald Trump's new National Trade Council is about to become one of the world’s most powerful economists . Peter Navarro Free-trader turned game-changer turned gamechanger WASHINGTON, DC .
 Mr Trump's threat to slap a tariff on American outsourcers could look like an import tariff . That’s worrying ► ity could look sufficiently like an imported tariff for Mr Trump .
 Mr Trump’s biggest economic promise is deregulation. After tax cuts and new trade terms, Mr Trump's biggest economic promises are deregulation .
 His pledge to scrap and replace Obamacare will be a more daunting test of his political skills . But many rules attached to it will be more daunting than his promise to scrap it .
 Democratic senators could filibuster away any bill to repeal the health-care programme . Republicans plan to starve it of money until the insurance markets that underpin it collapse .
 Many think Democrats would grudgingly support whatever alternative scheme they are offered . Many think that, presented with a fait accompli, the Democrats would support it .
 Mr Trump appears unconvinced by this, and he is probably right to be . But Mr Trump is probably wrong to be, says Mr Trump .
 Slow starvation of Obamacare would ensure many hard-luck stories, for which the Republicans would be blamed .
 An alternative ploy would be to make relatively footling changes to Obamacare and declare victory . An alternative would have been to make some changes to the Affordable Care Act .
 It would be hard to persuade the Republicans in Congress to swallow that. It's not easy to persuade them to do so, according to the GOP .
 Mr Trump claimed on January 14th to be putting the final touches to a plan that would involve ‘insurance for everybody, somewhat like Obamacare’
 The small matter of whether Mr Trump means to launch a trade war is a pressing foreign-policy question . Russia is a key issue for Mr Trump .
 Mr Trump, Mr Bannon and Mr Flynn want a better relationship with Mr Putin . Mr Trump and Mr Bannon want to be more friendly with the Russian leader .
 Mr Trump has signalled that he might drop some of the sanctions Mr Obama placed on Russia after its intervention in Ukraine .
 Perhaps he would also consider scrapping American troop deployments to Poland and the Baltic states .
 Either step would be viewed by nato's European members as evidence that Mr Trump's apparent disdain for the alliance is for real .
 Mr Trump could back-pedal on protectionism, ignore or somehow improve Obamacare and maintain America's watchfully adversarial footing with Russia .
 His administration could turn out as well as the markets seem to expect, according to the markets .
Trump administration has been saved by the better angels in his cabinet, some say . But that would be largely down to Mr Trump himself, they say .
 On January 20th that student, now a professor, will enter the White House as part of a populist insurgency .
 Peter Navarro, a China-bashing eccentric, will lead the new National Trade Council . Navarro has emerged as the brains behind Donald Trump's brawn on trade .
 Mr Navarro may soon be the world’s most powerful economist working outside a central bank .
 Mr Navarro’s change of heart came decades later, after he took an interest in China .
 In 2000 or so he began studying online education, and was an early adopter of technological aids in his own teaching . Frank Harris, one of his former students, says he was early adopters of technology aids .
 In 2000 he wrote two papers with Mr Harris on the best way to develop wind energy . Mr Harris has been in charge of developing wind energy since 2000 .
 Just months after the attacks of September nth 2001 he tried to calculate their economic costs .
 He is a prolific writer, but has no publications in top-tier academic journals . He is also a prolific author, but is not a published author .
 Mr Navarro has always been focused on a broad swathe of the middle, says Richard Carson, a co-author .
 In the 1990s, he ran for office several times as a Democrat, losing every race . He has been a Democrat for more than 20 years .
 Mr Trump's recent work on China led to his unlikely hiring by Mr Trump . It is his recent work in China that led to him being hired by the president .
 Mr Navarro has penned three books warning darkly of the dangers posed by China’s economic and military rise .
 The film tours communities that have suffered from competition with Chinese imports . It juxtaposes shuttered U.S. factories with shots of Chinese sweatshops .
 The core allegations Mr Navarro makes against China are not all that controversial .
 He accuses China of keeping its currency cheap, a common charge until 2015 . China began intervening in currency markets in the opposite direction .
 He deplores China’s practice of forcing American firms to hand over intellectual property as a condition of access to its market .
 Chinese firms pollute the environment more freely and employ workers in far worse conditions than U.S. rules allow . Chinese firms often benefit from government subsidies .
 A charitable interpretation of his views is therefore that he is not a protectionist at all. Trading positions are a charitable interpretation .
 In 2006 he estimated that 41% of China’s competitive advantage over America in manufacturing stemmed from unfair trade practices .
 Mr Trump has noted the similarity between this figure and the 45% tariff Mr Trump threatens to levy on Chinese goods .
 Mr Navarro’s oddest views, like his opinion of the trade deficit, do not explain his views . But this interpretation does not explain what he thinks about the deficit .
 Mr Navarro claims that unbalanced trade is responsible for a slowdown in growth since 2000 .
 Mr Trump spouts similar lines, talking about the trade deficit as if it were simply lost American wealth .
 A deconstruction of spending in the economy shows exports as a positive and imports as a negative .
 Government spending also shows government spending as a component of gdp. But the same accounting exercise also shows spending as part of gDP .
 Few economists-and certainly few Republicans-would say that the bigger the government, the richer the econFree markets and free workers United States 0 20 omy in the long-term .
 Were Americans unable to buy cheap imports, they would be poorer, with less to spend on other things . Americans would be better off buying cheap imports .
 They would be less specialised, and hence less productive, at work . They would also be lessSpecialised, or less productive. They would have been less specialising, and therefore less productive .
 Lawrence Edwards and Robert Lawrence estimate that, under certain assumptions, by 2008 trade in manufactured goods put $1,000 in the pockets of every American .
 If China exploits its workers and pollutes its rivers so that poor Americans can enjoy cheaper goods, it is not obvious that America is getting a raw deal .
 When capital flows in one direction, goods and services flow in the other way . When capital flow in one way, goods, services flow to the other .
 A book he wrote in 2010 with Glenn Hubbard, a more Tariffs as a tax United States, was published in 2010 . The book is called "Tariffs* on household incomet"
 Trump’s plan for tax cuts and infrastructure spending, by pushing up government deficits, would make it worse .
 That probably means more than more than the retaliatory duties already imposed on some Chinese goods . That may be more than what already imposed by the Chinese government .
 Mr Navarro says that Mr Trump is merely threatening an across-the-board tariff, in order to exact concessions from China .
 When manufacturing production moves overseas and then returns, productivity has usually risen in the interim . So far fewer jobs come back than left.
 The trade deficit in 2010 was about two-anda-half times what it was in 1998 . The number of lost manufacturing jobs the deficit represented rose only very slightly .
 In any case, manufacturers would relocate to other low-cost emerging economies, not America, says Eswar Prasad of the Brookings Institution .
 Neither China nor tariffs could help many American workers. That means neither fairer play by China nor help many workers .
David Dollar has set out how a country could play “responsible hardball’s’ with China . Dollar is also a Brookings expert .
 He recommends restricting the acquisition of American firms by China’s state-owned enterprises . The Obama administration cautiously started doing this, he says .
 Such investment flows represent artificially high Chinese savings rather than the invisible hand of the market. Such investment flow represents artificially high savings, says analyst .
 With restrictions imposed, America could demand that China open up more of its services market . The U.S. could demand more services from China .
 Mr Prasad argues China will eventually have to follow rules that China will need to follow . The best way to improve those is to write trade deals, he says .
 It is a more realistic goal than returning low-skilled work to America en masse . It is more realistic than returning to the U.S.
 It is possible that Mr Navarro will lean towards these kinds of ideas in office .
 A man who has waited 32 years for a revolution has probably made up his mind . The man has been waiting 32 years to make a revolution .
 The giant’s client PHNOM PENH Why Cambodia has embraced China, and what that means for the region i AMBODIA is a thin piece of ham beV^i tween two fat pieces of bread, says a former Cambodian minister .
 To Cambodia’s west is Thailand, which has more than four times as many people . The two countries have a dormant but unsettled border dispute .
To the east is Vietnam, nearly six times as populous, which invaded Cambodia in 1979 and occupied it for ten years . To the east, Vietnam was almost six times more populous than Cambodia, which occupied it.
 China's past three presidents have all visited Cambodia, offering lavish aid and investment . China’s past three Presidents have visited Cambodia.
 The ramifications of the strengthening relationship extend well beyond Cambodia’s borders . Cambodia's relationship with the U.S. has been strengthened well beyond its borders .
 Norodom Sihanouk, the deposed king; and the Khmers Rouges, who displaced Lon Nol in 1975 and then murdered around 2m of their countrymen . The Khmer Rouges killed around 2million people in 1975 .
 China continued to support the Khmers Rouges even after the Vietnamese invasion pushed them out of the country . China continues to support them even after they were pushed out .
 Mr Hun Sen, a defector from the Khmers Rouges sheltered by Vietnam, fully consolidated power in the 1990s . China began assiduously courting him. But once he was a defector, China started assiduous courting Mr Sen .
 Between 2011 and 2015 Chinese firms funnelled nearly $sbn in loans and investment to Cambodia, accounting for 70% of the total industrial investment in the country .
 Chinese firms run garment and food-processing factories and are heavily involved in construction, mining, I Middle blingdom Cambodia . I Middle Blingdom is based in Cambodia .
 The Economist.com/asia infrastructure and hydropower.com's Asia Infrastructure and Hydropower report on Asia's infrastructure .
 Others hold at least 369,000 hectares of land concessions on which they grow sugar, rubber, paper and other crops . Others hold more than 300,000 acres of land concession.
 One is developing a luxury resort inside a national park on the edges of Sihanoukville, the country's main port .
 Another has won development rights over some 20% of Cambodia’s coastline . Another has been awarded development rights in Cambodia .
 Human-rights groups allege that fishermen who had lived in the area for generations were summarily evicted, taken inland and told that they were now farmers .
 Many bitterly recall the Vietnamese occupation and some demand the return of “Kampuchea Krom’-the delta of the Mekong river, which today is part of Vietnam, but is home to many ethnic Cambodians and was for centuries part of the Khmer Empire .
 opposition depicts Mr Hun Sen as a Vietnamese puppet . Since Vietnam harboured him, the opposition has depicted him as a puppet .
 Chinese money comes with no strings attached, unlike most Western donations . Most Western donations are often linked to the government's conduct .
 Mr Hun Sen mounted a putsch against his coalition partners in the 1990s . Western donors suspended aid after he mounted a putch against coalition partners .
 Chinese money will make it much easier for Mr Hun Sen to shrug off Western protests, he says . Chinese money to make it easier for him to shrug away Western protests .
 Cambodia has repeatedly blocked asean from making statements that criticise China’s expansive territorial claims in the South China Sea .
 China gave Cambodia an aid package worth around $6oom. Last year, Cambodia endorsed China’s stance that competing maritime claims should be solved bilaterally .
For the past eight E VERYONE knows that nurturing brainboxes is good for an economy . For the past 8 E VERY ONE knows that nurture brainboxes are good for the economy .
 For years shoddy teaching has favoured urban children whose parents can afford to send them to cramming schools or to study abroad . For years, urban children have been favoured by urban children who can't afford to go abroad .
 Dismal instruction in the countryside has made it easier for city slickers from posh colleges to paint political opponents as pliable bumpkins .
 The dangerous social divide is all the more reason to worry about Thailand’s poor rating in an educational league table published in December .
 Thailand's dismal performance is not dramatically out of step with countries of similar incomes . Thailand’s dismal performance isn't out ofstep with countries with similar incomes.
 Cambodia has held joint military exercises with the U.S. in some years . But this week it announced it would not do so this year or next . It is strange given its unusually generous spending on education .
 Cambodia and China staged an eight-day joint exercise in November . Cambodia, China, meanwhile, staged a joint exercises in November.
 The Philippines, which took China to an international tribunal over its maritime claims, has reversed course . The Philippines was taken to a tribunal over maritime claims by China .
 Rodrigo Duterte expresses contempt for America and affection for China . His new president, Rodrigo Duterte, expressed contempt for the U.S.
 Vietnam, China’s other main adversary in the sea, recently pledged to resolve its maritime dispute bilaterally . Vietnam and China have been involved in a dispute for years .
 Nobody yet knows what America’s policy on South China Sea will be under Donald Trump . But increasingly it looks as if Cambodia has picked the winning side .
 There is a shortage of maths and science teachers, but a surfeit of physical-education instructors .
 Thailand spends too much money propping up small schools, says Dilaka Lathapipat of the World Bank . Thailand is spending too much on small schools.
Road-building and other improvements in infrastructure mean most schools are now within 20 minutes of another . Opening lots of village schools once helped Thailand achieve impressive attendance rates .
 Over the next ten years falling birth rates will reduce school rolls by more than 1m . It will be harder for tiny institutions to provide adequate instruction at a reasonable cost .
 Prayuth Chan-ocha, Thailand’s prime minister and leader of its junta, says school reform is urgently needed .
 Some of his goals are aimed more at boosting his and the monarchy’s prestige than making children smarter . But some are aimed at boosting the monarchy's prestige, rather than making kids smarter .
 Mr Prayuth grumbled that few Thai children could cite the achievements of long-dead kings . He took power in a coup in 2014.
 The monarch ordered schools to display a list of 12 “Thai’s” values, including obedience to elders . He drew up a list that includes understanding democracy and loyalty to the monarch .
 In June the government restarted a long-stalled plan to merge small schools . Authorities say they hope to subsume more than 10,000 schools over four years .
 Analysts worry that the junta’s effort to re-centralise government will deprive good schools of independence .
 reformers hope reformers will eventually allow an ossified education system to adopt the best of international practice . But they also hope it will allow reformers to force an Ossified Education system.
 There is talk of education reform in a vague 20-year plan which the junta has promised to bequeath to the nation . Future elected governments will be constitutionally bound to follow .
 Sussan Ley resigned as health minister after claims she misused taxpayers’ money .
As the scandal erupted, the government was pursuing spending cuts and clamping down on some welfare recipients in a bid to balance the budget .
 Ms Ley bought an investment property worth almost A$8oo,ooo in 2015, while on a government-paid visit to the Gold Coast in Queensland . That made it all the more embarrassing that Ms Ley had bought the property in 2015 .
 Ms Ley tried to explain the apparent blurring of public and private business by suggesting that she had bought the flat on impulse .
 Ms Ley called the furore a “distraction’ but has agreed to repay some of the money she claimed she claimed .
 Ms Ley has been one of the more talented and colourful members of Mr Turnbull’s cabinet . Ms Ley is a member of the Turnbull's cabinet .
 The law required states to formalise the practice by issuing licences and designating areas where it was expressly has been a cattle farmer, a cook for sheep shearers and an official in the Australian Taxation Office .
 She failed to heed the lessons of “Choppergate’s expenses scandal, an expenses scandal that rocked the government months ago .
 Bronwyn Bishop spent more than $5,000 chartering a helicopter to attend a Liberal fundraising event . Bishop was then speaker of the lower house .
 Politicians from both sides have charged taxpayers thousands to fly their families with them to events in the farthest corners of the country .
 Australians have paid for Julie Bishop, the foreign minister, to attend a polo match . The foreign minister has been paid to attend the match .
Steve Ciobo says taxpayers 'expect' to pay for politicians to go to sporting events .
 opaque rules have given politicians leeway in judging how much they can get away with . But opaque rules mean politicians can be given more freedom to get away.
 An inquiry after Choppergate called the laws on parliamentary expenses a “complex patchwork’ that was “close to impossible’ to understand and administer’s laws .
 Mr Turnbull has promised to shift responsibility for overseeing mps’ claims to a new independent agency run by auditing experts, a former judge and former mp .
 Politicians will also have to disclose expenses monthly instead of twice a year . Politicians also will have to reveal expenses monthly .
 The government of Maharashtra, of which Mumbai is the capital, had been sitting on its hands for three years . The government had been in charge of the Maharashtra government for 3 years .
 It only decided to act in the run-up to municipal elections in February . It only acted in the running up to the elections .
 The draft rules, however, include a requirement that would-be hawkers be domiciled in Maharashtra .
 Even those who have been living in the city for decades would have trouble proving their status . They tend to live in informal dwellings and so cannot prove an address .
 The proposed rule is the work of the Shiv Sena, a party that blends Maharashtrian chauvinism with Hindu nationalism .
 states do not have the right to bar other Indians from settling or working in India . India is a federal country, but states don't have theright to bar others from settling .
 Only 14,000 of them make use of the existing one, according to unions that represent them . At least ten times that number operate, says union that represents them .
 Those who obtain a licence should find it easier to stand up to bribe-demanding cops and bureaucrats .
 A politician for the opposition Congress party claims the current system allows officials to squeeze some 3bn rupees a month from hawkers .
New rules to keep hawkers on the fringes of legality. If such bounty is indeed to be had, expect the new rules will keep hawker on the edge of legality .
 Motorists can drive for miles without seeing another vehicle, save perhaps for traffic cops manning speed traps .
 The two cities are already connected by the Grand Trunk Road, which is 90km shorter and toll-free . There is simply not much demand for a motorway in the two cities .
 Nawaz Sharif is once again running Pakistan . He was prime minister when it opened in 1997 .
 Mr Sharif enjoys comparisons to Sher Shah Suri, a 16th-century ruler who renovated the Grand Trunk Road . He never tires of talking about it .
 He regained power in 2013 with a campaign which both harked back to his famous road . He also promised more infrastructure to come .
 He even pledged bullet trains that would enable pious passengers to leave Karachi after dawn prayers and arrive in Peshawar, more than 1,000km to the north .
 Pakistan Muslim League Nawaz says investment in infrastructure is foolproof way of boosting economy . It is an article of faith for Mr Sharif and his party, the party says .
 His government is racing to finish umpteen projects before the next election, including a metro line in Lahore and a new airport for Islamabad . The government is also planning to finish an airport in Islamabad by mid-2018 .
 The new airport has been plagued with problems, including runways that have been built too close together . The likelihood is that the new airport will be as underused as most of the country's other airports .
 Pakistan's infrastructure is underused because the economic boom it was meant to trigger has never arrived . Pakistan’s infrastructure has been underused due to the lack of infrastructure .
 Over the past three years the government has successfully staved off a balance-of-payments crisis . The government has achieved some measure of macroeconomic stability .
 It has trimmed the budget deficit, partly by broadening the tax take and cutting energy subsidies . It has also cut energy subsidies and cut taxes .
 Pakistan has begun rebuilding its foreign-exchange reserves . That, along with lower oil prices, has narrowed Pakistan’s trade deficit .
Terrorism and insurgency have put off investors, both foreign and domestic investors . But terrorism and insurgency has put off investment in the past .
 The country is also held back by inefficient and often cartelised industries, which have fallen behind rivals in India and Bangladesh .
 Almost half of all those aged five to 16 are out of school-25m children . Almost half are out-of-school children .
 Health, like education, is woefully underfunded, in part because successive governments shy away from taxing the wealthy .
 Much of it is being financed on commercial terms, including several power plants . Much of the money is being spent on commercial and commercial terms .
 Pakistan undoubtedly needs to relieve a chronic shortage of electricity . Pakistan undoubtedly need to relieve the chronic shortage.
 Critics fear the country will struggle to pay back the debt, especially if foreign-exchange earnings from exports continue to dwindle .
 At the very least, the government will need to continue chasing deadbeat customers to pay their bills and cutting expensive subsidies-steps that are deeply unpopular .
Cpec is supposed to link China by land to Gwadar, a deep-water port on the Arabian Sea, in the hope of creating a lucrative new trade route . In addition to boosting Pakistan’s power supply, cpec is also supposed to boost Pakistan's power supply
 The Karakoram Highway between the two countries was built in the 1960s at vast expense over a high and crumbly mountain range . It is being upgraded as part of the trade corridor .
 Sceptics say Xinjiang, China's westernmost region, is too poor for better transport links to make much difference to Pakistan's economy .
 Securing isolated stretches of road from separatist rebels in Balochistan is also gobbling up large amounts of cash .
 China is all too aware that Pakistan needs more than just big-ticket infrastructure if it is to flourish . Lijian Zhao, a Chinese diplomat, says China is too aware of Pakistan's need for infrastructure .
 He praises the efforts of Britain and other countries to improve Pakistan’s ‘software’ He says education and the rule of law are key to Pakistan's success .
 It may not concern Mr Sharif unduly if the next generation of roads is as deserted as the last .
 Civilian governments have often struggled to get much done in between military coups . Voters are impressed by gleaming new projects, even if they never use them .
 The approach has worked for Mr Sharif’s brother, Shehbaz, the popular chief minister of Punjab province .
 He has lavished resources on endless sequences of overand underpasses to create ‘signal-free’ corridors in Lahore, the provincial capital, that are of most benefit to the rich minority .
 Khawaja Saad Rafique, the railways minister, recently admitted that the country would not be getting a bullet train after all .
 Xi Jinping tries to portray his country as a rock of stability in a troubled world . The new Davos man is the new leader of China .
 D ELEGATES at the World Economic Forum in Davos often treat politicians as rock stars . His timing, at least, is faultless .
 Xi Jinping's reception to China's leader, Xi Jinping, on January 17th was extraordinary .
 He was the first Chinese president to attend the annual gathering of the world’s business and political elite .
 Even an overflow room was packed when he delivered, in his usual dour manner . He delivered a speech laced with literary references-rendered through bulky headsets .
 The world’s most powerful communist presenting himself as a champion of globalisation and open markets .
 Mr Xi did not mention Donald Trump by name, nor even America, but his message was clear . Mr Xi was next to a panda icesculpture.
 Mr Xi likened protectionism to “locking oneself in a dark room’s dark room, a phrase delegates repeated with delight .
 His words seemed comforting to many after a year of political surprises, not least in America and Britain .
 Mr Xi quoted from Dickens to describe a ‘world of contradictions’ as he put it . Mr Xi said Dickens described a world of contradictions .
 Many foreign businesses complain about what they regard as a rise of protectionism in China . But no one could accuse Mr Xi of being out of tune with the Davos mood .
 The Chinese president also portrayed his country as a staunch defender of the environment . The president also said his country was a staunch advocate for the environment.
 Trump's threat to reject the pact will make China's commitment to it all the more crucial .
 The timing of Xi's trip was fortuitous according to the Financial Times . His aides were working on it before Britain voted to leave the European Union .
 He must have relished the points that enabled him to score at Davos . But he must have re- relished those points that helped him to win the title .
 Britain would vote to stay in the eu and that Mr Trump would not win. Mr Xi would have relished the occasion even had the predictions.
 The forum is one where embarrassing questions about China’s politics are seldom raised openly . China's politics are rarely raised openly.
 Previously, the highest-ranking Chinese attendees had been prime ministers .
 Li Yuanchao, who ranks lower than the prime minister in the party hierarchy, led the team in 2016 .
 China's slowing economy in wake of stockmarket crash and sudden devaluation of the yuan .
 Many analysts still worry about China's economy . But the West's problems have loomed larger over the Swiss Alps this week .
 Xi shows no signs of wanting to take over as world's chief troubleshooter, even if Mr Trump shuns that role .
 He is unlikely to take the lead in making the world a better place. But he is likely to be the world's most successful man .
 China's first aircraftcarrier, the Liaoning, was combat ready in November . China's navy dispatched an impressive-looking carrier battle-group with three escorting destroyers, a couple of frigates, a corvette and a refuelling ship .
 It sailed from the northern port of Qingdao down through the Miyalco Strait . It sailed past Taiwan and into the South China Sea .
 Three weeks later the Liaoning was back in port having sailed home via the Taiwan Strait . The Liaoning has completed a loop around the island .
 Taiwanese scrambled fighter jets and sent naval ships to monitor the group’s progress .
 Shenyang j-15 fighters staged a series of take-off and landing drills . The Chinese ships showed off their firepower, with Shenyang J-15 fighter taking off and landings .
 The carrier, acquired as a partially built hulk from Ukraine in 1998, formally entered naval service . He had meticulously prepared for this moment .
 China’s deployment of an aircraft-carrier is not a military game-changer . China's deployment of a military aircraft is not an aircraft carrier .
 It is a conspicuous symbol of the country’s ambitions as a maritime and global power . But it is a symbol of its ambitions.
 The Liaoning has been a crucial building block for the navy in its evolution from a coastal defence force to a modern navy . China uses the Liaoning to assert its maritime claims in the East and South China Seas .
 China expects its navy to become a powerful blue-water fleet within the next 25 years . China expects it to protect the country's farflung commercial interests .
 To that end, probably around 2004, China made up its mind that it must have aircraft-carriers .
 Second, indigenously designed one, based on Liaoning but with latest radar and space for more aircraft, is nearing completion at the northern port of Dalian .
 Many analysts believe that a third such vessel, larger and more complex, is under construction in Shanghai .
 IISS walk, run’s approach to developing a carrier capability, recognising the difficulties involved . IISS walked, run and run is a step towards developing carrier capability .
America lost 8,500 aircrew in the 40 years to 1988 on its way to reaching what Mr Erickson calls its current “gold standard’ of carrier expertise. Carrier operations are inherently dangerous, he says .
 The ship is based on the Soviet Kuznetsov-class design of the ship . Much modified and fettled by the Chinese.
 It is big, with a displacement of about 60,000 tons, but nowhere near the size of America’s super-carriers such as the uss Ronald Reagan, which is based in Japan .
 Liaoning pales in comparison with America’s 10 Nimitzclass carriers .
 Liaoning can only handle 24 J-15S (based on the Russian Sukhoi su-33) and a handful of helicopters . The Liaoning is based on the SukhoI su- 33 .
 Unlike the American carriers, it lacks a catapult to propel aircraft from its deck . Unlike the U.S. carriers, the carrier has no catapult .
 The J-15S have to carry a lighter load of weapons and fuel . As a result, the J- 15S are more likely to carry more weapons than the other models .
 Heavier, slower airborne early-warning and anti-submarine aircraft cannot take off from the Liaoning at all . The Liaoning is the world's most powerful air carrier .
 That limits the type of missions the ship can perform and makes the vessel vulnerable when operating beyond the range of shore-based aircraft . The ship can't perform any missions that can't be carried out by the ship .
 The Liaoning also depends on a notoriously unreliable Soviet-era design for its steam turbines, which cuts its range and speed compared with the Nimitz-class carriers .
 Office of Naval Intelligence has dismissed Liaoning's ability to project naval power over a long distance .
 It can provide air-protection for China’s fleet, and would be a major asset in disaster-relief or evacuation missions .
 A Liaoning-led battle group would also seem pretty formidable to neighbours, such as Vietnam or the Philippines, should China feel like bullying them, says Peter Singer .
 Liaoning is giving the navy the experience that it is giving to the navy in the complex choreography of carrier operations . But the main value of the Liaoning was the experience of the navy.
 Those skills will help in the eventual deployment of indigenously designed carriers . They will be used in the future deployment of carriers .
 The carrier thought to be under construction in Shanghai will be a genuine flat-top . This has fuelled speculation that the carrier is under construction .
 It is possible that the ship will also be nuclear-powered, which could give it the range and speed of American carriers .
 As a rule of thumb, you need three to be certain of having one at sea all the time .
 Some analysts in China have been suggesting a fleet as large as six . Mr Erickson says that some analysts have suggested a fleet of six .
 Mr Singer thinks it is possible that China’s carriers will one day match the capability of American ones .
 China can copy a lot, without combat experience and “tribal knowledge’s’S, it will find it hard to attain that level .
 Submarines are less vulnerable, but highly visible ships bristling with weaponry are still badges of pride for aspiring great powers like China .
 As in America, the view in China that carriers and status go together will be hard to change. As in the U.S. it will be difficult to change, according to CNN.
 We’ve all had our fill of politicians who waffle their way around the important issues and say nothing .
 They make the Twitter timeline, the Brexit referendum and become the next President of the U.S. They will be the next president of the United States . They will also make the twitter timeline.
 Whether you want to reach government, investors, lobbyists or journalists, you need to say something clearly, even if it is going to put a few celebrity noses out of joint .
 At Thoburns, we go beyond PR and advertising and look at different ways to say interesting things . Our approach is to bring a provocative mind, and a different perspective .
 Pepper Sells atsells@thoburns.com.com and see if we can help your organization find its voice .
 I F THE world’s most popular museum, drawing overism visitors a year, suddenly offered a priceless haul of artefacts-on permanent loan . It is absolutely free-you would expect that city's residents to jump for joy .
 The Palace Museum occupies most of Beijing’s vast Forbidden City . Hong Kong's Palace Museum is doing the offering .
 Hong Kong’s chief secretary Carrie Lam announced surprise plans to build a branch of the Palace Museum in a showcase cultural district going up on reclaimed land .
 Mark O’Neill has written a book on the Forbidden City’s treasures . The cultural and commercial benefits for Hong Kong are unarguable, he says .
 The complex was the seat of China’s emperors from the 15th century until Pu Yi resigned in 1912 . Pu Yi, the last emperor, resigned in 2012 .
 The Palace Museum is able to display less thani% of the collection at any time . It houses such an array of imperial Chinese pieces that the Palace Museum can display only a fraction of them .
 A trove on show in Hong Kong would draw in millions of visitors a year . The Hong Kong exhibition would be the first time the city has hosted a show in its history .
Think of all the merchandising possibilities, from catalogues to replicas of jewellery and furniture . Think of all of the merchandise possibilities, as well as ticket sales .
 The whole city would profit from increased visitors. Not just the museum but the entire city would benefit .
 One country, two Hong Kongs So great is the furore, however, that it may even scupper the plans .
 On one side are those who favour smooth relations with mainland China and who would do the bidding of China's Communist masters in Beijing .
 Hong Kongers resent the central government’s growing influence and heavy hand, and aim zealously to guard Hong Kong's freedoms . On the other areHong Kongers who resent central government's growing influence .
 Pro-democracy politicians staged a protest in the subway system in front of a huge display promoting the museum project .
 leaders said they were not opposed to the idea of a museum, but to the murky way in which the decision in favour of it was reached . Their leaders said the decision was reached.
 They made clear that they associated the Forbidden City mostly with the crackdown on students who in 1989 protested in Tiananmen Square just in front of it . They also made clear they associated it with the bloody crackdown on student protests in 1989 .
 Hong Kong administration has called for politics not to be dragged into the debate . But at the same time the Hong Kong government calls for politics to be not dragged into debate .
 China's rulers want a museum in Hong Kong precisely to make a political point . China’s rulers want the museum to be a museum .
 As local obstreperousness has grown, Hong Kongers have lamented that brattish residents lack patriotism and appreciation for China's greatness .
 The Yongle emperor, or rather thousands of forced labourers, built it as an expression of Ming-dynasty might .
At the height of the Cultural Revolution, Mao Zedong stood before the Forbidden City to call for the destruction of all traits carried over from old, imperial China .
 Zhou Enlai said to have closed it to save it from rampaging mobs of Red Guards .
 It was reopened in 1971 when Henry Kissinger visited Beijing as part of America’s effort to forge ties with the Communist regime . It was re-opened in 1971 after Kissinger visited in 1971 .
 Mr O'Neill points out there was no better way to impress on Mr Kissinger a sense of China's power and sophistication .
 Thousands of tourists gather every morning to watch paramilitary troops march out of the Forbidden City, goose-step across the road .
 The Palace Museum in Beijing has a far finer display than the one in Beijing . It has the word “National’ at the beginning of its name .
Hundreds of thousands of artefacts, mostly from the Forbidden City, were carried to Taiwan by Chiang Kai-shek and his Kuomintang forces when they retreated in 1949 .
 For Chiang, the treasures boosted the kmt’s claim to be the sole and rightful ruler of China .
 Beijing's Palace Museum lent pieces to its Taiwanese counterpart as a mark of goodwill . Ma Ying-jeou stepped down last year .
 The kmt used Taiwan's Palace Museum to make a point about the island’s distinct identity . But even thekmt used the museum to highlight the island's distinct identity.
 A branch of the collection opened two years ago near Chiayi, a city in southern Taiwan .
 Taiwan is an island nation steeped in Asian influences . It emphasises a history of Taiwan not as an adjunct to China but as an island country .
 Taiwan has sought to enforce Taiwan’s diplomatic isolation. The treasures remain a source of soft power, with Taiwan lending them to the world's top museums .
 China's leaders will be peeved at the ingratitude of many residents over the museum offer . Hong Kong's leaders are peeved over the offer .
 Hong Kongers' refusal to be awed by a supposedly glorious past is hardly surprising . But Hong Konger's refusal is not surprising, it's not surprising .
 China is denying them full democracy. Their problem is an inglorious present, with China denying it full democracy . China's problem is a problem with China's lack of democracy .
 China’s problem is that it is still scrabbling for a source of soft power with which to appeal . China is still trying to find soft power to appeal.
 Californians expressed their anger and disappointment in different and creative ways . California's most progressive state is set to lead the new fight against federal power .
 Some took to the streets and burnt papier-mache effigies of Mr Trump’s bronzed face .
 Kevin de Leon and Anthony Rendon, the leaders of the California Senate and Assembly, released a statement . The statement was released by the two leaders .
 California lawmakers are putting their words into action as Mr Trump takes residence in White House .
 During the Obama administration, Texas and Oklahoma were strident advocates for state sovereignty .
 Several other states also challenged the federal government in court and by making their own laws . The federal government also challenged its own laws.
 Democrats find themselves turning to the states as bulwarks of resistance. But with the election of Mr Trump, it is Democrats who find themselves turned to states .
 California, America's most populous and progressive state, will lead the blue-state opposition .
 California has plumped for Democrats since the early i990s-Hillary Clinton won by a margin of 30 percentage points .
 Democrats hold the governor’s mansion and both houses of the state legislature . It is one of six states where Democrats hold both the governor's mansion and the legislature .
 California's largest economy-stands to lose more than any other state . If America’s new president honours his promises to deport illegal immigrants, repeal the Affordable Care Act .
 More than 3m undocumented immigrants call the Golden State home . The Migration Policy Institute reckons the Golden state is home to many .
 These workers make up nearly 10% of the workforce and contribute $i3obn-or about 5%-of the state’s annual output .
 Health Access California estimates that the state government could lose $22bn in federal funding annually if Obamacare is gutted . Some 5m Californians could find themselves without health coverage .
 California is likely to continue complying with or even exceed the requirements laid out in the framework .
Companies might find themselves at a competitive disadvantage if other states do not. But its companies might find itself at a disadvantage if others do not .
 On December 5th California’s lawmakers introduced a package of laws to impede mass deportation .
 One bill would create a programme to fund legal representation for immigrants in deportation hearings . The bill would also create a scheme to fund representation for illegal immigrants .
 A recent national study found that immigrants with legal counsel were fiveand-a-half times more likely to avoid deportation than if they represented themselves .
Only 14% of detained immigrants in deportation proceedings had lawyers . Only 14% had lawyers in deportation hearings .
 Gun control, health care and environmental policy are other areas where Democrat-dominated states might focus in the coming years .
 The leaves are brown. Several states are also getting ready to challenge the Trump administration in court .
 Eric Holder served as Mr Obama's attorney-general as outside counsel . California State Legislature announced earlier this month that it had retained Eric Holder .
 He will work with the state’s next attorney-general to bring suits against the federal government . He will be working with the next attorney general to bring suit against federal government.
 California’s decision to hire outside counsel is distinctive, but litigation as a means of stalling the federal government is hardly new .
 In 2010, a group of mostly Republican attorneys-general filed a lawsuit to block Obamacare . The lawsuit was filed by mostly Republican lawyers-general .
 The Lone Star State sued the Obama administration at least 48 times during Mr Obama’s term .
 Hiring Mr Holder “sends a message to the administration about the state’s resolve to defend our people, our diversity, and economic output,’ says Mr de Leon .
 Gavin Newsom, California’s lieutenant-governor who will run for governor in 2018, has said the state could sue under the California Environmental Quality Act or its federal equivalent to quash Mr Trump's plans for a wall along the border with Mexico .
 The argument would rest on the claim that construction of the wall could upset water flows and quality as well as wildlife .
 Donald Trump may unwittingly be a revitalising force for American feminism . Trump's admission on tape that he grabbed women “by the pussy’s by the pussy without their consent .
 Republicans-and voters-eventually looked past his attitude towards women . Yet Republicans- and voters- eventually looked Past his attitude toward women .
 Many Americans remain worried that a Trump presidency heralds a new age of sexism and misogyny . Many Americans, however, remain worried about a new era of misogyny .
 In the days after the election, donations to women’s non-profit groups surged .
 Women worried that access to birth-control would be curtailed . So did demand for contraception, as women worried it would be cut .
 On January 21st, some 200,000 men and women are expected to turn up at a march in Washington to protest against regressive policies and demand equal treatment for Still suffering women .
 The march grew from two unrelated Facebook posts into the ‘Women’s March on Washington’ The march promises to be the biggest single anti-Trump demonstration yet .
 It was originally called the “Million Women March’s’. Organisers were admonished for appropriating the name of the 1997 ‘Million Woman March” It focused on African-American women and focused on women .
 Others claimed that it too closely resembled the 1963 ‘March on Washington’ led by Martin Luther King Jr. Others claimed it too similar to the 1963 March on Washington .
 It is the kind of semantic nitpicking that has made progressive movements unappealing to many Americans . It is a kind of semantics nitpicking. It has made progressives unappeal to many people .
 The protest platform embraces other causes-immigrant rights, ending police brutality, climate protection-as integral to women’s progress .
 The organisers argue that matters of social justice and women’s rights go hand in hand .
 In the comfortable Obama years, many liberal Americans believed feminism’s work was mostly finished .
 The final way in which blue states can resist Mr Trump’s policy agenda is by trying to get around federal policy .
California already has cap-and-trade agreements with foreign jurisdictions such as Quebec . California already has agreements with other countries such as Canada .
 Mr de Leon says that under the Trump administration the state will work to expand such programmes .
 Nine states in the north-east have participated in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, a capand-trade programme . Since 2009 nine states have participated.
 Even if climate protections are relaxed under Mr Trump, such an alliance could continue .
 California has legislation preventing local jails from holding people for extra time just so that federal immigration enforcement officers can deport them .
 There are 5,800 federal deportation agents compared with 750,000 state and local police officers . Such policies are likely to be effective at obstructing a massive dragnet .
 Deporting undocumented immigrants without local co-operation is much more difficult . Deporting undocumented immigrants with local help is more difficult.
 Mr Trump has threatened to cut federal funding for jurisdictions that insist on adhering to “sanctuary’s policies . Mr Somin suggests that courts may not look kindly on such an action .
 Chinese leader hints he might upgrade ties with Taiwan, the island that Chinese leaders call no more than a breakaway province .
Members rallied supporters on Chineselanguage internet forums and messaging apps . WeChat attracts outsize d attention from media outlets and elected officials .
 Mr Wang remains a true believer in Diamond Bar, an affluent, majority-Asian city east of Los Angeles .
 Typically, most combined a mild preference for Democrats with a general wariness of party politics . Usually, most combine mild preference with mild preference.
 Early immigrants from southern China, Hong Kong and Taiwan lacked education and “worked in bad jobs,’s sniffs Mr Wang .
 Recent immigrants from mainland China often attended good universities, he says . They often work in the professions and “want to mingle with white people’s, he adds .
 Chinese-Americans mobilised against SCA5, a proposed amendment to California’s constitution that would have opened the door to race-based affirmative action .
 Many ChineseAmericans charge that race-conscious school admissions hurt high-achieving Asian youngsters . Many Chinese Americans favour black and Hispanic candidates and favour black candidates .
 Phillip Chen, a young Republican of Taiwanese descent, won a seat in the California state Assembly in November . Chen represents Diamond Bar and a swathe of nearby suburbs .
 Asian-Americans, who make up about a third of his district's registered voters, shunned politics . They longed to assimilate and fit in other ways .
 At the recent election his own mother's friends wondered aloud why her son was running for office .
 Chinese-American constituents admire Mr Trump’s business acumen and worry about taxes, regulation and law and order .
 Taiwan's new president will be watching the new president with a wary eye . But they also want peace between Taiwan and China, he says .
 Asian shopping centre in Rowland Heights is the most worried. Mike Lee, a sales director from Taiwan, backed Hillary Clinton .
 Mr Trump fears that Mr Trump will use the island as a “bargaining chip’ with China . He fears that he will use it as a 'bargain chip'
 Hundreds of thousands of leaked documents included a video of a shocking American airstrike on innocent Iraqis . The video was carelessly mistaken for terrorists .
 A caustic ambassadorial cable describing the sybaritic lifestyle of Tunisian presidential family may have sparked Arab Spring .
 The leaked cables mostly exposed nothing more than mild hypocrisy and buried literary talents . In truth, though, the leaked cables were mostly harmless, though .
 In some countries-China and Zimbabwe, for example, discussions with U.S. officials are regarded as tantamount to treason . There and elsewhere retribution duly followed .
 People mistakenly trusted America’s ability to keep a conversation private . So too did costly and secret State Department efforts to protect, where possible .
 The soldier was jailed for 35 years on 22 charges, including espionage .
 Fans decried persecution of a brave whistle-blower, and what seemed vindictively harsh treatment, including nearly a year of solitary confinement . Fans decry persecution of the whistle- blower, including almost a year in solitary confinement.
 The authorities allowed her to take hormone-replacement therapy, but not to grow her hair . The authorities let her take hormone replacement therapy .
 Chelsea Manning, now aged 29, was the most prominent name on a list of presidential pardons and commutations . Most of the commutations involved those serving long terms for drug offences .
 Her sentence will now end in May, after almost seven years behind bars . She was sentenced to seven years in prison for nearly seven years .
 Critics argue that Ms Manning ignored whistle-blowing criteria, such as trying internal channels first .
 WikiLeaks’ founder, Julian Assange, holed up since 2012 in the Ecuadorean embassy in London to avoid questioning in a Swedish sexual-assault case .
 WikiLeaks had said he would be willing to face trial in America for leaking secrets if Ms Manning was pardoned .
 Edward Snowden fled to Russia in 2013. The other is Edward Snowden, an intelligence contractor who fled in 2013 .
 Officials dismissed any talk of forgiveness for Manning, saying that the damage he had done was far graver . They said that Ms Manning had already served a sufficient sentence .
 Despite his clemency splurge, Mr Obama has been mostly regarded as rather harsh on whistle-blowers .
 Lexington visited the Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum in Yorba Linda, California . The potential urgency of this question took Lexington on a cross-country pilgrimage .
 The museum reopened in October after an expensive overhaul . It attempts to weigh the flaws of the 37th president against his undoubted merits . The museum opened in October.
 The only president to resign the office of the U.S. President Barack Obama has been in office for more than a decade .
 New display allows visitors to photograph themselves on the Great Wall of China next to a life-size Nixon cut-out . Nixon visited the wall in 1972 and visited China in 1972 .
 The display explains how Nixon prevented a bloodbath by ordering his Secret Service agent to hold fire on his car in 1958 .
 The museum hails Nixon for rallying a “silent majority’ of Americans who felt ignored and disdained by bossy, self-dealing elites .
 Nixon balanced a conservative's wariness of big government with a pragmatist's willingness to wield federal authority to heal chronic ills .
 The museum admits via filmed interviews with aides and family members-Nixon was a brooding introvert, ‘suspicious’ to the point of paranoia .
 Nixon recorded conversations with hidden microphones to preserve his presidency for posterity .
 One guide spends long minutes explaining Maoist China to two youngsters perched on the sofas in a replica of his Oval Office from around 1969 .
 The museum's historical displays have become more candid over the years . The complex became part of the official presidential library system in 2007 .
 The museum would like visitors to judge Nixon the man, which is why it includes a sculpture of a favourite dog curled up in an armchair . Yorba Linda was a rural backwater when he was born in a modest cottage .
First, Nixon employed in his cabinet and White House many clever men with brilliant cvs. First, Nixon used in his Cabinet and the White House .
 Nixon's White House tapes show him ordering illegal acts . The Supreme Court had not forced Nixon to release tapes of his illegal acts.
 A striking interview, filmed in 2008, shows Bob Dole, who later became a party leader and presidential candidate, conceding that he tried to convince himself that sinister aides were behind every misdeed .
 The museum records Nixon fulminating against perceived tormentors in the press .
 West Wing briefing room-a facility whose future is currently in doubt . But photographs also show him acknowledging its reach by speaking .
Reporters who unearthed a new Watergate would start with roughly half of the country ready to disbelieve them .
 The Nixon museum shows how the symbolic power of the presidency can cow dissent, even in this sceptical age . The museum also shows how it can also cow dissent .
 Tours end with a peek into a lovingly restored Sea King helicopter used by four presidents . The helicopter was used by the four presidents.
 A reverential guide points out a chic white racing stripe along the dark green fuselage, painted at Jacqueline Kennedy’s suggestion .
 The aircraft is the one that carried Nixon into enforced retirement, and museum-goers look no less impressed . He adds, lightly, that the aircraft is one that brought Nixon into retirement .
 On January 16th 1992 the government signed a peace accord with left-wing guerrillas at Chapultepec castle in Mexico City, ending a 12-year civil war in which 75,000 people died . The government signed the peace accord in January 1992 .
 The agreement, followed by a truth commission, laid bare the war’s atrocities and by an amnesty, was a model for reconciliation in other countries . The agreement was followed by the truth commission.
 The festivities held to commemorate it this week fell flat. Stirring as that achievement was, it fell flat .
 The convention centre in San Salvador’s Zona Rosa, not far from where guerrillas invaded the capital in 1989, was emptier than normal for big events . In 1989, the first peace talks were held in the capital .
 A small exhibition displaying military uniforms, guerrillas’ weapons and quotes about peace from Confucius and John Lennon .
 The crowd seemed more interested in free pupusas (bean-and-cheese filled tortillas) than in speeches .
 The event ended with a confetti drop, listless applause and a return to the food queues . The event was held in London, London and London .
 The mood was downbeat because El Salvador’s 6m people have little to celebrate . El Salvador's 6million people are under the influence of El Salvador .
 Alejandro Marroqui'n is a member of a breakdancing group that was invited to the commemoration . The dominant feeling these days is “fear, not peace’s’n, he says .
 Having fled gang violence in greater San Salvador four years ago, he thinks that “the war has continued.’s war has been continuing, he says .
 El Salvador is the most violent country in the Americas, with a murder rate of 80 per 100,000 people . The murder rate is more than 15 times that of the United States . El Salvador has a homicide rate of more than 20 per cent .
 Two post-war presidents face charges; another died last January before he could be tried . Another one died last year before he was tried .
 That is the highest level since the university started asking the question a decade ago . The university has asked the question for more than a decade .
 A big factor behind these let-downs is the flaws of the main political parties, heirs to the combatants of the civil war . A big issue is the failure of the major political parties.
 Since the peace accord, the right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance and the leftist Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front have had turns in power .
 The antagonism between them is abnormal for rivals in a democratic system. The antagonisms between them are abnormal for rivals in the democratic system .
 The fmln still yearns for socialism, though it has reconciled itself to the market economy for now . The fmn still has a long way to go, but it has been reconciled with the market .
 The clash “doesn’t allow for a vision of the country” says Luis Mario Rodriguez of Fusades, a pro-business think-tank .
 The only thing the parties agree on is that the real point of wielding power is to enjoy the spoils .
 The result is what Salvadoreans call a “patrimonial state, which justifies itself through patronage and stifles any institution that stands up to it. The result of the state is a ‘patrionial state’
 El Salvador's leaders now realise that a new peace agreement of sorts is needed . El Salvador’s leaders now finally realise that the peace agreement is needed.
 Mr Andion, a Mexican diplomat, will interpret that is unclear . Just how he will interpret this is unclear, he says .
 Some suggest that his job will be to help broker a peace between the government and two main gangs, Barrio 18 and Mara Salvatrucha .
 Mr Andion’s appointment is to ‘address the key challenges’ affecting El Salvador, which sounds like a broader brief .
 Just as in 1992, “we need dialogue that matches today’s historical moment,’ says Mr Sanchez Ceren .
 Budget brinkmanship has brought El Salvador to the brink of economic catastrophe . El Salvador has been hit by an economic crisis in the past two years .
 The central government nearly ran out of cash late last year . After years of slow growth and overspending, in part to prop up a state pension scheme, the central government almost ran out.
 The opposition stopped making monthly payments to municipalities . The opposition, which has more seats in congress, stopped making payments .
 Health workers went on strike after the government reneged on wage agreements . Health workers were angry about the government's reneging on wage agreement .
 A deal in November between the gov. and Arena averted disaster by allowing the government to issue $550m of new debt in exchange for agreeing to a “fiscal-responsibility law’s” law . The law would cap borrowing and spending .
 The opposition has refused to approve the budget for 2017 . The opposition is doubting that the government will keep its fiscal promises .
 The quarrel is partly about how to reduce the budget deficit, which was an estimated 4% of gdp last year . The quarrel was partly about reducing the deficit.
 The fmln wants to lift the government’s low revenue by raising income tax and levying one on property .
 A ‘negotiating table’ set up last April has so far failed to come up with a solution . A “negotiated table” set up in April last year has sofar failed to find a solution.
 The government has called in the imf, which may now broker a resolution to the crisis .
 A budget deal, if it happens, would unlock just one of the many manacles on the economy . A deal could unlock just a few of the key manacles in the economy.
 El Salvador’s use of the strong dollar as its currency keeps prices stable but holds back exports . El Salvador's use of a strong dollar has kept prices stable and exports stable .
 El Salvador depends on remittances from 2m Salvadoreans living in the U.S. El Salvador has a trade deficit of nearly 20% of its gdp .
 Its biggest firms are consumer-oriented conglomerates that mainly live off the American bounty . Its biggest firm is consumer-orientated conglomerates .
 Nothing constrains the economy more than crime, which deters investment and drives young workers out of the country . Nothing constrs the economy.
 The cost of violence and insecurity is 16% Argentina Tango in trouble . The flat-footed economy is pulling dancers off the floor .
 17 milongas closed. With a weak economy and high inflation cutting into incomes, attendance fell by half last year .
 A milonga is a dance as well as an event, a forerunner to the tango that mixes Cuban, African and European influences .
 In tango's heyday, some 70 years ago, milongas attracted thousands of dancers .
 If she accepts, the pair will dance anti-clockwise to a tanda, or set of three or four songs .
 A cortina, a few seconds of music, signals the end of a set . The man escorts his partner back to her seat .
 Young milongueros prefer modern tango, which mixes music of classical composers like Carlos Gardel, who died in 1935 .
 It sets up a registry and offers tax exemptions and 9m pesos a year of financial aid from the budget . It also offers tax exemption and financial aid.
 In September one local government in western El Salvador set up a camp on a basketball court for dozens of families that had been ordered to leave by gangs . It is the first settlement for internally displaced people since the civil war .
 The fmln government, which tries to seem as tough on criminals as is the opposition, claims that its recent crackdown is working .
 The government has largely cut off phone contact between imprisoned gangsters and their confederates on the outside . They operate the extortion business and carry out murders .
 Mara Salvatrucha and a faction of Barrio 18, perhaps weakened by the government’s offensive, have proposed a dialogue with the government and offered to lay down their arms .
 Critics contend that the government’s mano dura policies have worsened conditions in prisons .
 Police say that the killing of gangsters by police amounts to state-sponsored murder . They say that they are responsible for the deaths of the gangsters .
 Such brutality will provoke more violence, says Jose Luis Sanz, director of El Faro, a digital newspaper .
 When the state does something right, it is usually in spite of the main parties rather than because of them .
 The process of appointing people to sensitive jobs as prosecutor and high-court judge is designed to ensure that only creatures of the political parties get them .
 Douglas Melendez, attorney-general since 2016, has been pursuing corruption cases against figures of both parties . Melendez has been in charge since 2016 .
 Antonio Saca, who governed until 2009 as a member of Arena, is in jail awaiting trial on charges that he helped embezzle $246m of public money . Saca is accused of embezzling roughly 1% of the public money.
 The constitutional court has shown an independent streak by challenging political parties’ abuses . The court has also challenged political parties' abuses .
 El Salvador’s best hope for cleaning up government and modernising politics . Such checks on power are El Salvador's best hope.
 Demonstrators encouraged by the fmln have been issuing death threats against constitutional judges, says Sidney Blanco .
 The Summit convenes key stakeholders in the inclusive finance ecosystem to drive collective actions to promote positive change and inclusive growth across the region .
 Photos of Mr Melendez in the company of foreign ambassadors send the message that he is not alone, notes Mr Burgos .
 American support for the attorney-general is part of a broader programme to improve governance, investment conditions and law enforcement in El Salvador . The aim is to weaken the lure of emigration to the United States .
 El Salvador is a beneficiary of the Alliance for Prosperity, which provides it and the two Cuban migrants Special no more HAVANA and MEXICO CITY .
 Barack Obama ended the 22-year-old "wet foot, dry foot" policy on January 12th . The policy allowed Cubans who land on American soil to stay in the country . Those caught at sea were sent home .
 That shuts off the main escape route for Cubans in search of a better life . Cubans are looking for better life in the United States .
 Donald Trump has said contradictory things about the rapprochement with Cuba . His more recent comments have been negative . Trump will become the American president on January 20th .
 Some members of his transition team are fierce opponents of the normalisation policy . Some of the transition team members are also fierce opponents.
 Trump's administration may try to undo the rapprochement with Cuba, which includes freer travel and better telecoms links with the island .
 Mr Trump does not like immigration; he will find it awkward to reverse a decision that makes it more difficult .
 It will be tricky to justify reopening automatic asylum for Cubans but not for citizens of countries that are even more repressive . It will also be tricky for Cuban citizens to justify.
 Many Cubans rushed to the U.S. to see if the United States would shut its Cubans-only entrance . The United States will not shut Cubans only entrance .
 In fiscal year 2016, 56,000 arrived in September, more than double the number of two years before . The fiscal year ended in September .
 Central America’s ‘northern triangle’, Guatemala and Honduras, with nearly $750m a year . Many paid thousands of other countries in Central America.
 Authorisation to spend that money in El Salvador probably would have been withheld had the government shut Mr Melendez down .
 Salvadoreans expect assistance to continue under the Trump presidency . Salvadores expect that assistance to remain under the president .
El Salvador's political will is needed to reform El Salvador, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says El Salvador's own politicians should be responsible for the country's political problems . El Salvador has a long history of corruption, he says .
 One popular route started with a flight to Ecuador, followed by a perilous land j ourney through Central America . Another popular route includes a flight from Ecuador to Ecuador .
 Some Cubans still venture into leaky boats to cross the Florida Strait . Some still venture in to cross Florida Strait.
 Obama’s abrupt decision to end the wet foot, dry foot policy leaves some-no-one is sure how many-stranded en route to the United States .
 The U.S. says it will try to give them humanitarian assistance . They will now be treated just like others clamouring for admission .
 About a third were from Central America’s ‘northern triangle’ The region is less repressive than in Cuba but violence is far worse .
 Cubans who face The Economist January 2lst 2017 political persecution will still have a right to asylum . Cubans face political persecution.
 Others can apply for the 20,000 migrant visas available to the country’s citizens each year .
 Mr Obama's wet foot, dry foot reversal, and his simultaneous decision to stop giving Cuban doctors who defect from a third country fast-track entry to the United States .
 The regime has become more repressive since he unfroze relations, they maintain . The regime is now more repressive than before .
 Defenders of Mr Obama's thaw point out that the government now uses shortterm detention rather than long jail sentences .
 Trump has complained that the U.S. gets “nothing’ from its new relationship with Cuba . It has led to co-operation in such areas as drugtrafficking and cyber-crime .
 Cuba's government saw wet foot, dry foot policy as an insult and a cause of a damaging brain drain . Cuba’s government is pleased.
 Wet foot, dry foot was just ‘another way to implement the blockade’ said a well-dressed woman who would not give her name .
 Most Cubans leave for financial reasons, not political ones, says housewife . Barbara Izquierdo's brother went to U.S. 15 years ago .
 Many Cubans, living on monthly incomes of $50-200, are crestfallen . But many Cubans are living on a monthly income of $ 50-200 .
 He must now wait for the government to allow greater economic and political freedom, he says . He must wait for more freedom to be allowed to be more free.
 The death last November of Fidel Castro, the leader of the Cuban revolution, may help bring change . Raul Castro’s plan to step down as president next year may bring change, he says .
 Cubans denied the prospect of escaping to the U.S. may now push harder for that .
 Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma delivered the first-ever ‘State of the Continent’ speech there last month . The speech was delivered at the au’s grand headquarters in Addis Ababa .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma’s speech focused on high-minded plans for education and agriculture .
 She acknowledged “pockets of problems’ in war-ravaged Burundi, Libya, Somalia and South Sudan, but only in passing .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma spent her term at the au with one foot in South Africa . She is jockeying to succeed her exhusband, Jacob Zuma, as president in 2019 .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma's four-year term as head of the au’s executive arm should have ended six months ago . But its members could not agree on a successor.
 Among the contenders are a veteran diplomat from Senegal and the foreign ministers of Kenya and Chad .
 The selection process is less about the candidate's talents than about governments and regional blocs vying for influence .
 For the second consecutive summit, representatives of civil society will be barred . Some au leaders apparently don’t like scrutiny .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma came into the role in 2012 buoyed by high hopes and promises to reform a moribund institution . She was the first woman to head the au's executive arm .
 A medical doctor and veteran of the anti-apartheid struggle, she had served as a cabinet minister under four South African presidents, including Nelson Mandela .
 As home-affairs minister, she was credited with making her ministry less corrupt .
 Within 50 years, Africans will grow more, earn more and eat more, document says .
 A few paragraphs later it promises African passports and visa-free travel for all Africans by 2018 . A few minutes later it says African passports will be free for all African citizens by 2018.
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma struggles to convince border guards that her real life is real . She is so rare that even she can't convince them she is real.
 It is by no means all Ms Dlamini-Zuma’s fault that the au is so ineffective that it's so ineffective . The au is not the only reason why the au has been so ineffective.
 The only leaders it ostracises are those who seize power in a coup or who ignore the results of an election too blatantly, as recently happened in Gambia .
 The au’s current chairman is Idriss Deby, the oil-fuelled strongman of Chad . He is a ceremonial but symbolically important figure chosen by the body's assembly .
 The previous one was Robert Mugabe, who has misruled Zimbabwe since 1980 . He has been in charge of the Zimbabwe government since 1980.
 She has campaigned against sex discrimina, violence against women and for an end to child marriages .
 The au has failed to grapple seriously with the crisis in South Sudan, where women and girls are gang-raped by soldiers .
 She seldom visits countries riven by conflict, but she has yet to visit Somalia .
 The au has repeatedly failed to deploy peacekeepers to crisis zones . When put to the test the au has failed to deployed peacekeepers.
 Darfur was the first outfit to send peacekeepers to Somalia . Somalia has helped to push jihadists from the capital . Darfur is the first country to send a peacekeepers .
 President Pierre Nkurunziza’s decision to seek an illicit third term ignited mass protests . The decision was followed by a brutal, ethnically charged crackdown .
 Some 70% of its budget comes from non-African donors such as the European Union .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma tried to reduce the au’s reliance on the West . Donald Kaberuka was a former head of the African Development Bank .
 His plan to finance the organisation through a 0.2% levy on imports into African countries is meant to start this month .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma is wary of foreigners who scold Africans about human rights . She is concerned that they scold African people about rights .
 During her tenure the au has considered a mass pullout from the International Criminal Court . Some members deem prejudiced because most of its targets have been African .
 The au has barred from hearing cases against incumbent government heads and their senior officials . Her alternative is the African Court of Justice and Human Rights, which has barred the au .
 Mr Zuma is expected to stand down as head of South Africa’s ruling party, the African National Congress .
Whoever succeeds him as party chief is likely to win the presidency at the next general election . Whoever succeeds him will likely be the party chief of the country .
 Mr Zuma has used all his presidential powers to avoid standing trial . He is no doubt keen to anoint a sympathetic successor to the president .
 He argues that it is time for the anc to have a female president . His ex-wife is the most qualified candidate, he says .
 Ms Dlamini-Zuma has said little about her plans beyond blandly indicating that she would never refuse a request from the anc to serve the party .
 He started growing it in 1976, and over the years its soft, green leaves have brought him a measure of prosperity .
 He has a modest plot of land, n children and money to pay their way through school . He has no money to go to school.
 A short walk down the hill, the central marketplace of this part of Ethiopia comes alive with farmers, merchants and salesmen as the sun sets .
 Young men sprint down streets with bundles of fresh qat leaves on their shoulders . traders call out prices and haul bags aboard lorries .
 The following morning they will be sold to qat-chewers in the city of Addis Ababa . They will be packed onto planes bound for neighbouring Djibouti and Somaliland .
 Ethiopia's trade in qat, a mild stimulant native to this part of Africa, is booming . Ethiopia’s trade in the qat is booming.
 Once cultivation and consumption were restricted to Muslim lowlands towards the country’s east . Today it is grown and masticated throughout the country .
 Nearly half a million hectares of land are thought to be devoted to it . Some two-and-half times more than was grown 15 years ago, according to experts .
 Ethiopia’s biggest export, coffee, is Ethiopia's biggest export . Many of those cultivating it have switched from coffee to one that offers juicier and more stable returns .
 Qat is now the country’s second-largest source of foreign currency, with prices rising . It is a handy source of government revenue .
 Qat kiosks are dotted around all main towns in Ethiopia . Young men chewing on street corners or in university libraries are a ubiquitous feature of Ethiopian life .
 Much the same is true in neighbouring Kenya, the region’s second-largest qat producer .
Demand is growing thanks to a large diaspora of Somalis (the plant’s long-standing international missionaries) and better roads that allow farmers to get perishable qat to market .
 Maua, a small town considered the Kenyan trade’s epicentre, gives pause for thought . But the plight of Maua gives pause to thought . Maua is considered the Kenya's biggest trade hub .
 Britain’s decision in 2014 to ban the substance (against the advice of its drugs advisory council, which thought it harmless) slammed the qat economy .
 In 2013, before the prohibition, Britain imported some Eism-worth worth of the stuff .
 Europe has been less affected by bans in Europe because they sell most of their crop close to home . But they fret that their market will shrink as they sell their crop near home .
 Experts doubt that qat will ever become a mass-marketed global commodity like coffee, tea or sugar .
Small towns in places such as Wondo-Genet are becoming dependent upon the production and trade of a substance that will probably be outlawed in yet more countries .
 qat is perhaps the only crop that can provide sufficient income from a small plot of land to support a family . Even so, qat’s popularity among farmers persists because it is the onlycrop that provides sufficient income .
 Investors were optimistic, so much so that in 2013, they snapped up $8som of bonds issued by a state-owned tuna-fishing company .
 "tuna bonds" were the first mis-step in a widening scandal that led the government to say on January 16th that it would default .
 The main reason the government is in a pickle is its own fecklessness. Yet the main reason is the government's lack of leadership . The government has been criticised for its lack of transparency .
 The state-owned tuna company that issued the bonds never caught many fish . The bonds were issued by the state- owned tuna company .
 Much of the money raised went toward buying gunboats instead of the fishing sort . That is scarcely surprising since much of the funds went toward gunboats .
 When it became clear that the company could not honour its debts, bondholders agreed to swap the bonds it had issued for government ones . The company had issued government bonds for government bonds .
 The government has also guaranteed $i.bn in secret loans, worth 11% of gdp. But before the ink was dry on that debt-swap, the government admitted it had also guaranteed the money .
 The revelation shocked the imf and donors into freezing support to a country that still relies on international aid to balance its books .
 The government may be trying to use the default as a tactic to force bondholders into “restructuring” the debt . It is a polite way of saying that it wants bondholders to give it a handout .
 This week’s missed payment will irk bondholders, but may not be enough to force them to the table, says Stuart Culverhouse.
 They have refused to negotiate until it signs up to an imf programme and allows a full audit of its indebtedness . They are refusing to negotiate with the government .
 imf, for its part, also wants an investigation into where the money went and who authorised the borrowing before it will lend more . The imf also wants to know where the cash went and where it went .
 Kroll, a firm hired by the government, is expected to release a report next month . Kroll is a firm of investigators hired by government .
 Few members of the ruling party, Frelimo, want to shine too much light on those loans . Frelio wants to focus on bigwigs who may be implicated .
 Frelimo may struggle to buy support in local elections next year, says Alex Vines of Chatham House, a think-tank .
Gas revenues expected in the middle of the next decade. Gas revenues expected to be bountiful in middle of next decade .
 Regulators are probing the banks that arranged both the bonds and secret loans . Credit Suisse and vtb.
 Yet they are still hounding the Shias A SAGGING rope, haphazard barricades-and fear .
 Diraz, Bahrain’s largest Shia village, is under siege for the past seven months . It has taken to keep Diraz under siege.
 Isa Oassim is the island's leading Shia cleric . He is known as the leader of the Shia cleric of the island .
 Bahrain typifies how Arab autocrats have crushed the Arab Awakening’s demands for greater representation .
Maligned as the cat’s paw of Iran and a threat to Sunni rule in Bahrain, their movement is battered and broken . Maligned as Iran's paw of the Middle East, they are now the cat's paw.
 More than 2,600 political prisoners are in jail, a large number in a kingdom of just 650,000 people .
 Many of the detainees are children, says a former member of parliament from Wefaq, the Shia party the government banned last year .
 Even the execution on January 15th of three Bahrainis-the first for two decades-roused only sporadic unrest by the island’s opposition .
 Salman bin Hamad's son and crown prince is on hold. The “national dialogue’s that was es►►: The ‘national dialogue' that was  was es.►►► Protesters may topple bins but they can't bin Hamads 40 Middle East and
 Many of his erstwhile interlocutors are in jail on implausible terrorist charges . Many of the interlocuttors are also in jail for terrorism .
 The online edition of the last independent daily newspaper was banned on January 16th .
 Few youngsters risk more than a token rally before police start firing birdshot . The graffiti on village walls declare “Death to Hamad’s”
 The king's uncle, Khalifa bin Salman, is the world's longest serving prime minister . He has been in place for 46 years, having been in the prime minister for 46.
 Although the Al Khalifas monopolise power, they spread the pain of austerity, they also spread the cost of austerity . The Al KhalIFas monopolised power.
 Vision 2030, an economic programme devised for Bahrain by McKinsey, has cut subsidies on such basics as meat .
 Standard and Poor's, a ratings agency, judged the country's debt to be junk .
 Fellow Gulf states have given billions in aid to prop up the kingdom . But much has been channelled into building housing for Sunnis and foreigners .
 New mansions, compounds, compounds and high-rise blocks screen rundown Shia villages . The Shia villages are known as Shia villages in Shia communities .
 The demographic majority of the Shias once made up 60% of the population . The authorities have chipped away at the demographic majority .
 A rash of new Hindu temples, churches and Sunni mosques testifies to an influx of non-Shia foreigners .
 Bahrain has opened its doors to Syrian Sunnis from Jordan’s refugee camps .
 Shias gibe that even the ruling Al Khalifas, who came from the Arabian hinterland over the water in 1783, are foreigners .
 Communal tension is less fierce in the few places where Sunnis and Shias live together .
 sects that once shared the same streets in new towns built in the 1980s are now moving apart .
 Flags of Shia saints hang from the homes on one side of the main road through Hamad Town . Bahraini flags of loyalist Sunnis fly from the other side .
 Intermarriage, too, is getting rarer, says Suhail Algosaibi, who runs an interfaith group .
 Bahrain still marks Ashoura, the holiest day in the Shia calendar, as a public holiday . But divisions are widening in the Gulf states, with Bahrain still marking the holiday .
 Sunni grandmothers still bake pomegranate cakes for Ashoura, their husbands who once joined the chest-beating rites .
 Islamic State put out an hour-long video of a Bahraini ideologue from the same tribe as the royal family . The video was released by Islamic State last month .
On New Year’s Day militant Shias broke into a high-security jail, freeing ten dissidents . The opposition has asked if it might be more effective underground .
 Abu Musab al-Zarqawi was the leader of al-Qaeda in Iraq, before he was killed a decade ago . He was killed by al- Qaeda's leader, Abu Musalal, who was killed 10 years ago .
 He was referring to a town in southeastern Tunisia that is one of the world’s biggest exporters of jihadists .
 Tunisia's government is trying to consolidate a wobbly democracy six years after the revolution that toppled the old dictatorship . No place better epitomises the challenges facing Tunisia’s government .
 Hundreds of Tunisians marked the anniversary of the revolution on January 14th by taking to the streets .
 The protests began in Ben Guerdane before spreading to other poor places, such as Sidi Bouzid and Meknassi .
 The unemployment rate of 16% is higher than it was before the revolution . But the unemployment rate is still 16% higher than the previous year's rate .
 Terrorist attacks have driven away tourists and foreign investors, says the author . This is partly because of a series of terrorist attacks, he says .
 Unemployed protesters have blocked roads leading from phosphate mines, further harming export earnings .
Past governments have responded by promising to create public-sector jobs . Past governments have promised to create jobs for the public sector .
Youngsters in rural areas are prime targets of jihadist recruiters . Disillusioned and aimless, youngsters are prime target of jihadist recruits .
 Anis Amri, a 24-year-old follower of Islamic State, drove a lorry into a Christmas market in Berlin . 12 people were killed in the incident .
 The government is trying to stem the flow of people joining jihadists abroad .
 It has closed mosques led by radical preachers and keeps an eye on thousands of young suspects .
 Tunisians under the age of 35 are not allowed to travel to Libya, Turkey or Serbia . The main transit routes to Iraq and Syria are the main routes for Tunisians .
 Parliament has passed an anti-terrorism law, criticised by human-rights groups . It gives the government more power to detain suspects and tap phones .
 In any case, the flow is reversing, with fighters making their way home as the groups they had joined are pushed back .
 The U.S. government has told them to do so and has claimed responsibility for several atrocities in the country .
 Last March a large group of Tunisian is members crossed the border from Libya to stage an assault on Ben Guerdane that left dozens dead . The assault left dozens of people dead .
 Tunisian security forces fear a possible Somalification of the country . Security forces fear the country will become Somalified .
 The government braced up after much criticism, and calls to strip militants of their citizenship . But after many criticism, the government braces up .
 Youssef Chahed, the prime minister, belongs to Nidaa Tounes, the main secular political party . He has said returning militants will immediately be arrested .
 Ennahda, the moderate Islamist party that shares power with Nidaa Tounes, backs this approach . Some blame it for having previously indulging radical preachers .
 Many probably left the country and came back without passing through customs . But many probably came back with no official documents .
 The grievances that prompted so many to become jihadists have not yet been dealt with .
Locals still feel that the government does not care very much about them . In places like Ben Guerdane locals still feel the government doesn't care much about the government .
 Recep Tayyip Erdogan may soon have the executive presidency he has long sought I T HAS been a u-turn to make a stunt driver proud. The Soufan Group; The Economist .
 Mr Erdogan's pet project is now rolling out the red carpet for Mr Erdogan’s pet project .
 Turkey's parliament is poised to adopt a package of 18 amendments that would place all executive power in Mr Erdogan’s hands .
 Mr Bahceli and his whips, undeterred by a mutiny that has been swelling inside their party for months, provided remaining votes .
 The new constitution will be put to a referendum in early April or late March . Barring a new wave of defections, the referendum will be held in April or March .
 Mr Erdogan spent a decade as prime minister before being elected president in 2014 . In fact, he has continued to rule almost uncontested .
 Emergency law, adopted in the wake of a violent coup attempt in July, has removed most remaining checks on his power .
 Mr Erdogan would manage his own cabinet without needing approval from parliament . He would appoint senior officials without needing parliamentary approval .
 The changes would kick in after the 2019 presidential elections . Mr Erdogan could remain in power until 2029 .
 Analysts-and the handful of mhp members willing to speak to the press-are at a loss to explain what Mr Bahceli gains by backing constitutional amendments .
 Umit Ozdag, a onetime mhp deputy chairman, suggests that his former boss may have been offered cabinet posts .
 Others say he is paying back Mr Erdogan for a court verdict that helped him stave off a leadership challenge over the summer .
 Mr Bahceli has never won an election, but has not relinquished control over his party for two decades . He has not won a election, though he has never been elected .
 Turkey is taking a new direction in the Middle East, it is said . Turkey has a long history of anti-Islamism in its history . Turkey is a key region in the region of the continent .
 The government has disowned peace talks with Kurdish insurgents, opting instead for a ruthless military offensive . Mr Bahceli has favoured the solution for years .
 Since the failed coup, Mr Erdogan and his ministers have revved up nationalist rhetoric to justify a crackdown against Kurdish politicians, socialists and the press .
 The vote on the constitutional changes has been a pathetic spectacle. Wham, bam, Erdogan the vote on constitutional changes is a pathetic sight, he says .
 Ruling-party lawmakers openly flouted rule on secret balloting, then assaulted an opposition mp who used her phone to film them .
 Punches, notebooks and at least one flower pot flew across the parliamentary floor during brawls .
 One ak member displayed a gash on his shin. He claimed to have been bitten during the melee .
 The referendum, if it goes ahead, risks becoming an even worse travesty. The referendum is expected to be held in the coming weeks .
 Under the state of emergency, the government has arrested, sacked or suspended over 130,000 people . Only some of them linked to July’s coup .
 Mainstream media outlets are increasingly wary of airing dissenting opinions . Mainstream Media outlets are more wary of air dissenting opinions.
 Mr Erdogan retains the right to close newspapers and ngos with a stroke of his pen .
 Binali Yildirim opined that the referendum should not take place under such conditions . In late 2016 his own prime minister, BinalI Yildirsim, opined the referendum shouldn't take place .
Emergency rule went into effect on January 19th, just as parliament began voting on the amendments . Emergency rule goes into effect for another three months .
 There are fewer and fewer workers in Panevezys. That is not because workers in the area are too picky, but because there are fewer of them .
 There are about half as many students in the municipality’s schools as there were a decade ago, says the mayor .
Birth rates are low and emigration rates are high in central and eastern Europe . Such worries are increasingly common across central and east Europe .
 The ex-communist countries that joined the European Union from 2004 on dreamed of quickly transforming themselves into Germany or Britain .
 Many of their workers transported themselves to Germany or Britain . Instead, many of their jobs were moved to Germany and Britain .
 Latvia’s working-age population has fallen by a quarter since 2000 . A third of those who graduated from university between 2002 and 2009 had emigrated by 2014 .
 Lithuania's loss of workers is costly, says Stasys Jakeliunas, an economist . Lithuania’s loss of jobs is costly.
 Remittances and eu money for infrastructure upgrades have helped, but labour shortages discourage foreign investment and hurt economic growth .
 In some countries in eastern Europe emigration shaved 0.6-0.0 percentage points from annual gdp growth in 19992014 . In other countries, emigration is down by 0.5-0%.
 By 2030 gdp per person in Bulgaria, Romania and some of the Baltic countries may be 3-4% lower than it would have been without emigration . By 2030, Bulgaria, Romanian and Baltic countries could have had more emigration.
 Pensions, which take up about half of social spending in eastern Europe, are the biggest worry . Pensions are the largest worry in Europe .
 In 2013 Latvia had 3. working-age adults for each person older than 65, about the same as Britain and France . By 2030 that is projected to fall to just over two, a level Britain and French will not reach until 2060 .
 As a share of Brain drain Education Level of emigrants v general population 2010 40 # Latvia . The country has the highest level of brain drain in the world .
 governments are trying to lure people back from South Korea, Ireland and South Korea . They are inspired by successful efforts in Ireland and Korea .
 Daumantas Simenas is project manager of the Panevezys free economic zone . He credits his return from Britain to the country's “Create for Lithuania’s ‘Create for Lithuanian’ programme .
 Having a job already lined up made the decision to return easier, he says . He says having a job lined up makes it easier .
 Returnees include an mp, a deputy mayor and several advisers to the prime minister . Returnees also include an MP, a Deputy Mayor and several adviser to the PM .
 skilled workers from eastern Europe are attracted by the quality of institutions such as good schools . Better social benefits matter more for unskilled migrants, studies show .
 A recent report by the imf suggests it has been ‘modest’ in some countries as low as 5% of those who left . Data on return migration is scanty, but a recent report suggests it is “modest,’s
 At a recent business conference in Bulgaria, employers said they are having to raise wages to entice workers from farther and farther away .
 In Bulgaria and the Baltic states wages have grown faster than productivity for the past five years . The trend makes exports less competitive .
 Higher labour costs are pressing firms to automate, says Rokas Grajauskas, an economist at Danske Bank .
 Many tasks once done by hand, such as cutting cloth into shapes for winter pullovers, are now executed by robots .
 Estonia’s population increased in 2016 for the second year in a row thanks to incomers from Ukraine, Belarus and Russia . Estonia's population has risen steadily since the 1990s .
Almost all of the 400,000 Ukrainians who obtained residency permits in Poland in 2015 work in agriculture, construction or as household help . Almost all of those who obtained permits in 2015 worked in agriculture or in construction .
For those who leave eastern Europe, the freedom to live and work where one chooses is an immense boon . For those who left eastern Europe.
 Antonio Tajani, a centre-right Italian, won the presidency of the chamber on January 17th . Tajani is the sort of bland functionary the European Union specialises in .
 Mr Tajani's cv grabs the eye, bar an affection for Italy's long-defunct monarchy and a spell as spokesman for Silvio Berlusconi .
 His victory was engineered in classic eu fashion, after four rounds of voting and endless dealmaking between the parliament's sundry political groupings .
 Martin Schulz was to serve two-and-a-half-year term as president before giving way to an epp candidate . Schulz, a German Social Democrat, was a Social Democrat .
 Jean-Claude Juncker secured the presidency of the European Commission . Donald Tusk was appointed president of the EU Council, the eu's version of an executive arm .
 Seven candidates from fringe outfits threw their hats into the ring . Many of them were from fringe outfit outfits, many of them from the fringe .
 Mr Tajani defeated Mr Pittella only after the epp struck deals with the Euro-federalist alde grouping, led by Guy Verhofstadt .
 The job of the president sits somewhere between parliamentary speaker and institutional cheerleader . The job is between the president and the parliamentary speaker .
 The parliament will not enj oy the stature it did under the bruising Mr Schulz, but wiliness may be more important than charisma .
 The parliament is often mocked, but it plays a crucial role in eu policymaking . The parliament plays a key role in the eu government .
 This year it must work on tricky reforms to Europe’s migration and asylum systems . It must also ratify a controversial trade deal with Canada .
 The epp-alde agreement calls for action when ‘European principles’ are breached . It could mean steps against Poland’s populist government .
 The deal also seeks a bigger role for the parliament in Brexit talks . Ips must approve the final settlement in early 2019, just as they gear up for re-election .
 Messrs Tajani and Juncker's relationship will be one of the most watched relationships in history .
 The commission president and Mr Schulz got on famously, despite hailing from different political families . The pair got on.
 The setting was the Gaidar Forum, a symposium named after the architect of Russia’s market reforms in the 1990s .
 Vladimir Putin drafted Mr Kudrin to come up with a new economic strategy. Nine months ago, as Russia’s recession deepened, he drafted him .
 Former minister resigned in 2011 in protest against massive increase in military spending . Former minister oversaw strong economic growth in the early 2000s .
 Mr Putin is a personal friend of Mr Putin . He is a counterweight to the hardliners of Russia’s security services .
 He is seen as the most senior liberal courtier in the Byzantine world of the Kremlin . He holds no formal position .
 Russia is at a low pace of economic growth even compared with the period of stagnation in the 1970s and 1980s that led to the Soviet collapse . Russia's economic growth is at low pace, he says, compared with that of the 1980s and 1970s .
 Russia lags far behind in technology and innovation, and faces a severe demographic slump . Russia faces a serious demographic slump, and is facing a severe population slump .
 The key problem is not a lack of intellect or business talent, but state inefficiency and dysfunctional institutions, says the author . The key issue is not the lack of talent or intellect, but inefficiency, he says .
 Mr Kudrin made it clear that technical tinkering favoured by the Kremlin cannot pull Russia out of its economic trough .
 Reforms must involve fundamental changes to the system, particularly to the judiciary . The judiciary is the most important part of the system .
 Courts must provide justice even when that requires ruling against the state or security services . Courts must also provide justice when that needs ruling against state, security services.
 Mr Kudrin framed his strategy in terms of national security and global prestige . Mr Putin seems to care about the few subjects Mr Putin cares about .
 Mr Kudrin presented Mr Putin with a choice. Economist Intelligence Unit; Centre for Strategic Research .
 If it implements Mr Kudrin’s reforms, growth rates will top 4%-enough gradually to close the income gap with Western economies .
 The government is already trying to cut public spending from 37% to 32% of gdp down to 32%. The fight for shrinking resources was evident at the forum .
 Mr Kudrin moderated a panel composed of Russia’s most successful and powerful regional governors .
 The president of the Muslim republic of Tatarstan complained of excessive centralisation and a lack of trust from Moscow .
 Moscow cut 8bn roubles from his budget last year, about 5% of his annual spending . Last year Moscow cut 6% of its budget, about 6% from its budget .
 Moscow, fearful of separatism, keeps regions dependent on hand-outs from the centre . Instead of granting economic freedom and rewarding regional initiative, Moscow is fearful of separatistism .
 The risks of comprehensive reforms could be greater than the benefits, especially when he faces no immediate pressure, at home or abroad .
 A source close to the Kremlin says the president is confident that he has earned the unwavering support of his people . The Kremlin says he no longer needs to reinforce his standing through stellar economic performance .
Despite two years of recession, Russians have adjusted to falling incomes without much protest . Despite two years in recession, Russia has adjusted to rising incomes without protest .
 Putin's prevaricating puppets RT broadcasts drivel, but is far less influential than the West fears P RODUCERS at rt, the Kremlin-financed media weapon formerly known as ‘Russia Today’
 More than half of the report on Russian electoral interference released on January 6th was devoted to warning of the network’s growing influence .
 The channel claims to reach 550m people worldwide, with America and Britain as its most successful markets . The channel's professed mission is to present the Russian point of view to foreign audiences .
Rt has a clever way with numbers. That is no doubt true, but whether it is succeeding is a different question . Rt has the clever way to use numbers.
Rt has never released the number of people who can access its channel, not those who actually watch it . A 2015 survey of the top 94 cable channels in America by Nielsen found that rt did not even make it into the rankings .
 In Britain last month, it captured just 0.04% of viewers, according to the Broadcast Audience Research Board .
 YouTube bills itself as the ‘most watched news network’ on the platform . Its biggest claim to dominance is on YouTube, where it bills itself.
 rt videos get 1m views a day, far surpassing other outlets . Rt videos are viewed 1m times a day .
 Rt’s most popular videos are of earthquakes and grisly accidents . This sounds like a canny strategy, but it does not work, rt.
 Among the top 15, the closest to a political clip is one of Vladimir Putin singing ‘Blueberry Hill’ rt is not all strongman serenades .
Nato has called for counter-messaging to combat its propaganda . Ofcom, Britain’s media regulator, has rebuked the network .
 Russian hacking has made it out to be a 10-foot monster, says Samuel Charap, a Russia analyst . But the conflation of rt with Russian hacking and espionage has been made out, he says .
 Kremlin cut funds by 10% last year as it struggled to balance the federal budget . In fact the Kremlin cut its funds by a 10% .
 With awestruck reviews from U.S. spooks, money may flow more freely in the future .
Early December 2016 to January 18th 2017 Europe has convinced many in the Kremlin that things are going their way .
 State television channels ignored Mr Kudrin's speech, concentrating instead on Mr Trump's upcoming inauguration . State TV channels ignored his speech, focusing instead on the inauguration .
 Channel One announcers relished America's obsession with claims that Russia had interfered in its elections and that Mr Trump employed prostitutes while visiting Moscow .
Valery Fadeev, the anchor of Channel One’s weekly analytical programme, says the era of liberal interventionism is coming to an end .
Russian elite believes liberalism is on the retreat and a new Russian model is on rise . But it is unlikely to adopt liberal reforms when its elite believes that liberalism is in the retreat .
 His advisers devised a strategy to bolster America’s European allies, incorporating transatlantic visits, political theatre and pep talks .
 Mr Obama invited Matteo Renzi, Italy’s ill-starred prime minister, to Washington to back his constitutional referendum .
 Mr Obama's visit to Hanover, ostensibly to encourage a floundering transatlantic trade pact, occasioned a stirring defence of European unity .
 Sharp-eyed readers will have noticed that each of these gambits failed . The gambits fail.
 All of these outcomes revealed voters’ discontent with their political masters . The mood that found its fullest expression in the election of Mr Trump was that of Trump .
 If Europeans seek change, they will receive it good and hard from America’s new president .
 He said he was as likely to fall out with Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, as with Vladimir Putin, Russian president .
Four days before his inauguration, they delivered a hefty payload . But coming four days before he was inaugurated, the payload was a heavy payload .
 Mr Trump appears to promise the biggest rupture in transatlantic relations since 1945 .
 Atlanticists urged by Atlanticists to pin his hopes on appointments like that of James Maths .
 General Maths, a conventional Republican hawk, hammered Russia and declared nato vital to American interests . During last week’s confirmation hearings, Maths hammered Russia.
 More likely it reveals Mr Trump's slapdash approach to policy, and promises bureaucratic chaos those adversaries will be delighted to exploit .
 Mr Trump shows little affection for Germany, despite his Bavarian grandfather . Mr Trump has a German grandfather .
 Other German officials place their faith in America’s institutions-Congress, the civil service, the military-to restrain the new commander-in-chief .
 Bien-pensant Europeans were terrified of Ronald Reagan when he took office in 1981 . Less than a decade later they watched the Berlin Wall tumble .
 Mr Trump has no track record in government on which to base forecasts, and his habit of self-contradiction renders prediction impossible .
 Perhaps a Putin-friendly president could ease tensions with Russia, at least in the short term .
 Trump's threat to withdraw America’s security umbrella provides a useful argument to Europeans pressing for more defence spending at home .
 Maybe the uncertainty Mr Trump has injected into global politics will galvanise Europeans into resolving their petty differences and forging a common foreign policy .
 The risks to Europe of a Trump presidency outweigh any possible benefits. Be afraid, but the risks outweigh any potential benefits, says David Cameron .
 A fraying eu may be susceptible to the president’s brand of bilateralism .
 Poland’s nationalist government is a pariah in the eu for its unconstitutional power grabs at home . Jan Techau of the American Academy in Berlin says Poland is a prime candidate for Trumpian deal-making .
 The roll call of visitors to his gold-plated tower since the election includes the leaders of populist outfits from Britain, Austria and France .
 The eu struggles to extend its sway to weak countries on its fringes . But the eu struggle to extend it to weaker countries on the fringes.
 Mr Trump’s hint that he might ease sanctions on Russia over its aggression in Ukraine .
 Ukraine may be sucked into Russia’s orbit as the West loses attraction .
 Atlanticists in post-Soviet states like Moldova and Georgia will be left in the cold .
 Tensions in the Balkans may bubble over, especially if Putin steps up his meddling .
 American support, both hard and soft, has always undergirded European unity . American support will be keenly felt, and its absence will be felt .
 Mr Obama sought to reassure his allies that the transatlantic bond would survive the Trump era .
 Europeans must hope that on this trip, unlike the earlier ones, the president got it right . Europeans need to hope that this trip is not the first time the president has done so .
 Mrs May has been urged by businesses to clarify her goals since she became prime minister last July .
Investors have reacted by selling sterling because she has shown a preference for a “hard’s ‘hard” (or, as her advisers prefer, ‘clean’)Brexit that takes Britain out of the eu's single market and customs union .
 In fact the pound rose on January 17th when she gave a speech that set out her most detailed thinking so far about Brexit .
 The pound fell in the run-up to her speech, causing the pound to fall . That was partly because her decision to leave the single market and customs union had been widely trailed .
 markets were pleasantly surprised by her language in setting out a dream of a liberal, open future for the country . She spoke behind the slogan ‘A Global Britain’ and expressed wish for continuing friendly relations with Europe .
 Britain escapes the most protectionist features of the eu and opens its economy to the rest of the world . There is a liberal vision of a post-Brexit future.
 It is one that includes lower taxes, less pettifogging regulation and freer trade . It is also one that has lower taxes and fewer pettIFogging regulation .
 The trouble is that, for all her pleasing rhetoric, Mrs May is not really pursuing this vision . The Trouble is that for all the pleasing rhetoric.
 immigration control is her priority, even though today’s service businesses depend on being able to move people around at short notice, as does high-tech industry .
 The eu will not offer favoured access to its market only for certain industries . It will not be available to certain industries.
 eu would be obliged by the wto’s non-discrimination rules to offer the same deal to all wto members, including China and India .
 Mrs May was frank about the trade-off between being in the single market and taking back control of borders .
 She even declared that to stay in the single market would mean ‘to all intents and purposes’ not leaving the eu at all . She even said that to remain in the market would be “to allintents and reasons’
 The Economist was less honest in not admitting that a hard Brexit will impose costs . A hardBrexit will make them heavier, he said, and that it will make it harder .
 A YouGov poll for Open Britain finds that even maj ority of Leave voters are not prepared to be made worse off in order to control immigration .
 Mrs May’s response that the economy has done better since the referendum is disingenuous .
Brexit has not yet happened, and until recently many firms hoped to stay in the single market . Not only have easier monetary and fiscal policy and the fall in sterling cushioned the impact .
 There are currently no customs checks on the border with Ireland . Mrs May did not offer any solution to the problem .
 Negotiating free-trade agreements will be harder and more time-consuming than Mrs May suggests .
 She expressed hope that a comprehensive deal with the eu could be done in two years . She said she hopes that the deal could be completed in 2 years .
 Many eu countries say they need to settle divorce terms before even talking about trade . Many say divorce terms need to be settled before even talk about trade.
 Canada's free-trade deal with the eu has taken seven years and is not yet in force . Canada’s free- trade deal with The eu is not in force.
 The truth is that when Mrs May formally triggers Brexit she will find the cards stacked against her . Mrs May will find that when she formally triggersBrexit she will be able to make the decision .
 Subject to an imminent Supreme Court ruling on needing parliamentary approval, she plans to initiate the process in March . Subject to the imminent court ruling on need parliamentary approval .
 The divorce proceedings then have an extremely tight two-year deadline . The divorce process then have a very tight deadline .
 Mrs May acknowledged the need for transition, but only as an implementation process towards a final deal .
 The other 27 eu countries have been impressively united over the issue .
 The union is more pressing than all else. They may welcome her new clarity, but for them the preservation of the union is pressing .
Several leaders have said Britain cannot have a better deal outside than inside the club . As many leaders say, Britain can't have a good deal outside the club.
 Mrs May made helpful noises about not wishing to see the eu unravel, unlike Trump .
 She stressed the need to retain co-operation on foreign policy and security . She said she would not give up on the role of foreign policy .
 Britain could retaliate by slashing taxes, she said . But she also threatened her partners, calling it an act of “calamitous self-harm” if they pushed for punitive settlement .
 David Cameron made a mistake by not being ready to walk out rather than accept inadequate new membership terms . She believes her predecessor, David Cameron, made a mistakes by not walking out . David Cameron's predecessor was not prepared to accept new terms .
 In her speech, indeed, she insisted that no deal was better than a bad deal . In her Speech, indeed. She insisted that she had no deal that was better.
 No deal would mean falling back on wto terms, implying not just non-tariff barriers, but actual tariffs on exports of cars, pharmaceuticals, processed foods and much else .
 Britain’s to the eu are worth 12 % of its own gdp . The eu would suffer too, but its goods exports to Britain are worth only 3% of its gDP .
 Britain, not the 27, that is the demandeur in these negotiations . But it is Britain's demandeur.
 Mr Trump refused to specify how far up his list of priorities Britain would be after he took office on January 20th .
 Britain will leave the eu's single market and customs union, allowing it to sign trade agreements of its own .
Donald's deal with the Donald is underwhelming for Britain, especially for Britain . Unfortunately the probable benefits of the deal are underwhelming .
 In 2015 Britain sent exports worth about Eioobn to America, making it Britain’s biggest export destination after the eu .
 In insurance Britain probably has a larger trade surplus with America than it does with the eu .
 An index of ‘trade complementarity’ produced by the World Bank suggests the British and American economies would be highly suitable trade partners .
 Britain sends relatively few cars to America, for instance, because America and the eu use different safety standards . Britain sends little cars to the U.S. because of the different standards .
 America has turned its nose up at British meat since a food-safety crisis in the 1980s .
 Haggis, a Scottish delicacy containing sheep heart, liver and lungs, is in effect banned . The delicacy contains sheep heart and liver, and is also known as a delicacy .
 Haggis makers are delighted by rumours that Mr Trump wants to lift the ban . Mr Trump's mother was born in Scotland and his mother is Scottish .
 Britain might allow in genetically modified crops, which are regulated more heavily in the eu, or buy from U.S. farmers .
Car industry shows it is not tariffs but non-tariff barriers, such as differing regulations, that most impede British American trade . But as the car industry shows, it's not tariff barriers, it is non- tariff barriers .
 Caroline Freund of the Peterson Institute, a think-tank based in Washington, d c, reckons that Britain and America could make progress on ‘digital trade’ The eu and America have stalled negotiations between the two countries .
This could include agreements on data sharing and copyright . This could include, for instance, agreements on Data Sharing and copyright.
 Mr Trump may play hardball with more lucrative industries, he says .
 Britain, whose economy is one-sixth the size of America’s, would have little bargaining power .
 U.S. negotiators could target Britain’s insurance market, extracting an agreement to lower non-tariff barriers and in so cutting that prized trade surplus .
 Britain's public-procurement market might also be of interest, in which case expect headlines about American health-care firms snapping up National Health Service contracts .
 Mr Trump makes political capital from protecting America’s auto industry, not throwing it open to foreign competition .
 geography will also limit the impact of a British-American trade deal. Even if these bumps can be smoothed over, the impact will also be limited .
 London-based lawyer provides services to a Californian client when their working days barely overlap .
 Other countries “are already queuing up’ for a trade deal with Britain, says Boris Johnson .
 One estimate suggested quitting the eu and falling back on World Trade Organisation rules would be associated with a decline of about a fifth in Britain’s total trade volumes .
After she replaced him she could easily have dumped the target, but instead cleaved to it . After she replaced her husband she could have dumped him .
 Number 10 overruled Amber Rudd, her liberal-minded home secretary, when she suggested it be softened . Number 10 promptly overruled her .
 Prime Minister believes it is worth pulling Britain out of the European single market and customs union to achieve this elusive goal .
In 2019, free movement will be replaced by a system of work permits . In 2019, immigration cuts are expected to be drastic .
Immigration was integral to the anti-EU campaign in the referendum . Immigration was a key part of the campaign for the EU referendum .
Poll of Leave voters’ motivations commissioned by Lord Ashcroft, a Tory peer, found that regaining control of borders had been second only to casting off rules from Brussels .
Immigration is no monolithic political issue, but it's not a monolithic issue, it's a political issue . Immigration is not an issue, says a panel of experts .
 Mrs May should think twice about slamming the door, she says . But picking these apart suggests she should think again.
 Voters dislike hearing foreign languages, mistrust cultures other than the native one and assume foreigners are scoundrels and malingerers . These voters are not bad people- they may be pillars of their communities .
 British Future, a think-tank, found that 84% favoured allowing European residents in Britain to stay after Brexit .
 Voters discuss their worries about immigration and it becomes clear that these are part of a broader sense that society is unstable and unjust . The system does not work properly, says the author .
 This encompasses concerns about the integrity of borders, crime and terrorism . It also includes concerns about social atomisation and the speed at which society is changing .
 One study showed that people who do not feel in control of their lives are more likely to oppose immigration . One study last year showed people who don't feel in Control of their life were more likely.
 Voters need no specific quarrel with immigrants to see them as part of this phenomenon . Voters need to see immigrants as a part of the phenomenon, not just a quarrel.
 Reducing numbers is therefore unlikely to get to the heart of their complaints . Reducing number is not likely to make a difference to complaints .
Immigrants make Britain richer, but locals believe prosperity is unevenly spread . In other words, locals correctly believe that immigrants make Britain rich .
Only a fraction of the political energy and capital invested in cutting immigration goes into thinking up and implementing ways of relieving its pressures .
Views about immigration bear only an imprecise relationship to number of immigrants . Views about immigration are only an imprecise relationship.
Parts of the country with the most foreign-born residents voted most heavily to remain . Those areas that had seen the fastest increase in foreigners that were among the keenest to leave .
 Britons guess 31% of the population is foreign-born, when the true figure is 13% . When confronted with the disparity they tend to question the figures rather than their assumptions .
 Whether voters would acknowledge, let alone notice, a large fall in immigration is therefore open to question .
Coming crackdown could alienate not just cosmopolitans-a group likely to grow . Young Britons' relaxed stance on immigration is meant to placate those nativists .
 Ditch the constipated talk of ‘concerns about immigration’ and make the honest case for the current, controlled levels . Ditch: Make the case for current,controlled levels .
 The number of immigrants in the U.S. is up by more than 100,000 . It's unclear how many immigrants will need work permits to be issued .
Revive and expand the Migration Impacts Fund, a foolishly mothballed programme that channelled government resources to places experiencing fast population change. Revive and expansion the Migrationimpacts Fund.
 communities secretary Sajid Javid wants to relax green belt to accelerate housebuilding .
 Have a proper debate about health-care funding, make the welfare system more contributory, put more police officers on the beat, make a period of national service compulsory for youngsters . Have a properly debate about the health- care funding.
 Before reaching for reckless immigration cuts, pick the lowhanging fruit, pick it up .
 The selective abortion of female fetuses is an oddly common topic of conversation in India . Thank urbanisation, economics and soap operas F OR something so private and covert, the selective abortion is a common topic .
 Narendra Modi, the prime minister, exhorts his countrymen to save girls and send them to school . Narendra Modi's countrymen are urged to send girls to school.
 Sakshi Malik won India’s first medal at the Rio Olympics in wrestling . It was an occasion for regret as well as national chest-beating .
 Virender Sehwag, a dashing cricketer turned Twitter star, is a Twitter star . Such victories are only possible when girls are not killed, he said .
 45m girls and women are missing from the country, according to two demographers . John Bongaarts and Christophe Guilmoto say 45m people are missing .
 Some never born, having been detected by ultrasound scans and aborted . Some were never born .
 Some villages in the north have an alarming surplus of boys and young men . Some villages have a surplus of young men and boys .
 In India, and in the world as a whole, the war on baby girls seems to be winding down . The war on babies is winding down in India.
 By the time men and women are ready to have children, the numbers ought to be roughly balanced . That seems to be the way of compensating for the higher death rate of boys and men .
 A woman moves out of her parents' home upon marriage and into her husband's home to dote on his parents and harvest his family's crops . That happens mostly in “patrilocal’s societies, where a woman moves from her parents’ home to her husband
 In this section 50 Prizing girls in South Korea two children are more likely to try to tip the odds . Also in this section, two children in South Korean two are morelikely to try.
 Third, there must be an accessible, tolerated way of getting rid of superfluous girls . There must be a way to get rid of  superfluous girls, and an accessible way of getting rid of them .
 All three things used to be true of South Korea and they are true today of China, India, Pakistan, Vietnam and the south Caucasus . South Korea is now the most populous country in the world .
 The Minangkabau, from West Sumatra, practice matrilocality-that is, newly married couples move into the wife’s household .
 A Minangkabau who gives birth to a boy will, on average, have a second child more quickly than a girl . The average birth rate is higher than that of a girl who has a baby .
 The first signs that sex ratios might be returning to normal appeared after the last round of censuses .
 The sex ratio among China’s children did not budge between 2000 and 2010 .
 In India, the excess of boys over girls over girls worsened slightly between 2001 and 2011 .
 More girls were counted in the states where sex selection had been most common . Haryana and Punjab were among the most common states where girls were chosen .
 Annual data on births is less authoritative than census figures on children . But more up-to-date data suggests tide has turned .
 Vietnam still has too many male births, but the situation has not worsened since 2010 . Vietnam has not had too many men born since about 2010, but it has not been worse since then .
 A blogger recalls the moment she learned that her baby was a boy . Armenia and Azerbaijan are also holding steady .
 The woman was “so envious of a mother who had just given birth to a daughter’s daughter . The woman said she was ‘ so envious’ of the woman who had given birth .
 ‘ddalbabo’ is a new term for men who go loopy over their female offspring . They have created a new name, “ddal babo”-“daughter crazy’- for men.
Until the early 20th century failure to bear a son was grounds for divorce . Until the early 1900s failure to have a child was grounds to divorce .
 Many South Koreans used ultrasound technology to detect female fetuses and then have them aborted . South Koreans also used it to detect fetuses, then have the babies aborted .
 The South Korean government made it illegal for doctors to reveal the sex of a fetus . In response to these trends the government made the decision to make it illegal .
Following the Asian financial crisis of 1997, many women took part-time jobs to supplement the family income .
 In 2015 three-quarters of South Korean female secondary-schoolers went to university, compared with twothirds of their male peers . In 2015, three- quarters of South Korea's female secondary schoolers attended university .
 Aborting girls simply because they are girls has become so unthinkable that the law has been relaxed . The law has become more relaxed because of the change .
 Since 2009 expectant parents have been allowed to know the sex of their baby after 32 weeks’ gestation .
 Many will have found out before, from doctors who trust that parents’ attitudes have changed .
 Some countries have made efforts to crack down on sexselective abortion . Not, probably, the efforts that some countries have been made to cracking down on the issue .
 Indian couples find it easy to circumvent an official ban by booking their ultrasound scans at one clinic and their abortions at another .
 The Chinese authorities have cracked down harder, scrutinising couples who already have a girl and are thus highly likely to abort another female fetus .
 Ms Das Gupta thinks that urbanisation is a more powerful force for change . She thinks urbanisation can be more powerful for change.
 A citydwelling couple might be teased by neighbours for having only girls, but that's nothing compared to the pressure heaped on villagers by clan patriarchs and matriarchs .
Young city-dwellers tend to live apart from their parents, which removes one reason for preferring sons . Young city- dwellers live apart.
 Children tend to support their parents by sending money. Now that children tend to send money, daughters are just as good .
 Urbanites have access to the latest medical technology, but they seem less keen on using it . Urbanites are more likely to use it than those who use it .
 As urban women grow more independent and more valuable to their parents, rural men are struggling . Rural men are also struggling as urban women become more independent .
 Years of skewed sex ratios mean there are already too many would-be grooms for every village bride .
 The women they might marry often head for cities, where they can find a better husbands .
 Rural Chinese men increasingly look like burdens on their parents, according to reports .
 A remarkable paper by Shang-Jin Wei and Xiaobo Zhang shows that parents of sons in districts with high sex imbalances tend to save large amounts of money .
 This effect is so strong, the authors calculate, that it explains about half the increase in China’s household savings rate between 1990 and 2007 .
 governments have tried to cajole citizens into prizing girls by putting up posters or even offering them money .
 Under China’s one-child policy, couples who gave birth to a girl were often allowed to have a second child . The policy implies that the state felt sorry for those who failed to produce a boy .
Popular culture has been loud and insistent about the worth of girls . But where governments have been confused and half-hearted about the value of girls, popular culture is loud andInsistent .
 TV is good for you for sheer attention-grabbing power, nothing beats tv in India .
 Just 5% of women in the district had seen a film produced by the government about the equality of boys and girls . Less than 1% had heard about the subject from religious leaders . “tv is not just entertainment-it is a big source of education,’ says P
 One of his soaps, “Balika Vadhu’s, is about the evil of child marriage .
 Mr Shekhar thinks the show changed attitudes, and it certainly entertained the country .
 He believes even conventional soaps hinge on conflicts between women and their mothers-in-law and dial all emotions up to 11, get viewers used to women .
 Studies of India have shown that tvwatching is associated with reduced preference for sons, even after controlling for wealth .
 Indians often distrust politicians and public officials, says Shoma Munshi, an expert on Indian soap operas .
 tv and film stars often become politicians, or are used to front public-health campaigns .
Gendercide now looks like an example of the former gendercide. But there is an important difference between a giant social problem and an endless one, says the author .
 Mr Guilmoto believes that sex ratios will continue to normalise until they return to natural levels . He says sex ratios are expected to continue to increase until natural levels return .
 Asia has engaged in a demographic experiment with disastrous consequences. Asia's demographic experiment has resulted in disastrous consequences for Asia's population .
Plucky strike NEWYork B ritish American tobacco announced on January 17th a final deal to buy Reynolds American for $49bn . bat already owns 42% of Reynolds; buying the rest of it will create the world's largest listed tobacco company by sales and profits .
 The deal is a frantic bid to revive an ailing industry. The casual observer might imagine the deal to be a frantic attempt to revive the industry .
 Cigarettes may kill you, but the big companies that make them are rather healthy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 In 2015 just over a fifth of adults smoked, down from almost a quarter ten years earlier, estimates the World Health Organisation . In 2015, just over five of adults smoke, according to the WHO .
 Aboutibn people still smoke, roughly as many as did in 2005, according to statistics . But global smoking rates have fallen, but population growth means that aboutibn still smoke .
 Retail sales jumped by 29% in the decade to 2015, according to Euromonitor, a data firm . This, combined with rising prices, means that the value of retail sales jumped 29% .
 Altria, which sells Marlboro in America, will be bought by Philip Morris International . Philip Morris is the industry's leader to date-a scary prospect even for a merged bat and Reynolds .
 The merger of bat and Reynolds has clear logic. Regardless of whether their rivals’ deal proceeds, the merger is clear logic . The deal is expected to go through .
 Reynolds will also give bat access to America, a market that once looked repulsively litigious but now seems stable .
 Companies still operate under a vast settlement reached with American states in 1998 . But separate classaction suits have turned out to be less costly than feared .
 WHO passed a battery of laws to fight smoking, including taxes and bans on advertising and on smoking in pubs .
 Tobacco companies have fought ferociously, suing countries such as Australia and Australia for logos on cigarette packs .
Bans on advertising lower marketing costs and make it harder for young upstarts to challenge established brands .
 Large tobacco firms are investing in such “reduced-risk’s products, as they term them . Large tobacco companies are investing.
 New requirements for e-cigarettes in Europe and America, finalised last year, may also hinder smaller companies' ability to innovate .
 Companies are particularly bullish on new products that heat tobacco, without burning it .
 These gadgets contain nicotine but no tobacco, so may encourage more smokers to switch . These gadgets are more satisfying to smokers than e-cigarettes, which contain no tobacco .
 Some smokers might switch to the new products rather than give up tobacco completely .
 If enough would-be quitters switch to “safer cigarettes instead, firms could slow or even reverse what had seemed to be a permanent downward trend .
 If so, the company formed by bat and Reynolds stands to gain, as it will combine . The company will combine its research into reduced-risk products .
 Philip Morris has spent nearly twice as much on research as bat . That will help it compete against Philip Morris, which has spent almost twice as many time on research .
 Philip Morris is seeking approval in America to market its heated tobacco product as safer than traditional cigarettes . It submitted its application to American regulators in December .
 T HE priorities of America’s Environmental Protection Agency will doubtless change under Donald Trump .
 Mr Trump may well relax emissions rules for carmakers in return for concessions, such as keeping production in America .
On January 12th, before conditions change, the agency took action against Fiat Chrysler Automobile .
Fca accused fca of using software in 104,000 Dodge pickups and Jeeps that allowed them to exceed legal limits on toxic emissions of nitrogen-oxide gases .
 Fca's shares plummeted by 16%, though they have since recovered slightly . Nervous investors feared a repeat of the huge penalty imposed on Germany’s Volkswagen for cheating American emissions laws .
 A day earlier vw had agreed to pay a criminal fine of $4.3bn for selling around 500,000 cars in America . The cars were fitted with “defeat devices’ designed to reduce NOx emissions .
 fca’s engines used undisclosed software that alters the characteristics of emissions controls to exceed NOx limits . The Italian-American carmaker may not suffer so severely, vw admitted .
 The epa has not determined whether these bits of software constitute a defeat device . Crucially, the epa hasn't determined whether the software is a loss device .
 Failure to disclose this type of software also breaks the rules, however . The rules also break the rules.
 Philip Morris’s chief executive describes a possible future in which his cigarette company phases out cigarette sales . Important to its argument will be the fact that excessive emissions are permitted for limited periods .
 combustible products still account for almost all of cigarette firms’ revenue . For now, combustible product still account.
 tobacco remains responsible for more than one in nine of all adult deaths, such as cold weather starts .
 If fca is right it can expect a fine but nothing as severe as vw’s punishment . The fine is not the same as the punishment given to fca .
 German authorities concluded that emissions controls were timed to turn down after 22 minutes of the engine starting in some fca’s cars .
 Italy’s testing agency, which certifies the cars for the European market, dismissed the complaints . It said it was part of a “modulation’ of the controls designed to protect the engine .
 Germany's transport minister insisted that it amounted to an “illegal shutoff device’s ‘illegal shutoffs’ and said the cars should be withdrawn for sale . Fca is not alone.
 French prosecutors say they are probing Renault over abnormally high emissions from some of its diesel engines . A day after the epa announced its investigation of fca, French prosecutors said they were probing Renault .
 The French carmaker’s shares also dipped, but by only 6% and have since rebounded slightly too . The carmaker's shares have since bounced slightly too.
 Europe's watchdogs are much less of a threat than the epa, largely because the continent's emissions rules are open to rather wide interpretation . Europe’s watchdog is much more of athreat than the Epa, mainly because of the continent’
 vw has reached the conclusion that its “defeat device’s’deat device does not actually contravene European regulations .
 Transport & Environment, an ngo based in Brussels, reckons that new models from the worst offenders produce 15 times more NOx on the road than when tested .
 No penalties have ever been issued for carmakers contravening emissions rules in Europe . Enforcement is almost non-existent in Europe and no penalties have been issued .
 The eu is beefing up its testing system but there will still be lots of grey areas for carmakers to exploit . Fca’s biggest worry remains the epa.
 A fine exceeding $4 billion would not “break its neck in the current environment’s current environment, says Patrick Hummel of ubs, a bank .
 Mr Marchionne’s target of shedding debt and having cash in the bank by 2018 is now widely assumed to be at a peak . But it would scupper his target of shed debt by 2018 .
 It would also complicate any attempts to merge with a big carmaker, another of his ambitions, even if he can find a willing partner .
 Lee Kun-hee, the only son of Samsung’s chairman, is accused of bribery, embezzlement and perjury . A court rejected a request to arrest him as a suspect in an investigation into a vast influence-peddling case that led to the South Korean president
 It saw “no reasonable grounds’ to detain him while prosecutors pursue their probe. It saw no reasonable grounds for detain him, prosecutors say .
 Mr Lee has said he provided the funds, but denies any bribery . During intense questioning by mps and prosecutors- including one 22-hour stretch-Mr Lee has been questioned .
 Samsung Electronics share price, won, m 2. Of the merger, advisory firms urged shareholders to reject the deal because of a big discrepancy in the two firms’ valuations .
 Mr Lee was able to gain large stakes in key affiliates at no extra cost through the group’s complex web of cross-shareholdings . His father has been in hospital for nearly three years since a heart attack .
 The court deemed that the evidence for bribery was not persuasive enough to detain Mr Lee before any official charge was made . Legal experts say that the decision may yet propel prosecutors to strengthen their case .
 The charge, linking a corporate “princeling to the president, is unprecedented, says Chaebul.com .
 It came despite the fact that collusion between the state and its chaebol, the large conglomerates behind South Korea’s economic boom, has long been tolerated .
 The miscreant bosses of cj, Hanhwa, Hyundai and sk, other chaebol have all been sentenced to prison in the past decade .
 Each has been pardoned, supposedly because of the importance of their firms to the economy . Each has also been pardoning, supposedly due to their importance to their firms .
 Lee Sung-bo, formerly head of Korea’s anti-corruption and civil-rights agency, says citizens often misunderstand pre-charge arrests as a punishment .
 The prosecution says that it will carry on its investigation “unshaken’ by the court’s decision . The prosecution will carry out its investigation, the court says .
Revived global demand for chips and screens that use oled (organic light-emitting diode) are buoying up the firm . Samsung Electronics produces more than any other firm .
 The division announced in November that it would boost dividends and consider moving to a holding-company structure . Its shares rose to a 40-year high on the expectation of more transparency in its Byzantine workings .
 South Koreans are fed up with the culture of impunity at their chaebol . Many will see the court's decision as leniency towards them .
 In a recent poll, 70% thought their third-generation heirs were unfit to lead firms run to global standards .
 Mr Lee is trying to burnish his credentials to be the face of Samsung for the next three decades, says Mr Chung .
 Some Italian business leaders fret about expansionists from across the northern border plucking control of some of their most celebrated local firms .
 Luxottica, an Italian maker of fancy specs, and Essilor, a spiffy French producer of lenses, announced this week . The latest example is the merger between Luxotticas, an Italy maker, and a French producer .
 Together they will produce an entity with a market value of at least €46bn . 140,000 staff and annual revenues of €isbn .
 The deal is one of the largest cross-border tie-ups attempted by European firms . The deal had long been expected by industry watchers .
 The idea is to produce an entity that combines Italian style and skills in marketing with deft French engineering . The concept is to combine Italian style with French engineering and French style .
 Essilor has been trying to arrange a merger for years. That will mark the culmination of a long campaign to arrange the merger . The merger is expected to take place at the end of the year .
 Leonardo Del Vecchio, now 81, is the founder and owner of Luxottica . He had long resisted the idea of owning a luxury car company .
 His change of heart may stem from the problem of arranging for a successor . He may have changed his heart.
 The company he founded in 1961 is widely lauded and owns global brands such as Ray Ban, Oakley and Sunglass Hut . He founded the company in 1961 .
 Mr Del Vecchio rose from poverty to become Italy's second-richest man . He spent some of his childhood in an orphanage .
 For all his strengths, he could not foster a strong alternative leader . He would not let any of his children (from various marriages) become managers .
 Colleagues felt squeezed out, seeing the boss as reluctant to delegate . The boss was seen to be reluctant to delegates .
 One ex-employee says “90% of top management’s abandoned the company in recent years . The company was founded in 1998 .
 The deal with Essilor is thus a way out, even if Mr Del Vecchio is not stepping down yet . The deal has been agreed, even though he is not yet stepping down .
Through his family trust, D elfin will be the largest shareholder in the merged entity and its “executive chairman and chief executive’s” for the next few years .
 Hubert Sagnieres looks well placed to take charge once Mr Del Vecchio retires . But Essilor’s boss, HubertSagniere, will share equal managerial duties of the new entity .
 It is expected to grow as cohorts of middle-class consumers in Asia find they need eyesight correction and develop a liking for specs .
 French conglomerates with deep pockets, notably lvmh and Kering, have been acquiring smaller Italian rivals for years . In luxury goods, for example, French companies have been buying smaller rivals .
 French firms first grew faster by attending to flourishing markets for accessories such as handbags . French firms also grew faster.
 Gucci, Bulgari, Fendi and Fendi took over Italian brands . Then they paid handsomely to take over prominent Italian brands, including Gucci .
 Vincent Bollore led his firm, Vivendi, to buy nearly a quarter of Telecom Italia last year . Bollore is determined to grow in Italy and wants to expand his company .
 The daring Frenchman is also pushing Vivendi in a second bid for Mediaset . The company in which Silvio Berlusconi, a former Italian prime minister, and his family are the biggest owners .
 Auchan and Carrefour operate more than 2,000 supermarkets in Italy’s unusually fragmented industry . In retailing, too, a pair of French supermarket chains, Auchans and CarRefour, together operate more.
 Many businesses in Italy are run by first-generation founders with no clear plan for succession . More targets are bound to attract buyers from Italy's neighbour to the north .
 The Trent xwb is the second-biggest commercial jet engine in the world . It is the world's second biggest jet engine . The engine-maker assembles the Trent Xwb .
 Some components are made to a tolerance of 50 microns-the width of a human hair . The width of the hair is 50 micron-the length of a hair .
 Rolls agreed to cough up £67im to settle allegations that it had in the past secured sales with bribery . Rolls has agreed to pay £67m to settle the allegations .
 The fine is the largestever imposed by Britain on a firm for criminal conduct . It is the biggest ever imposed by the UK on a company for criminal misconduct .
 It admitted a dozen counts of corruption and bribery in seven countries, spanning decades . It admitted 12 counts of bribery and corruption and corruption in seven nations .
 This included giving officials money, hotel stays and even a luxury Rolls-Royce car to secure engine sales . The car was given to officials and hotel stays .
 Rolls has since cut its use of the freewheeling third-party consultants . Rolls promises better oversight of all staff .
 If it errs again, the firm will be prosecuted for the original charges . The firm will face charges again if it is found guilty .
 The engine-maker has been struggling to make any money. Despite bulging orderbooks the engine-makers have struggled to make money .
 In 2014 and 2015 Rolls issued five profit warnings in quick succession, halving the firm’s share price . The firm issued five warnings in a single year .
 Last February it was forced to cut its dividend in two-the first such paring for more than 24 years . It was humiliatingly forced to do it in February . It is the first time the company has cut dividend in 24 years.
 Next month, it is expected to reveal that profits fell from £i.bn in 2014 to just £68om in 2016 .
 The fine-of £293111 will be paid this year-may prevent Rolls from meeting financial targets in 2017 .
 The market for passenger jets is flying at full throttle . The engines make up more than half of the company's revenues .
 As engines represent a third of the price tag of a new jet, some analysts reckon that enginemakers will sell more than $1 trillion over the next two decades .
Rolls has been badly buffeted by the downturns in many of its other businesses . But Rolls has been badly buffeted by in India's outsourcing specialists .
 Rolls is more exposed than ge and utc. Both its main enginemaking rivals are huge conglomerates, and churn out other products .
 Low oil prices hurt sales of its power-generation turbines and marine engines . The price of oil is hurting sales of the turbines, marine engines and turbines .
Several investors have said it should sell off its non-aerospace divisions . Jet engines are largely responsible for the thickness of its £8obn order-book .
 Warren East lured Warren East out of retirement in 2015 to turn the firm around . To tackle its problems, the engine-maker lured the firm to turn around .
 Former boss of arm, a British chipmaker, turned middling startup into a worldbeating tech giant .
 The new boss reckons that selling off Rolls’s non-aerospace businesses is unwise .
 In November he revealed that the firm’s accounting practices had been flattering the performance of its civil-aerospace engines .
 Instead of the £8oom in profit declared for 2015, that division probably made a small loss .
 The boost will increase the firm’s economies of scale in its factories . The boost is expected to boost the firm's economies.
 Eric Schulz is the boss of Rolls’s civil-aerospace business . He says the more engines that are installed, the more in profit from servicing them .
 Each engine brings in four times as much revenue from maintenance over its lifetime as from its original sale . Each engine has four times more revenue than the original sale of its first engine .
 The firm currently makes an initial loss of up to £2m on each and every engine it sells .
 More than 4,000 jobs have been culled (nearly a tenth of its workforce) and a third of cost centres have been eliminated .
 The falling value of the pound since June has reduced its assembly costs in Britain . But leaving Europe’s single market will disrupt its international supply chain .
 Many analysts question the firm’s decision in 2011 to exit the faster growing engine market for short-haul planes .
 Rolls can consider re-entering this segment in the 2020s with the cash generated by servicing the engines it is currently building . Mr East hopes Rolls will be able to re-enter this segment.
 Investors believe in Mr East’s strategy, says Sandy Morris at Jefferies, a bank .
 Rolls fails to generate cash for Mr East’s visions, but recovery will be hard to engineer . But if Rolls failed to generate the cash for the Mr East's visions, it will be difficult to engineer.
 Infosys, Wipro and Tata Consultancy Services used to be national champions growing at double-digit rates .
An entire industry built on the back of globalisation is fretting about the incoming American president . Their prospects have dimmed of late, according to the industry .
 Donald Trump is merely the latest threat to their operating systems . But he is merely a threat to the operating systems, he says .
 The big three have over 700,000 employees in total-paying them starting salaries of $5,000 or so . The Indian firms hoovered up bright graduates .
 Tens of thousands were dispatched to client sites in Europe or America, along with expensive local staff .
 The rest ensured their clients’ computer systems kept ticking over from cosy cubicles in Bangalore, Hyderabad and elsewhere .
 Jefferies India biggest customers have been in pennypinching mode of late . Ditto energy companies struck by falling oil prices .
 cyclical softness looks increasingly like it is being compounded by structural decline . But what felt like cyclicalsoftness looks like it's being compounded with structural decline.
Margins of over 20% are coming under pressure, even after a sustained fall in the rupee against the dollar .
 There is still plenty of the $90obn global it services budget for them to capture .
 The incoming president has railed against certain visas for skilled workers . Many of which are gobbled up by Indian firms to send staff on stints to America .
 A proposal to hike the minimum salaries to qualify for such is a proposal to raise the minimum salary . Tata Sons Chandra’s challenge MUMBAI Old problems await a new boss .
 Natarajan Chandrasekaran is the head of Tata Consultancy Services . He became the boss of Tata Sons, its parent and India's largest company .
 Chandra is known for helping build up the it services firm that delivers much of the salt-to-steel conglomerate’s profitability . He now takes on India's toughest corporate job .
 Few expected an outsider after the botched defenestration of Cyrus Mistry on October 24th .
 Mr Mistry has thrown heaps of mud at Ratan Tata, the 79-year-old patriarch who seized back the reins from him .
 As boss of tcs since 2009, he has overseen steady progress, even if the company now faces headwinds . He has been in charge since 2009 .
 He started off on the shop floor as a tcs intern three decades ago, rather than being handed the family kingdom . He is a rare boss in India who started off as a shop assistant .
 Many are faring poorly, notably its European steel unit, an undersized mobile-telephony arm in India, a stalled domestic carmaker, and a struggling global chain of hotels .
 Chandra has no experience in turning around failing businesses, let alone in any industry outside it . Chandra has been in business for more than 20 years .
 He must ensure his old tcs fiefdom, whose day-to-day management he will now give up, continues to generate enough profits to prop up the duds .
 Mr Mistry complained he was never truly at the helm, and that all his decisions were second-guessed by Mr Tata . Mr Tata owns two-thirds of the charitable trusts that he owns .
 Tata will need the right ideas to get Tata back on an even keel-and the authority to put them into action . The right ideas would make many postings uneconomical .
 The cap for the number of new visas is lowered from the existing 65,000 a year . That would mean replacing Indian expats to America with locals, especially if the cap is lowered .
 higher visa-application fees for large-scale labour importers may trim up to five percentage points from it companies' margins .
 Fuzzy talk of an “outsourcing tax’s’ will hardly encourage procurement managers to look overseas .
 Changes in how clients think about technology is a bigger worry for Indian it firms .
 Budgets globally are growing steadily, at about 3% a year, reckons Gartner .
 An increasing amount of the money is spent on trendy stuff like analytics and the internet of things . But an increasing amount is spending on trendy things like analytics or the internet.
 Some of the tasks which engineers used to do, such as tailoring software for a client, can now be done by machines .
Workers in India's codewriting centres are as much at risk of being made obsolescent by automation as those in factories making cars or shoes .
 Indian firms want to get in on the new digital action, which they think is less likely to be commoditised .
 The Economist January 2lst 2017 novation. Infosys; Credit Suisse. More than 5 years 3-5 years 1-3 years 0-1 year .
 Devising a mobile-banking app for millennials, say, is a far cry from parsing lines of code for bugs .
 Others have a head start in the race to the sunlit digital uplands . Please wait, update in progress .
 Accenture has digital-services revenue per employee around four times its Indian rivals . Vaibhav Dhasmana of Jefferies, a bank, says Accenture .
 European and American rivals have heftier consulting arms that can shape companies’ spending . European and U.S. rivals have similar consulting arms, which can shape spending .
 Boutiques that give them skills they cannot develop internally. They are eager acquirers of companies, often boutiques.
 Accenture has margins on earnings before interest and tax of around 15%, not much more than half what Indian firms have traditionally secured . Accenture's margins on Earnings before interest, tax of about 15% .
 All have invested in ‘platforms’ they can sell to more than one client, for example, to analyse social media . All have investments in “platforms. They can also sell to one client-for example.
 Pivoting towards higher-value offerings requires an overhaul of Indian companies’ past models, not a tweak .
 This middle-age bulge in staffers increases staff costs by 5-7%, says Anantha Narayan of Credit Suisse .
 Infosys and Wipro are still adapting to a newish generation of professional managers who took over from the entrepreneurs that founded these firms .
 The economics that made Indian it such a compelling proposition are fading rather than disappearing altogether . The economics of Indian economics are fading instead of disappearing altogether, says CNN.
 computers are best to replace an ageing model before it unexpectedly crashes . But as with computers, it is best to replaced an ageing models before it crashes .
 A growing cohort of citizens want corporations to be cuddlier, invest more at home, pay higher taxes and pay more people . They are voting for politicians who say they will make all that happen .
Firms are run in the interest of shareholders, who usually want companies to use every legal means to maximise their profits . But according to law and convention in most rich countries, firms are run by shareholders .
 In the 1990s, this view spread to Europe, Asia and Latin America because of reforms to governance laws and the rising clout of institutional investors .
Schumpeter reckons there are six distinct corporate tribes, each with its own interpretation of what shareholder value means . Schumpeter: There are six different corporate tribes.
Start at the far right of the spectrum, with the corporate fundamentalists. Start at the right right with the Corporate fundamentalists .
 In 2011-15 it raised prices, slashed investment, paid little tax and fired staff . In 2011 -15 it also raised prices and slashed investment . In 2012-15, it fired staff and cut jobs .
 ibm is shoring up its stock price with savage cost cuts and share buy-backs . Occasionally firms become so weak that they use fundamentalist tactics, temporarily, to restore confidence .
 They believe in the primacy of shareholder value but are prepared to be more patient . They are more patient with shareholders than with shareholders .
 Shell and Intel are consistently successful-think of Shell or Intel investing on a ten-year time horizon . At their best these firms are consistentlysuccessful-think.
 Corporate oracles want to maximise profits within the law, but with a twist . The third group want to maximize profits in the law .
 Lawmakers think the law will evolve with public opinion and so they voluntarily do things today that they may be required to do tomorrow . They think they will have to do what they want to do today .
 Most energy firms have become greener to anticipate changing public expectations on pollution and safety . Most energy companies have become more environmentally friendly .
 Laggards discover it can be devastating when the rules of capitalism change . Laggard: 'The rules of Capitalism are a disaster'
 Shares of coal and nuclear-energy firms in the rich world have collapsed .
 Soft-drinks firms may be next as attitudes and laws about sugar and obesity change .
 They are so successful at creating shareholder value that they have a licence to ignore it periodically . They are also so successful that they are able to ignore the value of their shareholders .
 Paul Polman describes Unilever as a non-governmental organisation committed to cutting poverty . He runs the consumer-goods firm he runs, which he says is committed to reducing poverty .
 Outside Western boardrooms, the most common sect is the fifth, corporate socialists . The most common group of corporate socialists is corporate socialists.
 These firms are controlled by the state, families or dominant managers . The firms are owned by state or families .
 They think shareholder value is not as important as social objectives such as employment, high pay or cheap products . They think that shareholder value isn't as important.
 institutional investors recognise that institutional investors have some legal powers . But they recognise that they have someLegal powers .
 profits are set according to an informal quota system-outside shareholders should get the minimum required to avoid a revolt, but no more . So profits should be set to be set.
 It pays shareholders the least it can get away with and allocates what is left as bonuses for its staff . It pays its shareholders at the least.
Corporations are organised in a corporate form but don’t care about shareholders at all . They’s organised in an organisation but don't care about investors at all.
 Venezuela's state oil firm pays for much of the country’s welfare state and cronyism . Usually this is a result of political dysfunction, pdvsa.
 Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two state-owned American mortgage firms, are run to make cheap loans, not profits . The two companies are run by state- owned American mortgage companies .
 Between 1990 and 2007 companies around the world drifted right, towards shareholders .
 Carmakers are shifting factories to America; drugs and defence firms may slash prices . Drugs and defence companies may cut prices .
 Trump administration will change rules on tariffs and government procurement that govern their businesses .
 Firms become corporate socialists if they have controlling owners who demand they prioritise social obj ectives . Firms could become corporate socialism if they are controlling owners .
 Many individual firms will still move the other way, towards shareholders . Many individual companies will still be moving towards shareholders.
 Google is becoming a corporate toiler, not a king, as its growth slows . The company's growth is slowing, but it's becoming a company toiler .
 Volkswagen is dropping its extravagant ways and firing staff after its emissions scandal . The company is dropping extravagant ways, firing staff .
 Tata Group in India will now start to worry about profits as much as nation-building .
 In the contest between shareholders and the people, companies and bosses are caught in the middle .
Fight against non-communicable diseases has not been as great, especially in developing countries where their share of the overall disease burden has increased dramatically over the last 15 years .
Low-income and lower-middle-income countries will need to expand their focus from infectious diseases to NCDs in the coming years .
 Canadian rating agency downgraded Italy’s sovereign debt, stripping the country of its last a rating .
 Government bond-yields rose; so will the cost of funding for Italian banks . Italian banks are struggling to find funding for their banks .
 Monte dei Paschi di Siena is now Italy’s fourth-largest lender . A planned state rescue of the bank is expected to take place .
 A private recapitalisation scheme collapsed in December, prompting it to seek government help . The scheme was set up in a bid to boost the economy .
 The state had created a €2obn fund to support ailing banks . Days earlier, anticipating the plan’s demise, the state had set up the fund . The plan was expected to be scrapped by the government .
 Monte dei Paschi’s chief executive, Marco Morelli, will present a new business plan next month .
 The bank is expected to issue a state-backed bond, for perhaps €i.bn, to shore up liquidity . It hopes eventually to raise €isbn to replace deposits that bled away last year .
 The first state rescue of a big bank since the commission tightened state-aid rules . Once the plan is out, negotiations between Italy and the EU will ensue .
 Between 2007 and 2014 the commission approved €strn-worth of state aid, including guarantees, for banks . Between 2007-2014 the commission approval of €stn- worth of state help .
 The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive came fully into force last year . It demands that banks receiving state help be put into “resolution-^ effect, bankruptcy’s bankruptcy .
 Shareholders and junior creditors cop it, for at least 8% of liabilities, if the state steps in . Shareholders, junior creditorsCop it, if state steps into it .
 The government plans a “precautionary recapitalisation-allowed by the directive’s directive . The government is planning a ‘precautionsary recapitalsisation’
 One Monte dei Paschi failed last summer in a stress test .
 That would imply “burden-sharing’s” converting junior debt to equity, rather than a bail-in . That would implies “Burden- sharing” instead of ‘burden. sharing’ The move would imply that
 Retail investors who were “mis-sold’s subordinated bonds may be compensated. Separately, retail investors who are ‘mis- sold’ might be compensated .
 The world’s oldest bank, Monte dei Paschi was founded in 1472 by Sienese magistrates . The bank is the world's oldest bank .
 In 2007 it bought Antonveneta, another Italian bank, from Spain’s Santander for €9bn in cash .
 The private plan, devised in July, would have stripped out and securitised €27.6bn-worth of non-performing loans and recapitalised the bank with Csbn .
 The ecb told the bank that its capital shortfall had widened to €8.8bn . The bank's capital shortfall, under an ‘adverse scenario’ in the summer’s stress test, had widened .
 The capital required will depend on Mr Morelli’s revised plan, and in particular on what will be done to clean up bad loans .
 Retail investors have around €2bn-worth of bonds and are in line for the same value in shares . The conversion of bonds to equity could raise €4bn, but retail investors may then be eligible for compensation .
 Pier Carlo Padoan, the finance minister, says the banking system is turning a page .
 UniCredit's shareholders approved a €i3bn share issue on January 12th UniCredit’s shareholders . The issue is part of an overdue overhaul to UniCredit .
 Last year was the first since 2008 in which banks’ total non-performing exposures declined . Cyprus’s biggest lender T HE banking woes of Italy pale next to those that plagued Cyprus four years ago .
 Bank of Cyprus, the biggest local lender, finished repaying €n.bn of emergency liquidity assistance from the country’s central bank .
 It followed that by returning to the bond markets, raising €25om in a sale of unsecured notes, albeit with a stiff 9.25% coupon . The bond market has since returned to the market, with a price of €25m .
Bank of Cyprus listed on the London Stock Exchange on January 9 .
 It has also rid itself of operations in Romania, Russia, Serbia, Serbia and Ukraine . It also has also had operations in Russia, Ukraine and Romania .
 Cyprus seemed in grave danger of tumbling out of the euro area. All this marks a big improvement since 2013, when Cyprus seemed to be in danger of falling out of euro .
 Banks closed their doors and capital controls were imposed for the first time in the zone’s existence . Banks closed the doors and Capital Control was imposed for first time .
 The imf and the rest of the currency club were rescued by the imf . The price of a rescue was steep, according to a report .
 Laiki was wound up, its bad loans were put into a "bad bank" and its good ones were transferred to Bank of Cyprus . Laiki's good ones and deposits are transferred to the bank .
 Moody’s, a rating agency, expects 2.7% in 2017 . It managed 2.9% in 2016; Moody's, a ratings agency, manages 2.8% in 2015 .
 Progress in recent talks on reunifying the Greek-Cypriot south of the island would surely be a boon . The island is recognised only by Turkey, which is recognised by Turkey .
 Bank of Cyprus took€90om-worth of property onto its books in the first nine months of 2016 . Ciyom- worth has been sold .
By 2018, bad loans will almost be back to their pre-crisis level, according to Cerved . But that may depend on what happens to Monte dei Paschi .
 The plan to securitise its portfolio was intended to kick-start a market in duff debt . The plan was meant to create a market for debt.
 The resolution in November 2015 of four tiny banks, in which bondholders were bailed in, caused uproar . The resolution of the four banks, which bailed bondholders in, sparked uproar .
 ubi Banca, the fifth-largest lender, hopes to buy three of the four “good’s residual banks for €1. Now ubi banca hopes to purchase three of four ‘good” residual banks .
 A merger finalised on January 1st created Banco bpm, now Italy’s third-biggest bank .
 Analysts at Credit Suisse suggest that the government's €2obn fund should suffice to plug any remaining capital gaps .
 Many lenders will find life a grind without stronger growth than Italy’s recent pitiful record .
 Russia lent Ukraine $3bn in the form of a bond to bolster his resolve in resisting the demands of pro-EU protesters .
 The bond was issued under English law, and a hearing began this week in London . The bond is issued under British law .
 Russia made it harder for Ukraine to repay the bond by annexing Crimea and stoking war in the Donbass region . Ukraine's annexation of Crimea and war in Donbass made it more difficult for Russia to repay it .
 It has fiddled with gas supplies to the country and slapped on trade sanctions . Moreover, it has fiddle with gas supply supplies to its country .
 In 2013 eight hryvnias bought one American dollar; it now takes more than 25 to buy one . In 2013 it took eight American dollar.
 English courts would wish to rule definitively that Russia was responsible for Ukraine’s economic woes . It is not clear that English courts, which pride themselves on their political impartiality, would want to rule .
 Ukraine continued to pay interest on the bond in part of 2015, when it was in the depths of recession .
 Russia’s annexation, perversely, may have made it easier for Ukraine to repay the bond . Russia's annexation may have helped Ukraine repay its bond .
In October the imf predicted 2.5% growth in gdp for 2017 . The weak hryvnia is helping to lift exports . In October the Imf predicted a 2.4% growth for 2017.
 A building boom is under way in Kyiv and the shopping malls off Independence Square are now filled with people eating noodles and hamburgers .
 The hryvnia would come under renewed pressure after $3bn was eventually extracted from Ukraine .
 The next few years look tough, says The Economist . The Economist's new book, The Economist, will be published January 2lst 2017 .
 Ukraine will have to fork out about $isbn in 2017-20-an amount roughly equivalent to its current reserves of foreign exchange . To service other dollar debts Ukraine will need to pay about $ isbn in the next year .
 Investors will start to worry about the country’s financial health if reserves fall below $iobn .
 Ukraine's bail-out programme with the imf, agreed in 2015, should soften the blow, but it is behind schedule . Ukraine’s bail-outs programme was agreed in2015, but is now behind schedule.
 Ukraine’s economic to-do list is daunting. Bond repayment or no bond repayment is a daunting task for Ukraine .
Far-reaching reforms are needed to stamp out corruption and improve the rule of law . Far-reaching reform is needed to tackle corruption, improve the rules of law, say experts .
 The recent nationalisation of the nation’s biggest lender, the struggling PrivatBank, has maintained financial stability, says Tomas Fiala .
 Raising heavily subsidised gas prices has improved the finances of the state monopoly, Naftogaz .
 Hopes that Ukraine’s market for agricultural land would be thrown open to foreign investors have been dashed .
 Popular disillusionment has set in about the government’s reformist zeal .
 Elena Besedina of the Kyiv School of Economics points out that no big names from the old regime have been thrown in jail for their wrongdoing . But luxury-car dealers and fashion boutiques still do a surprisingly brisk trade .
 With elections scheduled for 2019, populist vote-winning measures will doubtless be wheeled out . With elections set for 2019.
 stocks and industries have had the odd wobble, not least when they have been the subj ect of a hostile tweet from the incoming president .
Brexit negotiations, tax laws and trade talks are used as a way to favour some industries and punish others .
 The real problem is that it is more about protecting the position of established corporations-cosseting losers, in other words . But the real problem, he says, is to protect the position.
 Nissan has made an undisclosed commitment to the British government . Nissan is a Japanese car giant . Many companies have expressed concern about Brexit .
 The danger is that this cements in place the existing structure of the corporate sector and prevents the emergence of more efficient firms that can drive forward productivity improvements .
New paper* from the oecd finds link between the proportion of zombie firms surviving in an economy and declining productivity .
 A 3.5% increase in the zombie share is associated with a 1.2% decline in labour productivity across industries . Specifically, a 3. 5% increase is linked to the increase in zombies .
 The paper defines zombie firms as those aged ten years or older with an interest-coverage ratio of less than one in each of the preceding three years .
Today the zombies shuffle on, discouraging more efficient firms from investing and making it harder for rivals to earn increased profits and gain market share . But today the zombie shuffle on.
 The decline in new business formation may be partly caused by the suffocating impact of zombies . The decline is still worse still, according to the study .
 Europe often gets criticised for its economic inflexibility in the labour market . The difficulty of firing workers makes companies reluctant to hire them in the first place .
 Oecd study suggests problem of corporate ossification may be even more widespread . But the study suggests that the problem may be more widespread than ever .
 The issue may also help to explain why the productivity performance of the global economy has been so disappointing .
 The new versions of industrial policy are likely only to exacerbate this problem . The new version of industrial policies are likely to exacerbate the problem .
 A company makes an investment decision on the back of a tax break or a threatening presidential tweet, then it is probably not making the most efficient use of its capital .
 It may seem like good news in the short term for workers who keep their jobs. It may be good news for the workers who stay their jobs .
 The companies they work for will be less competitive in international markets . As consumers, workers will either pay higher prices or buy inferior goods .
 Instead of an inflexible labour market, you get an infLexible corporate market . You get a corporate market, rather than a labour market .
 In the long run, a more interventionist government policy is likely to weigh on economic growth and to make equities riskier . But in the longrun, more interventionists are likely to be in place .
 President Bernie Sanders was berating American companies on Twitter, or Jeremy Corbyn was pledging unquantified British government support to manufacturers .
 The economy is not as fragile as officials' nervousness suggests I N RECENT weeks signs have appeared in the poky arrivals hall at Soekarno-Hatta airport in Jakarta .
 South-East Asia’s largest economy, South- East Asia's largest, has long been suspected of foreign interference in the economy . The currency's vulnerability to capital flight is also a concern, according to analysts .
 Indonesia was seen as one of the ‘fragile five’ emerging markets . In 2013, the Federal Reserve’s “tapering’ of its asset purchases led to a 21% slide in the rupiah against the dollar .
 On December 14th the Fed raised interest rates for the first time in a year . The Fed is raising interest rates in the first year.
Higher yields in advanced economies draw capital from emerging markets, putting pressure on currencies . Higher yields in emerging markets put pressure on their currencies .
 The rupiah fell by 3.7% against the dollar in November, the steepest monthly decline for more than a year . The fall was part of a wider sell-off of emerging-market currencies .
 J.R Morgan downgraded its view of Indonesian equities to ‘underweight’ following Donald Trump’s election victory . The finance ministry severed all business ties with the American investment bank .
 Sri Mulyani Indrawati says financial institutions have a responsibility to create positive sentiment .
 Indonesian officials penalised banks for their research . It is not the first time Indonesian officials have been penalised for their work .
 Ms Mulyani is widely regarded as the cabinet’s most pro-market member . She has previously served as finance minister in 2005-10 .
 Markets rallied when the president, Joko Widodo, brought her back in a reshuffle last July .
 Foreign reserves amount to a hefty $n6bn, but are among the lowest in Asia relative to the economy’s overall financing needs .
 IMF: Foreigners hold nearly 40% of Indonesia’s local-currency bonds . IMF: International Foreigners have more than 30% of the country's currency bonds .
 Still, the economy seems better placed to withstand shocks than a few years ago, says economist . The economy seems to be in better shape now than in years ago .
The trade surplus rose to $8.8bn last year, the highest level since 2011 . The trade surplus is the highest since 2011.
 Exports are recovering rapidly, boosted by higher prices for coal and other commodities . Exports of coal, other commodities are also recovering rapidly .
 At 1.8% of gdp, in the most recent quarter the currentaccount deficit is less than half what it was in 2013 . In 2013, the deficit was 1.7% of the GDP .
 Alarmist signs at the airport and lashing out at banks for their research tend to bury rather than highlight positive indicators . Alarmists often bury signs at airports and banks for research .
 Indonesian nervousness risks making the country appear weaker than it actually is . Not for the first time, Indonesia's nervousness has made the country seem weaker .
 The most striking characteristic of the deals is how gently their tyres were let down .
 The Moody’s deal, about high ratings accorded securities that crashed during the crisis, was announced late on January 13th . The deal was announced before a holiday weekend .
 The Moody’s settlement will inflame suspicions that Wall Street is infested with conflicts of interest .
 As part of it, the firm admitted that it vitiated its stated standards for evaluating securities in an area where those standards put in question its ability to win business .
 The Port Authority failed to provide investors with critical information on the risks of a $2.3bn bond offering . The case involves the Port Authority's failure to provide critical information to investors .
 The cost will be levied on the Port Authority itself . The Port Authority is financed by local taxpayers .
 The Securities and Exchange Commission is the first time a municipality admitted wrongdoing in an enforcement action .
 It opens the door to further actions against municipalities ever keener to raise debt . So it opens the doors to further action against municipalities.
 Citadel settlement revolved around charges that unfavourable prices were used to consummate trades from retail customers on orders routed from other brokers . The Citadel settlement was revealed on January 13th .
 The business prospects of none of the defendants seem to have suffered much harm from these investigations . The business prospect of none the defendants seems to have been harmed by the investigations .
 The large agencies have had the heft to comply with a costly regulatory framework imposed after the crisis . The heft has had to comply.
 It is worth wondering whether these three entities would fare worse if their legal travails were better known . It's worth wondering if they would fare better if they had better known.
 Citadel could be required to note its settlement on trade confirmations sent to clients . Citadel could also note its settlements on trade confirmsations sent.
 T HERESA MAY’S speech on January 17th set Britain definitively on a path to a ‘hard’Brexit . It will leave not just the eu but the European single market, it will leave.
 The prime minister did at least pick out finance, along with carmaking, as an industry for which “elements of current single-market arrangements’ might remain in place as part of a future trade deal .
 The City is holding out hope that a bespoke deal built on the existing legal concept of “equivalence’ could still accord it a fair degree of access to Europe . The City wants to build a deal on the current legal concept.
 Two big banks, hsbc and ubs, this week each confirmed plans to move 1,000 jobs from London . Already, two big banks have confirmed plans for moving 1,00 jobs from the capital .
 For the City, these focus on so-called ‘equivalence’ provisions . Third-country financial firms can access to the eu if their home country’s regulatory regime is deemed equivalent .
Currently only some regulations, such as those governing clearing houses and securities trading, contain provisions . Currently only some rules, like that of clearing houses, contain the provisions .
 Even where the provisions exist, applying them will, in effect, be a political decision .
Black Volkswagen shuttle vans ferry delegates from their hotels in Davos, Switzerland, to this year’s World Economic Forum . Optimists hope equivalence could just form the basis of a feasible deal .
 The world’s eight richest men could squeeze into one of these vans . They might feel cramped, but they are not .
 Forbes magazine lists the wealth of billionaires and Credit Suisse, which estimates the smaller holdings of everyone else . The charity draws on data from Forbes magazine, which lists wealth of the billionaires .
 Oxfam’s headline-grabbing comparison for its handling of debt, the dollar, labour and data .
 The world’s least wealthy include over 420m adults whose debts exceed their assets . They have negative net worth .
 There are over 21m Americans with a combined wealth of minus $357bn . There are more than 21m people in the U.S.
 Only people with relatively good prospects, by global standards, can be so poor . The wretched of the earth could never borrow so much, according to experts .
 If all of the people with sub-zero wealth are excludable, Britain could remove some onerous regulations .
Jonathan Herbst of Norton Rose Fulbright, another law firm, notes that precedents exist for “variable geometry’ in regulation .
 Some British clearing houses already submit to partial American regulatory oversight . For instance, some clearing houses have already submitted to partial U.S. oversight .
 European Central Bank under direct oversight without leaving London . If they deal in euro-denominated trades, nothing seems to stop them from submitting to the bank .
 Equivalence determinations are at the full discretion of eu regulators . The status can be withdrawn at short notice .
 Even a small future divergence could be construed as moving away from equivalence . In a charged political environment, even a small political environment could be interpreted as moving towards equivalence.
 The poorest half of the remaining population would have a combined wealth equivalent to the richest 98 billionaires . Europeans are not minded to let Britain off the hook by allowing it easily to “cherry-pick’s sectoral carveed from the comparison.
 The Credit Suisse team converts the world’s wealth into dollars at market rates . The team converts world's wealth to dollars at the market rates.
 studies of global poverty typically make currency conversions at “purchasing-power parity’ instead . So studies of poverty usually make currency conversion at ‘purchased-power parity’ Instead, studies of world poverty typically do so .
 The returns on that assetsuch as wages-do however appear in income statistics . The returns are not as good as income statistics.
 Oxfam also seems to have committed a rounding error in valuing the poor’s wealth at $409bn .
 For what it's worth, $384bn is less than the wealth of the world's seven richest men .
 There would be no need to squeeze Bloomberg, the world’s eighthri chest person, into the minivan .
 That would leave room for the magnificent seven to stretch their legs. That would be the first time they've done so so far .
 The ecb had sought to move euro clearing into the euro area before the referendum in June . Even before the vote in June the ecb wanted to move Euro clearing into euro area .
 Canadian banks admit Canadian banks into the eu on the back of the recent Eu-Canada free-trade deal under better terms than British banks .
 The ecb would be tricky for the ecb to stop this unless it were to forbid European banks from using non-European clearing houses, which would deprive them of access to liquidity .
 It might be in the ecb’s interest, then, to agree on a bespoke arrangement on clearing .
 Other financial-market activities may prove harder nuts to crack-especially if, as seems possible, broader negotiations descend into acrimony .
 A proposed border-adjusted tax plan could prove a taste of things to come . It is fair to say, but not perhaps the most consequential of the looming reality checks .
 Mr Trump and his Congress work to make policy, there are many ways for things to go awry .
 Both Mr Trump and congressional Republicans are keen to cut taxes on corporations . Both men want to cut tax on corporations.
 Paul Ryan, Speaker of the House of Representatives, has something very different in mind . Ryan is a Republican policy wonk .
 The new tax, assessed at a rate of 20%, would apply to all domestic sales while exempting foreign ones . The tax would be assessed at the rate of20%, assessed at an average of 20% .
 This ‘destination-based’ system would reduce the incentive to move profits or operations abroad . This “destinations-based system’s” system would be used to reduce the incentives of moving abroad .
 Many suppose that a vat, because of the adjustment, provides the countries which use it with an export advantage .
 Some Republicans have argued in favour of their reform plan on just those grounds . Some Republicans argue that the reform plan is just a matter of a few grounds .
 Imposing a 20% vat means adding 20% to the price of imports while rebating domestic firms 20% of the value of their exports . Imposing the 20% Vat is adding 20%, to the cost of imports .
 The combination of import tax and export subsidy certainly sounds like a boon to exporting firms . The combination is good for exporting firms.
 Congress was to impose a universal sales tax on all coffee mugs sold in America, regardless of origin . To see why, imagine that Congress were to impose such a tax on mugs.
 The tax would have no effect on the price of American coffee mugs sold abroad . It would not give a boost to exporting American mugmakers .
 The U.S. exception Tax revenue as % of GDP, 2015 H Corporate tax Value-added tax . The American exception Tax Revenue as% of GDP .
 The U.S. tax would then come on top of whatever sales taxes were in place in foreign markets . The American tax is a significant disadvantage relative to competitors .
 The rebate paid to exporters is the way the government prevents what is essentially a national sales tax from penalising domestic firms seeking to compete in foreign markets .
 A value-added tax with border adjustments has no effect on export competitiveness whatsoever . The tax has no impact on the export competitiveness of the country .
 Republicans accustomed to seeing vat as a money-generating machine, fit to support a European-style welfare state . That is partly because labelling it as such might discomfit rank-and-file Republicans .
 The wage exemption is similar to that of a cut in payroll tax . Still, the effect of the wage exemption was similar to the payroll tax cut in 2012 .
 It can hardly be taken as a ham-fisted attempt to sock it to foreign competitors . It is not the first attempt to try and sock it.
 Mr Ryan unveiled his plan in June of last year, long before election day, in a distant past when Republicans were less supportive of trade restrictions .
Congressional leaders may have tried to slip a nonprotectionist tax plan past Mr Trump under the cover of “border adjustment’s language.’
 A more straightforwardly mercantilist policy such as import tariffs might not please him any better, even if he could wring one out of Congress .
In a world of flexible exchange rates, policies which reduce demand for foreign goods-and, correspondingly, for foreign currency-generate exchange-rate shifts .
 American exporters would suffer in the short run, and a rising dollar could exacerbate global financial stress . The rise in the dollar could also exacerbate global economic stress .
 Mr Trump previously unappreciated inconsistencies in his policy preferences . The need to make real-world policy decisions will reveal to Mr Trump, he says .
In practice, the impact that competing Republican tax plans have on exports will be a sideshow . In practice, it will be an impact on exports.
 Mr Trump's presidency will be the unceasing, stomachchurning drama to be expected in the presidency .
 The tax-policy battle will reveal how well he and Congress can manipulate each other .
 It will give a taste of how the president reacts when economies fail to do as they are told . It will be the first time the president has been told about how he reacts to the news .
Brain Initiative, announced by Barack Obama in 2013, or the Human Brain Project, approved by the European Union in the same year, aim to analyse how nerve cells interact in a real brain .
 The hope is that the torrents of data these schemes generate will contain crucial nuggets that let neuroscientists get closer to understanding how the brain does what it does .
 A paper just published in PLOS Computational Biology questions whether more information is the same thing as more understanding .
Like brains, computers process information by shuffling electricity around complicated circuits . Like brains, they process information on complicated circuits.
 Unlike the workings of brains, those of computers are understood on every level .
 A microprocessor is a microprocessor that can be used to create a chip that matches what is already known to be true about how the chip works . The chip was developed by a team of researchers at the University of Cambridge .
 mos Technology 6502, first produced in 1975 and famous for powering, among other things, early Atari, Apple and Commodore computers . Their test subject was the mos technology 6502 .
With just 3,510 transistors, the 6502 is simple enough for enthusiasts to have created a simulation . The simulation can model the electrical state of every transistor, and the voltage on every one of the thousands of wires connecting those transistors .
 That simulation produces about 1. gigabytes of data a second-a large amount, but well within the capabilities of the algorithms currently employed to probe the mysteries of biological brains . The simulation is based on a simulation that produces 1.5 million gigabytes.
 A common tactic in brain science is to compare damaged brains with healthy ones . The chips are down, but the chips are not down .
 In rats, for instance, damaging the hippocampuses-two small, bananashaped structures buried towards the bottom of the brain-reliably interferes with the creatures' ability to recognise objects .
 When applied to the chip, that method turned up some interesting false positives . The chip is a chip that can be used to make a chip .
 The circuit is part of a circuit which implements a much more basic computing function . It is crucial for loading one piece of software, but not some others .
 Another neuroscientific approach is to look for correlations between the activity of groups of nerve cells and a particular behaviour .
 A seemingly significant finding was mostly an illusion. Again, though, that seemingly significant find was mostly a illusion .
 Drs Jonas and Kording know that transistors are not directly involved in drawing pictures on the screen . They know that these transistors aren't directly involved.
 They are only involved in the trivial sense that they are used by some part of the program which is ultimately deciding what goes on the screen . They are used in a trivial sense.
The patterns were a mishmash of unrelated structures that were as misleading as they were illuminating . The patterns were as confusing as the patterns were illuminating.
 Two strange mammals illuminate the process of natural selection since 1986 . Two strange animals have been spotted in the past two decades .
 The creature’s ‘brain’ works more than they do about computer chips with millions of times as many components . Yet they understand much less about how the creature's “brain” works.
 Logic gates are organised into logic gates, which implement simple logical operations . These are organised in logic gates .
 The mess of electrical currents within the chip gives rise to a cartoon ape throwing barrels at a plumber-is difficult . But inferring the existence of such highlevel structures-working out how the mess of Electrical currents in the chip is difficult .
 Dr Jonas draws a comparison with the Human Genome Project . Dr Jonas drew a comparison to the effort to sequence a complete human genome .
 The hope was that this would provide insights into everything from cancer to ageing . This would be the first time this could be done by a doctor .
Just a long string of text written in the four letters of the genetic code . But it has proved much more difficult than expected to extract those sorts of revelations .
 Some neuroscientists have criticised the paper, arguing that the analogy between chips and brains is not so close that techniques for analysing one should automatically work on the other .
 The 6502 in particular is about as different from a brain as it could be, says Gael Varoquaux .
For all its limitations, neuroscience has made real progress, he says . And he points out that, for all its limitation, neuroscience is making real progress .
 The ins-and-outs of parts of the visual system are reasonably well understood . The ins and-out of the system, such as how it categorises features like lines and shapes, are well understood.
 The data it generated, and the reams of extra information churned out by modern, far more capable gene-sequencers, have been useful .
Hype-fuelled hopes of an immediate leap in understanding were dashed . But hype-futhed hopes of a breakthrough were dashed by the news .
 The phenomenon has not yet been much looked at, but its underlying genetics is the underlying genetics .
How often such changes arise from similar mutations in the two convergent lines, and how often they have different genetic causes that happen to have similar effects on the organisms’ forms and functions .
 Their habitats-mountainous areas of southern China and its neighbours-overlap, but their last common ancestor lived 43m years ago . Their habitats were in southern China.
Members of the mammalian order Carnivora share a limited kinship, though, for both are members of the species . They do, but they do, though.
 Both have a sixth digit on their forepaws-a kind of ancillary thumb derived from one of the bones of the wrist that helps them hold bamboo stalks for consumption .
 Hu Yibo of the Institute of Zoology, in Beijing, and his colleagues wondered if the two vegetarian carnivores also shared genetic modifications that might explain those features .
 Dr Hu observes in a paper just published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .
P pandas share features of their dna with each other, but not with the four comparison species, he reasoned . It is likely that those features encode recent adaptations common to the two of them .
 The team identified 70 genes (out of the 20,000 or so that mammals have) which sport bits of dna that seemed to be shared .
 They also found ten genes which have been disabled by crippling mutations in both of the pandas, but not in the other four species .
 Not all of the shared genetic features obviously tied in with the shared peculiarities of pandas, but some did .
 The anatomy-related adaptations were those that seemed to control the development of the pandas’ second thumbs . The pandas' second thumbs were found to be the key to their development .
 Two genes in particular, DYNC2H1 and pericentrin, have mutations that cause identical changes in each type of panda .
 In mice, mutations in these genes are known to encourage extra digits to grow . It is not unreasonable to suspect they are also the cause of this in pandas .
 When working, this gene encodes a protein which forms part of the tongue’s taste buds for umami . A savoury ‘meatiness’ separate from the other four tastes of sweetness, sourness, bitterness and saltiness .
 Umami perception is stimulated by glutamic acid, one of the 20 amino acids that make up proteins-but one that is more characteristic of animal proteins than plant ones .
 Sensitivity to umami is valuable to a carnivore but unnecessary and possibly harmful to a herbivore .
 The other genetic convergences Dr Hu recorded were related to the digestion and metabolism of substances scarce in, or absent from, bamboo .
 He and his colleagues noted parallel changes in the genes for three digestive enzymes . Their job is to liberate two particular amino acids, lysine and arginine, from proteins .
 Both lysine and arginine are abundant in meat, but in short supply in bamboo . Both are found in the bamboo .
 The team noted parallel changes in four genes that encode proteins involved in the metabolism of two vitamins, a and B 12, and of arachidonic acid, a lipid essential for bodily function .
 Exactly how the genetic changes seen alter the effectiveness of the proteins involved remains to be determined .
 The prediction would be that they enhance the availability of the nutrients in question . But the prediction would not be that the nutrients would enhance their availability .
 The upshot is that the two pandas do indeed seem to have similar genetics underlying their similar peculiarities .
 Such similarities are, admittedly, easier to find than different genetic routes to the same outcome would be .
 In the case of pandas, natural selection has often taken the same paths to arrive at the same outcomes . But Dr Hu has established that, at least in the case, it has often been the same path .
Would-be journalist to spend three months of the summer working on the newspaper in London, writing about science and technology .
 Sunspots are apparent blemishes in the sun’s photosphere, the layer which emits its light .
 Though still hot, they are cooler than their surroundings and thus appear dark by contrast . They are also darker by contrast.
 A cycle starts with spots appearing at mid-latitudes in both northern and southern hemispheres . The cycle begins with spots in both Northern and Southern Hemispheres.
 The amount of light and other radiation the sun emits first increases to a maximum and then decreases to a minimum . As they do so, the spots vanish and the cycle renews . The sun emits a maximum of light.
On Earth, the increased illumination of solar maxima drives photosynthesis, and thus plant growth . On Earth, an increase of solarmaxima drives plant growth.
Botanists use trees’ annual growth rings to work out what sunspot activity was like hundreds, and occasionally thousands, of years ago .
 Determining solar activity millions of years ago, though, has not been so easy . Determination of solar activity is difficult .
Solar physicists wonder how far back into the past the sun’s magnetic field that drive the cycle go . But it is of interest to solar physicists.
 The Natural History Museum of Chemnitz, in Germany, has cracked the problem . Now, Ludwig Luthardt and Ronny Rossler of the Natural History museum have cracked it .
 The tree-ring method has been applied to petrified trunks from a nearby fossil forest . They have been able to apply the tree-rings method to the trunks .
 This forest was buried by a volcanic eruption 290m years ago, during the Permian period . The forest was created by an artist's impression .
 The sunspot cycle was little different then from what it is now, according to Geology .
 The Chemnitz fossil trees, mostly conifers and ferns, are particularly well preserved . The trees are mostly Conifers, fern and conifer trees .
 Volcanic minerals seeped into them soon after the eruption and petrified them before bacteria and fungi could rot their tissues away .
 Mr Luthardt and Dr Rossler selected 43 of the largest specimens and looked at their growth rings . The pair looked at the growth rings of 43 specimens .
 They found 1,917 rings which were in a good enough state to be measured under a microscope . The rings were found in good enough states to be tested under the microscope .
 The trees had died simultaneously, giving them a baseline to work from . So they were able to compare the rings from different plants .
 About three-quarters of their specimens showed synchronous growth peaks like those caused by modern sunspot activity .
In total, the rings they measured let them study 79 years of forest growth before the eruption . In total, they measured the growth of the rings .
 That compares with 11 years in the modern era, although this figure conceals wide variation in the lengths of individual cycles . That compares to 11 years when the average length of a cycle was 11 years .
 The sunspot cycle was the same in the early Permian as it is now, suggesting that the sun’s magnetic oscillations were the same then as they are at present .
 There is no reason why the method should not be applied to other petrified forests, from different periods, to find out .
 Shkval turned out to be less threatening than hoped. Problems with its design meant it was less dangerous than hoped . It is still made and deployed .
Supercavitation, the principle upon which its speed depends, has continued to intrigue torpedo designers . But supercavitations, which is based on speed, have continued to fascinate designers .
 Some in the West worry that the country's engineers have cracked it . Russia is the successor of the Soviet Union's successor .
 Life in a bubble Bubbles form in water wherever there is low pressure, such as on the trailing edges of propeller blades .
 Shkval’s designers sought, by amplifying, to make use of the phenomenon . The designers sought to use the phenomenon to make it easier to use it .
 The torpedo has a blunt nose fitted with a flat disc that creates a circular trailing edge as it moves forward .
 A single, giant bubble envelopes the entire torpedo except for the steering fins . They also gave it a rocket motor to accelerate it to a speed fast enough to create a cavity .
 Most of the torpedo experiences no hydrodynamic drag, greatly enhancing its potential velocity . The result is that most of the torpedors experience no hydroynamic drag .
 A hydrojet-a motor fuelled by a material, such as magnesium, that will burn in water . To take advantage of this it is propelled, when the booster rocket runs out of oomph, by a booster rocket .
 First, it has a short range-around 15km compared with around 50km for America’s principal submarine-launched torpedo, the Mk 48 .
 Second, the hydrojet is noisy, so opponents can hear the weapon coming . Third, it is noisy. Second, it's noisy. Third and fourth .
 Most torpedoes use sonar to home in on the ship they are intended to sink . Most of the torpedoes are designed to sink, but they are not meant to sink.
 Any sonar needs to be mounted on the cavitation disc, which is too small for the purpose . Because Shkval travels inside a bubble, any sonar must be mounted to the disc .
 Returning sonar pings would be drowned out by the hydroj et’s noise . In addition, returning sonar Pings would also be drown out by hydrojet's noise .
 Shkval’s only guidance is an autopilot which steers it towards the place where its target was located at the moment of launch .
 Western countries are trying to build supercavitating torpedoes of their own . These deficiencies have not stopped Western countries building torpedoes. These deficiencies are not stopped by Western countries .
 Diehl, a German firm, announced a programme for such a weapon, Barracuda in 2004 .
 In 2006 General Dynamics, a big American firm, was commissioned to look into the matter . The company's brief did not include the word “torpedo’s’.
 The firms’ engineers tried to overcome the guidance problem by developing a new type of cavitator .
 General Dynamics’ design had a curved surface, increasing the area available for sonar reception . The design was designed to increase the area for sonor reception .
 The sonar’s transmitters, mounted on the torpedo's steering fins, were separate from the receiver . The interference caused by engine noise was reduced by special filters .
 American naval research into supercavitation in general ended in 2012, though which problems proved insurmountable has never been revealed .
 Few details have been released, except that the work is being carried out by Elektropribor, a design bureau specialising in high-precision systems for submarines .
 General Dynamics-style sonar with a better motor could result in a weapon that the world's navies would truly have to fear . The sonar could be a weapon for the world’s navies .
 Georgiy Savchenko of the Institute of Hydromechanics at Ukraine’s National Academy of Sciences. Such a motor is possible, he says .
Supercavitationresearch group estimates that with the right fuel a new torpedo could have ten times the range of Shkval . The right fuel packs more energy per kilogram than magnesium .
 Such a combination of range and tracking ability would make it hard to evade . It would still be noisy, but, added to its speed, it would be easier to track .
There is no theoretical reason why Khishchnik should not travel quite a lot faster than Shkval does . There's no theoretical reasons why KhISHchnik shouldn't travel quite much faster.
 In laboratory tests, supercavitating projectiles have clocked more than 5,oookph. The projectiles have been clocked over 5,000 times .
 The supercavitating design being developed for Khishchnik might also feed into the Kanyon project . A giant nuclear-powered torpedo with a nuclear warhead that is intended to attack coastal targets .
 The project was revealed to the world in 2015 during a televised meeting between Vladimir Putin, Russia's president, and senior officers of the country’s armed forces . It was either a deliberate leak or a piece of disinformation .
 The leaked design did not appear to use supercavitation-but if Kanyon is genuine, then thoughts of adding it cannot have escaped its designers .
 Khishchnik seems real enough. Even if Kanyon is smoke and mirrors, though, he's real enough . Kanyon's life seems like he's a real man .
 Laotians cowered in caves to escape what is considered the heaviest bombardment in history . The campaign was certainly not a secret .
 America's involvement was well known in the capital, Vientiane, and covered in the international press .
 Eventually it became well publicised and was even investigated by Congress . Eventually it was well-publicised and even investigated.
 The "secret" label stuck to America’s war in Laos, in part because of official denials and in part due to public indifference .
 President Barack Obama pledged more money to remove unexploded American bombs in South-East Asian nation in September .
 Fresh interviews and newly declassified records document how American involvement escalated and then swiftly ended .
 In 1961 Laos was the focal point of America’s containment strategy against communism in South-East Asia . President Eisenhower gave it priority in a pre-inauguration briefing to his successor, John Kennedy .
 A cia operation then began to train and fight alongside an army taken mostly from the Hmong ethnic minority . The Pathet Lao-translated as “Lao Nation’s’ who were backed by North Vietnam .
 American air force unleashed an average of one attack every eight minutes for nearly ten years . Hitting the Pathet Lao in the north and on the Ho Chi Minh trail in the south, the U.S. air force unleashes one attack each eight minutes .
 By 1970 tens of thousands of American-backed fighters were involved, at an annual cost of $3.ibn in today’s dollars .
 By the time the campaign ended in 1973, a tenth of Laos’s population had been killed . The campaign was launched in 1973 .
 Thousands more accidental deaths would follow from unexploded bombs left in the soil .
 Mr Kurlantzick paints a vivid picture of protagonists like Vang Pao, a military leader who emigrated to America, and Tony Poe, a hard-drinking cia operative who lived in the jungle and collected severed enemy ears .
 Mr Kurlantzick looks into allegations that the cia sold heroin and opium . The cia has been accused of selling heroin, opium and heroin .
 The agency was happy to look the other way when the Hmong sold drugs . He finds no evidence of this, although the agency washappy to look other way .
 The cia's conduct did not spark outrage, or even much interest, among the American public . One question is why the cia’s conduct didn't spark outrage .
 Even a high-profile hearing, when Senator Ted Kennedy challenged the war, provoked little public reaction .
 Heavier media coverage of the bombing in Cambodia may have contributed, as did the cia’s attempts at a cover-up in Laos and the fact that the American dead were clandestine advisers rather than young draftees .
 Successive U.S. administrations wage “secret wars in Central America and the Middle East with minimal American casualties and without congressional interference .
 The cia viewed its Laotian operation as a success, even though the Pathet Lao took over after America’s withdrawal, and are still in power .
 Some disapproving bishops and headmasters thought his novels, particularly "La Terre," to be corrupting .
 He met leading literary figures and addressed thousands at banquets at Crystal Palace and Guildhall . But with his wife, Alexandrine, he stayed in the Savoy Hotel, met literary figures .
 When he arrived at Victoria Station in 1898 he was alone, a fugitive, carrying a nightshirt wrapped in newspaper . By contrast, when he arrived in July 1898 he had a night shirt wrapped in newspapers .
 In an open letter in L'Aurore, a French newspaper, he attacked the authorities for their shameful anti-Semitic conduct in the political scandal that came to be known as Dreyfus .
 Zola fled to England with no idea of when it might be safe to return to England . Found guilty of libel and sentenced to prison, Zola was sentenced to jail .
 Michael Rosen tells the story of a little-known episode in characteristically engaging style . He was to stay for almost a year, and it is Accuser-in-chief .
 Zola's wife joined him from time to time for idyllic weeks and with her permission, did Jeanne, his other, younger, chere femme, and the children he had had with her .
 Jacques was exiled from France in 2007 . His son Jacques is now living in France . Jacques was a member of the French national team .
 Dreyfus's case was reopened, but he was not yet pardoned . Eventually the French government relented and Zola could return to France .
 Mr Rosen’s great-uncles were deported to Auschwitz, along with 76,000 other French Jews . Zola's death was ‘a tragic rerun of antiSemitism’
 Picador, £25 N EWS of a fatal new disease affecting gay men first broke in 1981 .
 The virus had infected 7,700 people in America by 1984 and killed 3,600, according to a new book . A question about it at a White House press conference aroused laughter .
 It was only in 1985, after Rock Hudson, a Hollywood star, was hospitalised with aids, that President Ronald Reagan publicly acknowledged the virus .
 David France's masterful account of the epidemic offers plenty of opportunity for outrage . David France’s masterful accounts of the outbreak offer plenty of opportunities for outrage.
 America’s response to this public response to the public's reaction to smoking has been positive . The joys of smoking Naughty, but nice Nicotine. America's response is positive, says CNN.com .
 Fitzcarraldo Editions: £12.99 i i T REALLY shouldn’t be writing this A book .
Gregor Hens is a German author and a translator . He wrote a memoir about smoking . It's too much of a risk, he says .
Every smoker knows but few admit, nicotine is easy enough to kick . The fact is, as many smokers know, it's easy to kick.
 The physiological addiction can be overcome with patches, with hypnosis, with self-help books, with good oldfashioned will power .
 "Every cigarette that I’ve ever smoked served a purpose-they were a signal, medication, a stimulant or a sedative, they were a plaything, an accessory, a fetish object, a memory aid, a communication tool or an object of meditation.
Cigarettes represent youth, rebellion, wilful disregard for sensible advice . Cigarettes represent young, rebellion and wilful disregarding advice .
 To stop smoking isn't just to give up the intake of that toxic air, it's redeeming air into your lungs .
 Readers and smokers who smoke will be grateful that Mr Hens wrote ‘Nicotine’ despite the risk of relapse .
 At a time when several states still banned gay sex, many Americans saw aids as a punishment for sinful behaviour .
 Early patients were thrown out of hospitals, ignored by ambulances and locked out of their homes .
 When reports became inevitable, editorials frequently castigated gay men as public-health menaces .
 By 1990 one American was dying from the disease every 12 minutes, often after succumbing to a preventable infection . Gay foreigners entering the country were often quarantined and deported .
 The federal government failed to help states treat and prevent the disease, and federal research remained sluggish and disorganised . But even as hospitals overflowed with aids patients, the federal government didn't help.
 Drugs that officials called promising in 1985 had still not been tested five years later . Officials called the drugs promising five years after they were called promising .
 Others that were transforming lives in off-market experiments, such as an antiblindness drug called dhpg, still awaited clinical trials . Many aids patients would go blind unnecessarily.
 Federal officials dithered for years before issuing guidelines on treatable infections . The guidelines were issued after years of delays .
 Nine years of the war on aids had extended the average 18-month lifespan of patients by a mere three months .
 Public indifference and political ineptitude drove activists to take matters into their own hands .
Condoms became popular, bath houses closed and transmission rates for all sex-related diseases slowed dramatically . Condoms became more popular and bath houses were closed .
 Washington would take over a decade for Washington to fund a safe-sex campaign nationally . It would take more than a decade to fund the campaign.
 The government's flat-footed strategy for researching and testing new drugs spurred black-market clubs that peddled unapproved drugs by the truckload .
 Activists staged protests to highlight the cost of federally approved drugs . They learned enough about virology, chemistry and immunology to propose essential drug-trial innovations .
 Never before had a group of patients done so much to guide the agenda of so-called experts .
 His own story is one of those he knits together in this riveting account of the men and women who refused to surrender in the face of aids .
 ‘How to Survive a Plague’ offers a salient reminder of what can be achieved by citizens who remain unbowed and unbroken .
 The history of the Elbphilharmonie had been chequered . The project was the first time the project had been called 'ElbPhilharmonies'
 Conceived in 2003 at a projected cost of €77m, it ended up costing ten times that and was completed seven years late . The cost of the project was estimated at £77m .
 architects, Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron-creators of Tate Modern and Tate Modern feared job would destroy their Basel-based firm .
 The tallest building in town, it sits on the end of a busy wharf and has been likened to a crystal on a rock, a bubble-wrapped ice-cube and a ship under sail . The building's roof is covered in giant sequins .
 The hall had to fit into a very small footprint, so architects had to think vertically . The hall was designed to fit in a small footprint .
 Yasuhisa Toyota's acoustics expert was celebrated and demanding Yasuhis Toyota . Their acoustic expert was the celebrated and demanded Yasuhia Toyota .
 Suntory Hall in Tokyo is still a benchmark for acoustic refinement and visual elegance . His 30-year-old Suntary Hall is still an acoustic benchmark .
 Berlin Philharmonie's "vineyard" seating design-pioneered at the i96os-is now widely adopted . His customary terraced “vineyard’s” seating design is widely adopted.
 The traditional ‘shoebox’ design has good seats and bad seats, but the more democratic ‘vineyard’ has no “best’ seats . The more democratic "vineyard" design is more democratic, but there are no �
 At the Elbphilharmonie in Hamburg no one is more than 30 metres from the stage . No one is over 30 metres away from stage .
 Achieving the sound that Mr Toyota wanted meant hanging the hall like a cocoon from the roof and surrounding it with feather pillows to isolate the building from external industrial noise .
 The interior is clad with 10,000 distressed gypsum panels, each individually computer-designed both to diffuse the sound and to keep it rich .
Hollowed-out like a cave, and conceived in curves and swirls with not a straight line in sight, the space feels as if it has been crafted entirely by hand .
 The inaugural concert on January nth, programmed to show off the acoustic flexibility, was a triumph . The first concert was held in New York City .
 The sound was balanced and warm with absolute clarity of detail . Sir Bryn Terfel's clarion baritone or Philippe Jaroussky’s ethereal falsetto .
 The bare oak foyers, with their vast flights of stairs, are spartan . They reflect the tastes of a city that is elegant yet restrained .
 There is also a smaller chamber hall and a substantial education department . There are also smaller chamber halls and a larger education department.
 The resident ndr Elbphilharmonie Orchester is there, as is Resonanz, a radical experimental string ensemble .
 The Elbphilharmonie programme is being devised by Christoph Lieben-Seutter . The programme has been devised by the ElbPhilharmonies general director .
 This features not just glittering names, but also breadth and variety, and a determined drive to bring in new audiences . This is not just a glittering name, but there are plenty of those, though there are lots of those .
 Every concert in the opening season sold out within hours of tickets going on sale . It is telling that every concert sold out in the first week of the season .
 Four months ago the depressed Ruhr-valley city of Bochum opened a charming new concert hall . The venue had been in part crowdfunded by 20,000 local residents .
Two years ago the superb Philharmonic de Paris opened its doors to near-universal acclaim . Two years ago a threedecade campaign for its creation led by Pierre Boulez led by other French musicians .
 Seine Musicale is due to open in Paris soon . The hall is mostly publicly funded . It is expected to open soon .
 A proposed new hall for the Barbican Centre would probably cost £400m . The Economist has cheerleaders in the press .
 The project, promoted with implausible bombast about “outreach, has few friends even in the music profession, let alone outside it .
 London's Southbank and Barbican halls have already been built . It would be nice for London to have its own state-ofthe-art concert hall . But with the alreadyexisting Southbank halls, imperfect though they may be, musical life is perfectly liveable .
 One of the richest cities in Europe, it has never been seen as a top-tier cultural destination . The city is one of Europe's richest cities .
 Fewer still leave as big a mark on linguistic lives as Zhou Youguang, who died on January 14th .
 Mr Zhou was the chief architect of pinyin, the system that the Chinese use to write Mandarin in the roman alphabet .
Young children learn the sounds of the thousands of characters required to be literate in Chinese .
 The alphabet borrowed by Communist China from its ideological enemies in the 1950s . In other words, the primary way that the Chinese interact with their language in the digital age is via an alphabet borrowed from Communist China .
 Mao Zedong wanted a radical break with old ways after 1949, when the civil war ended in mainland China . He was Mao Tse-tung before pinyin under the ‘WadeGiles’ romanisation system .
 China's beautiful, complicated and inefficient script was a hindrance to the country’s development . He was hardly the first to think that China’'s beautiful and complicated script was hindrance .
 Taiwan, Hong Kong and other overseas Chinese communities still use the traditional characters . Taiwan and Hong Kong still use traditional characters.
 He was drafted by Zhou Enlai, Mao’s premier, in the 1950s to create a system not to replace, but to complement, the Chinese characters .
 People joked that Mr Zhou’s team had taken three years to deal with just 26 letters .
 The letters do not always sound the same as they do in Western languages . But pinyin overall was a hit, credited with a huge boost in literacy in China .
 Even the Taiwanese, who abhor Mao's simplified characters, are gradually adopting Mr Zhou’s pinyin (which they had also once abhorred)
 Chinese characters are used throughout the Chinesespeaking world, not just by Mandarinspeakers but also by speakers of Cantonese, Shanghainese and other varieties .
 The Chinese writing system unifies the Chinese world . The writing system is the same as the big Romance languages .
This is not obvious from looking at the characters, but it is obvious if you look at pinyin . This is not clear if you are looking at a character .
 If China adopted it wholesale, the linguistic divisions in China would be far more apparent .
 Outsiders focus so much on efficiency probably because those who do try to learn the characters cannot help but be struck by how absurdly hard they are to master .
 English-speakers have rejected most efforts to clean up the language’s notorious spelling .
 The Irish accept the expense of keeping Irish on signs and in classrooms, even if it isn’t efficient .
 Pinyin, which has helped the Chinese have a bit of both, will long outlast the long-lived Mr. Zhou .
 GMAP brings together distinguished midand senior-level leaders to examine issues at the intersection of business, law, diplomacy, finance, development, and geopolitics .
 GMAP hybrid learning format offers the ability to pursue a graduate degree program without career interruption or relocation or relocation . The GMAP Hybrid learning format is designed to offer students the chance to learn without interruption .
 La Oroya Metallurgical Complex and the Cobriza Mine, both located in the Central Andes of Peru, are located in central Peru .
 The former is one of the world’s few polymetallic processing and recovery complexes . The latter is a working copper mine with proven possibilities for considerable reserve development over a long horizon .
 Doe Run Peru is currently operating partially as an ongoing concern . Its productive units will be sold as assets, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances .
 We are scheduled to enter the first round of a Public Auction Process in March 2017 . We are set to enter a first round in March 2016 .
 Qualified bidders will obtain access to our Virtual Data Room, which contains full technical, legal and financial information . The room is also a virtual data room .
Dr. Dr. John Sutter says he has received a teaser and additional information . If you want to receive a teaser or additional information, please feel free to contact Dr. Sutter .
 ESM Grade 1, from £100,000 per annum London and Leeds based NHS England is seeking a Chief Analyst to provide outstanding professional leadership .
NHS England’s analytical services are highly effective, producing world-class insight and evidence . Policy development, decisions and implementation in NHS England are underpinned by world- class analysis .
 National Director for Commissioning Strategy will work closely with NHS England national directors and the NHS England Board, as well as other colleagues .
 You will be a highly experienced leader, with an excellent reputation and significant track record of professional achievement .
 You will play a key role in establishing new partnerships with academic and other experts in the health and care sector . You will make an impact both inside and outside of NHS England .
 NHS England values contributions from diverse backgrounds, and would welcome applications from under-represented groups .
 Navi Mumbai is one of the largest planned titles in the world . The Economist is the latest in a long line of titles to be announced .
 The city with population of 2 millions people is an outstanding example of planned urban development . The city has a population of two million people .
 Navi Mumbai is poised to witness explosive growth with investments of more than USS 6 billion slated in & around the city . More than $6 billion is slated to be invested in the city, including more than $1 billion worth of investments .
 Kharghar is centrally located and is accessible by Mumbai -Pune Expressway, Metro and just 3 km from the upcoming Navi Mumbai International Airport t CIDCO .
 The details regarding participation are available on www.cidco.mah arasht ra.g.g o vin.
 The entries marked with caption 'EOI for preparation of Master Plan for Corporate Park at Kharghar, Navi Mumbai/ on the envelope should reach the following address latest by 21 rt March 2017 .
 The project involves the rehabilitation and Conservation of 12 historical buildings . Irked throu^i a 3. km long waidng trail .
 The project also involves construction of 1 7 open pubfc spaces, a visitor center, pedestrian bridge and 4 parking buittngs . The project will also involve construction of a pedestrian bridge.
 ihe execution contract for the construction erf 17 open pubfcc spaces along ihe Fearing Pathway . The object of this procurement notice is ihe Execution contract .
 The Muharraq streets are designed by Office KGCVS and equipped with trees providing shadng and lighting elements . These spaces are destined to be appropriated by all members of the community in a miititude of ways .
 The Pearling Pathway is connected by lighting elements to facilitate the way findriging process . They are also markers tor visitors to find their way a ong the Pearlingpathway .
 Bidding will be conducted using International Competitive Bidding procedures among IDB member countries . The Guidefines for Procurement of Goods and Marks under Islamic Development Bank Financing is open io ail ettgfcte bidders .
 The Economist. Pearling IBM Testimony of an Island Economy The Economist January 2lst 2017 .
 VlP tables available vipta bte'Seco norm ist.c om pride, ec onofnist.com SAVE 15% with code EC0NMAG15 . The Economist Events join the conversation @EconomistEvents .
 The Economist January 2lst 2017 Economic and financial indicators 77 Dec 31st 2015 Index Jan 18th one week in local in $ currency terms United States 19,804. -0.0 . The Economist.
 New passenger-car registrations in the European Union rose for the third consecutive year .
 Volkswagen saw its share of the European market shrink following its emissions-testing scandal . It remained the best-selling brand in Europe .
 Sales in Britain do not seem to have been strongly affected by the referendum . Low interest rates could keep sales buoyant, according to analysts .
 17.6m cars were sold in the United States last year, but sales are expected to plateau or decline .
 The Index one in local in $ Jan 18th week currency terms United States 2,271. -0. ACEA, AEB; AEB, Autodata; tlncludes light trucks JAMA .
 Her passport was to hand, with visas up to date, just in case the foreign desk rang .
 Aged nearly 80, she was seen climbing a lamppost to gain a better look at Tiananmen Square crackdown .
 She once avoided arrest in Bucharest by staying wrapped only in a towel .
 Romanian secret police might strip a woman, she reckoned, but would not dress one by force .
 She ruthlessly trounced rivals, broke rules and exploited an unmatched array of contacts . She was ruthless and ruthless. She exploited a vast array of relationships .
 India banned foreigners from covering the war with Pakistan in 1965 . She cajoled the prime minister, Indira Gandhi-whom she knew from a previous posting.
 Laconic and unadventurous in print, she was better at getting the story than telling it . She was also unadventureous in print .
 She quizzed and befriended generals, prime ministers and spymasters, politely but relentlessly . She was polite but relentlessly, politely and relentlessly .
 She gained the first interview with the last Shah of Iran in 1941 . After his fall in 1979, he said he would speak only to her .
 In 1968, an anonymous source brought the plans for peace talks to end the Vietnam war to her in Saigon cathedral . Another scoop, in 1968, was a plan to end Vietnam war, brought to her.
 At an age when most journalists are contemplating retirement, she moved to Beijing to open the Daily Telegraph bureau .
 She became a notable China-watcher . She spoke not a word of Chinese .
 It all started in August 1939, when she was 27 and a foreign correspondent for barely four days . She commandeered a British consulate car and drove into Germany from Poland .
 A gust of wind lifted a roadside hessian screen, revealing Hitler’s army .
 At first nobody believed her. It was to be the scoop of the century, though at first nobody thought her .
 On her return she had to produce her shopping-German products unavailable in Poland to show she had crossed the border .
 It was a similar story with her next scoop, that the invasion had started . It was the same story with the next scoop.
 The official line was that talks were still continuing-so she held her telephone out of the window to prove to Warsaw that tanks were indeed roaring into battle .
 In Algiers she marshalled her fellows into a 30-strong posse to accompany a journalist arrested by paramilitaries . She was arrested in Algier in the early hours of the morning .
 She was ferociously competitive, unabashedly criticising female colleagues for being ‘pushy’ or for-perish the thoughtusing their femininity .
 Even in her final, half-blind years she haunted the Foreign Correspondents' Club in Hong Kong .
 From a modern country, we offer a fresh perspective on the events of today . We offer a new perspective on today's events .