First heavy fighting began in eastern Ukraine in early May, with Ukrainian forces trying to retake Sloviansk . As violent clashes spread elsewhere, there has been a growing sense that a larger confrontation, one that could involve Russia and the West, may be unavoidable .
 It is essential for Western governments to focus on what they can do to avoid war, preserve democracy, and keep Ukraine united . It is absolutely essential for the West to focus.
 Kiev's government cannot help the government in Kiev to win with military force in the east. What they cannot do is help the Kiev government in Ukraine to win, says the government .
 The rebel forces have taken control of the Donbas, the largely Russian-speaking industrial and mining region in the east . They appear well organized, have much local support, and are implicitly backed by the Russian troops deployed to the Ukrainian border .
 Ukrainian forces would take many months to reach sufficient strength to retake the Donbas . It would take a few years for Ukrainian forces to reach enough strength to defeat a Russian invasion .
 Moves to raise Ukrainian nationalist volunteer forces should be strongly discouraged by the West, says the West .
 The intervention of such groups would risk repeating what has just happened in Odessa . Dozens of people were killed in street battles on May 2 .
 All the blowhard posturing of U.S. and European government officials cannot hide this essential fact .
 In these circumstances, to give the unelected interim government in Kiev the idea that we support it with military backing is irresponsible, immoral, and contemptible, says the author .
 Olexander Turchynov has publicly hinted at for the Donbas . This, not further separation, is what Moscow is proposing . This is what the Ukrainian interim president has publicly hint at for.
 rebels in Donetsk and other eastern cities have declared the Donetsk Republic . Many easterners have indicated they want some kind of federalization and not independence or annexation .
 Lviv, controlled by Ukrainian nationalists, declared for itself back in February . It seemed that President Viktor Yanukovych would remain in power and take Ukraine into the Russian-dominated Eurasian Union .
 If Lviv could demand this as insurance for its identity and interests when the national government was going in a direction it did not like, it is very hard to argue that Donetsk does not have the right to do the same .
 Nor is there any moral reason why the West can't support federalization .
 The United States, Germany, Canada, and half a dozen other Western democracies are all federal states . The U.S. is one of the largest states in the world .
 A fundamental moral principle of Western foreign policy is that sauce for the goose can never under any circumstances be Sauce for the gander . But to oppose a federal solution for Ukraine on such grounds is ridiculous, we all know .
 A constitutional solution to the crisis has already been supported by all sides, including Russia, the US, and Ukraine . The Geneva Declaration of April 17 called for Ukrainians from all parts of the country to disarm and take part in a national dialogue .
 Geneva did not set out an outline of the constitutional settlement, which will have to be agreed to in advance before the rebel militias in eastern Ukraine will put down their weapons . The problem with Geneva is that it did not.
 There is also profound disagreement on the process by which constitutional change should be introduced . How much regional autonomy should be granted is also a question .
 National and regional elections under a constitution agreed to by all parties are the only way of giving ultimate power to the people of eastern Ukraine . Pro-Russian gunmen have seized control of much of the region, and from the Russian government .
 Kiev's military offensive may only empower pro-Russian gunmen, the Ukrainian ultranationalist militias, the separatists and Vladimir Putin . By contrast, for Kiev to continue its military offensive, it may empower the pro- Russian gunmen .
 Agreement on a new federal constitution for the country as a whole must be reached first, and ratified by a national referendum .
 The rebel militias in eastern Ukraine and the camp of demonstrators on the Maidan in Kiev should both agree not to use force and not to disrupt such a solution . Neither regional nor national democracy is possible if governments have to submit for approval to unelected crowds .
 Elections for the presidency, parliament, regional assemblies, and regional governorships can then be scheduled to take place simultaneously later in the year . Elections for president, parliament and regional assemblies can also be held simultaneously .
 The United Nations and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe would need to report on compliance by all sides . Some kind of observer force needed to be put in place .
Ukrainian forces must continue to hold their positions at airfields and military bases in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia was able to disarm and expel Ukrainian forces in Crimea . This will prevent a repetition of the experience of Crimea, where Russia has been able to remove Ukrainian forces .
 Russia would have to send in its own army to attack the Ukrainians . Russia is clearly unwilling to do this, and that would bring all negotiations to an end .
 The continued presence of Ukrainian forces in eastern Ukraine will be a guarantee that under a new federal constitution, the region will remain a constituent part of Ukraine . Under a new constitution, Ukraine's army will continue to fight local militias in their urban strongholds .
 Since the tragic killings in Odessa, it is no longer possible to deny that the Ukrainian crisis involves a serious threat from extreme nationalist groups . Some of the extreme nationalists are sitting in the present interim government in Kiev .
 Russia undoubtedly has armed local allies in eastern Ukraine, which it has strengthened with some disguised Russian officers .
 civilians have blocked the path of Ukrainian troops in the Donbas . But the rebels also enjoy a very considerable measure of local support .
 Ukraine contains different identities, and cannot be ruled unilaterally by one of them alone, or pulled in a single geopolitical direction, without risking the breakup of the country itself .
 Yanukovych's and Moscow’s hope of taking Ukraine into the Eurasian Union was impossible . Many Ukrainians would literally give their lives to prevent it .
 Ukrainian state that defines itself purely in pro-Western and anti-Russian terms is also out of the question . A great many Ukrainians will not tolerate this either, because of this either .
 In these circumstances, it is no good for one side to hope for absolute victory. In these cases, it's not good for a side to expect absolute victory, says David Cameron .
 When Russia tried for this with Yanukovych, the result was a fiasco, which among other things destroyed Russia’s influence over Ukraine as a whole . The result of this is a fiasco.
 The West is now risking an even greater failure in the opposite direction . The West has now risked a greater failure. The West's failure could be even greater.
 Moscow and its allies in Ukraine have already done this. What is surely apparent, however, is that Moscow has already done it .
 The goal of the West must be to get all the opposing forces in Ukraine off the streets and back within a legitimate democratic process that is recognized by a majority of Ukrainians . That will allow the possibility of economic and political reforms by democratic means .
Once fighting begins, previously possible solutions quickly become impossible . We saw again and again, in the Balkans, the Caucasus, and elsewhere in the 1990s, that once fighting began, once fighting begins .
Ukraine does not need to be Yugoslavia or Georgia. This would be a tragedy, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Most of Russia’s allies in eastern Ukraine are not separatists, most of the Western media say .
 Many in the Donbas fear that a government in Kiev will be unelected or elected by a small majority . The government is under the sway of extreme nationalist demonstrators .
 Many of them are deeply opposed to the interim government in Kiev . Many continue to envision being a part of a federal Ukraine in which they would have greater autonomy .
Until now, every opinion poll and election in the east has also suggested this. Until now, all polls and elections in the East have suggested this .
 Once a few hundred people have been killed, this reasonable position will quickly be destroyed . But once a few 100 people have died, thisreasonable position will soon be destroyed, says author .
 To return power to a reasonable majority, the international community must put forward the outline of a constitutional settlement on which a majority of Ukrainians can agree .
 It is hopeless to expect that the opposing sides themselves will be able to abide by a compromise proposal on their own, without outside help .
 Germany is the country with the greatest influence on Russia . Germany is one of the world's most influential countries . Russia has the most influence in the world .
 The German government has called strongly for a resumption of the talks with Russia . But it has also insisted that the presidential elections take place as scheduled on May 25 .
 Berlin should adopt a strategy that calls for national and regional elections under a new constitution . Berlin should put forward a clear plan for democratic federalism, not as Russia's plan, but as Germany's, and in accordance with Western democratic values .
 The process of adopting this constitution could then take place under UN and OSCE auspices . The process could then be held under UN, OSCE and other auspices.
 Such a proposal from such a source would be very hard for Washington, Moscow, and Kiev to reject . Such a request from such an source would, I believe, be very difficult for Washington and Moscow .
 Angela Merkel and Franz-Walter Steinmeier have the chance to go down in history as true statesmen . They compensated for some of the past disasters of German history by saving Europe from war .