 Nigel Walker Russian annexation of Crimea is a Russian annexation. Nigel Walker is a specialist in the subject of Subject specialist .
 Other Parliamentary material 24.1 Debates 24 5.2 Statements 25 5.3 Early Day Motions 36 6.6.1 Statements 25.2 statements 25.5.3 Statements 25 .
 The House of Commons Library prepares a briefing in hard copy and/or online for most non-legislative debates in the Chamber and Westminster Hall . Other than half-hour debates are also included in the briefing .
 Debate Packs produced quickly after the announcement of parliamentary business . Debate Packs are produced quickly and produced quickly .
 They are intended to provide a summary or overview of the issue being debated and identify relevant briefings and useful documents, including press and parliamentary material .
More detailed briefing can be prepared for Members on request to the Library . More detailed briefing is available at the Parliament's website .
 18 March 2019 was the fifth anniversary of Russia’s annexation of Crimea . The Crimea annexation took place in Crimea in March 2014 .
 The process began in February 2014, as soldiers wearing Russian combat fatigues and carrying Russian weapons began seizing important installations in the peninsula .
 Russia initially denied they were Russian soldiers but later said they were . Russia later said it was Russian soldiers .
 Referendum held after Russia gained full control of Crimea . Voters were not given the chance to choose the status quo, conducted in polling stations under armed guard .
 A member of the Russian Human Rights Council mistakenly posted the real election results . About 55% had voted to join Russia on a turnout of 40%, according to reports .
 UN General Assembly adopted a resolution calling on states not to recognise the annexation of the territory .
 The 47-member Russian annexation of Crimea 3 council oversees the 1949 European Convention on Human Rights and its associated court . Some argue a Russian departure would deprive Russians of one of last protections against authoritarian government .
 Stability remains elusive in eastern Ukraine and Russia has moved to shore up its hold on Crimea . Recent developments remain elusive in east Ukraine .
 Russia is building a road and rail bridge across the Kerch Strait, connecting Crimea to Russia . The bridge will connect Crimea to the Crimea .
 Russian border patrol ships attacked and seized three Ukrainian Navy vessels attempting to enter the Sea of Azov from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait . The move looked designed to gain complete control of the sea.
 In December suspicions that Russia has nuclear arms in Crimea were reported . In December, suspicions were reported that Russia had nuclear arms.
 Russia does not intend to restore Ukrainian sovereignty over Crimea, according to reports . The conflict in the eastern mainland regions of Ukraine may be resolved .
The following is a selection of press and media articles relevant to this debate . The following is the following. Press articles .
 Five years ago, Russia illegally annexed the peninsula of Crimea in a blatant land grab from Ukraine . British Foreign Secretary statement on the fifth anniversary of the illegal annexation of Crimea .
 Russia seized key Parliamentary and Police buildings from the Ukrainian authorities . It then ran a sham referendum in an attempt to legitimise its actions .
 Once President Putin signed an illegal decree to absorb Crimea into Russia, the Russian authorities ran illegitimate 'elections' and imposed Russian citizenship, Russian law and military conscription on everyone living in this part of Ukraine .
 I condemn the illegal annexation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol, Ukraine, five years ago .
 The UK will never recognise Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea . We call on Russia to end their illegitimate control of the peninsula and their attempts to redraw Europe's boundaries .
 Russia’s pattern of unacceptable behaviour has continued with their supply of weapons and personnel to the conflict it initiated in eastern Ukraine . The illegal construction of a bridge connecting mainland Russia with Crimea, and their relentless attempts to monopolise the Kerch Strait in a campaign intended to undermine Ukraine�
 Russia continues to commit human rights violations beyond its borders by systematically persecuting those who voice their opposition to the illegal annexation of Crimea . Russia has been accused of a series of human rights abuses in recent years .
All Ukrainian political prisoners are being held in Crimea and Russia without access to international monitoring organisations or essential medical treatment . I call for the immediate release of all Ukrainian political prisoner .
 Russia must immediately release the 24 Ukrainian servicemen who were detained while attempting to sail through the Kerch Strait . Russia must also immediately release them . The 24 servicemen were detained whilst trying to sail into the Strait .
 NATO and EU condemn Russia's unjustified use of force on Ukrainian vessels in November last year .
 The UK, along with our EU and G7 partners, remains unwavering in support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 The Russian Ambassador spoke at length and in colourful and imaginative language about many other actors . He said nothing about Russia’s role in the role of Russia .
 The German Ambassador an eyewitness to Minsk -showed us why with his accounts of the events of the time and Russia’s actions .
 United Kingdom welcomes opportunity to discuss repeated violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Russia’s aggression towards Ukraine is not limited to the Donbas and Crimea . Russia seeks to undermine Ukraine at every opportunity, undermining the ceasefire and calling illegitimate electionsall in breach of the Minsk agreement .
 Ukrainian civilians have been killed in Ukraine by Ukrainian soldiers . The deaths have a tragic impact on the lives of Ukrainian civilians .
Despite the parties recommitment the ceasefire on 29 December, violations are increasing . Military activity continues to be military activity in the disengagement zones .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission is unable to carry out its mandate . However, our understanding of the situation within non-government controlled territory is limited .
This threatens the ceasefire and ultimately the security of Ukraine and the wider region . This threatens the safety of Ukraine. This is not the first time the ceasefire has been agreed .
 A raft of incidents that Russia is yet to provide an explanation for, only reinforces this conclusion . Russia has been accused of a series of incidents in recent weeks .
 For example, the downing of an SMM long range UAV near the Ukraine-Russia border, outside Ukraine government control.
 Just last week, SMM twice observed the Russian electronic jamming system ‘ZHITEL’ in the Donbas .
 I would ask the Russian Ambassador to ensure his country’s support for the Special Monitoring Mission and to allow them to observe .
 Mr President, a further example of Russian attempts to destabilise Ukraine is the illegitimate elections in the non-government controlled territories of the so-called Luhansk People's Republic and Donetsk People’s Republic .
 This represents a clear breach of the Minsk agreements and unnecessarily increases tensions. This is a clear breaches of the agreements, says the author . This is the first time the two sides have been involved in a dispute.
 Russia could use its influence on the Russian backed separatists to encourage them to comply with them its commitments . Russia could also use its considerable influence to encourage the separatists to cooperate with them .
 Mr President next month marks the fifth anniversary of the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia .
 Russian annexation of Crimea 7 the facts. And it’s worth reminding ourselves of Russia's annexation .
 In response to Russia’s plans for an illegal and illegitimate referendum in Crimea, Crimea has been called into question . Russia's plans for a referendum in the Crimea have been described as illegal .
 The Security Council on the 15th March 2014 voted on a draft resolution that reaffirmed the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine . It noted that Ukraine had not authorised the referendum and that it had no validity .
 The U.N. General Assembly adopted Resolution 68262 supported by one hundred member states . It affirmed the General Assembly’s commitment to the territorial integrity of Ukraine . It underscored the invalidity of the referendum .
 Mr President, we not only object to the illegal annexation of Crimea because it is illegal, we also object to Crimea's annexation .
 Russian government's appalling treatment of many of those who live there. We also object to it due to the Russian government’s appalling treatment.
 U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit Crimea continues to refuse to visit Russia . U.S. calls in General Assembly resolutions for the United Nations to visit the Crimea .
 We call for Russia to release all political prisoners and allow urgent, unrestricted access for human rights monitoring organisations immediately . We, the international community must stand united and call for the release of political prisoners .
 Russian authorities admitted to using force in the Black Sea to seize three Ukrainian naval vessels . Three Ukrainian servicemen were injured in the incident .
 Berdyansk and Mariupol ports are not in conformity with the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea . The actions are a blatant attempt to destabilise Ukraine by harming economic activities of other ports . Ukraine’s ability to manage its economy.
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine have no basis in international law. Let me be clear, Mr President, says Mr President . Mr President.
 To protect it, the international community must continue to stand united and remain focused on Russia’s behaviour and its attempts to integrate Crimea into Russia . Russia is building a bridge across the Kerch straits.
 I would like to end by reiterating the United Kingdom's full support for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity . The United Kingdom is currently supporting Ukraine's independence .
 We look forward to discussing the situation in Ukraine further at the forthcoming General Assembly debate on 20th February . We will discuss the situation at the General Assembly next month .
 Russian Ambassador's enthusiasm for Security Council meetings on Ukraine . Russia is doing to meet its obligations and bring an end to the suffering of the people of Ukraine .
 UK Ambassador Martin Shearman is on the Third Committee resolutions on Crimea . The UK Mission to the U.N. has been in charge of the United Nations since 2007 .
 The OHCHR has detailed the arrests, ill-treatment, torture and intimidation perpetrated against political opponents and minorities . It has also detailed the denial of basic human rights to those who do not accept the forced imposition of Russian legislation on the Peninsula .
 The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned at the persecution of the Crimea Tatar minority . The U.S. is concerned about the use of anti-extremist legislation to silence dissenting views .
 The de facto authorities continue to deny access to all international monitoring organisations, thereby preventing an independent assessment of the human rights situation in Crimea . It is deplorable that the de facto Authorities continue to denied access to the international monitoring organisation .
 The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Human Rights Monitoring Mission for Ukraine, has been operating in the Ukraine for two years . Throughout that period, it has been systematically refused access to Crimea .
 Restoring access to the Crimean peninsula for international human rights monitoring bodies is the primary, and necessary, goal for this draft resolution . The Crimean peninsula is the Crimean Peninsula of Crimea .
 The international community has sent a strong message through the passing of this resolution that Russia cannot simply trample over international law . The resolution has been passed by the international community .
 President Putin should take notice of this clear and resounding message and work together with all parties to de-escalate the situation, Putin should say .
 PM statement on President Putin's actions on Crimea Prime Minister’s Office, 10 Downing Street 18 March 2014 . David Cameron has made a statement about the President's actions to attempt to annex Crimea .
 The steps taken by President Putin today are in flagrant breach of international law and send a chilling message across the continent .
 Britain depends on the stability and security of the international order . Britain depends upon the stability of the International order .
 That relies on a rules based system where those who ignore it face consequences . That system is based on rules based on what happens when people ignore it .
 The EU and the U.S. have already imposed sanctions on Russia, Russia and the EU .
 It is completely unacceptable for Russia to use force to change borders on the basis of a sham referendum held at the barrel of a Russian gun . Russia is not allowed to change its borders, says Russian Foreign Minister .
 President Putin should be in no doubt that Russia will face more serious consequences, I will push European leaders to agree further EU measures when we meet on Thursday . President Putin will face a more serious consequence if Russia fails to comply with EU measures .
 The Kremlin has this evening announced that President Putin has signed a decree recognising Crimea as a sovereign state . Foreign Secretary condemns Russia’s recognition of Crimea as 'sovereign state'
 The United Kingdom does not recognise the 16th March Crimea referendum or its outcome as legal or legitimate . The European Union and the majority of the international community do not .
 UK condemns Russia's flagrant disregard of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . UK condemns in the strongest terms Russia’s disregard of Ukrainian sovereignty .
 The UK calls again on Russia to enter into dialogue with Ukraine and with the international community to resolve this crisis through diplomacy . Russia should not exacerbate it further through unilateral and provocative actions, the UK says .
 Continuing to ignore those calls will bring serious consequences for Russia . Russia is facing a growing backlash from the West .
 The European Council will consider its response to this latest escalation with our allies and partners, including at the European Council this week . We will urgently consider our response.
 Five years at Home Harbour concert held to mark the fifth anniversary of the 2014 Crimean referendum and Crimea's reunification with Russia .
 I would like to speak to those present here, on this square in Simferopol, as well as to all people of Sevastopol and Crimea who are not here but whose hearts are with us .
 Crimea and Sevastopol's reunification with Russia. I would like to congratulate you on the fifth anniversary of Crimea's fifth anniversary .
 The Crimean Spring has become part of our lives, our perception and our history as the Crimean Spring . This event has become our perception of our life and history as a Crimean Spring. This event is now part of the world's history .
 referendum took place five years ago, where all of you took part and voted for this historic decision .
 The actions of the people of Crimea and Sevastopol remind me of the actions of Red Army soldiers during the first tragic months after the breakout of the Great Patriotic War .
 You have also kept your love for our Fatherland, Russia, for many years and even decades . You were not part of Russian statehood, although you were not in Russia .
 The events five years ago resulted in an incredible growth of patriotism across Russia . The events also demonstrated the great power of truth and justice .
 Russia opened its heart and soul and embraced you into its huge multi-ethnic family with joy and happiness . This is why Russia opened it up to people with joy, happiness and joy .
 There is still more to do. We have done a lot over the last five years, but there is still a lot to do . We have been doing a lot in the past five years.
 Five years ago, Russia's occupation of Ukraine's Crimean peninsula fueled an escalation of Russian aggression . The Crimea is now Ukraine's Crimea peninsula .
 Russia attempted to upend the international order, undermined basic human freedoms, and weakened our common security . Russia tried to upends the international Order, undermined human freedoms and weakened common security, says the author .
 The world has not forgotten the cynical lies Russia employed to justify its aggression and mask its attempted annexation of Ukrainian territory . Russia has been accused of trying to annexe Ukrainian territory to Ukraine .
 Russia’s use of force against a peaceful neighbor must not be tolerated by reputable states . Russia's use of Force against a peace neighbor must be tolerated, says the author .
 The United States remains gravely concerned by the worsening repression by Russia’s occupation regime in Crimea .
 During the past five years, Russian occupation authorities have engaged in an array of abuses in a campaign to eliminate all opposition to Crimea .
 Russia has arbitrarily detained and wrongfully convicted individuals for peaceful opposition to the occupation . In some cases, Russia has forcibly transferred these individuals from occupied Crimea to Russia .
 The U.S. calls on Russia to release all of the Ukrainians, including members of the Crimean Tatar community . Russia has imprisoned all Ukrainians in retaliation for their peaceful dissent .
 This includes Oleh Sentsov, Oleksandr Kolchenko, Volodymyr Balukh, Ruslan Zeytullayev, and approximately 70 others . This includes approximately 70 other people .
 We call on Russia to cease all its abuses immediately, to end its occupation of Crimea . We also urge Russia to comply with its obligations under international law, including the law of occupation .
 The U.S. reaffirmed its refusal to recognize the Kremlin's claims of sovereignty over Crimea in July 2018 .
 The United States condemns Russia’s illegal actions in Crimea and its continued aggression against Ukraine . The U.S. also condemns Russia's illegal actions.
 The United States will maintain respective sanctions against Russia until the Russian government returns control of Crimea to Ukraine and fully implements the Minsk agreements . The U.S. will maintain the sanctions until Russia returns control to Ukraine .
 The U.S. reiterates its unbending support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, within its internationally recognized borders, including its territorial waters .
 Ukraine and the Ukrainian Government are countering Russia’s aggression and occupation of Ukrainian territories . Ukraine is bringing the day of reunification of continental Ukraine with the peninsula closer .
 United States Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations, Kurt Volker took part in the event .
 The Head of Government stressed that the history of occupation of Crimea became a personal history of many families, including the family of the Prime Minister .
"Our citizens today are in Russian prisons, because they defend their right to freedom and free views," Volodymyr Groysman stressed .
 The Prime Minister emphasized that today calls for the liberation of Crimea and the release of Ukrainian political prisoners are questions not only of Ukraine, but of the entire civilized world, he said .
 Before annexation it was a beautiful Ukrainian resort with a temporary stay of the Russian fleet . The Russian fleet had to leave the peninsula and relocate to Russia .
 Today it is a military base that poses a threat to the entire democratic world . The base is located in the U.S. military base in Washington DC .
 The whole democratic world must be united in order to force the aggressor to refuse from his plans and to respect the law and sovereignty of other countries .
"We must fight for the release of every political prisoner so that Ukrainians return home," the Prime Minister said .
 Volodymyr Groysman expressed confidence that aggressor should pay heavy price for his barbaric actions . Groysmen said he believes that aggressors should pay a heavy price .
 The date of the liberation of Crimea from the Russian occupation forces will be celebrated on March 14 .
 The Ukrainian Crimea will be a hospitable resort and a pearl of our state . The Ukrainian peninsula will be the country's most popular tourist destination .
 North Atlantic Council on Crimea 18 March 2019 1. International organisations Statement by the North Atlantic council on Crimea .
 Five years ago, Russia used force against Ukraine to illegally and illegitimately annex Crimea. Five years later, Russia is still trying to annex Crimea .
 This violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity is a serious breach of international law . This violation is a major challenge to Euro-Atlantic security, says U.S. State Department .
 We reiterate our full support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognised borders and territorial waters . We reiterate its full support.
 Allies are deeply concerned by the human rights abuses being carried out by the Russian de-facto authorities in illegally annexed Crimea .
 These violations include extrajudicial killings, abductions, enforced disappearances, violence, arbitrary detentions, arrest, and torture .
 The Crimean Tatars' self-governing body remains under persecution and banned in its homeland . Despite the 2017 Order of the International Court of Justice, the Mejlis, the Crimean Tatar's self-Governing body is still under persecution .
 NATO calls on Russia to bring an immediate end to all violations and abuses in illegally annexed Crimea . NATO calls for Russia to release political prisoners and hostages and grant international monitoring organisations access to Crimea .
 Any attempts to legitimise or normalise the annexation of Crimea must end, including the automatic imposition of Russian citizenship, forced population movements, conscription in the armed forces of the Russian Federation .
 We condemn Russia's ongoing and wide-ranging military build-up in Crimea . We are concerned by Russia's efforts and stated plans for further military build up in the Black Sea region .
 Russia's construction of the Kerch Strait bridge represents another violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity, we say . We also condemn Russia's building of the bridge, which is imposing additional hardship on Ukraine.
 Russia's unjustified use of military force against Ukrainian ships and naval personnel near the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait in November 2018 is part of a larger pattern of Russian aggressive actions in the region . Russia's use of force against Ukraine ships and navy personnel near Sea ofAz
 U.N. General Assembly Resolution 73/194 calls on Russia to unconditionally release the Ukrainian crew members it detained . Russia must return the captured vessels and comply with international commitments .
 NATO's response to Russia's illegal actions in Ukraine has been alongside and in support of an overall international effort, which has included sanctions . NATO has also included sanctions against Russia in the Ukraine .
 There can be no return to "business as usual" until there is a clear, constructive change in Russia's actions . Russia has shown compliance with international law and its international obligations and responsibilities .
 The European Union reiterates that it does not recognise and continues to condemn this violation of international law . The EU has condemned this violation.
 It remains a direct challenge to international security, with grave implications for the international legal order that protects the territorial integrity, unity and sovereignty of all States .
 The European Union remains committed to fully implementing its nonrecognition policy, including through restrictive measures . The EU is committed to Fully implementing its Nonrecognition Policy .
 The European Union calls again on UN Member States to consider similar nonrecognition measures in line with the UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262 . The EU calls for similar measures to be considered by the UN.
 Russia's violations of international law have led to a dangerous increase in tensions at the Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov . Russia has been accused of violating international law in the past .
 The unjustified use of force by Russia against Ukraine on 25 November 2018 is a reminder of the negative effects of the illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula on regional stability .
 The EU reiterates its call on Russia to release the illegally captured Ukrainian crewmembers, vessels and equipment without further delay .
 Russia should respect their rights to legal representation and access by consular authorities, says Russia . Russia should provide the injured crewmen with appropriate medical treatment, Russia says .
 The European Union condemns the construction of the Kerch Bridge without Ukraine's consent . It is a further violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 The EU expects Russia to ensure unhindered and free passage of all ships through the Kerch Strait to and from the Azov Sea . Russia is expected to ensure freedom of passage of ships and ships .
 The illegal restrictions to such passage have negative economic consequences for Ukraine's ports in the Azov Sea and the whole region .
 The European Union does not and will not recognise the holding of elections by the Russian Federation in the Crimean peninsula .
 The increasing militarisation of the peninsula continues to impact negatively the security situation in the Black Sea region . The increasing militarisation of the peninsula continues to impact negatively on security situation .
 Russian citizenship and conscription in the armed forces of the Russian Federation have been imposed on Crimean residents . In violation of international humanitarian law, Russian citizenship is banned .
 Since the illegal annexation by the Russian Federation, the human rights situation in the Crimean peninsula has significantly deteriorated . Since the annexation, the situation has significantly worsened .
 Residents of Crimea face systematic restrictions of fundamental freedoms, such as freedom of expression, religion or belief . Russian annexation of Crimea 15 association and right to peaceful assembly .
 UN General Assembly resolution 73/263 of 22 December 2018. It is crucial that the regional and international human rights monitoring mechanisms have unimpeded access to Crimea and Sevastopol .
 The rights of the Crimean Tatars have been gravely violated through the shutting down of Crimean Tatar media outlets . The banning of the activities of the Mejlis, their self-governing body, and the persecution of its leaders and members of their community .
 The EU expects Russia to reverse these decisions and to end pressure on the Crimean Tatar community . The EU expect Russia toreverse these decisions .
 Crimean Tatars, Ukrainians and all ethnic and religious communities in the peninsula must be ensured to maintain and develop their culture, cultural heritage traditions, education and identity .
 Russia must also take measures to improve the environmental situation, which has worsened since the illegal annexation . Russia has also taken steps to improve its environmental situation .
 The EU reiterates its call for the immediate release of Oleh Sentsov, Edem Bekirov, Oleksandr Kolchenko, Mykola Semena, Volodymyr Balukh, Emir-Usein Kuku and all those who have been detained in
 Journalists, human rights defenders and defence lawyers should be able to work independently and without undue interference and intimidation and intimidation . Journalists and human rights lawyers should work independently.
 The EU calls for full compliance with international human rights standards in the peninsula . The European Union has called for fullcompliance with international rights standards .
 All pending cases of human rights violations and abuses, such as enforced disappearances, torture and killings, should be thoroughly investigated . The case should be investigated .
 Full, free and unrestricted access for international human rights actors to the whole territory of Ukraine continues to be paramount . Full, unrestricted access to Crimea and Sevastopol is still paramount .
 The EU recalls UNGA Resolution 73/263 of 22 December 2018 . It calls for full implementation of Russian Federation's obligations under applicable international humanitarian law .
 The Candidate Countries North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania, Albania and Albania align themselves with this declaration . Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European Economic Area, also align themselves .
 The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs has made representations to Russian Ambassador in London and his Russian counterpart on actions taken against Crimean Tatars in Russian-occupied Crimea .
 The Foreign and Commonwealth Office is deeply concerned by ongoing reports of human rights abuses against the Crimean Tatar community .
 Foreign Secretary has not made direct representations to the Russian Ambassador in London . He has publicly condemned Russian human rights abuses in Crimea .
 He co-signed an op-ed with EU partners on 27 February in which he criticised Russia's treatment of the Tatar community . He also condemned Russia's continued pattern of human rights violations in the peninsula .
 The UK supports the work of the UN Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine . The mission works to reduce violations by strengthening the field presence of monitors .
 Sanctions imposed alongside international partners, including the US, have had a coordinated impact on Russia . Russian aggression in Ukraine will not be tolerated, says Lord Ahmad .
 This impact has been strengthened by the continuation and maintenance of 2014 sanctions since their implementation . The impact of the 2014 sanctions has been increased by the implementation of the sanctions .
 The current bilateral relationship is not the one the UK wants and we remain open to a different relationship with Russia . Russia desists from attacks that undermine international security and actions that undermine the territorial integrity of its neighbours .
 Prime Minister Theresa May says she is happy to give her right hon. May says he is 'happy to give his right hon'
 This was an illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia, and we have been doing everything we can to ensure that the appropriate sanctions are imposed that will have an impact. This was a illegal annexation by Russia. We have been do everything we could to ensure this will have a
 The EU Council has been advocating the roll-over of sanctions at every stage . We enhance those sanctions and rightfully put pressure on those who are responsible . We have been one of the voices around the EU Council table.
 Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. Jim Cunningham has made a recent assessment of the current levels of political stability in Ukraine .
 The UK remains concerned over persistent attempts by Russia to undermine political stability in Ukraine .
 Russia's malign intent is evident in their support for separatist forces in eastern Ukraine . Russia has fired on Ukrainian vessels in the Black Sea and their growing economic stranglehold on Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdyansk .
 This is reinforced by Russian disinformation campaigns and cyber-attacks designed to create a false narrative of Ukraine as a failing state . This is also reinforced by Russia's disinformation campaigns.
 Ukraine has made enormous progress towards realising its potential as a fully democratic, modern and prosperous state . The reality is that Ukraine has been making enormous progress.
 The UK is providing substantial assistance to strengthen Ukraine's democracy and institutions as part of its reform programme . The UK will also provide substantial assistance.
 This includes support to help Ukraine counter potential outside interference in presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019 . This includes specific support for Ukraine to fight outside interference .
 The best answer to malign Russian activity remains a well-functioning, democratic and stable Ukraine . The best solution is to stop malign Russia's activity, says the Ukrainian government .
 The Russian annexation of Crimea has been followed by the construction of the Kerch bridge to the Russian mainland . The Kerch Bridge is the first bridge to be built in Russia .
 To date, no NATO ship has entered under the bridge into the sea of Azov .
 The Royal Navy was the first navy to enter the Black sea and go to Odessa in solidarity with Ukrainian friends . Gavin Williamson: We can be very proud of the Royal Navy .
Royal Navy vessels will visit the Black sea later this year . Currently we have no plans, but we will continue to keep this situation under review .
 The Marquess of Lothian will ask Her Majesty's Government what long-term strategy they have formulated to deal with the conflict .
 Russia's pattern of aggression undermines the international rules-based system. Lord Ahmad of Wimbledon says Russia's patterns of aggression undermine the system .
 Prime Minister has been clear that the UK is open to a different relationship with Russia if Russia changes its behaviour .
 Russia has illegally annexed the Crimean peninsula, continues a conventional conflict in eastern Ukraine . Most recently, Ukraine has fired on Ukrainian ships . Russia has also fired on Ukraine ships .
 The UK is fully committed to upholding the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally-recognised borders .
 The UK is working with international partners to resolve the conflict peacefully and help Ukraine to strengthen its democracy and institutions . The UK has been working to help the country's democracy.
 It is imperative that Russia abides by its commitments under the Minsk Agreements and withdraws its forces from all of Ukraine, including Crimea .
 The Crimean peninsula is returned to Ukraine . We fully support EU sanctions which will remain in place until there is progress on Minsk .
 To deal with the conflict, Her Majesty's Government provides substantial technical, development and political support to Ukraine in areas including good governance, anti-corruption and defence reform and capability .
 Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs asked what steps he is taking to support Ukraine's independence and sovereignty .
 The UK continues to fully support Ukraine's independence and territorial integrity .
 Crimea and Donbas are part of Ukraine – what Russia has done and continues to do there breaches its obligations under international law . Crimea and the Donbas were part of the Ukraine, which is part of Russia's territory .
 Russia withdraws its forces from all of Ukraine, including the Donbas and Crimea . Russia continues to abide by its international commitments and withdraw its forces .
 We strongly condemn recent Russian aggression against Ukrainian vessels near the Kerch Strait .
 This is yet further evidence of Russia's continued violation of Ukrainian sovereignty following the illegal annexation of Crimea and construction of the Kerch Bridge . This is the latest evidence of the Russian annexation of the Crimea .
 The Foreign Secretary issued a statement on 26 November, and spoke with the Ukrainian Foreign Minister on 29 November . UK stands with Ukraine against Russian aggression .
 The UK is also providing over £35 million to support Ukraine in a range of areas including governance reform, anti-corruption and humanitarian aid .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine have deliberately violated a number of international agreements and commitments including the 1997 RussiaUkraine Treaty of Friendship .
 Ukraine continues to work with international partners to support Ukraine as it deals with the ongoing impact of Russia's aggression against it .
 Russia supplies weaponry and personnel to the separatists . Russia refrains from using its influence on the separatists to get them to comply with their Minsk commitments .
 It is imperative that Russia abides by its commitments under the Minsk Agreement and withdraws its forces from all of Ukraine, including Crimea .
 The Government is offering to the Government of Ukraine in relation to the situation in the Crimea . Nia Griffith asked the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs for help .
 The UK is absolutely clear in its rejection of Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea .
 The British Government regularly highlights, publically and multilaterally, Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea and human rights abuses .
 UK calls on Russia to immediately release Ukrainian prisoners detained for politically motivated reasons . UK calls for release of Ukrainian prisoners for political reasons .
 The EU has taken practical measures to reinforce its policy of non-recognition of Crimea's annexation . The EU renewed trade sanctions in response to Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea for a further 12 months .
 Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs will decide whether to support lifting the suspension of Russian credentials at the council of Europe .
 The decision is a matter for the Parliamentary Assembly to decide .
 PACE has made clear its own criteria for Russia to return which are laid down in its own resolution requirements . PACE made clear that Russia must comply with its own requirements .
 PACE has not suspended Russia since 2015 not to present credentials for its own Delegation in response to voting restrictions placed upon Russian annexation of Crimea 21 them by PACE . Russia has not been allowed to present its own credentials since 2015 .
 The UK is clear that a Russian return to PACE would be contingent on the withdrawal of all Russian military personnel and support for separatists in Eastern Ukraine . It would also include an end to the illegal annexation of the Crimean peninsula .
 Russia’s destabilisation of eastern Ukraine has resulted in a humanitarian crisis . Over 1. million people displaced, over 6000 people killed and tens of thousands wounded .
 The situation will only improve when Russia abides by the commitments it made at Minsk . Russia will withdraw its troops, its heavy weaponry and support for the separatists .
 Since Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea, we have become increasingly concerned by the deteriorating human rights situation there .
 We continue to call for free and unconditional access by international humanitarian and human rights organisations to Crimea at all times .
 President Putin's statement that the Russian annexation of Crimea was planned before the referendum on self-determination was planned .
 Foreign and Commonwealth Office policy is fully in line with our international partners including the EU and US .
 We do not, and will not, recognise the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia . We will not. recognise the annexation by Russia.
 Russia’s intervention in Ukraine represents a flagrant violation of a number of its international commitments. Russia's intervention is a flagant violation of the country's international commitments, it says .
 Russia has been isolated in the Security Council and in the wider international community . That is why Russia is being isolated by the Security council and the wider community .
Until Moscow does so, it can expect the EU’s Crimea sanctions to remain in place . The EU's Crimea sanctions will be in place.
 Tim Farron asks Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs for what he has made to the Russian government about its annexation of Crimea .
 Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea remains a part of the sovereign territory of Ukraine .
 This point is raised as a matter of principle in any high-level level level UK/Russia bilateral meetings . This is raised in any UK/ Russia bilateral meetings.
 I last raised this issue last time I met the Russian Ambassador in December . I last met the ambassador in December.
 Andrew Rosindell to ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs for what the Government's policy is on recognition of Crimea as the territory of Ukraine .
 The UK does not recognise the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia .
 Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs. Andrew Rosindell asked what steps he is taking to ensure Crimea is still recognised as part of Ukraine .
 The Government strongly condemns Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea which violates the UN Charter and is illegal under international law .
 Russia's actions in Crimea made clear Russia's isolation in the Security Council and in the international community . This result delivered a resounding international condemnation of Russian actions .
 23 G7 leaders issued a statement on 4 June which affirmed G7 countries’ non-recognition of Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea . The Russian Federation condemned the unacceptable interference in Ukraine’'s sovereign affairs by the Russian Federation .
 G7 Leaders confirmed the decision by G7 countries to impose sanctions on individuals and entities who had actively supported or implemented the violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . They were threatening the peace, security and stability of Ukraine .
 They underlined their implementation of a strict policy of non-recognition with respect to Crimea/Sevastopol . In line with UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262 .
 The EU has regularly condemned Russian actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . It has supported action including the imposition of travel bans and asset freezes on 72 individuals .
 The Prime Minister and other EU Leaders requested the European Commission and the European External Action Service to present proposals on restricting investments in Crimea and Sevastopol .
 The European Council also asked the International Financial Institutions to refrain from financing any projects that explicitly or implicitly recognised the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol .
 The UK remains firmly committed to Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity .
 Russia has effectively annexed Crimea, in contravention of the Budapest agreement signed by Britain, U.S. and Ukraine in 1994 . Sir Gerald Howarth says Russia continues to threaten eastern Ukraine, what consideration has my right hon.
 Defence Minister Philip Hammond says a graduated response to Russia's actions is necessary . He says it should be a diplomatic response in terms of economic and trade sanctions .
 Meetings are ongoing today across the European Union to try to agree the best way to deliver that response .
 The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs attended the Foreign Affairs Council on 18 February .
 It was chaired by the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy . Federica Mogherini .
 Ukraine The Council had a comprehensive discussion on Ukraine . It covered the security and humanitarian situation in eastern Ukraine and the Sea of Azov .
 The Council reiterated its full support for Ukraine's independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty . It continued condemnation of the illegal annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia .
 Foreign Ministers acknowledged the important progress Ukraine has accomplished in key areas over the past five years . The need to maintain reform momentum was highlighted by the Foreign Ministers .
 The Council expressed the importance of ensuring that the elections in Ukraine are well conducted . The Council also expressed the need to ensure that the election is well conducted.
 The OSCE election observation mission can conduct its work and can observe the elections in full accordance with its usual practice . They highlighted the importance of ensuring that the OSCE elections are conducted in accordance with the usual practice.
 Ministers exchanged views on how the EU can help, following developments in the Azov Sea and Kerch strait region .
 EU's call for all detained Ukrainian seamen to be released immediately as well as for the return of the seized vessels and free passage of all ships through the Kerch Straits .
 I have laid before Parliament a Ministry of Defence Departmental Minute concerning a further gifting package which the UK intends to make to the Government of Ukraine . I have today laid before parliament a MoD Minute concerning the further gifted package .
 Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and its destabilising activities in Eastern Ukraine have demonstrated its disregard for international law . Russia has shown its disregard to international law, including direct military support to separatists .
Nearly 8,000 people have been killed and 18,000 injured since fighting began . Since fighting began, 26 Number CDP-0093 has been killed .
 The latest ceasefire agreement, reached on 29 August, has seen a reduction in violence in the conflict zone .
 Ukrainian Armed Forces have to remain deployed forward and continue to suffer fatalities and casualties . Until there is a political settlement to the conflict, the Ukrainian armed forces have to stay deployed forward .
 The UAF face a chronic shortage of basic equipment, and have requested help . As a result of the prolonged engagement in this conflict, the UAF has requested help.
This Government is committed to supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity . This Government is also committed to support Ukraine's sovereignty and independence .
Non-lethal equipment is designed to prevent further Ukrainian fatalities and casualties and to help improve resilience on the ground . Our proposed gift of non- lethal equipment is to be given to Ukraine .
 Departmental Minute process expected to be completed over the coming weeks . Delivery is expected to take place over the next few weeks .
 The total cost of this proposed package of equipment is approximately £971,000 . It includes transportation costs and contingency .
 Ministry of Defence Departmental Minute describes gifting package which the UK intends to make to the Government of Ukraine .
 Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and its destabilising activities in Eastern Ukraine have demonstrated its disregard for international law . Russia's military support to the separatists, including direct military support, has shown disregard for law .
 The latest ceasefire agreement, reached in Minsk on 12 February, came into force on 15 February . It has seen a reduction in violence in the conflict zone .
 fighting has not ceased in some areas and there continue to be fatalities and casualties amongst the Ukrainian armed forces .
 Ukrainians face a serious shortage of basic equipment, and have requested help . Ukrainians have been engaged in the conflict for more than two years .
Non-lethal equipment is designed to prevent further Ukrainian fatalities and casualties and to help improve situational awareness on the ground .
 The Departmental Minute describes a gifting package to the Ukrainian armed forces . The package will comprise five priority items that will provide immediate benefits .
 The items are Individual first aid kits, Global Positioning Systems units, helmet-mounted monocular night goggles, ruggedised laptops, and Mk6 helmets .
 The total cost of this proposed package of equipment is approximately £850,000, including transportation and contingency costs . The package includes transportation, contingency costs and transportation .
 This gifting package is being delivered by UK military personnel to the Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 The past month has seen an escalation of violence in the eastern regions of Ukraine . The violence has been seen in the past month in Ukraine's eastern regions .
 Fighting has been intense around the town of Debaltseve, a strategically important rail and road hub between the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The Ukrainians have suffered indiscriminate missile attacks on buses in Donetsk and Volnovakha and on the port city of Mariupol .
 What is happening on the ground now resembles, to all intents and purposes, a small-scale conventional war . It is now a small, conventional war.
 Over 5,000 people have been killed since the crisis began last spring, and over 1. million have been displaced from their homes . Over 1.1 million people have also been displaced by the crisis .
 Russia has stepped up military support it provides to its proxies . In recent weeks, Russia has aggravated the effects of its initial incursion by stepping up the military support .
 Ukraine has transferred hundreds of heavy weapons, including rocket launchers, heavy artillery, tanks and armoured vehicles . It maintains hundreds of regular soldiers, including special forces, in Ukraine, as well as command and control elements .
 The recent escalation in fighting would not have been possible without the military support and strategic direction that Russia provides . Russia provides a strategic direction and military support for Russia .
 All the countries who have a stake in the rules-based international system remain clear and united against Russian aggression . In these circumstances, it is vital that all the countries in the world remain clear.
 In Normandy last summer, we agreed with the US and European partners that the most effective channel of communication with the Kremlin would be through a small group . In Normandy, we agree with the U.S. and our European partners.
 Normandy Format comprises Germany, France and France as the host of the Normandy meeting, Ukraine and Russia . This is known as the Normandy Format, comprising Germany and France .
 Chancellor Merkel and President Hollande met President Poroshenko in Kiev last Thursday . President Putin and President Putin met in the Kremlin on Friday .
 Kerry held meetings with Secretary of State Kerry and German Foreign Minister Steinmeier to assess prospects for a 28 Number CDP-0093 , 18 April 2019 diplomatic resolution of the crisis .
 The German Chancellor and the French President will meet in the Normandy format in Minsk tomorrow . Poroshenko and Putin will hold a conference call on Sunday .
 The aim is to reach agreement on an implementation plan for the Minsk ceasefire agreements that the Russians entered into last September . They need to be updated as they need to reflect subsequent changes on the ground .
 The UK welcomes efforts to achieve a peaceful resolution of the situation in eastern Ukraine . The UK remains sceptical of Russian commitment to such a resolution .
 The consensus within the European Union that Russia must pay a price for its disregard of the international rules-based system remains strong .
There is a clear consensus that the EU does not, and will not, recognise Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea . Equally, there is aclear consensus.
 The emergency EU Foreign Affairs Council on 29 January agreed to roll over all the Crimearelated tier 2 sanctions against individuals and companies . The emergency council has agreed toRoll over the sanctions .
 That is another clear sign that the EU remains united in its response to Russian action in Ukraine . The EU is united in response to Russia's actions in Ukraine, it says .
 The European Union and the United States have imposed economic sanctions on Russia . The package of economic sanctions is a critical element of the pressure on President Putin to change his behaviour .
 Britain was and remains at the forefront of the successful effort to build and maintain an EU-wide consensus on a sanctions regime on Russia . The Kremlin has been surprised and dismayed by Britain's efforts to build a consensus on sanctions .
 UK Foreign Affairs Council reconfirmed its decision to apply additional sanctions to Ukraine . Ukrainian Foreign Minister and as a gesture of support for the political process, delayed entry into force until next Monday .
 The informal European Council of Heads of State and Government will have further discussions about Ukraine on Thursday . The informal council of heads of state and government will also have further talks about Ukraine .
 Public debt has risen sharply, foreign exchange reserves have fallen . The currency has lost nearly half its value against the United States dollar .
 Ukraine needs support from international partners to stabilise the economy . Ukraine must pursue reforms to which it has committed under the association agreement with the European Union and the International Monetary Fund .
 Britain is providing £10 million in technical assistance to support economic and governance reforms and the humanitarian effort . Britain will also provide £10million in support for the humanitarian efforts .
 The EU will make a substantial contribution to the immediate estimated $15 billion financing needs of the country . The majority of the money will be provided through an IMF-led package .
 We shall also continue to work through NATO to offer technical support to the Ukrainian armed forces and reassurance to our eastern NATO allies . We shall continue to offer support to Ukraine's armed forces .
 Wales summit agreed a readiness action plan to reassure our eastern allies . Wales summit also agreed to reassure eastern allies of the UK .
 NATO allies agreed to a new spearhead unit, the very high readiness joint taskforce . The unit will be able to deploy at very short notice wherever they are needed .
 NATO Defence Ministers agreed the size and scope of that mission on 5 February . On 5 February, NATO Defence Minister agreed that the mission would be the largest ever .
 Friend the Defence Secretary has announced that the UK will lead the force in 2017 and on a rotational basis thereafter .
 The UK also made a commitment to contribute to headquarters in Poland and Romania . The six NATO forward integration unit headquarters in the Baltic states, Poland, Romania and Bulgaria .
 The UK will contribute four RAF Typhoons to operate alongside Norway in support of the Baltic air policing mission .
 The UK remains a strong supporter of the OSCE’s monitoring mission in eastern Ukraine . The UK also supports the monitoring mission.
 We have provided funding of more than £2 million, the second largest number of monitors and 10 armoured vehicles to allow monitors to move around dangerous areas .
 Ukrainian armed forces have been given non-lethal assistance since the start of the crisis . There must be a political solution to this crisis, says David Cameron .
 We are providing additional support on crisis management, anti-corruption, defence reform and strategic communications . We have increased our defence engagement with Ukraine and are providing more support for crisis management .
 Three members of the Ukrainian armed forces were wounded in the Donbass life-changing surgery at the Queen Elizabeth hospital in Birmingham .
 We are providing a substantial package of nonlethal equipment to Ukraine . It includes medical kits, winter clothing and equipment, body armour, helmets and fuel .
 The package is focused on reducing fatalities and casualties among members of the Ukrainian armed forces . The package was designed to reduce deaths and casualties in Ukraine .
 Each country in NATO alliance decides whether to supply lethal aid to Ukraine . It is a national decision for each country in the NATO alliance to decide whether to provide lethal aid .
 The UK is not planning to do so, but we reserve the right to keep this position under review . The UK does not plan to do it.
Members of the alliance take nuanced positions on this question, and are entitled to do so . Different members of the Alliance take nuanced views on this issue .
 There is no military solution to this conflict, we could not allow the Ukrainian armed forces to collapse . We share a clear understanding that while there is no Military solution to the conflict, there is not a military solution .
 Russia has demonstrated its disregard for international law. By its illegal annexation of Crimea and its destabilising activities in eastern Ukraine, Russia has shown disregard for International law .
 The international community has shown its determination to rebuff Russia’s anachronistic behaviour . It is clear that President Putin respects only strength, and by standing united, 30 Number CDP-0093 .
Until we see Russia complying with the terms of the Minsk agreement on the ground, there must be no let-up in the pressure, says Peter Bergen .
 Fine words in a declaration tomorrow will, of course, be welcome, but we have seen them before. Fine words will be welcome.
 We will monitor the situation carefully, and we will agree to a relaxation of pressure only when we see clear evidence of changed Russian behaviour and systematic compliance with Russia's obligations under the original Minsk agreement .
 I represented the United Kingdom at the 21st Ministerial Council meeting of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe . The meeting was held in Basel, Switzerland on 4-5 December 2014 .
 The Council is the key decisionmaking body of the OSCE . Ministers from across its 57 participating States attended by ministers from across the world .
 The Council took place in the final month of a year when the OSCE has been at the centre of the international response to the Ukraine crisis . This subject dominated the Council.
 Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea would not be recognised by the international community . Russia was fully responsible for the instability in eastern Ukraine, says David Cameron .
 Russia must implement its commitments under the Minsk Protocols, I said . Russia must withdraw military personnel, equipment and weapons from Ukraine’s sovereign territory, and secure its border with Ukraine .
 I commended the role of the OSCE in facilitating dialogue and providing valuable impartial reporting from eastern Ukraine . The UK has provided and will continue to provide significant financial and personnel support .
 U.S. Secretary of State Kerry, German Foreign Minister Steinmeier, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Klimkin and EU High Representative Mogherini among others . Similar sentiments were expressed in plenary by Kerry, Steinmeier and others .
 Russian obstruction meant that a declaration on the OSCE’s role in Ukraine could not be agreed despite the vast majority of OSCE States’ desire to do so . It is regrettable that Russian obstruction means a declaration was not agreed .
 Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Dzhemilev described the restrictions and violations that the Tatars are now experiencing .
Russian civil society groups are facing restrictions and threats from Russian authorities . Separately I met representatives of Russia-based civil society group .
 Both meetings underlined the need for tough messages to be given to Russia about its conduct in eastern Ukraine and Crimea .
 On 25 July, the European Council added 15 more persons and 18 entities responsible for action against Ukraine’s territorial integrity . The European Council also added a visa ban and asset freeze .
 The European Council widened the designation criteria in the legal basis for restrictive measures to be applied . European Council also widened the definition of restrictive measures .
 This paved the way for imposing asset freezes and visa bans on persons and entities that actively support or are benefiting from Russian decision makers responsible for the annexation of Crimea or the destabilisation of eastern Ukraine .
 The European Council also agreed to a ban on European investment in key sectors in Crimea . Eight more persons could be added to the list of those subject to an asset freeze and a visa ban .
 Number of persons currently under EU sanctions in Ukraine to 95, while number of entities will rise to 23 . This will bring the number of people currently under sanctions in connection with the situation to 95 .
 The 29 July package reinforces the measures already adopted by the EU since March 2014 on the situation in Ukraine and the illegal annexation of Crimea . The EU has already adopted the measures on Ukraine and Crimea .
 These restrictive measures are a response to the unacceptable Russian behaviour in destabilising another country . The measures are aimed at applying pressure to Russia to change such behaviour .
 Work on this package within the European Union has been aimed at ensuring that it is fair and balanced . The package has more impact on Russia than on the EU itself, says the EU .
 Any further measures would be proportionate, carefully constructed and designed to keep pressure on Russian authorities to act to restore Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 A Council Decision and Council Regulation on the Crimea investment ban will be agreed by written procedure today . An Amended Regulation on listing further names of entities and individuals will be announced today .
 Council Decision and Council Regulation on so-called “Tier 3’ sectoral restrictive measures will be agreed by written procedure tomorrow .
 Copies of these documents will be deposited in the Libraries of both Houses . Copies will be placed in the libraries of both houses .
 Mr Speaker would like to make a statement on last week’s emergency European Council .
 Its territorial integrity has been violated and the aspirations of its people to chart their own future are being frustrated . The aspirations of their people are now being frustrated.
 This European Council sent a clear and united message to Russia that its actions are in flagrant breach of international law and will incur consequences . Russia's actions are 'flagrant breach' of law, says European Council .
 Russia's response to what Russia has already done, we agreed on some immediate steps . First, as a response to Russia's actions, we agree on what Russia's already done .
G8 summit would be completely wrong for a G8 summit to go ahead at all under current circumstances, he says .
 The talks were under way on a more liberal visa regime in the Schengen area . Russian Ministers and business delegations have pushed for more than anything else .
 I have ordered an urgent review of all Government business with Russia. Here in Britain, I have orders to review all Government businesses with Russia .
 No Ministers or members of the royal family will visit the Sochi Paralympics . We have already announced that no ministers will visit Sochi .
 Many planned ministerial-level contacts will be cancelled in current circumstances . Many other planned meetings will be canceled in the future .
 All bilateral military co-operation is under review, with the presumption that we will suspend it, except for work carried out to fulfil international treaty obligations, such as arms control inspections .
 It is hard to see how anything that could be used in Ukraine could be justified. It is not clear how anything could be done in Ukraine.
 It is best if possible to take these decisions in concert with our European allies . As with other measures, it is best to take this decision in concert.
 There has been intense work to persuade Russia to come to the negotiating table with the Government of Ukraine and to discuss its stated concerns .
 The idea of such a contact group, including other countries and organisations, was one I first proposed to the Polish Prime Minister .
 The European Council agreed it was essential for such talks to start within the next few days . It was also essential for them to deliver progress quickly .
 If Russia did not co-operate there would need to be further measures, such as the so-called second phase . We also agreed that if Russia didn't co-operation there would be more measures to take place .
 The meeting will be the focus of a meeting here in London tomorrow with key international partners .
 Crimea referendum vote in Crimea this week will be illegal, illegitimate and will not be recognised by the international community . We are all clear that any referendum vote this week would be illegal .
 Any campaign would be completely impractical as well as illegal. In addition, I have to say that any campaign would have been completely impractical .
 There is no proper register or proper campaign, and the territory is covered with troops . There is also no proper campaign or proper register, and there are no proper campaigns .
 It is completely impossible for a proper referendum campaign to be carried out. It is impossible for the proper campaign to take place .
 Russia can choose the path of de-escalation by signalling it understands it understands that the outcome cannot be acted on as legitimate .
 Chancellor Merkel and I were clear that any attempt by Russia to legitimise an illegal referendum would require us to respond by ratcheting up the pressure further .
Thirdly, and most significantly, we agreed that it was essential to stop Russia taking further unacceptable steps in Ukraine . Thirdly, it was important to stop Russian actions in Ukraine, we also agreed . We also agreed that Russia should not be allowed to take further steps in
 The Council agreed that if further steps are taken by Russia to destabilise Ukraine, there will be additional and far-reaching consequences for the relationship between the Russian Federation and the European Union on the one hand .
 Britain played a leading role in helping to reach this agreement, including through a meeting with fellow leaders from France, Germany, Italy and Poland .
 EU sanctions would have consequences for many EU member states, including Britain . But as I argued at the meeting, the costs of not standing up to aggression are far greater .
 Britain’s own security and prosperity would be at risk if we allow countries to flout international rules without incurring consequences .
 Ukrainian Government and people send political message of support to Ukrainian government and people .
 The interim Ukrainian President spoke at the European Council with great power and force . The Ukrainian President has been in charge of the EU since July 2014 .
 Ukrainian people want the freedom to be able to choose their own future and strengthen their ties with Europe . They want a future free from the awful corruption that they have endured for far too long .
 Ukrainian PM's request to bring forward signing of political part of EU's association agreement with Ukraine . Ukraine agreed to help Ukraine tackle corruption.
 The EU has now frozen the assets of 18 people linked to the former regime . Britain has deployed a team to Kiev from our Russian annexation of Crimea 35 National Crime Agency .
 Britain is providing substantial and immediate technical assistance to Ukraine to support elections . It is now vital that Ukraine proceeds towards free and fair elections that enable all Ukrainians to choose their leaders freely .
 The EU agreed unilaterally to lower trade tariffs, and to work with the International Monetary Fund on a package of financial assistance to the Ukrainian Government . The EU also agreed to lower tariffs and work with IMF on financial assistance .
 Russia is still an opportunity for Russia to resolve this situation diplomatically . President Obama agreed with President Obama during our call this weekend .
 It should engage in direct talks with the Ukrainians, return Russian troops to their bases in Crimea, withdraw its support for this illegal and unconstitutional referendum in Crimea . The rest of the international community should support free and fair elections in Ukraine in May .
 Ukraine should be able to choose its own future and act as a bridge between Russia and Europe . Ukraine should act as an international bridge between the two countries .
 Britain’s own future depends on a world where countries obey the rules .
 Europe has spent 70 years working to keep the peace in Europe . We know from history that nations are trampled over stores up greater problems for the longer term .
 We must stand up to aggression, uphold international law and support the Ukrainian Government and the Ukrainian people . We must support the Ukrainians, who want the freedom to choose their own future, says the author .
 This statement was repeated and debated in the House of Lords 36 Number CDP-0093 . This statement is repeated and debate was repeated in the Commons .
 The report also stated that Russia’s action in a sovereign territory was unacceptable . In the run-up to the crisis, mistakes were made by the EU as well as Russia .
 Russia and Ukraine House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee 4 September 2014 . This was a one-off oral evidence session on Russian foreign policy in Europe and the UK's policy response so far to the crisis in Ukraine and Russian actions in the region .
 The House of Commons Library research service provides MPs and their staff with the impartial briefing and evidence base they need to do their work .
 Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly available research briefings is correct at the time of publication .
 Readers should be aware that briefings are not necessarily updated or otherwise amended to reflect subsequent changes . Readers should also be aware of the changes in their briefings .
 Authors are available to discuss the content of this briefing only with Members and their staff . The content of the briefing is only available to members and staff .
 If you have any general questions about the work of the House of Commons you can email hcinfo@parliament.uk.uk .
 This information is provided to Members of Parliament in support of their parliamentary duties . Disclaimer This information was provided to members of Parliament.
General briefing only and should not be relied on as a substitute for specific advice . It is a general briefing only, and should be used to give advice .
 The House of Commons or the author shall not be liable for any errors or omissions, or for any loss or damage of any kind arising from its use, and may remove, vary or amend any information .
 The House of Commons accepts no responsibility for any references or links to, DEBATE PACK or the content of, information maintained by third parties . The House is not responsible for any links or references to the DEBate PACK .
 This information is Number CDP-0093 provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence . This information was provided by the Government .