 German and French foreign ministers’ visit and Ukrainian government’s and Russia-backed militants’ declarations vanished in hours . A hope for a stable cease-fire in eastern Ukraine has vanished.
 Pro-Russia proxies and Ukrainian army both reported violations of the cease-fire on September 16 . EU ministers were visiting the war-torn region when the violations were reported .
 Ukrainian troops reported that Russia-backed militants opened fire on their positions 30 times in 24 hours near Donetsk, Avdiivka.
 Six Ukrainian soldiers wounded on first day of ceasefire . One of them died in hospital .
 Moscow-backed forces accused Ukraine of cease-fire violations . At the same time, Moscow- backed forces accused Ukrainian forces of violations .
 Pro-Russia separatists in Ukrainian eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk announced a unilateral cease-fire starting at midnight September 14 .
 Russian state television aired their statements, in which they were expressing a full commitment to the Minsk peace agreement . The statement was aired on state television .
 EU ministers were visiting Ukraine to show the pro-Russia side of the conflict is doing efforts towards a peace settlement . The declarations were aimed at getting PR, and to show they were trying to get PR .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says he expects parliament to vote soon on constitutional amendments granting a special status to the separatist-controlled area .
 On September 15, the German and French foreign ministers made their first visit to Ukraine’s war-torn Donbas region .
 The foreign ministers of France, Germany, and Ukraine traveled to the conflict zone to evaluate the freshly installed ceasefire .
 Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Jean-Marc Ayrault had returned from Moscow . They discussed the ways of implementation of the Minsk agreement .
 Steinmeier and Ayrault visited Slovyansk, which was captured by Russian forces led by former GRU colonel Igor Girkin in April 2014, which triggered a war .
 separatists want to push a new bid for peace after a recent surge in violence . They viewed a bridge destroyed in fighting between the separatists and Ukrainian troops .
 The French FM also said that they were looking “to create the conditions for a summit’ between French President Francois Hollande, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Jean-Marc Ayrault added there was “no plan B’ to the Minsk agreement in order to end a 29-month war between Ukrainian government forces and Russia-backed forces .
 France’s Foreign Minister stressed the need for the adoption of a law on local elections in Donbas . He insisted it is important to grant special status to the region .
 Ukraine reminded that the elections are impossible unless Kyiv regains a full control of the state border with Russia and security level would become satisfactory . But Ukraine reminds that the election is impossible unless Ukraine regains control of its border with the Russia .
 Kyiv pointed out reports on new arrivals of Russian weapons and munitions to Donbas armed militants through the uncontrolled by Ukraine part of border .
 Ayrault and Steinmeier urged Ukrainian government to fulfill its obligations of the 13-points Minsk plan . The rebels would get partial autonomy within Ukraine .
 Moscow denied it had promised Berlin to ensure a ceasefire, as it does not think of itself as a party to the conflict . However, later Moscow denied that it had made a promise to Berlin .
 Russia hopes the foreign ministers' visit will encourage Ukraine to fulfill its Minsk obligations . Russia hopes that the visit would encourage the Ukraine to fulfil its obligations .
 The initiative of giving a special status to the separatist-held area remains unpopular within Ukrainian society .
 French and German ministers faced protesters during their visit to Kramatorsk, a town close to Slovakia .
Do not repeat Munich 1938, which symbolized diplomatic capitulation of European democracies to an aggressor, Nazi Germany . Dozens of activists in front of the office of the OSCE held placards saying “No to a special status for Donbas’s’
 The previous attempt at a ceasefire from September 1st broke down after less than two weeks .
 Ukraine said on September 13 that Russia-backed militants killed three of its soldiers in violation of the truce . Ukraine said in September that three of the soldiers were killed by Russia- backed militants .
 separatist leaders accuse Ukraine of not honoring the ceasefire . They say the Ukrainian military fired heavy weapons at Donetsk residential area .
 The Minsk peace agreement was agreed between Russia, Ukraine, Germany and France in February 2015 . The agreement was signed by the Russian government and France .
 It helped reduce fighting and to end large-scale battles in the Donbas region . It helped to considerably reduce fighting in the region .
Violations have occurred regularly and smaller clashes have continued to claim lives . But since violations have occurred, smaller clashes are still taking place .
 A political settlement, an implementing of further points of the Minsk plan, has stalled . The plan includes adopting a special status for separatist-held area and returning to Ukraine control of border with Russia .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said Ukraine will not make any further steps in the settlement of the situation in Donbas . He said Russia's commitments to ensure security there will not be honored .
Russia must ensure a sustainable and comprehensive ceasefire in Donbas . Russia must ensure the ceasefire in the region is sustainable .
 Poroshenko’s statement was seen by some media as sign of burying the Minsk agreement which does not work .
 Russia claims it cannot ensure full cessation of hostilities as it is not a party to the conflict in Donbas . Meanwhile, Russia says it can't guarantee full cessation.
Without Moscow's help separatist militants would be deemed to a fiasco . It means that without Moscow’s help separatist militant militants would have been deemed a fiasco.
 Russian president Vladimir Putin offered to mediate in the negotiations between Ukraine and the Russian-backed militants in Donbas . Putin offered, still pretending that Moscow is not a party to the war, to Mediate .
 RIA Novosti quoted him as saying: "That is what we can, want, and will do if our partners in Kyiv want it,’ RIANovosti said .
 Moscow wants a bill on special status for separatist area and an amnesty for separatist fighters . Ukraine says it’s possible only after it restores control over its border with Russia .
 Russia's top priority is not to end up the conflict, but to get the Western sanctions lifted . Russia’s top priority was to get sanctions lifted, and to end the conflict .
 There are signs that Kremlin tries to achieve that goal without a full implementation of the Minsk agreement .
 Russia may reuse its assertion that the sanctions policy is counterproductive and damage the economy of both Russia and the EU . Russia may also use the influence of some pro-Moscow politicians and leaders inside the European Union .
 Several of them expressed an opinion that sanctions did not deter Russia or that they block diplomatic solutions . Many of them said that sanctions didn't deter Russia .
 The sanctions are linked to the annexation of Crimea by Russia and Moscow's role in Ukraine’s territorial integrity violation in Donbas war . The sanctions were linked to Russia and Russia's involvement in the Donbas conflict .
 The sanctions against Russia will remain unchanged for another six months . The European Council confirmed the decision in a statement .
 The European Union introduced restrictive anti-Russian sanctions in March 2014 after Crimea was annexed by the Russian Federation . The EU introduced the sanctions after the annexation of Crimea .
 The West also accused Moscow of meddling in the conflict in eastern Ukraine . It also imposed further political and economic sanctions on Russia .
 The Kremlin has repeatedly refuted the accusations and introduced countermeasures . The Kremlin claims that the Western sanctions are counterproductive and undermine global stability .
 Ukrainian President welcomed the EU Council’s September 15 decision to extend individual sanctions . He urged the EU to keep comprehensive sanction pressure on Russia until the restoration of territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 The EU’s position is that Russia must fully comply with Minsk before it relaxes sanctions . Russia must comply with the EU's position before it Relaxes sanctions.
 EU could blame Kyiv for Minsk non-compliance, even though it cannot hold elections in Russia-occupied regions until Russian forces pull out .
 Some European politicians rush to get an effective solution to the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine as soon as possible and at nearly any price . But why some European politicians rushed to get a effective solution?
 Some politicians in Europe are constrained by lobbies and interests in trade with Moscow . There are those who want to restore business relations with Russia as some politicians are constrained.
Ruling parties saw their popularity decline following migrant crisis, terror attacks and failed attempts to settle ongoing conflicts in Syria and Ukraine . They head towards elections while ruling parties see their popularity declining .
 Latest developments in Syria show that the US-Russia brokered deal does not work . U.S. and Russia have been working on a deal for Syria for years .
There are many influential figures in the U.S. who are in favor of more help to Ukraine . There are also some influential figures who are opposed to more help .
 Former U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates told on the margins of the Yalta European Strategy conference that he wishes the West would have taken stronger and swifter action against Russia's invasion of Ukraine .
 Gates: "There are a number of areas where we could have done more and frankly done it without provoking a dangerous Russia’s"
 He served as U.S. Defense secretary under President George W Bush starting in 2006 . He continued in the post under Obama until 2011 .
 Ukrainian officials are worried that the European support for Ukraine is weakening .
 Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister in charge of relations with the EU Ivanna Klympush-Tsintsadze in interview to the Euractiv .
 A slow pace of reform and persistent corruption have shaken Europe’s confidence in Kyiv as trustworthy ally and contributed to discourage Brussels . A slow rate of reform has shaken Europe's confidence inKyiv as a trustworthy ally .
There is an aggressor country, while Ukraine is the victim, she stressed . There is an aggressive country, she said .
 The Ukraine-Russia conflict is still in deadlock and the Minsk agreement to settle the armed conflict in Donbas doesn't work . The EU remains divided on that issue .
 The Ukraine crisis highlighted this division which is generated by different states’ interests, but also Moscow’s role in EU fragmentation . We can say that the Ukraine crisis highlights this division .
 Many see Kremlin's hybrid warfare aiming at shattering the EU's unity and stimulating divisions . In fact, many see Kremlin’s hybrid warfare as aiming to shatter the EU.
Kremlin-sponsored news sites, agencies and TVs write and broadcast in almost all EU languages . French National Front got 9 million loan from Kremlin-linked bank .
 In these warfare anti-Brussels and anti-US sentiments, refugee crisis, terror attacks by ISIL-linked extremists are being weaponised to divide and blow up Europe from inside .
Paris and Berlin may not realize this, but a hybrid propaganda war is waged against Europe . Even if in Brussels, Paris and Berlin might not realize it, it's a hybrid war .
 Ukraine-Russia conflict is going to be a topic which either worsens the split in the EU, or unites on the basis of common values .
 Depending on what stance European leaders take on Ukraine issue, we will know what Europe will become in the coming years .