 The leaders of the Russian Federation shocked the world and made the controversial decision to invade Georgia . Georgia is a small, sovereign nation located in the Caucasus Mountains just south of Russia .
 Georgian military had been engaged with separatists from the regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia for just under a week . By the time a large batch of Russian military personnel entered their territory through the mountainous Roki tunnel, it was too late .
 Georgia lost a major chunk of its territory to this aggressor from the north . The international community knew what any news outlets would later report . Georgia had just lost a big chunk of the territory .
 The Russian military has been involved in a decade-long war with its neighbors in Russia . The Russian government has been criticized for its behavior .
 Historically, the strained relations between Russia and Georgia are nothing new, and can be traced back as early as 1785 . The Russian Empire violated a treaty and refused to defend the eastern Georgian Kingdom during a Persian invasion .
 Georgia joined the Russian Empire in 1801, and it remained a protected member until 1918 . The independent Democratic Republic of Georgia was established following the Russian Revolution and the abdication of the Russian Tsardom .
 The Bolsheviks and the Red Army overthrew the Georgian government in 1921 . The Red Army forcibly annexed the region into the newly-established United Soviet Socialist Republic in 1922 .
 The USSR forced an era of tension, fear and powerlessness upon the citizens of Georgia . Georgia's citizens were forced to live with the USSR .
 Under the first three years of Soviet control alone, approximately 50,000 Georgians were executed by the government . An insurmountable 150,000 were purged up through 1951 by Joseph Stalin, a native Georgian .
 Soviet State Security, 1939-1953, forced entire Ingush, Chechen, Balkarian and Karachay populations, all native to Georgia, into deportation .
 Georgian protests promoting independence from the USSR resulted in the massacring of hundreds of college students and demonstrators .
After the accord’s ratification, a shaky sense of peace was established between Georgia and the separatist regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia . The accord was ratified by the Georgia government in 2009 .
 South Ossetia went so far as to hold an unofficial referendum in which 99% of the public voted in favor of independence . The vote was ignored by the European Union but supported by the Russia Duma .
 Russian President Dmitri Medvedev pledged both political and military support to both Abkhazian and South Ossetian officials . Two years later, he said allying with the separatist regions “is not an easy choice, but it is the only way to save the lives of
 Russia launched its now-infamous military invasion of South Ossetian in 2009 . Several months later, the Georgian military responded to another attack . Russia also launched its own military invasion in 2009.
 Russia's 2008 seizure of the Ossetian and Abkhazian territories provided eerie foreshadowing for what the Federation's neighbors had in store . Russia’s 2008 seizure.
In 2014, a near-identical crisis transpired in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine’s Luhansk and Donbas regions . In 2014, Ukraine's Crimea and Ukraine's Luhansi regions were in the midst of a crisis . The region has been in the
Both the Georgian and Ukrainian annexation attempts had in common . The primary characteristic that both the Georgian, Ukrainian annexation attempt had incommon is that they highlighted deep, pervading insecurities from within the highest ranks of Russian leadership .
 stress is two-pronged, with stress placed on both military and political pressures . These insecurities are two- pronged .
 The more alarming insecurities are political, and they continue to grow increasingly problematic as democracy gains popularity in Russia .
 President George W Bush proudly referred to Georgia as a beacon of liberty during a 2005 visit . Georgia is a region where freedom is not always taken for granted .
 He spoke glowingly about the 2003 Georgian Rose Revolution, in which a peaceful change of power allied Georgia more strongly with the West .
 Ukraine's 2004-2005 Orange Revolution forced the overturning of then-President Viktor Yanukovych and his corrupt, Russophilic administration in favor of the more Western-oriented candidate, Viktor Yushchenko . This revolution preceded and arguably inspired the 2004- 2005 Orange Revolution .
 These so-called Color Revolutions also took place in post-Soviet Yugoslavia and Kyrgyzstan . They sent a message to their former occupier that these nations were now independent .
 Vladimir Putin, a longstanding disbeliever in the promises of democracy, was far from pleased with the symbolism of these revolts . Seeing that his neighbors were quickly working to distance themselves from the influence of a relatively weakened Russia.
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko began to indirectly lay the groundwork for his own country's invasion by publicly voicing his support for Georgian independence .
 Russia seized to further exacerbate political troubles in Ukraine in November of that year . It is no coincidence that this stance hurdled Ukraine toward further political crisis .
 Putin chose to involve himself on his pro-Russia counterpart's behalf . Yanukovych successfully regained his presidency in 2013, Ukraine spiraled into yet another revolution .
 The autonomous region of Crimea was annexed by Russian soldiers . Shortly after, the autonomous region was annexation by Russia .
 Russia had been guilty of testing Western resolve throughout the 21st century, particularly in Eastern Europe . The dramatic actions against Georgia in 2008 marked a critical shift in Russian foreign policy .
 Long gone were the days of press releases or discrete political subversion, and ushered in an era of violent military intervention and territorial seizures .
 The only thing protecting Russia’s other Western-oriented, post-Soviet neighbors is their NATO membership . The United States and its allies should not be surprised to see Russian intervention on behalf of other separatist groups from non-member states .
 The world still waits to see who will be next. Ten years after the Georgia events, the world still waiting for the next generation .
 The fifth highest grossing film of all time at a staggering $1. billion since its release two months ago . Black Panther continues to receive widespread acclaim from movie fanatics worldwide .
 The film creatively addresses some of today’s heaviest themes such as white radicalism, institutionalized colonialism, female empowerment, Afrofuturism . The film also addresses the longstanding debate between socialist versus capitalist societies .
 In both Black Panther and the Syrian civil war, uprisings began due to a series of grievances towards the ruling figures . A distinction needs to be made in regards to whom the grievances came from .
 In Syria, it was primarily the public that held mass economic, social, and later political frustrations towards President Assad and his ruling minority Alawite party in 2011 .
 There are grievances towards Erik Killmonger’s rule as King in Black Panther . They stem from the elite and not necessarily the public, as seen from the council of tribal leaders .
 DeFronzo's first condition of mass frustration resulting in public unrest. So, despite the common existence of grievances towards both ruling figures, the grievances root from different groups .
 The public frustrations towards President Assad and the elite in Black Panther serve as catalysts for the revolutionary processes in Syria and the fictional world of Wakanda .
The next lens reflecting parallels between the two worlds is the disproportionate violence used to quell the uprisings . The next lens reflects how disproportionate violence has been used in the past .
 Syria's President Assad stood as a stark contrast to his father's dictatorial rule . The Western-educated, initially reformist-minded President Assad was once considered the country's beacon of hope .
Public opposition to his rule has morphed into a reflection of his father’s governance . His failures to meet the demands of the people quickly resulted in the public's opposition .
 President Assad has and continues to utilize his state resources to carry out forced disappearances, frequent episodes of torture, and overall terrorization of the public . As a response to such opposition, President Assad continues to use state resources.
 In Black Panther, Killmonger too resorts to disproportionate violence as the sole method to suppress uprisings and potential threats of succession .
 King T’Challah has self-inflicted scars that cover most of his body . Killmonger is willing to eliminate any and all contenders to his rule, as well as reinforce his own power base .
 The next factor is the rebel groups and disunity forming as a result of the uprisings . The nextfactor is the rebels' disunity, according to reports .
 Over the years, additional factions began to crystallize, with the Alawites in the west, Kurds in the north, and an overall distribution of moderate and Salafist Islamists . The latter being ISIS strongholds, still scattered across the country .
 In Wakanda, there is also disunity, but not quite to the extent of Syria’s case . There is also a disunity in Wakanda.
 W’Kabi, a former ally of T’Challah, chooses to ally with Killmonger, while Queen Mother, Nakia, and Shuri seek the Jabaris, an isolated mountain tribe that formerly contested T'Challah’s rule .
Despite the common existence of rebel groups and disunity, the extent of the disunity serves as the primary distinguisher between Syria and Wakanda’s revolutionary trajectory .
 Syria’s revolutionary process has become deeply porous, thus transforming into an endless proxy war with an extensive network of outside influencers . In Syria, DeFronzo has failed to meet his third condition of powerful, unifying motivations needed for a revolution to succeed .
 There is no apparent split amongst the opposition forces in Black Panther . The common goal remains the removal of Killmonger from power .
 The penultimate factor is outside forces in both the uprisings of Syria and Wakanda, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Tartus is Russia’s sole military base in the area extending to the Mediterranean Sea . In Syria there is Tartus, which is Russia's sole militarybase in the region .
 Russia’s heavy involvement in the war stems from its attempts at preserving the base and preventing rebel groups backed by Western powers from succeeding in the country . That would likely result in Russia's loss of such strategic grip of power, as that would likely be a loss of
 Ulysses Klaue, an independent actor, also uses Wakanda as a means to an end, as the country to him is merely a passageway to the much prized vibranium he illegally seeks for reselling .
 The last factor is the military involvement in both situations, which has largely influenced the varying outcomes of Syria and Wakanda .
 In Syria, the military has and continues to remain by President Assad’s side since the dawn of the conflict . The military has frequently used brutal force against the public .
 This, along with support from outside parties, helps explain how President Assad has been able to maintain his power . This, including support fromOutside parties, help explain how Assad has maintained power .
 DeFronzo’s second condition of dissident movements that include elites will not be fulfilled . So long as there exists no elite versus elite power struggle, there will be no such a revolution, he says .
 General Okoye's forces turn on Killmonger as a desperate attempt to save the country from his tyrannical rule . On the other hand, in Wakanda, despite the elite Dora Milaje forces being in service to Killmongers, her forces eventually turn on the
 This turn is very similar to Egypt’s situation during the ousting of ex-president Mohamed Morsi by the Egyptian military .
 Egypt’s current status quo of a successful post-revolutionary state remains debatable . In both cases, because the ‘elite’ turned against the 'elite,’ the revolutions were successful, the revolution was successful .
 Black Panther still gives room for debate amongst political junkies, particularly those partial to Middle Eastern affairs . In the end, even as one series of events remain set in a fictionalized world .
 The film raises pertinent questions regarding the various factors that determine the trajectories, successes and failures of revolutions across the Middle East and in Syria . It is an unorthodox comparison, indeed, but a pressing one nonetheless .
 Western capitalists were able to take advantage of the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991 to attain the status that they have today . If the American dream consists of starting from scratch and through tireless labor, it should be easy for Western capitalists to understand .
 Boris Yeltsin's oligarchs with insider connections, of course, are exceptions to this . Instead, the individuals being referred to include middle class contractors, mid-tier managers, and even hot dog stand owners .
 Yevgeny Prigozhin provides a particularly dramatic case study for economic success following modest origins .
 Prigozhin used to rob banks and sell street snacks just to pay his bills . Today he owns a number of bustling enterprises and can be seen driving a blue Lincoln Continental .
 This Gatsby-esque individual is not as picture perfect as it seems for this individual . However, all is not the same picture perfect .
 In 2016, the U.S. congress imposed economic sanctions against Prigozhin alongside several other Russian political elites in an attempt to strike back at the heart of Putin's inner circle .
 Prigozhin was indicted by Robert Mueller for playing a major role in the alleged Russian interference in the U.S. 2016 presidential election .
 Prigozhin is Russia’s premier private military corporation acting in Syria, Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . The international community has expressed repeated disdain for his establishment of the Wagner Group .
 Russian political rebel Aleksei Navalny says he didn't invent anything, didn't win at the Olympics . Prigozhin said in a recent interview that he didn’t find buried treasure .
 New Island is a buoyant restaurant that lies atop an adorned ferry in Saint Petersburg, Russia .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin brought Yoshiro Mori to a professional dinner at New Island in 2000 . Two years later, the then-Prime Minister of Japan was brought to New Island by Putin . The dinner was held out of sheer interest .
 Putin took a liking to Prigozhin, the very next year he brought Jacques Chirac, the former President of France, to the restaurant .
 He also brought President George W Bush to the U.S. in 2002 . He hosted his personal birthday party there in 2003 .
 Putin and Prigozhin rapidly formed a unique friendship, the shady personal and economic perks of which would be seen in the years to follow .
 Prigozhin was feeding 90% of Russian service-members at his peak . He earned him over a billion dollars, Vox News reports .
 Prigozhin’s humble origins as a hot dog stand owner may be because he is not afraid of doing President Putin's dirty work . Perhaps it is because of his humble origins.
 Perhaps he was enraptured by the economic benefits, or perhaps he was simply too afraid to say no .
 Putin's economic favors from Putin came political and social responsibility for Prigozhin to serve his leader’s interests .
 Prigozhin was presumably advised to use his funds to create the Internet Resource Agency . Glavset is a Saint Petersburg-based technological company seeking to promote disinformation campaigns both domestically and abroad .
 Glavset’s campaigns initially sought to put down domestic protests by creating fake social media accounts advocating on behalf of President Putin . It allegedly expanded to the point of interference in international elections, including the United States’ in 2016 .
 The most prominent evidence citing Prigozhin’s involvement in the U.S. election meddling pertains to his meeting with Mikhail Bystrov, the appointed head of Glavset .
 Glavset’s Project Lakhta received approximately $1. million in funding from Prigozhin in 2016 alone .
 Prigozhin used his immense wealth to found and develop ChVK Wagner, a private military corporation . It has become one of President Putin’s primary sources for military operations that Russia cannot formally be involved in .
 Dmitry Utkin is an ex-Russian Special Forces brigade commander . He has been involved in both the conflicts in Syria and Ukraine’s Luhansk region .
 The Wagner Group shot down the Ukrainian Air Force’s Ilyushin Il-76 in 2014 . The act was originally attributed to rogue Russian nationalists in Ukraine and killed all 49 of the plane's passengers . All 49 passengers were killed .
 Prigozhin's decision to fund military bases in Ukraine’s Donbas region has been a critical component of the success of Russian encroachment .
 In Syria, ChVK Wagner's shady activities include serving as “shock troops’ to President Bashar al-Assad, as well as seizing ISIS-held oil fields for Russian companies .
 The Wagner Group’s economic and military influence is easily one of the most valuable assets that Prigozhin is bringing to Putin and his oligarchs’ table .
 A hot dog stand owner with a vast criminal record can rise to a point of such prominence in one of the world's most powerful political and military systems .
 Prigozhin himself once said that “Vladimir Putin saw how I built up my business from nothing,” but the roots of his success lie in the fact that Putin was a personal witness .
 Modern Russia has operated since Boris Yeltsin and Yegor Gaidar’s disastrous economic reforms in the early 1990s . This is precisely how modern Russia has worked since the 1990s, says the author .
 Putin’s crony-infested inner circle will continue to thrive on loyalty and trust above all else, according to Putin .