 KIEV presented a concert featuring Russian singers supportive of the separatist movement in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian TV channel Inter accused of broadcasting pro-Russian separatist sympathizers on New Year's Eve . Oleksandr Turchynov, Ukrainian National Security and Defense Council Secretary, accused Inter of acting against the Ukrainian state .
 Anger over New Year's Eve broadcast by Inter, Ukraine's major television channel, centers on appearance of pop singers who support separatist movement .
 Government officials condemned the New Year's Eve concert, taped in Moscow . It featured prominent singers who have supported Russian incursions into Crimea and Ukraine .
 Iosif Kobzon is a deputy in the Russian parliament . He appeared with singers Valeria and Oleg Gazmanov in a segment . They stood behind a border gate and performed a song ridiculing Western sanctions .
 Ukraine's Minister of Information Policy, Yuriy Stets, threatened to introduce legislation banning all Russian performers from Ukrainian television . He is aware he cannot order the withdrawal of Inter's broadcasting license .
 Ukraine has been one of the most reckless policies of all administrations prior to 2014 . Ukraine's information space has been a complete laissez faire attitude on Ukraine .
 It is now reaping in both Crimea and the Donbass the poisonous fruit of that neglect . The poisonous fruit is now being reaped in the Crimea and Donbass .
 Russia has had a free hand in poisoning the average Ukrainian resident's view of his country and government and to build up loyalties towards Russia . Russia has been accused of poisoning Ukrainian residents' view of the government and government .
 Russian government wants to put some controls on Russian propaganda . The current government has been criticized for its desire to impose some controls .
 No country western or otherwise has allowed full freedom of the press and expression in time of war, and neither should Ukraine . No country west or other has allowed free freedom of press, expression, and no country western should Ukraine.
 Ukraine needs to organize an effective response to Russia's so far unchallenged propaganda machine. I would agree that Ukraine should organize a response to the Russian propaganda machine .
 Of course I understand the "free press" concerns that are raised but perhaps desperate times call for desperate measures .
 A free Ukrainian press could broadcast more accurate accounting and analysis of Eastern Ukrainian news into the heart of Russia .
I doubt Putin would be so popular at home if Russian people had wider access to the free press/media . I doubt Putin's popularity would have been so much better at home .
 Scrat335 is a big difference between giving free reign to a hostile force to foul your home with daily lies and propaganda about your country .
 There is very little you know about the world around you except what you pick up in the media . There is little you can know about your life.
 If that media is twisted to suit someone's agenda, then that is the way you will see the world, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "If that media was twisted to suits somebody's agenda," then that's how you'll see world .
 Russia's zombies are state-generated zombies in Russia . Just listen to the zombies and you'll know what I mean .