 Pro-Russian separatists secede from Ukraine in late 2013 and early 2014 . The new government was under a new government less friendly to Moscow .
 In February 2014, Russian armed forces began the process of annexing the Crimean Peninsula from Ukraine .
 Russia had taken control of the region, held a referendum to declare Crimea independent from Ukraine, and integrated Crimea as a Russian territory . Within months, Crimea had been integrated into Russia's territory .
 Pro-Russian separatists in the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces of Ukraine declared independence from Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has declared an armed conflict with the separatists .
 Despite repeated attempts to implement ceasefires, fighting has not stopped . All ten ceasefires to date have failed .
 Neither side appears to be near victory. Backed by Russia, the separatists have managed to create a stalemate .
 Ukraine has consistently opposed efforts by Russia and Pro-Russia separatists to claim former Ukrainian territory as independent or part of Russia . Most recent ceasefire in March 2018 collapsed on its first day .
 Ukraine has utilized its armed forces, National Guard, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Security Service, and various paramilitary groups to reclaim territory since the fighting began . Ukraine has used its armed force to reclaim its territory since fighting began.
 Most Ukrainian counter-insurgency efforts have centered on reclaiming the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Crimea is fully under Russian control .
Large percentage of Crimeans voted for independence from Ukraine and subsequent integration into Russia . Some observers cast doubt on both the legal validity of the referendum and the results of the voting .
 Russia has made efforts, both in Ukraine and elsewhere in countries like Georgia, to reintegrate former territories of the Soviet Union into Russia via military force . Russia has also made efforts in Ukraine, Georgia and other countries, including Ukraine .
 Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics are a part of the overall trend of Russian attempts to reclaim former Soviet territories . Ukraine has voiced their support for the Ukrainian government .
 The U.S. and EU have implemented economic sanctions on high-level Russian government officials and oligarchs .
 France and Germany played important roles in ceasefire negotiations for the two Minsk Protocols . EU members France, Germany and France also played key roles in negotiations .
 The Ukrainian revolution results in the ousting of the Ukrainian President, Viktor Yanukovych, who is supported by the Russian government . The Russian government is supporting Yanukovych .
 The revolution is motivated by the Ukrainian government’s decision to suspend the signing of a European Union ascension agreement .
 Protests in the eastern and southern regions of Ukraine break out in response to the government that was installed after the revolution .
Protests break out on the Crimean peninsula and within the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces in support of Russia . In particular, protests break out in the Crimea peninsula and in the Donetsk provinces .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin holds an all-night security meeting in which it is decided that the Crimean peninsula should be returned to Russian control by force .
 On the 25th, several hundred pro-Russia protesters block the Crimean parliament to demand a referendum on Crimean independence .
 Thousands of Ukrainian Tatars who support the Ukrainian government launch a counter-protest to the pro-Russia protesters .
 The new Crimean Prime Minister takes control of Ukrainian military installations on the Crimean Peninsula . He asks for additional Russian military assistance .
 Putin receives authorization from the Federation Council of Russia for a military intervention in Ukraine . He sends additional troops, armor, and helicopters to secure Crimea .
 The Crimean Supreme Council sets the date for the independence referendum to the 16th of March .
 A UN Security Council Resolution to affirm Ukraine’s sovereignty failed after Russia vetoed the resolution .
 China abstained from voting, but all 13 other members of the Security Council voted in favor of the resolution . The resolution was approved by the United States and the European Union .
 The independence referendum is held, despite being declared unconstitutional by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine . The Crimean parliament is formally dissolved by the Ukrainian government .
 Crimean Supreme Council declared Crimea to be an autonomous republic on the 17th . Crimea was declared an autonomous Republic on 17th. Crimea is now an autonomous nation on the 18th anniversary .
 Crimean leaders meet with Russian leaders to draft and sign a treaty of ascension for Russia to formally annex Crimea . Crimea has been in Crimea since Crimea was annexed by Russia in 2009 .
 By the 20th, the treaty has been signed, upheld by the Russian Constitutional Court, and ratified by the court . The treaty is the first to be signed by a Russian court .
 The G8 countries remove Russia from the G8 in retaliation for the annexation of Crimea . The move comes after Russia annexed Crimea in Crimea in 2014 .
 On the 27th, the UN passes a non-binding resolution condemning Russia for the annexation of Crimea . The resolution condemns Russia for annexation of the Crimea .
 The U.S. and most of the EU have imposed economic sanctions on Russian oligarchs as retaliation for the collapse of the Russian ruble . By this time, the United States and the European Union have imposed sanctions on the oligarchs .
 1,000-2,000 pro-Russia separatists in Donetsk and Luhansk provinces of Ukraine seize control of government buildings . They demand an independence referendum similar to the Crimean referendum .
 The Ukrainian President vows to launch an anti-terror campaign . Ukrainian Minister of Internal Affairs publicly states that the conflict will either be resolved by military force or negotiations .
 Armed forces in Donetsk led by a Russian operative seize control of other government buildings in the province .
 Separatists in Luhansk declare independence as the LuHansk People’s Republic . They demand the Ukrainian government release arrested protesters, enshrine Russian as an official language, and hold a referendum .
 They issue an ultimatum that if their demands are not met within 48 hours, they will join Donetsk in their insurgency . They say they will leave Donetsk in the next 48 hours .
 The United States and EU begin a second round of sanctions on Russia . The sanctions target executives of Russia's state owned oil company, Rosneft, and 15 other companies .
 Donetsk People's Republic held a successful independence referendum . New leader of the Donetsk People’s Republic petitions Russia for military support .
 By this point, government and insurgent forces have begun to fight for control over various cities in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Ukrainian government forces slowly reclaiming territory and pushing insurgents into Donetsk and Luhansk cities . Fighting for territorial control continues, with Ukrainian forces slowly gaining control .
 The United States and European countries issue a third round of sanctions to target major Russian oil companies and banks . The U.S. and various European countries are also issuing sanctions .
 Russian forces enter the region to provide support to insurgent forces and reclaim lost territory . Russian forces entered the region in an attempt to reclaim the lost territory.
 The first Minsk ceasefire is signed by Ukraine, Russia, the DPR, and the LPR . It was organized by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, an intergovernmental organization .
 Heavy fighting resumes despite the ceasefire still nominally still being in effect .
 A new ceasefire agreement, dubbed Minsk II, is negotiated, signed, and largely observed across the combat zone . The agreement is largely observed despite occasional violations .
 Minsk II continued to be observed, heavy artillery is mostly withdrawn from the combat zone . casualties on both sides’ are reduced .
 Minor skirmishes and ceasefire violations become more frequent, with both sides suffering casualties daily . Both sides suffer casualties daily.
 No agreement is reached to sign a formal peace treaty, and the conflict becomes frozen . No territorial changes take place, and small skirmishes occasionally occur along the line.
 2016 marks the first full calendar year where the Ukrainian government has not lost territory . The conflict remains frozen, and casualties are greatly reduced .
Heavy fighting resumes in the city of Avdiivka in late January, 2017 . A string of ceasefires have been broken by both sides within hours of being signed .
 The Ukrainian government passes a new bill expanding the war powers of Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko . The bill is aimed at reclaiming separatist territory .
 A new comprehensive, indefinite ceasefire is signed, beginning on July 1 . The ceasefire will be in place for the first time since July 1.
 The new ceasefire begins, but is violated by a flare-up of conflict in the first few days . The ceasefire begins.