 The German leader's visit is of symbolic importance to Ukraine's upcoming presidential election . Ukraine is already experiencing election turbulence .
 Merkel's arrival can be seen as a signal to Ukrainians, as well as to the West, that she supports Ukraine's current government and personally Petro Poroshenko .
 Germany has become the most important ally of Ukraine in Europe and the world with the onset of Russian aggression . The visit is a serious signal on the eve of the presidential election, says German leader .
 Ukraine's president and German chancellor have a high level of personal trust . The president of Ukraine and the German chancellor are close to each other .
 Andriy Melnyk, Ukraine's ambassador to Germany, said in an interview with LB.ua this August . "Even with her hand in the fire, German Chancellor Angela Merkel will never surrender Ukraine," she said .
 According to the ambassador, Merkel has a deep personal affection for Ukraine and Ukrainians .
 There is a close personal bond between the two heads of state . Besides, there is aclose personal bond.
 There is a personal contact and it is extremely close, Melnyk said . So, there is apersonal contact, he said .
After the Revolution of Dignity, Merkel's Germany became Ukraine's most important ally .
 Merkel's support for Ukraine getting an association agreement with the EU, as well as visa-free status . This concerned Merkel's backing for Ukraine's association agreement.
 According to LBua, it was the German chancellor who repeatedly assured Petro Poroshenko that Ukraine’s visa-free status was a done deal . He happily and immediately shared with the public .
 Poroshenko had to face harsh criticism for giving premature hopes . But because of European bureaucracy, the dates were delayed time and again, and Poroshenko faced harsh criticism .
 Ukraine has never disclosed the source of the assurances in order not to expose the relationship between the heads of state . But it should be said that Ukraine has not disclosed the assurances .
 Second, Merkel became the guarantor of European sanctions against Russia . Second, she became the Guarantor of Europe's sanctions against the Russia .
 Merkel's government was criticized for lack of decisive actions against Russia . It was largely thanks to its international experience, put the greatest pressure on Putin .
 Third, Ukraine has become part of Germany's foreign and domestic policy of Germany . Ukraine has been part of not only the foreign but also domestic policies of Germany.
 The Minsk agreements are Merkel's special contribution to support for Ukraine . They are part of the Minsk agreement to support Ukraine .
 The memoirs published by former French President Francois Hollande give an idea of how difficult negotiations were .
 Hollande does not want Ukraine to join NATO and get weapons which could change the balance of power, he said .
 His regime is being harshly punished with European sanctions for failure to deliver on them . His regime has been accused of failing to deliver to the European Union .
 Ukraine's unilateral withdrawal from the Minsk process will undermine the EU's support for anti-Russian sanctions . Ukraine’s unilateral withdrawal will undermine EU support for sanctions, according to some presidential candidates .
 Merkel torn between greed of German gas companies and need to punish Russian aggressor . Germany downplays role of Germany as a global player capable of settling international problems .
 Berlin has taken four years of painstaking efforts to build bilateral relations with Berlin . It is important not to push too much in order to keep this one question, albeit a problematic one, from destroying the entire framework of bilateral relations .
 There will be “well-wishers’ who will be extremely happy about this, both behind the border and in Ukraine. Of course, there will be "well-Wishers" who are very happy about the situation, according to CNN.
 It is not often that foreign leaders visit other countries during election campaigns in order not to give any party a chance to use this opportunity for campaigning .
 Moscow openly played on the side of Yanukovych in the 2014 elections in Ukraine . For example, Moscow played in the elections in 2014 .
 Merkel's visit to Kyiv before the legal start of the presidential campaign in Ukraine is a way to avoid accusations of Berlin's bias .
 The German leader's visit is of symbolic importance to the coming presidential election . Ukraine is already experiencing pre-election turbulence, but considering Ukraine's already experiencing turbulence .
 The visit was designed to carry a symbolic meaning, that is to become an important symbol of solidarity with the Ukrainian people in their struggle against Russia .
 Berlin will not allow being openly pulled in the domestic Ukrainian electoral agenda . It considers upcoming elections a risk, a risk that the current course of Ukraine may change .
 At the coming elections, Germany's government and political elite will unequivocally support those Ukrainian politicians whose practical steps meet several important criteria .
 It is also about putting the ideals of the Revolution of Dignity into practice for the sake of people, ambassador says .
 The second criterion is support for the implementation of the Minsk agreements despite all the difficulties . The second criteria are support for Implementation of the agreements despite the difficulties.
 Germany and France are the key international mediators of efforts to stop Russian aggression in the east . The Minsk agreements are practically an integral part of the coalition agreement .
 The chancellor’s visit to Kyiv is overshadowed by events in Germany . Merkel's plan not to seek re-election as CDU party leader is not to run again .
 Allegations about Merkel's "ousting" have been made for a long time, especially by the Russian press and its experts .
 She did not turn a blind eye to Putin's occupation of Ukrainian Crimea and Donbas . She has become an inconvenient partner for the Kremlin's master .
 For four years, she has been keeping together the European anti-Russian coalition . She has been trying to get Putin to do what he had committed himself to in Minsk .
 Merkel's statement should be regarded as a logical element of political struggle. Therefore, Merkel's statements should be considered as a political struggle .
 It became a legitimate reaction to the series of her party's election failures in federal states . It was a reaction to her party’s election failures.
 The populist Alternative for Germany party has been gradually biting off about 10% from each party in the ruling CDU/CSU coalition . The populistAlternative for Germany has been slowly biting off 10% of each party .
 nationwide polls of voters record with unenviable consistency a fall of the CDU/CSU rating . As a result, nationwide polls have a record of unenvable consistency .
 The last poll in mid-October showed that only 26% of voters are ready to vote for the CDU/CSU . It is the worst figure in the history of the conservative bloc .
 Germany has long maintained a conservative position while traditional parties in neighbouring European countries have suffered regular defeats .
 France's young, modern and decisive Macron with his haphazardly formed movement La République En Marche! It evolved from a social movement into a party on the eve of the elections only .
 Many Germans are irritated by the arrival of hundreds of thousands of people of the different culture and religion . The chancellor advocated integration of the newcomers into European society .
 Putin bombed Syria to stimulate the flow of refugees to Europe . Putin's goal of causing chaos in Europe was to create chaos, he said .
 Merkel has managed to hold the situation under control, so she is definitely not a wimp . Nevertheless, Merkel is not a Wimp .
 She is not planning to run for CDU party head again at the December congress . Her statement may have a deeper meaning than it seems at first glance .
 She is taking this tactical step to ensure that she remains chancellor of a big coalition until 2021 election . For example, she is taking a tactical step.
 Merkel's plans can be derailed by her fellow party members, who have already started carving up power, and Social Democrats, who can throw a tantrum and leave the coalition . Merkel's plan could be derailed.
 Merkel's manoeuvre proves right, but it is in the interest of Ukraine that it proves right. But it is also in the interests of Ukraine, it is not clear if it is right .
 Ukraine can enjoy Europe’s support at the high level. As long as Merkel remains the German chancellor, Ukraine can benefit from Europe's support .
 Both Kyiv and Berlin must remember this and not put off the implementation of important projects . Both Kyv and Berlin need to remember this, not to put off important projects, they say .