 Washington announces additional visa restrictions against Venezuelan officials and their families . The restrictions are tied to human rights violations and corruption, the U.S. Department of State says .
 Some people have the guts to say Israel does not controll U.S. foreign policy . Some people say Israel doesn't controll United States foreign policy.
 Russian envoy to NATO says changes in Russia's military planning will "naturally" lead to changes in military planning . The changes are aimed at ensuring the country's security .
 NATO's recent decision to set up additional command centers in six different countries will inevitably lead to "adequate" changes in Russia's military planning, envoy to alliance says .
 The envoy says the changes will lead to changes in Russia's military planning . The changes are aimed at ensuring the country's security .
 The defense ministers of NATO member-states agreed on the creation of six new command and control posts in Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Poland and Romania .
 The ministers also announced that NATO's Response Force would be doubled to include up to 30,000 people . The Response Force will also be doubled.
 The decision "creates a great risk for Russia," says Grushko . The Baltics could become a region of "military confrontation"
 The creation of a joint training center in Georgia will also contribute to geopolitical tensions and the aggravation of regional security, Jens Stoltenberg says .
"There is no necessity for NATO to create any centers," Grushko said . Grushkos said countries in the Black Sea region are capable of ensuring their own security .
 The training center will be set up in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, to train both Georgian and NATO troops . Stoltenberg said at a press conference Thursday.
 NATO's growing presence in Eastern Europe has been the subject of geopolitical tensions . Russia has expressed growing concern over the buildup of NATO forces along its western border .
 NATO claims the expansion is aimed at protecting its member-states and allies . NATO has accused Russia of being involved in the Ukrainian crisis .
 If NATO decides to give lethal aid to Kiev, it could have "unpredictable" results, Alexander Grushko has stressed . Kiev continues to fight independence supporters in the southeast .
 The NATO leadership draws a line between supplies from the alliance and declares that NATO does not have weapons, all weapons are national . "From the perspective of the situation on the ground there would be no difference," Grushko said .
 NATO allies disagree about providing lethal aid to Kiev that launched a military operation against independence supporters in Ukraine's southeast last spring . NATO allies say they don't want to provide lethal aid.
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel confirmed Tuesday that Germany will not provide weapons to Ukraine . Germany will pursue a peaceful solution to the military conflict, she said .
 The United States Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John McCain continues to urge the Obama administration to provide Ukraine with lethal assistance .
 Denis Pushilin, the negotiator of the self-proclaimed people's republic of Donetsk, announced shells with NATO markings were used in Horlivka in southeastern Ukraine .
 Pushilin also said that U.S. warfare tactics are being used by Kiev forces fighting independence supporters in the region .
 The United States is playing with fire by instigating a military standoff off Russian and Chinese borders . Neither the South China Sea nor Ukraine can be considered America’s backyards, according to the Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia .
 The bipolar world ended with the end of the Cold War, but what is now being suggested as true pluralism and consensus in international relations is seen by the United States as "uncertainty" and "danger" The U.S. newspaper correspondent Rafael Poch wrote in his blog
 Washington is now committed to blocking the rise of two large nuclear-armed countries, the journalist says . The journalist says the U.S. is now committing to blocking nuclear weapons . It's similar to a columnist Paul Craig Roberts who served as an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury in the Reagan
 To restrain Russia, the U.S. has created the crisis in Ukraine . The United States has created a crisis in the Ukraine .
 China is now confronted with the Pivot to Asia and the construction of new U.S. naval and air bases to ensure Washington’s control of the South China Sea .
 U.S. Defense Secretary Ashton Carter announced the United States New Maritime Security Initiative at the Shangri-La Dialogue, Asia’s premier security summit .
 It comes as ‘the next phase’ of the U.S. rebalances to the Asia-Pacific. It is the next phase of the United States rebalance to the region .
 The United States regularly sends aircraft and warships on patrol just within the limits of its adversary . The U.S. regularly resorts to the provocative practice, which generates constant tensions .
 Washington needs to understand that neither Russia nor China will yield to the U.S. pressure and won’t accept the vassalage status prepared for them by the US .
 The United States will counter any effort by Moscow to reestablish the Soviet sphere of influence, Ashton Carter says . The U.S. is not going to make an enemy out of Russia, he says .
 The Defense Secretary claims Russia has flouted international law and destabilized the European security order . Russia allegedly supports continuing violence in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia contends NATO has expanded eastward breaking commitments given by U.S. leaders before the collapse of the Soviet Union . Russia says NATO has increased threat-level on its borders .
 Moscow has pointed out it is the U.S. and European Union that supported the violent coup toppling Ukraine’s democratically-elected President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014 . This set off the secession of Ukraine's two eastern provinces of Lugansk and Donetsk .
 Since then, the Kiev successor regime of President Petro Poroshenko has used heavy artillery and air attacks against cities and villages in Eastern Ukraine . The Kiev regime, backed by Washington, is backed by the Washington government .
 More than 90 percent of Crimea's voters chose to reunify with Russia through a democratic referendum . Russia has pointed out that more than 90% of Crimea’s voters chose a referendum .
Nato gives the continent a level of security and stability never before seen in history . I have no issue with nato existing, says Nato .
 nato believes it must constantly expand and take in new members and believs it can do whatever it wants with nobody to oppose it . The problem begins when nato wants to expand.
 Since the breakup of the U.S. this brief period of a unipolar world has given the United States and nato the erroneous belief that they have the god given right to rule the world alone for all time .
 There will be blood, sweat, tears, tears and lots of hysteria coming out of the white house and nato before then . But there will be plently of blood and sweat, sweat and tears coming out.
 The United States wants to cut Russia economically and politically from its neigbours . The U.S. goal is not to prevent the restablishment of "the Soviet sphere of influence"
 From an U.S. perspective, countries that are independent from United States effective hegemony are a bad thing . From a United States perspective, nations, and moreover alliances, are bad thing, says John Sutter .
 The U.S. has become more and more active in attempts to counter any chain of events that would weaken its dominant position in the world .
 I remember the TV debate about security with McCain in Obama's first campaign . I also remember the debate about the security issue with McCain .
 The speech is clearly a reassurance to some circles of power that he will not deviate from the U.S. hegemonic strategic line .
 Alexei Navalny has reported on his general work and campaign trail to American diplomats . The former adviser to the Kirov Region Governor has been on the campaign trail for years .
 He personally visited the informal meeting of the members of the RPR-Parnassus . The meeting was attended by foreign guests .
 The source of the above is from a poster, Drutten, on Mark Chapman's blog called Kremlin Stooge .
 This can be seen in remarks expressed by leading U.S. politicians, political scientists and numerous articles . This is in response to comments made by politicians, scientists and scientists .
 Russian officials prefer to use more abstract expressions and definitions . Russian officials still prefer to using more abstract terms .
 Russian cult of hunger for justice still tries to prove something in the debate about what is happening in Ukraine .
 The new cold war has started again because of Russia’s belief in the power of a simple handshake . Russia is believed to be the only country in the world to hold a handshake .
 If leaders shake hands, it means that we do not have “black thoughts,’ nor do we prepare any treacherous attacks on opposite number. If leaders hold hands, that means that they don't have ‘black thoughts’
 The hand of an opponent that was defeated in the previous cold war was shaking. They were shaking their hand as they were shaking our hand as the hand of the opponent was defeated .
 U.S. leaders were moving their military-political bloc eastwards, closer to Russia's borders .
 Russia and America were friends, damn it, we shared common democratic values . Russia and the U.S. shared democratic values. Russia and U.K. were friends .
 Russia could only see American smiles against the background of ideological and military offensive . The U.S. is deploying more and more military bases closer and closer to our borders .
 energy resources stand above all for those who thought of themselves as masters of the world after the collapse of the bipolar system . Yet, energy resources – oil, coal, gas – stand above those who think of themselves.
 Russia, from their point of view, is just a big fat land of cash that has to be appropriated . Russia's government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Ukrainian authorities think of themselves as masters of the universe, they are sadly mistaken .
 The events in Russia serve as a bargaining chip in the global game for Russian resources . Their country, and all events that are now happening there, serves as a negotiating chip for Russia .
 In Luhansk and Donetsk, Washington does not bother to think of civilians . All those people will die anyway, when the extraction of shale gas begins .
 The war has been going on for all these years. Russia and the USA are engaged in a new stage of the war between the two countries .
 Russia cuts prices on energy carriers, and the West gives Russia technology . Russia also gives the West technology to Russia .
 We were trying to proceed from what was hammered into our heads during the perestroika period . We were also trying to get out of what was hammering into our Heads during the Perestroik period .
We were proceeding from academician Sakharov’s ideas of the unified world that would be so much better than the world divided into blocs . The world would be better than a single blocs.
 Russia was always seen as a victim that should be snatched up and torn apart . That is, that is, Russia was seen as an enemy that should have been torn apart.
 He was trying, even at the cost of losses, to build the country into the structure of the world economy . He tried to build a country into a world economy.
 Moscow's very restrained sanctions against the West made Europe react sharply to Russia's dissatisfaction . One can see from Moscow’svery restrained sanctions on the West that he managed to make Europe react strongly to Russia.
 The field of energy is the main trump card for Russia . There are lots of other sanctions that Russia can use .
 Russian president's actions seen as deviation from short-term interests of Russian business . This is where we begin to understand the true meaning of president’s actions .
 Russia announces retaliatory sanctions on certain sectors of economy . Russia is striking a sensitive blow on the political supremacy of the United States in Europe .
 Human rights have no national boundaries, and Russia has no national borders . Russia's human rights are not a country, but it is a country .
 Rossotrudnichestvo still believes that it is vitally important to hold concerts, distribute booklets about Russia and tell stories about studies of the Russian language .
 Russia needs the rest of the world to understand her logic, says Konstantin Kosachev .
 Kiev government exterminating people of western Donbass under patronage of Western instructors . We need others to understand that the lives of the people of Russia are Russian lives .
 Russian unions of journalists said nothing about the abuse of freedom of speech in Ferguson . Obama had done nothing to prevent the execution of James Foley .
 Colleagues were outraged about the detentions of political activists on Moscow's Triumfalnaya Square .
 Washington officials, declaring the new cold war on Russia, do not realize that we have been studying their logic for a quarter of a century, and we can work in synch with the State Department now .
 In Russia, there are many specialists who understand the logic of the U.S. in Russia .
 Washington officials can dictate anything to the elites that they bought. Washington officials are able to dictate anything they buy .
 The views of elite come into sharp confrontation with the views of people, then people overthrow elites . People overthrow elites.
 Ukraine has their own little ambitions too, like Ukraine wanting dominance . Ukraine has its own own ambitions too.
 Ukraine relied majority of its exports to Russia as its non-resource-based goods are not wanted/demanded outside . Other industries like metallurgy is going to get snuffed out by competition .
 Poland is less dependent but the baltic nations are quite dependent on sales to Russia for end goods and transportation . Poland is more dependent on Russia than other countries .
 transportation has dried up and competition from China's investors that invested in new manufacturing in Russia . The baltics are losing out big time.
 The biggest restraint is what I mentioned and even hinted in the article about their dreams on who will rule who in the little group . But the biggest restraint was what he mentioned and what he said about his dreams .
Unlike America's policy of regime change, Russia's policy is friendship . Unlike America's policies, it happened in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, Ukraine, Syria .
 After the Maidan coup, Poroshenko would have been overthrown by the people in a revolution . The Maidan revolution would have taken place after the coup .
 If was Putin who legitimized the coup government and prevented Ukrainian people from toppling Poroshenko, it would have been Putin's role . If wasPutin who legitimizes the coup, it could have prevented Poroshenko's overthrow .
 As a result, thousands of Ukrainians and Russians continue to die, the war continues on . The war has killed thousands of Russians and Ukrainians .
First USSR, then NATO on border, then Yugoslavia, then Iraq, then Libya, then Ukraine, then Syria . First USSR, first NATO on borders, then Serbia, first Yugoslavia on border. Then Iraq, first Libya, first Ukraine, first Syria, first Iraq,
 Putin still says Americans are friends when in reality Americans are enemies who are scheming to kill Putin and break up Russia . Yet, Putin still said Americans were friends when they were in reality .
 I hope Russia and many other countries like China and India become. If that is what it takes to win then I am glad they do not win... for them to win is to recreate another US... we don't need a new US. We need a real alternative to the US...
 If they don't win then the United States needs to be demolished and replaced by a new power . The U.S. needs to win, says CNN's John Sutter . The United States must win, he says .