 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko says government forces will unilaterally cease fire to allow pro-Russian separatists to lay down weapons or leave the country . The move follows his conversations with Russian and German leaders .
 Ukrainian president announces a plan to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine . He promises a unilateral cease-fire after discussions with the Russian and German leaders .
 Petro Poroshenko's plan would offer pro-Russian insurgents in the eastern provinces a chance to lay down weapons or leave the country .
 Moscow's annexation of Crimea was triggered by the ouster of Ukraine's pro-Russia president . It could help ease the worst crisis between Russia and the West since the Cold War .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin discussed a possible cease-fire in a phone conversation with Poroshenko late Tuesday, the Kremlin says .
 Poroshenko also discussed his peace plan with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, their offices said .
 He said those who lay down arms and haven't committed grave crimes will be granted amnesty . He said that those who don't commit grave crimes would be given amnesty .
 Poroshenko made repeated promises of steps to restore peace before and after winning May's election . Poroshenko won the election in May.
 Rebel leaders have remained defiant, saying they would demand the Ukrainian troops withdraw from the east as the main condition for talks . Rebel leaders say they will demand the Ukraine troops withdraw.
 Poroshenko has said before that he wanted a cease-fire, but Wednesday was the first time he said government forces will be the first to halt hostilities . Russia has been Russia's main demand, which has been the main demand .
 Russia's foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, said that any cease-fire should be "comprehensive" not temporary .
 The announcement of a unilateral cease-fire seems to be part of a carefully choreographed plan with Russian and German involvement . The announcement comes at a time when key leaders of the mutiny were meeting with Russian officials .
 Poroshenko nominated Pavel Klimkin, currently ambassador to Germany, to replace Andriy Deshchytsia as foreign ninister . The move would help appease Moscow .
 Lavrov had said he would never speak again to Deshchytsia after he joined an obscene anti-Putin chant . He tried to calm protesters who besieged the Russian Embassy in Kiev last weekend .
 Ukrainian officials said Wednesday they were completing the effort . Poroshenko has said previously that a cease-fire should follow securing the border with Russia .
 Russia has denied Ukrainian and Western claims that it is fomenting the insurgency in the east by sending troops and weapons . Russia insists that Russian nationals among the rebels are volunteers .
 If Poroshenko's plan is implemented, that would allow the Kremlin a face-saving way out of the crisis . The Kremlin would be able to save the country from the crisis.
 Putin appears to be eager to de-escalate tensions with the West and avoid a new round of economic sanctions . But he has been increasingly under fire from nationalist groups at home who have demanded he send troops into eastern Ukraine .
 Putin says Russia has fulfilled its goal of protecting Russian speakers in Ukraine . Putin says that Russia has completed its goal to protect Russian speakers .
 Poroshenko, in his turn, also would be able to claim victory over the rebellion . Poroshenko would also claim victory in the rebellion.
 Ukraine is trying to shore up the struggling economy and mend the rift between the east and the west . Most residents want close ties with Russia, and the West wants a quick integration into Europe .
 If Poroshenko's plan succeeds, it would allow him to consolidate his power and help set ground for early parliamentary elections . If he succeeds, that would help him set up early elections he has demanded .
 Any cease-fire would raise the question of whether the separatists would respect it . It would also ask whether Russia had the desire or the ability to persuade them to do so .
 Top rebel figures visited Moscow Tuesday and met with senior officials and lawmakers . Top rebels met with officials, lawmakers and senior officials .
 The insurgency in the eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions flared up in mid-April . Rebels, emboldened by Russia's annexation of Crimea, seized government buildings and declared independence for their provinces .
 Putin has stonewalled their demands. They have pushed for joining Russia, but Putin is stonewalling them .
 Ukrainian government forces have struggled to suppress the insurgents, who on Saturday shot down a military transport plane . All 49 on board the plane were killed, including all 49 passengers .
 United Nations human rights chief Navi Pillay says 34,000 people have been displaced in the country . The country's "climate of insecurity and fear" has displaced 34,00 people, he says . The United Nations says the country is suffering from a climate of
 John Heilprin in Geneva and Frank Jordans in Berlin contributed to the report . Nataliya Vasilyeva and Vladimir Isachenkov in Moscow, Moscow, and John Heilsprin on Geneva .