 An apparent rocket strike destroyed an administration building in Kharkiv, the second largest city, killing civilians . The explosion occurred on Day 6 of Russia's Invasion of Ukraine .
 Russia’s push to seize key Ukrainian cities accelerated on Wednesday . Russian military claims that its forces are fully in control of Kherson, a port near the Black Sea . The mayor said the city was “waiting for a miracle’ to collect bodies and restore basic
 Ukrainian officials disputed Russia’s claim, saying that while the city of about 300,000 people was surrounded, the municipal government was still in place and the battle was continuing .
 If captured, Kherson would be the first major Ukrainian city to fall to Russia . President Vladimir V Putin launched his invasion last Thursday .
 Russian forces are bearing down on several other cities, including Kyiv, where blasts were reported overnight . Russian forces appeared to be moving closer toward encircling the city .
 The government building in Kharkiv was hit by an apparent rocket strike on Wednesday morning . supplies of food and water are running low in the city of 1. million people .
 Overnight, Russian troops surrounded Mariupol, a port city in the southeast .
 Residents baked 26 tons of bread to help withstand the coming onslaught, mayor says . Residents baked the bread to protect themselves from the onslaught .
 President Biden predicted that the invasion of Ukraine would “leave Russia weaker and the world stronger” during a fiery State of the Union address .
 The Justice Department will try to seize the assets of oligarchs and government officials allied with Mr Putin, part of a global push to isolate Russia . A second round of talks between Russia and Ukraine was scheduled to take place on Wednesday .
 A Russian Navy vessel sailing in the Bosporus near Istanbul last month .
 Turkey asked Russia not to send three warships to the Black Sea in recent days . Russia withdrew its request to do so, the country’s top diplomat said late Tuesday . Turkey is trying to walk a fine line between Ukraine and Russia .
 Turkey has urged Moscow to stop its aggression but has not followed the West in issuing sanctions against Russia over the war . Turkey has strong military and economic relations with Russia .
 Turkey is already trying to assess the potential damage of the sanctions on its economy . Turkey is also trying to determine the impact of sanctions.
Turkey oversees access to the Black Sea through a 1936 treaty that regulates sea vessels passing through the Bosporus and Dardanelles straits . Turkey oversees access through the 1936 treaty. Turkey has a right to access the Black sea through a 1937 treaty .
 The Montreux Treaty gives Turkey the right to ban warring-party vessels from access to the Black Sea unless their home base is there . The pact, the MontreUX Treaty, also gives Turkey a ban on warring party vessels from accessing the sea .
 The demand from Russia came on Sunday and Monday, concerned four warships, Mr Cavusoglu said .
 Only one was registered to a Black Sea base and therefore eligible to pass, according to the information Turkey had . Turkey had only one base in the Black Sea .
 Russia withdrew its request for all four vessels . Turkey officially informed all of the parties to the Montreux Treaty that Russia had done so so .
 Turkey applies the treaty’s rules for both sides of the conflict, as the accord demands . He emphasized that Turkey applied the treaty's rules for the both sides.
 Naveen Shekharappa, an Indian medical student, was killed when he left a bunker in Kharkiv, Ukraine .
 The death of an Indian student in the fighting in Ukraine on Tuesday has brought into focus India's challenge of evacuating nearly 20,000 of its citizens who were Stranded in the country when Russia's invasion began .
 Naveen Shekharappa was a fourth-year medical student in Kharkiv, India . He was killed when he left a bunker on Tuesday to fetch food, officials and his family members said .
 As of late Tuesday, about 8,000 Indian citizens were still trying to make it out of Ukraine, India's Foreign Ministry says .
 The evacuation process has been complicated by active fighting, with the students struggling to make it to jammed border crossings .
 Indian students have walked miles in freezing temperatures to cross into neighboring countries . The conflict has intensified in recent days .
 Many posted videos from their underground bunkers and hostel rooms, pleading for help . Many posted Videos from their bunkers.
 Other students accused security forces at the borders of racism, saying they were made to wait longer only because they were Indians .
 India has a huge young population and an increasingly competitive job market . India has an increasinglycompetitive job market and a young population .
 Seats in Indian government-run professional colleges are limited, and degrees at private universities are expensive .
 Thousands of students from poorer parts of India pursue professional degrees . Russia will send its delegation for a second round of talks with Ukrainian representatives .
 Anton Troianovski S Russia claims to control Kherson, a strategic city, but Ukraine says the battle for it isn’t over .
 The Russian military says it fully controlled Kherson, a regional Ukrainian center with a strategically important location at the mouth of the Dnieper River, just northwest of Crimea .
 The claim could not immediately be verified, and Ukrainian officials said that while the city was surrounded, the battle for it was continuing . The claim was not immediately verified .
 If Russia does take Kherson, it would become the first major Ukrainian city captured by Russia during the war .
 Russia has sought to portray its military assault as one that is welcomed by most Ukrainians . The invasion touches off enormous human suffering, even as it touches off huge human suffering .
 fighting for Kherson, which provides strategic access to the Black Sea and is near a Soviet-era water canal leading to Crimea, is continuing . Oleksiy Arestovich, a military adviser to President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, said that
 The Ukrainian Navy accused the Russian Black Sea Fleet of using civilian vessels for cover . It said Russian ground forces were also using the tactic .
 The Ukrainian Navy said the Russians had threatened to fire on the ship if it did not comply . The Russian navy said the ship had been ordered to comply with the request .
 The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank say a spike in the prices of oil, wheat and other commodities risks fueling already high inflation . It is likely to affect poor people the hardest .
Disruptions in financial markets are likely to get worse if the conflict persists, the agencies say . Western sanctions on Russia and the flow of refugees from Ukraine are also likely to have major economic repercussions .
 China's top financial regulator said Wednesday that China would not join financial sanctions against Russia . The I.M.F and World Bank said they were working on finance assistance packages worth a total of over $5 billion to support Ukraine .
 Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine sought to rally the nation on Wednesday aiter . He repeated China's opposition to sanctions .
 Russian military says it now controls Kherson, a strategically important city at the mouth of the Dnieper River . The city would be the first major Ukrainian city that Russia has captured .
 The claim could not be immediately confirmed, and Ukrainian officials said that while Russian forces had surrounded the city, the battle for control was continuing .
 The United Nations refugee agency says 677,000 people have fled Ukraine . More than 4 million people could eventually be forced to leave, the agency says .
For days, Natalia Novak has sat alone in her empty apartment, watching news of the war outside her window .
 Novak reflected on Tuesday afternoon after learning of President Vladimir V Putin's plan to further attack the capital .
 An Australian air force transport plane left for Europe on Wednesday carrying military equipment and medical supplies . Australian military said on Twitter .
 Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia says his country will provide weapons to Ukraine through NATO . Australia will supplement nonlethal equipment and supplies it has already contributed to Ukraine .
 Australia will provide defensive military assistance to Ukraine . Australia's Prime Minister announced on 27 February that Australia would provide military assistance .
 An AusAirForce C-17A Globemaster ITI departed Australia for Europe on 2 March carrying critical military equipment and medical supplies . Mike Ives Reporting from Seoul Hoosli, a Ukrainian choir based in Winnipeg, Canada, performed the Ukrainian and Canadian national anthems while
 Ukrainian community honoured to represent our Ukrainian community in Canada . Honoured to represent their culture, our language and our song .
 The Central Bank closed the exchange on Monday as the Russian ruble cratered . It later extended the closure to Tuesday .
 Svitolina is the top seed at the Monterrey Open and won the event in 2020 . She is ranked 15th in the world, and is the world's top seed .
 Russia banned people from taking more than $10,000 worth of foreign currency abroad starting Wednesday . The country struggles to contain the financial shock from Sanctions over the Ukraine invasion .
 Russia’s currency has plunged in value this week, and long lines formed at A.T.M.s as residents tried to withdraw cash .
 Russia has tried to control the damage by more than doubling the key interest rate on Monday . It has forced exporters to sell 80 percent of foreign currency revenue .
 President Joe Biden delivers his first formal State of the Union address in Washington, D.C. on Tuesday . S Ukrainian flags are seen in the House Chamber .
 Putin of Russia had ‘badly miscalculated’ by invading Ukraine, he said . He vowed to make Moscow pay a steep economic “price’ even as he repeated his pledge to avoid a direct military confrontation .
 The speech, originally seen as an opportunity for a struggling president to send a reassuring message on the economy to a domestic audience, was hastily repurposed.
 Biden announced several new moves to further punish Mr Putin, including a ban on Russian aircraft in U.S. airspace .
 Mr Biden was repeatedly interrupted by applause from members of both parties as he addressed the crisis .
 The Republican cheering dissipated when he warned Americans to expect economic blowback in the form of higher energy prices resulting from the sanctions .
 U.S. would release 60 million barrels of oil from reserves, with half coming from domestic supplies . The United States, in conjunction with 30 allies, would release the oil, he said .
 He made no mention of the nation's nuclear deterrence capabilities in response to Mr Putin’s menacing references in recent days to putting Russia on a war footing .
 Mr Putin did not offer any clear way out of the crisis, or even a possible offramp for an increasingly bellicose and isolated Mr Putin . He also did not give any clearway out of Ukraine crisis .
 Mr Biden committed to providing Ukraine with enough weaponry, supplies and humanitarian assistance to ‘fight for freedom’ He said again he was not prepared to directly confront Russian troops .
 Our forces are not engaged and will not engage with the Russian forces in Ukraine, he said .
 Mr Perepeitsa resorted to poetry and toa poem in a language other than his native tongue to capture the mood .
 Mr Perepelitsa is a husband and a father of a little boy . He is a resident of Kyiv, Ukraine .
 Alex Lourie, an American photographer in Ukraine, recorded the video . He had lived in Tehran for a year and half and studied Persian, according to Lourie .
 Mr Lourie said he had been shooting photographs of soldiers in the outskirts of Kyiv when he and Mr Perepelitsa started chatting .
 Both men realized they spoke a little Persian and were familiar with Iranian culture and poetry . They both realized that they spoke little Persian .
 Mr Perepelitsa has since told him that he is getting flooded with messages from Iranians in support and solidarity . He posted it on his Instagram page .
 The last post from Mr Perepelitsa’s Instagram page, a landscape photograph of Ukraine, had 1,468 messages written Tuesday .
 The representative from North Korea blamed the conflict in Ukraine on the United States and other Western countries . The representative said they had undermined Europe's security by resisting Russia's demands and continuing NATO's eastward expansion .
 South Korea's representative denounced Russia's actions, saying the war was a choice made by the Russian Federation . South Korea says it was made by Russia's Federation .
 At least two people were killed, three others were injured, the embassy said . Three of the 10 homes caught fire, three of the houses caught fire .
 President Biden delivered his State of the Union speech from the United States Capitol on Tuesday .
 The White House has released some excerpts from President Obama's prepared remarks .
 Russia's Vladimir Putin sought to shake the foundations of the free world, thinking he could make it bend to his menacing ways . Six days ago, Russia’s Vladimir Putin tried to shake up the foundations.
From President Zelensky to every Ukrainian, their fearlessness, their courage, their determination, inspires the world. From President Zelenky toEvery Ukrainian, they inspire the world .
 Everyone from students to retirees teachers turned soldiers into soldiers defending their homeland .
 Let each of us here tonight in this chamber send an unmistakable signal to Ukraine and to the world. Let us here send a signal to the Ukraine and the world, we say .
 The United States of America stands with the Ukrainian people, U.S. President Barack Obama says .
Throughout our history we’ve learned this lesson when dictators do not pay a price for their aggression they cause more chaos. Throughout our history, we've learned this lessons when dictators don’t pay a cost for aggression .
 We spent months building a coalition of other freedom-loving nations from Europe and the Americas to Asia and Africa to confront Putin .
 We shared with the world in advance what we knew Putin was planning and precisely how he would try to falsely justify his aggression . We shared what he was planning with us in advance .
 Along with 27 members of the European Union, including France, Germany, Italy, as well as the United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, Korea, Australia, New Zealand, and many others, even Switzerland .
 Together with our allies, we are right now enforcing powerful economic sanctions . Together with their allies, the U.S. is enforcing powerful financial sanctions .
 We are cutting off Russia's largest banks from the international financial system . Russia's biggest banks are being cut off from the global financial system.
 Preventing Russia’s central bank from defending the Russian ruble, making Putin’'s $630 Billion ‘war fund’ worthless. Preventing the central bank is making Putin's $ 630 Billion “ war fund” worthless .
 We are choking off Russia’s access to technology that will sap its economic strength and weaken its military for years to come .
 The U.S. Department of Justice is assembling a dedicated task force to go after the crimes of Russian oligarchs .
 We are joining with our European allies to find and seize their yachts their private jets . We are joined by our allies to seize their luxury apartments their private jet .
 The U.S. will join allies in closing off American air space to all Russian flights, further isolating Russia and adding an additional squeeze on their economy .
 The Russian stock market has lost 40 percent of its value, and trading remains Suspended . The market remains suspended .
 Together with our allies, we are providing support to the Ukrainians in their fight for freedom . We are providing our support to Ukraine, we're providing support for the Ukrainians .
 We are giving more than $1 billion in direct assistance to Ukraine . We will continue to aid the Ukrainian people as they defend their country .
 Our forces are not engaged and will not engage in conflict with Russian forces in Ukraine . Our forces will not be engaged in the conflict with Russia, our forces say .
 Our forces are not going to Europe to fight in Ukraine, but to defend our NATO Allies . Putin decides to keep moving west, says Putin .
 The U.S. has mobilized ground forces, air squadrons, and ship deployments to protect NATO countries . Poland, Romania, Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia are among the countries that have been mobilized .
 The U.S. and its allies will defend every inch of territory of NATO countries with the full force of our collective power . The United States and our allies will protect all NATO countries.
 He will pay a continuing high price over the long run. But while he may make gains on the battlefield, he will pay the high price .
 Ukrainian people have repeatedly shown that they will not tolerate anyone who tries to take their country backward . They have known 30 years of independence, they say .
 To all Americans, I will be honest with you, as I always promised I would be . I always promise to be honest.
 A Russian dictator, invading a foreign country, has costs around the world, according to CNN.com .
 I'm taking robust action to make sure the pain of our sanctions is targeted at Russia’s economy. And I’m taking robustaction to makesure the pain is targeted.
 I will use every tool at our disposal to protect U.S. businesses and consumers, says President Barack Obama . "I will use all of our tools to protect American businesses," he says .
 The U.S. has worked with 30 other countries to release 60 million barrels of oil from reserves around the world . The United States has released 60 million Barrels of oil .
 America will release 30 million barrels from its own Strategic Petroleum Reserve . America will lead that effort .
 Putin's war on Ukraine will have left Russia weaker and the rest of the world stronger. When the history of this era is written, Putin’s war on Ukrainian will leave Russia weaker, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It shouldn't have taken something so terrible for people around the world to see what's at stake, now everyone Sees it clearly .
 We see the unity among leaders of nations, a more unified Europe . We also see the more unified West, we see a more united West .
 The Ukrainian people are gathering in cities around the world to demonstrate their support for Ukraine . And we see unity among the people who are gathered in cities across the world .
In the battle between democracy and autocracy, democracies are rising to the moment . The world is clearly choosing the side of peace and security, according to CNN .
 The iron will of the Ukrainian people. So let us continue to draw inspiration from the iron will, says the Ukrainian government .
 To our fellow Ukrainian Americans who forge a deep bond that connects our two nations we stand with you, we stand together .
 Putin may circle Kyiv with tanks, but he will never gain the hearts and souls of the Ukrainian people .
 Markets in Asia fell on Wednesday as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the impact of expanding sanctions continue to unnerve investors .
 Oil futures were up Sharply, with American West Texas intermediate crude futures rising 5. percent . The Brent benchmark was up 5.percent, while the Brent benchmark is up 5%.
 S. S March 1, 2022 Niraj Chokshi and Neal E Boudette Boeing and Ford suspend operations in Russia . The two companies have been suspended from Russia .
 Boeing and Ford Motor have suspended their business activities in Russia as the country escalated its war in Ukraine . The U.S. companies have been suspended as the Ukraine war escalated .
 Boeing says it has halted major operations in its Moscow office and temporarily closed another office in Kyiv, Ukraine . Boeing said on Tuesday that it had stopped major operations.
 The company also said it had ceased providing parts, maintenance and technical support services to Russian airlines . The company said it also stopped providing parts and maintenance and support services .
 In recent days, countries around the world have imposed sanctions on Russian carriers . They are limiting their ability to use leased planes; fly over Western Europe; or buy spare parts .
 Boeing employs several thousand people in Russia, Ukraine and a handful of former Soviet states . The company has a major design center in Moscow .
 The company also runs a flight training campus and research and technology center in the city . The company has a joint venture in Russia with VSMPO-AVISMA, Boeing's largest titanium supplier .
 Boeing has been trying to diversify its titanium supply in recent years . It said it had enough of the metal on hand to keep making commercial aircraft in the near term .
 Ford is suspending its remaining operations in Russia indefinitely because of the invasion . Ford once had three plants in Russia .
 Ford shut down its three plants in Russia in 2019 as part of an effort to turn around its struggling European operation . Ford's three plants will be shut down in 2019.
 The videos show that parts of both five-floor buildings had collapsed, including a section roughly 65 feet wide .
 The buildings surround a large courtyard containing Pinocchio Kindergarten . The playground was also damaged .
 The country’s schools have been closed since Feb. The Ukrainian government says the country's schools are closed .
 Diplomats have been relocated to Lviv, near the border with Poland . They are working to evacuate Japanese nationals seeking to leave Ukraine .
 March 1, 2022 oO Michael D Shear and Niraj Chokshi v Russian aircraft will be banned from American airspace . U.S. officials say.
 Aeroflot airplanes at the Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow, Russia, on Tuesday . The airport is located in the capital city of Moscow .
 Mr Biden will announce the ban during his State of the Union address Tuesday evening . The ban is expected to be announced during the address .
Russian planes owned or registered by Russians would be banned from flying over the U.S. It would prohibit planes that are owned by Russians from flying in the United States .
 It was the latest coordinated effort by Mr Biden's administration and the NATO allies to inflict pain on President Vladimir V Putin and his closest supporters .
 It was not clear how quickly the ban, which was reported earlier by The Wall Street Journal, will be put in place .
 Mr Putin has already retaliated against the European ban by canceling flights from European airlines over Russian territory .
 The ban would prevent Aeroflot, Russia’s national airline, from making flights to the U.S. or from traveling over the United States .
 Aeroflot is the only Russian airline that flies between that country and the United States . The airline is based on flight information from Cirium .
 Russian airlines also have little need to traverse the skies over the United States to get to other destinations .
 Russia is widely expected to retaliate with a reciprocal ban, according to experts . It has imposed flight bans on dozens of other countries, including Russia .
 American Airlines, which had used Russian airspace en route to India, started rerouting flights before the war began .
 United Airlines says it has temporarily stopped flights to India and will avoid Russian airspace . United Airlines, which was similarly exposed, said on Tuesday that it will avoid Russia's airspace .
 Cargo carriers UPS and FedEx had already stopped deliveries to Russia . Ban on flying over the country could slow some shipments as flights are rerouted .
 The move is the latest in a series of steps Mr Biden has taken to punish Mr Putin . He has taken similar actions by his counterparts in Europe and Canada .
 The president issued Sanctions on a Russian-owned natural gas line last week . Germany took a similar action last week, days after Germany took similar action .
 The International Skating Union, figure skating's world governing body, said it would bar all Russian and Belarusian skaters from international events . The ban apparently will include the world championships later this month in France .
 Anna Shcherbakova is the Olympic women’s singles champion . She would be defending her 2021 world title .
 Kamila Valieva tested positive for a banned substance at the Winter Games . Russia has now dropped Russia not because of doping but in response to the country's invasion of Ukraine .
 The top tennis organizations will bar Russia and Belarus from team events . They will continue to allow their players to compete as individuals, though without national identification .
 Russian F1 driver Nikita Mazepin will be allowed to race for Haas under rules announced Tuesday by the Fédération Internationale de Automobile .
 The world governing body for track and field barred Russian and Belarusian athletes and officials from events for the foreseeable future . The World Athletics Championships will take place in Oregon, as well as the World Athletics Indoor Championships .
 The International Cycling Union bans teams from Russia and Belarus from international competition . The move is part of a broad range of measures announced on Tuesday .
 The measure will effectively shut down a professional team co-sponsored by Gazprom . Gazprom normally makes appearances in toplevel events such as the Giro d’Italia .
 These images are a visual documentation of a populace coping with the initial stages of an invasion, struggling with newfound uncertainty and fear .
 Farnaz Fassihi S E Iran’s supreme leader blames the U.S. for the conflict in Ukraine . Iran's supreme leader blamed the United States for the Ukraine conflict .
 Ayatollah Ali Khamenei blamed the U.S. for the current crisis in Ukraine in a live speech broadcast to his nation on Tuesday .
 Mr Khamenei, who considers Russia an Iranian ally, did not condemn President Vladimir V Putin for invasion of Ukraine .
 Iran has a general policy of opposing wars and invasions of sovereign States, he says . He calls for an end to the conflict in Ukraine .
 The United States created, thrived and fed on crises around the globe, he says . He compared the U.S. government to a collective mafia of weapons, economics and politics .
 Khamenei: U.S. interfered with Ukraine's domestic politics, fueling covert coups and so-called “color revolutions’ against pro-Russian leaders . Khamenei said that the United States sent its senators to participate in protests .
 The Islamic Republic has long been paranoid about foreign interference . It has cracked down on dissent and anti-government protesters by labeling them agents of foreign coups .
 The majority of the Iranian public is deeply suspicious of Russia’s motives in cozying up to Iran . The majority is against the invasion of Ukraine .
 In recent days, some Iranians have taken to social media and to the streets to protest Russia’s actions . Some Iranians are protesting Russia's actions .
Demonstrators chanted “Death to Putin’s supporters of Putin” at a rally in front of the Ukrainian Embassy in Tehran . The rally was in defiance of the government .
 The families held photos of the loved ones they lost and chanted, “Death to warmongers,’ and ‘Death to Putin and supporters of Putin.’ The Association of Families of the flight posted videos on social media accounts .
 The association said security forces had attacked the families and injured some of the parents of the victims .
 The Mirror Field monument is part of the Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Site, in Kyiv, Ukraine, last year . It is one of the largest Holocaust memorials in Ukraine .
 It was not clear to what extent the memorial was damaged by the strike . It is not clear what extent it was damaged .
 The memorial is close to Kyiv’s main radio and television tower in Kyiv, which was hit by a projectile .
 President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said at least five people were killed in the area . He said the death toll is expected to rise .
 The Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Center said that Russian forces had struck the site . The center did not describe whether there was damage .
 More than 33,000 Jews were killed at the site over a two-day period, according to historians .
Mass shootings, including of Roma people and Soviet prisoners of war, took place there throughout the war . In addition, mass shootings took place in the Soviet-Roma war .
 Yair Lapid, Israel’s foreign minister, said on Twitter that the country would help with repairing damage to the memorial . Israel's foreign minister said the country will help with repairs .
 The Holocaust Memorial Day Trust said it was “horrified’ to learn of the strike . The charity said it is ‘horrified' to learn about the strike.
 The massacre at Babyn Yar, also known as Babi Yar, took place in late September 1941 .
 Jews were told to gather near a train Station in Kyiv to be resettled . Soon after the German army entered Kyiv.
 Crowds were forced to undress and gather in a ravine, where they were shot .
 The Nazis wiped out nearly the entire Jewish population of Kyiv over the course of the war . The Nazis also wiped out almost all of the Jewish population .
 Last year, Mr Zelensky unveiled a modern art installation at the site .
 Lawmakers at a congressional hearing Tuesday discussed the possibilities of having American intelligence provide more direct assistance to the Ukrainian military . A Russian military column moving toward Kyiv.
 Using American covert intelligence operations to assist Ukraine was first raised at a hearing of the Senate Armed Services Committee by Roger Zakheim, the director of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation and Institute .
 Former general counsel for House Armed Services Committee says U.S. should use intelligence agency assets to covertly advise the Ukrainian military .
 An American president can authorize the C.I.A. to operate covertly in a conflict . U.S. officials have declined to comment on whether such options are under consideration .
 intelligence forces could continue advising Ukrainian forces as they had previously been doing before they were ordered to leave the country in mid February .
 The idea caught the interest of several lawmakers, including Senator Joe Manchin III, Democrat of West Virginia .
 U.S. should use intelligence forces to “sabotage the roads’ using either people on the ground or unmanned drones, says Zakheim .
 Other senators seemed at least intrigued by putting operatives closer to the front lines . But other senators seemed to be more interested in putting operatives on the ground .
 Senator Tom Cotton, Republican of Arkansas, said the U.S. should provide intelligence to help Ukraine strike at Russian forces . He suggested it should be American operatives working near or alongside the Ukrainian military .
Lawmakers discussed ways of increasing support for Ukrainians without making the U.S. a direct party to the conflict .
 Senator Ben Sasse says the U.S. should provide more intelligence to the Ukrainian military . Sasse is a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee .
 French authorities are working to identify and seize homes, luxury cars, yachts and other France-based assets held by Russian oligarchs targeted for European Union Sanctions . Russians close to President Vladimir V Putin who “might be hit’ by new penalties, Finance Minister Bruno Le
 French banks and insurance companies are combing through millions of accounts to identify Russians on the sanctions list . Members of their families and any holding companies may have set up to hide their identities, he said .
 As the E.U. has imposed harsh new sanctions stemming from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, France has been one area of focus . France is one of the countries that has been hit by the sanctions .
 The country has long been a destination for ultrawealthy Russians, who have flocked to buy villas on the French Riviera and yachts .
Lyudmila Aleksandrovna Ocheretnaya was spray painted with the Ukrainian flag and anti-Putin slogans . The front gates of a multimillion-dollar villa near Biarritz belong to Mr Putin’s former wife, Lyudmilla Ale
 Videos show Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine .
 Another video captures Russian military vehicles near a central roundabout in the city of Moscow . Another video shows a Russian military vehicle near a roundabout .
 Other footage, filmed a few miles away, shows Russian foot soldiers patrolling the streets .
 Ukraine’s emergency services agency said on its Facebook page that two residential buildings in Kherson had been damaged by projectiles . Four people were injured in the incident, the agency said .
Kherson’s mayor, Igor Kolykhaev, wrote that Kherson was ‘still Ukraine’ and that Russian forces had not captured the city . Kheron’S mayor said Tuesday morning that he was still Ukraine .
 Glenn Thrush and Peter Baker will attend the State of the Union as Jill Biden's guest . Ukraine's ambassador to the U.S. to the United States will also attend the event .
 Oksana Markarova has emerged as an outspoken critic of President Vladimir V Putin of Russia . U.S. lawmakers consider President Biden's request for $6. billion in emergency funding to address the crisis .
 Ms. Biden said in a Twitter post that she and the president were “honored to welcome”
 Oksana Markarova, Ambassador of Ukraine to the United States, to sit with me and @SecondGentleman for the State of the Union . Markarov is the ambassador of Ukraine for the U.S.
 Ukraine is close to running short of Javelin and Stinger antitank missiles, she said . She was last there on Monday, pleading with senators for increased military aid .
 Biden's guest list includes a roster of Americans selected to illustrate his long list of other policy priorities .
National consensus on the coronavirus response, promoting his infrastructure law and reviving his stalled social spending bill . Also reassuring a jittery public that he has a plan to tackle rising inflation .
 Inviting a foreign national as a guest to the annual speech, while unusual, is not without precedent . Inviting foreign national to the speech is unusual, but not without precede .
 President George W Bush invited officials and activists from Afghanistan and Iraq after the U.S. invaded those countries in the early 2000s .
 Among them were the Afghan leader Hamid Karzai in 2002, and in 2005, the Iraqi human rights activist Safia Taleb al-Suhail .
 Melania Trump hosted Juan Guaido of Venezuela, a leading political opponent of that country's autocratic leader .
 At the time, Mr Trump was seeking to show his opposition to socialism and leftist governments .
 Ukraine’s independence is increasingly embraced by the two major parties in the United States, which can agree on little else .
 A group of refugees, including young children, crossed the border to escape Ukraine fighting .
 Sberbank, a Russian banking group, had been paying Venable $20,000 a month to lobby on sanctions-related bills .
 Sberbank says “Venable no longer represents Sber Bank’s. But a firm spokesman confirmed that the firm is no longer represented by the bank .
 VTB Bank, another Russian financial firm, paid Sidley Austin about the same sum last year for similar work .
 VTB has dropped VTB “in compliance with United States Sanctions,’ a Sidley representative said . But the firm has dropped the firm’s VTB.
 Mercury Public Affairs dropped Sovcombank, McLarty Inbound no longer represents investors in Europe’s Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline . Two lobbying firms, Roberti Global and BGR Government Affairs, cut ties with Russian company behind Nord Stream .
Some of the new sanctions have made it illegal to engage in transactions with particular Russian firms . Some of the sanctions have also been made illegal to deal with particular firms .
 Alfa Bank was founded by the Ukrainian-Russian oligarch Mikhail Fridman . But the Treasury Department hit other institutions with lesser sanctions .
 Skadden Arps has helped Alfa Bank obtain dozens of subpoenas for documents and depositions . The bank is investigating data scientists who raised concerns during the 2016 campaign about internet data . They said they suggested links between the Trump Organization and the bank .
 Skadden Arps did not respond to emails and phone messages asking about firm's intentions .
 Skadden lawyers have not withdrawn from the Alfa Bank litigation, but dockets show that they have not pulled out of the litigation . But dockets shows that Skadden has not withdrawn.
 Ukraine's government has enacted martial law, requiring men to stay in the country and either join the fight or face the prospect of conscription . As the Russian assault has intensified, Ukraine’s government has instituted martial law .
 Eugene, an I.T. worker from the northeastern city of Kharkiv, Tigran, an animator who tried to cross the border into Poland, and Andrew, who signed up for the territorial defense force two weeks ago .
 S r March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood .
 A large explosion struck central Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, on Tuesday . A huge fireball appeared in a video to engulf cars driving through an area called Freedom Square .
 The cause of the blast and number of casualties are not immediately clear . The city's mayor said there were dead and wounded .
 CCTV footage captured what appeared to be a rocket striking directly in front of the building . CCTV footage of the attack captured what appears to be an attack .
 Video of the aftermath showed a large crater in the middle of the city’s cobble-stoned central square .
 The blast hit around 8m., about two hours after the city’s curfew had been lifted, an adviser says . The blast struck about 8m. The blast occurred about two hour after the curfew had lifted, the adviser says.
 Ukraine's emergency services agency says it appeared to damage the administrative building . The opera house, the philharmonic theater and part of a large apartment block were also damaged .
 The explosion came a day after Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv . At least nine people were killed, including a family of five who were burned alive in their car, mayor says .
 Aiter the capital, Kyiv, no Ukrainian city has suffered more attacks from the Russian military than Kharkiv since the invasion .
 The city of 1. million people is not far from the Russian border, and most residents prefer to speak Russian .
 Mr Terekhov posts daily video updates about the destruction in Russian . At times he seems on the verge of tears .
 Military analysts are divided over whether Russian forces hope to occupy Kharkiv or simply surround it .
 Ukraine's forces have been fighting Russian-backed separatists for eight years . The goal appears to be to cut off the bulk of Ukraine’s forces, which are mostly deployed in the east .
Until this week, Russian troops had been pounding outlying areas with artillery but had largely avoided attacking the city center . Until this week.
 A seemingly haphazard effort by what appeared to be Russian special forces to enter central Kharkiv over the weekend was easily repelled . Ukrainian military captured several Russian soldiers and their vehicles .
Since the war began, residents of Kharkiv have been living in bomb shelters . Many of them in the city's metro stations have been parked to serve as makeshift hostels .
 If Russian forces expected to be greeted as liberators, they would have been sorely mistaken .
 She said that in phone calls to her counterparts asking for support for Ukraine she had received pushback . She said she had gotten pushback from her counterparts .
 Many nuclear power reactors in Ukraine are no longer producing electricity. E March 1, 2022 William J Broad S Many Nuclear power reactors are in Ukraine .
 A photo from 2008 of the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power complex of six reactors in the town of Enerhodar, in eastern Ukraine .
 Six of Ukraine's 15 working nuclear reactors have stopped sending power into the nation’s electrical grid . A high rate of disconnection compared with routine operations before the Russian invasion .
 The reduction in output might result from the war’s interference with operation of the plants, which require a wealth of industrial supplies .
 The cutbacks, Western experts say, may spiral into rolling blackouts that could further cripple the beleaguered country . The cuts could be the result of the cuts, they say .
 Ukraine has four sprawling complexes in different parts of the country that host its 15 operational reactors . Ukraine has a total of 15 reactors in the country .
 The disconnections are being reported by the State Nuclear Regulatory Inspectorate of Ukraine, which is in Kyiv and files daily updates .
 All of Ukraine’s nuclear reactors are sending power into the electrical grid, according to reports .
 individual reactors go offline for maintenance and other purposes . It is not unusual for individual reactors to go off for maintenance or other purposes.
 The inspectorate’s updates give bare-bones facts and no reasons for the outages .
 The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power facility in eastern Ukraine is the site with the most reactors offline . The most reactors in Ukraine are offline .
 The site is the largest nuclear reactor complex in not only Ukraine but Europe . Three of its six reactors are currently generating no electricity . The site in Ukraine is the biggest in Europe .
 The International Atomic Energy Agency says Russian forces are advancing close to Zaporizhzhia . The agency sets safety standards for the world’s nuclear reactors .
 Videos verified by The Times show bodies and damaged buildings next to a TV tower that was struck on Tuesday in Kyiv by what is believed to be a Russian projectile .
 Ukrainian authorities say at least five people were killed and five injured in the attack . Ukrainian authorities released a statement saying that at least 5 people were dead .
 Apple pulled RT News and Sputnik News apps from its App Store outside Russia . Apple said it had paused sale of all of its products in Russia .
 It's the latest tech company to pull back from Russian operations in response to the invasion of Ukraine .
 The British government announced measures directed at Belarus for involvement in Russia’s invasion of Ukraine . The measures include sanctions on four senior defense officials and two military enterprises .
 Russian troops launched an attack on an air defense base in Mariupol, Ukraine, on Thursday .
 Russia's military strategy in Ukraine is to enable separatist forces it backs in eastern Ukraine to link up and join forces with fighters from the Russian-annexed Crimean peninsula to the southwest .
 Moscow needs to seize control of the port city of Mariupol . To make that plan work, Moscow must take control of Mari upol .
 Russian-backed forces are advancing from two directions on the historic southern Ukrainian city . The city lies on the Sea of Azov near the Russian border and has a population of around 430,000 .
 Denis Pushlin, a separatist leader in eastern Ukraine, said his forces aimed to encircle Mariupol . Russia’s state-run RIA Novosti news agency reported that Pushlin said that his forces aim to encirle Mari upol .
 Mariupol’s fall would clear the way for the pro-Russian soldiers in Crimea to join up with the separatist forces, analysts say . The separatist forces have been fighting Ukrainian government forces since 2014 .
 Russia would be able to take control of the Sea of Azov and its rich industrial infrastructure . At the same time, Ukraine’s army east of the Dnieper River could face encirclement .
 An enormous main radio and explosion hit the television tower in the city’s central square .
 Kyiv Okirtyrka Kharkiv Intense fightin critical port cit lacks heat anc electricity . The port cit is located in the city of Kyiv, Ukraine .
 Intense fighting for a critical port city that lacks heat and electricity . The port city is in a critical state of crisis .
 He referred to Mr Putin's wider aims to extend Russia’s territorial reach . Mr Putin referred to his wider aims.
 Russian forces have also attacked the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, from the north and east, as well as the country's second-largest city, Kharkiv .
 Mariupol is a “strategic objective’ for Moscow, says Stuart Crawford, a defense analyst . It acts as a rail and road communications point as well as being a port, Crawford says .
 Ukrainian forces have so far defended cities fiercely. He said that taking Mariupol might not be easy despite Russia’s superiority in numbers and armaments .
 An initial attempt to take control of the city via an amphibious landing was thwarted, Ukrainian officials said . Ukrainian officials say .
 Russian forces landed about 70 kilometers, or 43 miles, from Mariupol, a Pentagon official says . The landing is a sign of risk-averse behavior by Moscow, the Pentagon says .
 The distance allowed the Russians extra time and space to organize an invasion force, an official said .
 Satellite imagery from Monday shows part of a Russian military convoy, stretching approximately 40 miles, on a road heading towards Ukraine's capital, Kyiv .
 Satellite images show a military convoy stretching 40 miles long on a roadway north of Kyiv . A number of homes and buildings are seen burning nearby .
 Experts fear the convoy could be used to encircle and cut off the capital or to launch a full-on assault . The convoy includes supply and armored attack vehicles, which are used to carry out attacks .
 Ukrainian military has air power and missiles capable of striking convoy . Its abilities are limited, according to the Ukrainian military .
Targeting such a long convoy would present its own challenges, as well as risk inciting Russia to retaliate . Targeting such an attack would present a challenge to Russia, which would also present challenges .
 He noted that the Russian military is likely defending the convoy aggressively . He said that the Russians are likely to be more aggressive .
 Ukrainian commanders are waiting to engage the armored vehicles until they enter Kyiv, where they could be more easily destroyed . neighborhoods could provide plenty of hiding places and protection for soldiers firing anti-tank missiles .
 Experts cautioned that it was still too early to tell the convoy’s exact purpose . It was also possible that the convoy could be used as part of a pincer movement to cut off the northeast .
 Russia appeared to be adapting its initial Strategy, say officials . But they said that Russia seemed to be adapting its initial strategy .
 Kremlin leaders wrongly assumed Ukrainian forces would suffer a swift defeat against a Superior Russian military . Russian forces could quickly take major cities without much fighting .
 Russian forces were stalled by stiff resistance from both Ukraine’s military and citizens who took up arms .
 Cloud cover has made it difficult to get a continuous or complete view of the area or a clear sense of the convoy’s movement .
 It was not clear whether the buildings and homes seen burning had been attacked . It is not clear if the buildings or homes were attacked .
 The convoy is dotted along a roadway that stretches from Antonov airport to the north toward the village of Prybirsk . Maxar Technologies released images of the convoy .
 Boulégue's assessment is made up of miles upon miles of heavy artillery . It includes food supply trucks for soldiers and fuel for vehicles .
 Some vehicles are spaced far apart from one another, while in some sections two or three military vehicles are moving alongside each other across the road .
 Mr Kagan said it was notable that the convoy was not made up entirely of attack vehicles .
 A Pentagon official said Tuesday that Russian forces had been plagued by shortages of fuel, food and spare parts . The official said on Tuesday that the Russian forces were plagued by fuel shortages .
 Mr Kagan said a number of trucks in the column likely contained such essential supplies to avoid more logistical problems .
 Russia didn’t appear to have built up a logistical base before an attack was launched, says Mr Kagan .
 Russia's incursion failed to quickly capture the capital, he said . That helped to explain why Russia’s incursion had failed to capture the city, he added .
 President Vladimir V Putin had spent at least months preparing for an invasion . He said it was unusual for an invading force to persist several days into an invasion.
 Mr Kagan said the outcome of the battle was not a forgone conclusion . Ukraine’s forces and civilians had shown unexpected resilience, he said .
 Russia's Latin American allies have distanced themselves from President Vladimir V Putin's war in Ukraine . Even his staunchest diplomatic supporters appear concerned about the consequences of the cataclysmic invasion of a neighbor .
 The governments of Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela have all blamed the United States and NATO for stoking tensions in Ukraine and disregarding Russia's security interests .
 Cuba, Bolivia and Venezuela have called for a diplomatic resolution to the crisis . Cuba, Venezuela, Cuba and Bolivia, in official statements, call for diplomatic resolution .
 President Nicolas Maduro of Venezuela and his Nicaraguan counterpart, Daniel Ortega, both spoke to Mr Putin by telephone by telephone in the days before the invasion .
 Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela have all relied on Russian support in their defiance of the United States . They are some of Mr Putin's most ardent international allies .
 All three have touted Russian investment as an antidote to the economic pain inflicted on them by U.S. sanctions . All three say Russian investment is an antidote.
 Cuba has long relied on Russian tourism for foreign revenue . It is likely to fall dramatically following the collapse of Russia’s currency and international restrictions .
 Maduro has used Russia’s banking system to bypass American sanctions . He has continued exporting oil and importing basic goods to Venezuela .
 Russia’s dramatic exclusion from the international financial system will likely complicate this trade, wrote the Venezuelan economist Asdrutbal Oliveros .
 Mr Putin sought to further expand Russia’s influence in Latin America . Earlier this year, he sought to build ties in the region to countries like Brazil and Argentina .
 President Jair Bolsonaro visited Moscow just days before the invasion . He said Brazil stood in “solidarity’ with Russia, though he didn't clarify what that meant .
 Mr Bolsonaro said Brazil must remain neutral in the conflict because of the potential economic fallout . He said Brazil's dependence on Russia for fertilizers could be to blame for the conflict .
 A popular mapping tool is under a denial-of-service attack. S 2 March 1, 2022 Christiaan Triebert.
 It was set up in 2014 by software developers and journalists as protests gripped Ukraine . It has since expanded to track other conflict zones, including in Afghanistan and Gaza .
 Russia has deployed its military might to try to bring Ukraine into its orbit and decapitate the Ukrainian government .
 Ukrainian officials are also concerned that Russia might seek to destabilize the country through cyberwarfare . But Ukrainian officials also fear Russia might try to destabilise the country by cyberwarning .
 Ukraine's ambassador to Belgium, Mykola Tochytskyi, applauded after a video address by the country’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, during a special plenary session in Brussels .
 President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine this week asked for his country to join the European Union . The European Union has helped preserve peace in Europe for decades .
 Ukraine's president submitted a formal application for Ukraine’s admission into the union . The union is headquartered in Brussels, the Belgian capital .
 Joining the bloc is a painstaking and arduous process that can take as long as a decade . Joining a bloc can take up to a decade and can take a decade.
 Poland made a formal request to join the bloc in 1994 and was finally admitted in 2004 . Poland, for example, made an initial request in 1994, but was finally admitting in 2004.
 To join, all E.U. member states need to approve the country's candidacy to be unanimously approved by all .
 More than 80,000 pages of rules and regulations on everything from environmental standards to food hygiene rules . E.U. must also make its political system, judiciary and economy compatible with bloc .
 One senior E.U. official explained that it can take as long as 18 months to evaluate a country’s application before it goes to member countries .
 Sweden and Finland managed to join the Union in a few years aiter applying . A speedy approach to fast-tracking is rare, but a speedy approach is rare .
 Albania, Bosnia and Serbia have been waiting for years to join, making it difficult for the E.U. to move faster on Ukraine . Other countries, including Bosnia, Serbia and Albania, have also waited for years .
 The E.U. also has expansion fatigue after being buffeted by economic crises, Brexit and the pandemic, as well as the misbehavior of member countries like Hungary .
 Ukraine hasn’t been made an official candidate, but rather has an association agreement with the E.U., signed in 2014 and concluded in 2017 . It agreed to intensify economic and political ties with the bloc .
 Ukrainians have been ardent in wanting to forge closer links with Europe . In 2013, hundreds of thousands of them took to the streets to protest when Viktor F Yanukovych backtracked on signing an association agreement .
 Russia's aggression has engendered an outpouring of solidarity in the bloc, drawing some of the toughest sanctions in its history . Ukraine's E.U. hopes, Russia’s aggression, has engender an outpour of solidarity.
 Poland and the Baltics have been among the most enthusiastic in backing Ukraine’s membership . East and central European countries like Poland and Baltics lived for decades behind the Iron Curtain .
 Most Europeans welcomed the E.U’s eastward expansion in May 2004, when the bloc admitted 10 mostly former Communist countries . It cemented the demise of the Soviet bloc, and helped spread economic and political liberalism across the continent .
 The European Union’s ability to offer membership to a country has been one of its greatest foreign policy tools in the post-Cold-War world .
 The prospect of joining Bulgaria and Romania to tackle corruption and accelerated the arrest of war criminals in Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro . The prospect has been motivated by the prospect of joined Bulgaria, Romania and Bulgaria .
 Ukraine's E.U. membership process is likely to be gradual, the country's attempt to forge closer ties with NATO and the European Union underlines that President Vladimir V Putin’s attempt to bring Ukraine back into Russia's orbit appears to be having the opposite effect .
 Ukraine's vice prime minister says cyberwar between Ukraine and Russia is escalating . Mr Kozyrev was first head of Russian diplomacy following the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Russia's foreign ministry says the country is facing a major increase in cyber attacks . Earlier on Monday, Russia’s foreign ministry said the country was facing a big increase in attacks .
 Monika Pronczuk and Ruth Maclean Africans say Ukrainian authorities hindered them from fleeing . They say they were hindered by Ukrainian authorities .
 Africans who had been living in Ukraine say they were stuck for days at crossings into neighboring European Union countries . Ukrainian authorities pushed them to the ends of long lines and beat them, while letting Ukrainians through .
 At least 660,000 people have fled Ukraine in the five days following the start of Russia’s invasion, the U.N. refugee agency says .
 Most are Ukrainians, but some are students or migrant workers from Africa, Asia and other regions who are also desperate to escape . Most are Ukrainian, but many are students and migrants from Africa and Asia .
 Chineye Mbagwu, 24, from Nigeria, said she had spent more than two days stranded at the Poland border crossing . The guards let Ukrainians cross but blocked foreigners .
 African Union and President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria have condemned the treatment of Africans fleeing Ukraine .
 Africans have also reported being barred from boarding trains headed to the border . Africans have been barred from board trains headed for the border.
 Ukraine’s deputy interior minister, Anton Heraschenko, denied that his country was obstructing foreigners from leaving .
 He says he will release all foreigners without hindrance . He adds that he will also release all foreign nationals without hindance .
 Martin Mpofu, a student from Zimbabwe living in Ukraine, is helped to walk by his brother, Maneedi, and Hatim Redouani, 27, from Morocco . The pair are from the small Polish town of Medyka .
 Mbagwu, the Nigerian doctor, managed to reach Warsaw, but said she crossed the border only by struggling and pushing her way through .
Medical student's brother, 21, had been blocked at the border since Friday, but made it into Poland after four days of trying . Her 21-year-old brother, a medical student, has been blocked since Friday .
 Not all foreigners reported ill treatment by Ukrainian authorities at the border crossings .
 Pakistani student and an Afghan national who crossed from Ukraine into Poland said the only problem was long lines .
 Vietnamese workers crossed easily into Moldova on Monday. And a group of Vietnamese workers cross easily into the country .
 Moroccan pharmacy student traveled from Ukrainian city of Odessa to Warsaw . Mohammed Saadaoul, 23, said he did not have any problems .
 The International Organization of Migration estimated that there are more than 470,000 foreign nationals in Ukraine . There are a large number of overseas students and migrant workers .
 At least 6,000 of them have arrived in Moldova and Slovakia alone over the past five days, according to the I.O.M., and many more have crossed into Poland .
 Many of the foreigners fleeing Ukraine said they were warmly welcomed in neighboring Poland, Moldova, Hungary and Romania . Many said they had been welcomed in other countries such as Romania and Moldova .
 Nigerian President Buhari says Polish officials refused Nigerians entry .
So far, “problems were on the Ukrainian side,’s Piotr Bystrianin, head of the Ocalenie Foundation, a Polish refugee charity, said .
 Makeshift accommodation is being set up across the country . Poles are transporting Ukrainians through the border, hosting them in their homes, feeding and clothing them .
 Poland's ambassador to the U.N. Krzysztof Szczerski said his country welcomed all foreign students studying in Ukraine . He invited them to continue their studies in Poland .
 In the years leading up to the Russian invasion, Poland had taken a hard line on migrants trying to enter the country .
 The army and border guards have pushed asylum seekers from the Middle East and Africa back into Belarus .
 aid organizations say a 26-year-old man from Yemen froze to death at that border . Last week, aid organizations said a man was killed at the border .
 Some of the foreigners arriving in Poland from Ukraine over the past few days were exhausted and freezing, aid organizations say .
 All foreign nationals, including Africans, Israelis, Canadians and Americans, were told to go to one gate at the Medyka crossing . Ukrainians were allowed to pass freely through another gate .
 Ghanaian medical student Dennis Nana Appiah Nkansah saw the same discrimination at the crossing from Ukraine into the Romanian town of Siret .
 Zambians, Namibians, Moroccans, Indians and Pakistanis were directed to one gate that was mostly closed . Another reserved for Ukrainians was open and people flowed through .
 Over three hours, four or five foreigners were allowed to leave, he says . There was a “massive influx’ of Ukrainians crossing, he said .
 Mr Nkansah, 31, said he had organized 74 Ghanaian and Nigerian students to pitch in and hire a bus to flee together . He said he has organized 74 students from Ghana and Nigeria to travel together .
 They reached the border early Saturday morning, he said, but it took them 24 hours to cross over . It took them to reach the border, he says .
 He said he was in a group with two other Moroccans and many other Africans . He asked a Ukrainian border guard to let them through . He said they were in the group and he asked the border guard for help .
 The guard started firing his gun in the air to scare them and so they stepped back . The guard then started firing the gun to scare the people away .
 He said the Romanians were taking good care of him and other foreigners . He said they were providing them with food and other necessities .
 Abdi Latif Dahir and Valerie Hopkins from Kyiv, Ukraine, Ben Novak from Zahony and Beregsurany, Hungary and Aida Alami from Rabat, Morocco .
 Advisory to Indians in Kyiv All Indian nationals including students are advised to leave Kyiv urgently today .
 The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday .
 A large fireball appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through the area . The explosion hit central Kharkiv .
 The blast hit at about 8m., two hours after the city’s curfew had lifted, an advisor to Ukraine's interior minister says . The blast struck at about eightm., 2 hours after curfew had been lifted .
 It was not immediately clear if there were any injuries or what caused the blast . It is not yet clear if any injuries have been caused .
 France’s foreign minister: “If I were an oligarch, in Russia or France, I’d be worried,” Jean-Yves Le Drian says .
 Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrol a strategic city in southern Ukraine .
 New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified’ The mayor of Ukraine said that Kherson was ‘still Ukraine’ and that Russian forces had not captured the city
 The South Korean government will donate $10 million worth of humanitarian aid to the Ukrainian government and refugees . South Korea will donate the aid to Ukraine in 2022 .
 Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood .
 Kyiv has suffered more attacks from the Russian military than Kharkiv since the invasion . The Ukrainian capital, Kyiv, has been hit by more attacks since the Russian invasion .
 The move would violate bitcoin’s “libertarian values, which strongly favor individualism and human rights, Jesse Powell said on Twitter . There is a legal requirement to do so, he said .
 About 35 people, including Lena Honchar and her 2-month-old daughter, Veronika, are living at School Number 5 in Vinnytsia .
 The wax sculpture was vandalized by visitors over the weekend, the museum's general manager says .
 A sculpture was removed over current events, he said . It was the first time in the museum's history that a sculpture was taken over the current events .
 Some Russian troops are surrendering or sabotaging vehicles rather than fighting, a Pentagon official says .
 Pro-Russian troops in the separatist-controlled settlement of Mykolaivka, Ukraine, on Tuesday . The Ukrainian army has been fighting pro-Russian forces in the region .
 Some Russian troops in Ukraine have surrendered en masse or sabotaged their own vehicles to avoid fighting, a Pentagon official says .
 Some entire Russian units have laid down their arms without a fight after confronting a stiff Ukrainian defense, a Russian official says .
 A significant number of Russian troops are young conscripts who are poorly trained and ill-prepared for the all-out assault .
 In some cases, Russian troops have deliberately punched holes in their vehicles’ gas tanks, a Russian official says .
 The Pentagon official declined to say how the military made these assessments . The intelligence includes statements from captured Russian soldiers and communications intercepts .
 The official spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss operational developments . The official said he was speaking to the official to discuss operations .
 Russian forces have come to a near crawl in the past day or two, U.S. officials say . The 40-mile convoy of tanks and armored vehicles near Kyiv, UkKraine’s capital, has come to an ominous 40- miles .
 Russian commanders may be "regrouping and rethinking" their battle plans, a Pentagon official says . U.S. intelligence and military officials say there is an inevitable push in the next several days to encircle and capture the capital .
Analysts have been struck by the “risk-averse behavior’ of such a large force, the Pentagon official says . The Pentagon official said.
 Russia launched an amphibious landing to seize Mariupol, a pivotal port city on the Sea of Azov, but landed forces around 40 miles from the city . Russia launched the landing in a bid to seize the port city .
 The Russians had extra time and space to mount an invasion, but also gave the city’s defenders time to prepare .
 Russia’s vaunted air force has yet to gain air superiority over Ukraine . Russian warplanes thwarted by Ukrainian fighter jets and a surprisingly resilient array of air defenses, Pentagon official says .
For Russian forces coming out of Belarus, logistics problems have proved stubborn, a European official says . For Russian forces.
 U.S. and British intelligence had raised questions about the supply chain for the Russian troops in Belarus .
 Some soldiers were getting inadequate supplies of food and fuel during military exercises, analysts say . Some soldiers got inadequate supplies.
 American officials told allies that the Russians had fixed those problems by mid-February, a European official says . American warnings about the invasion intensified in the middle of last month, the official said .
 Russian forces have faced challenges that have not been resolved, a European official says . But the challenges that Russian forces face show that their supply chain troubles are not completely resolved, the official said .
 The logistics failures may help explain the presence of the long, slow-moving convoy of military equipment that is coming toward Kyiv, a European official says . The long convoy is presenting a key target for the Ukrainian military, the European official said .
 Russian officials are expected to have secured air supremacy around Kyiv, a European official says .
 Ukrainian air defense systems are still operating in Ukraine . Both Russian aircraft and the convoy of equipment are still in danger .
 The German subsidiary of the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline has ceased operations . Germany mothballed the $11billion undersea link over Russia’s attack on neighboring Ukraine .
 The pipeline's operator, Nord Stream 2 AG, is owned by Gazprom, Russia’s natural gas company, but based in Switzerland .
 Switzerland’s economy minister told local television on Monday that all the employees at Nord Stream 2's headquarters had been dismissed .
Fassihi South Africa’s ambassador to the United Nations, Mathu Joyini, called for reform at the Security Council . He was addressing the General Assembly's special session on Ukraine . The General Assembly is in a special session.
 She said other conflicts around the world deserved as much global attention as Ukraine . She said the Ukraine conflict deserves as much attention as the Ukraine .
 U.S. Secretary of State Antony J Blinken will attend in person and also meet with E.U. officials . He will also visit Moldova and the three Baltic nations .
 March 1, 2022 Nick Cumming-Bruce U.N. asks for $1. billion for emergency needs in Ukraine .
 S Volunteers filling sand bags at a marina in Odessa, Ukraine, on Tuesday .
 Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine .
 An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood . The explosion happened in a neighborhood in the middle of a neighborhood .
 Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine .
 The main radio and TV tower is hit by projectile, with other explosions nearby . The tower's main radio, TV tower was hit by a projectile .
 Other videos captured at least two more explosions in the immediate area next to the tower .
 Television channels would be off the air temporarily because broadcasting hardware related to the communications tower was damaged . Ukraine's Interior Ministry said in a statement on Facebook .
 The tower, northwest of the city center, stands near the Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Site, where during World War II the Nazis shot tens of thousands of Jews, Roma, Ukrainian and Russian prisoners of war .
 Ukrainian refugees in Moldova have been living in the country for more than a decade . They are now living in Ukraine in the Moldova region .
 In Palanca, Moldova, a refugee camp of 30 tents was built to help incoming Ukrainian refugees . The camp is near the Ukrainian border about two hours west of Odessa .
 refugees can stay warm and organize before they move on to buses or are picked up by friends or relatives . At the camp, refugees are able to stay warm, organize before moving to buses .
 Customs agents are on hand to help — or carry — refugees across the border .
 Ukrainians, some pushing prams on foot and driving sport cars, lined up for hours in the snow to enter Moldova on Tuesday morning .
 International Energy Agency says member countries have agreed to release 60 million barrels of oil from emergency reserves . Oil prices are expected to rise to well above $100 a barrel .
 The IEA said that the release would provide the equivalent of 2 million barrels a day, or about 2 percent of global consumption, for 30 days . The release was the fourth in its history .
 The top U.S. diplomat questions whether Russia should remain on the U.N. human rights council . The top United States diplomat questions Russia's human rights status .
 The United States’ top diplomat pointedly questioned whether Russia should remain on the United Nations’ human rights council . He also criticized those who have sought to portray Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine as a conflict in which both sides bear responsibility .
 The Indian government said about 12,000 of the country’s citizens have managed to leave Ukraine . An estimated 20,000 were stranded in the country when the Russian invasion began .
 Half of the remaining 8,000 are in areas of conflict, India’s foreign secretary Harsh Vardhan Shringla said . The other half have made it to or were on the way to Ukraine's western borders .
 China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, spoke to his counterpart in Ukraine, Dmytro Kuleba . Wang Yi called on Russia and Ukraine to seek a negotiated settlement and expressed concern about the harm to civilians .
 China's public stance appeared to be part of an effort to distance Beijing from explicit support for the Russian invasion .
Personal security guard for Gennadiy Trukhanov, Odessa's mayor, walked a patrol .
 Geneva Secretary of State Antony J Blinken says Russia should be held to account for human rights abuses in its invasion of Ukraine . U.N. Human Rights Council said Russia should have been held to blame for its invasion .
 America's first statement to the council in Geneva since it returned this year as a full member . Mr Blinken questioned Russia’s fitness for council membership .
 The Russian Defense Ministry warned on Tuesday that it planned to conduct strikes against facilities belonging to Ukraine’s security service and a special operations unit in Kyiv . It urged people in the Surrounding areas to leave .
 The warning reflected the growing Russian threat against the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv . The warning reflects the growing threat against Ukraine .
 The ministry said it planned to conduct “high-precision’ strikes against the facilities belonging to Ukraine’s security service and a special military information operations unit .
 People living near unspecified communication facilities should leave their homes . It did not list the locations, but said that people living near unnamed communication facilities must leave .
 The ministry said it had observed a vast increase in the number of attacks against Russian state institutions . President Vladimir V Putin ordered the launch of a “special military operation’s’ in Ukraine last week .
 Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine .
 The Council suspended Russia’s representation rights last week . But decisions of the European Court of Human Rights remain legally binding on Russian government .
 Daria Kliuieva returned to Ukraine via the Medyka border crossing with Poland on Tuesday .
 Ukrainians are making their way home as Russia uses increasingly aggressive tactics in its invasion of Ukraine .
 She graduated in 2019 from a military school in Kharkiv, requiring her to enlist during a time of crisis . She graduated from the school in 2019 .
 Kliuieva, originally from Kakhovka, moved to Poland six months ago after landing a job cleaning rooms in a hotel in Gdansk .
 Her plan, she said, had been to save enough money to purchase an apartment back home in Kharkiv . She said her plan, which she said was to save money, was to buy an apartment.
 A picture of Daria Kliuieva’s relatives hiding in a Daria. KliUieva returning to Ukraine on Tuesday .
 Kliuieva was driven to Medyka by a 35-year-old carpenter, Artem Zhebrovskyl, also Ukrainian, who had taken a few days off from his day job in Gdansk .
 Kliuieva had responded to a post he put on a Ukrainian community Facebook group . He had offered to Shuttle people to the border .
 Another young woman was hoping to retrieve her family. They were joined by another young woman who was hoping for her family .
 Kliuieva showed a photo on her phone of her cousins, four young children, bundled in jackets and blankets, sitting in the basement bunker of their home in Kakhovka . KliUieva shows a photo of the four children sitting in
 Mr Zhebrokvskyi found another man, from Canada, who was driving to Lviv to retrieve his mother . He offered to give her a ride .
 Antony J Blinken criticized foreign diplomats who have portrayed Russia’s invasion as a conflict in which all sides bear responsibility .
 The French finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, backpedaled on his declaration earlier Tuesday that Europe was ready to wage a “total economic and financial war against Russia’s. Former Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev of Russia responded with a warning .
 Adults and children were stringing fabric together to make camouflage nets to send off to help Ukrainian soldiers .
 The first air-raid alarm of the night went off. Not long after I talked to the volunteers there, the first alarm went off . "Not long after we talked to them, it went off"
There are usually two to three minutes between alarms, though it varies . There are usually 2 to 3 minutes between alarm alarms .
 About 660,000 refugees have fled Ukraine in the last six days, an increase of more than 150,000 in the past 24 hours . About 600,000 people have fled the country in just six days .
 TotalEnergies owns 19 percent of Novatek . The company has developed a large liquefied natural gas facility on the Yamal peninsula in northern Russia .
 TotalEnergies, the French oil company with large natural gas investments in Russia, said it would no longer provide capital for new projects in the country in response to the invasion.
 BP, Shell and Equinor had said in recent days that they would exit their Russian investments . But its announcement stopped short of following BP and Shell, which had said earlier this week that it would exit Russian investments.
 TotalEnergies has played a Key role in developing Russia’s capabilities in liquefied natural gas .
 TotalEnergies continued to forge ahead in Russia after the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . Western sanctions prompted Western sanctions .
 Pressure may continue for the company to further disengage from Moscow . Now pressure may continue to continue to pressure the company.
 TotalEnergies said in its statement that it would implement sanctions put in place by Europe “regardless of the consequences’ for its activities in Russia .
 TotalEnergies has a large stake in the state-of-the art Yamal LNG facility in the Russian Arctic . The facility shipped its first cargoes in 2017 .
 Gas from the Yamal facility is important to the French giant’s status as a major producer and distributor of LNG . Gas consumption is expected to grow strongly in the coming decade .
 The Yamal facility is controlled by Novatek, a Russian gas company . TotalEnergies holds a 19. percent stake in the Yamal plant .
 partners are planning another giant LNG project called Arctic LNG-2 across the Gulf of Ob from Yamal . The partners are also planning a giant Lng-2 in the Gulf.
 Shell said on Monday that it would exit its joint ventures with Gazprom, the Russian natural gas giant . BP said it would sell its nearly 20 percent stake in Rosneft .
 The decision puts pressure on Exxon Mobil, which has a sizable Russian project, to back away from their oil ventures .
 The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday .
 The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday .
 The explosion comes a day aiter Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv, killing at least nine people, including a family of five, according to the city’s mayor, Igor Terekhov .
 The explosion comes a day aiter Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv, killing at least nine people . A family of five was burned alive in their car, according to the city's mayor .
 Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia's attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified’s actions as those of a bully .
 The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday . The embassy had earlier said that it was helping more than 2,000 people leave the country .
 The explosion comes a day aiter Russian forces shelled a residential neighborhood in Kharkiv, killing at least nine people . A family of five was burned alive in their car, according to the city’s mayor .
 Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia's attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified’s actions as those of a bully . Livia Albeck-Ripka Prime Minister JacindaArdern described Vladimir V Putin's actions as �
 Ukraine's minister of digital transformation has asked all major crypto exchanges to block Russian addresses . Mykhailo Fedorov, Ukraine's Minister of Digital transformation, had asked for all major exchanges to blocks Russian addresses.
 Asia Pacific markets opened mostly higher on Tuesday after a day of turbulence over the Ukraine crisis .
 The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong was down by less than 0. percent, while in mainland China the Shanghai composite index climbed by 0.% . In mainland China, Shenzhen component fell by 1.5 percent .
 The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong was down by less than 0. percent, while in mainland China the Shanghai composite index climbed by 0.% . In mainland China, Shenzhen component fell by 1.5 percent .
 A large explosion struck central Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, on Tuesday . A huge fireball appeared in a video to engulf cars driving through an area called Freedom Square .
 Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrolling a strategic city in southern Ukraine .
 The explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood . Michael Schwirtz An explosion happened in a neighborhood in the middle of the night .
Nick Cumming-Bruce Diplomats walk out of Lavrov’s speech at the United Nations in Geneva .
 Ukraine’s ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva led the walkout . The walkout left a largely empty conference hall to hear the remarks by Foreign Minister Sergey V Lavrov .
 Mr Lavrov delivered his speech by video link . He said European countries’ bans on flights from Russia had blocked his travel to Geneva .
 He accused Ukraine of seeking to acquire nuclear weapons, an unsubstantiated claim that Moscow has used it as one of the justifications for its invasion .
 Ukraine gave up its Soviet-era nuclear arsenal in 1994 in exchange for security guarantees . The country's nuclear arsenal was replaced with security guarantees.
 Russia believes a “nuclear war cannot be won and should never be fought’s Lavrov said . Russia has raised the alert level of its nuclear forces to the highest level .
 The United States should pull its nuclear weapons out of Europe and dismantle the associated infrastructure, Lavrov said . But he added that the U.S. should dismantle the infrastructure of Europe .
 The current "hysteria" in NATO and the European Union confirmed that “it was and still is the aim of the United States and all its allies built by Washington to create an 'anti-Russia'
 Mr Lavrov’s statement was “yet another example of his government's duplicity in invading Ukraine,’ Michele Taylor, America's ambassador to the Human Rights Council, said .
 Secretary of State Anthony J Blinken was scheduled to address the Human Rights Council by video link later on Tuesday .
 The true figure is almost certainly higher, according to the U.N. figures . The figures reflect only casualties that the United Nations’ staff verified .
 An apparent rocket strike devastated a large administrative building in Ukraine’s second largest city, Kharkiv, on Tuesday . Seven people were killed and 24 were injured, emergency officials say .
 A day earlier, at least nine people were killed in Russian shelling in the eastern city of the city .
Fears Russian forces could increasingly target civilian areas with more powerful weapons . Those attacks raised fears that Russian forces may increasingly target civilians .
 Some French minister has said that they declared an economic war on Russia .
 The United States energy secretary, Jennifer Granholm, will lead a meeting of energy officials from around the globe on the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on energy supplies .
 The International Energy Agency says member countries have agreed to release 60 million barrels of oil from their emergency reserves . Oil prices have soared to well above $100 a barrel .
 The decision was made at a meeting of energy ministers chaired by the U.S. energy secretary .
 The energy agency said the release was the fourth in its history . It would provide the equivalent of two million barrels a day, or about 2 percent of global consumption, for 30 days .
 Oil prices hit a seven-year high of $105 a barrel last week after the Russian attack started . Oil prices have been turbulent since they hit a 7-year-high of $ 105 a barrel .
 The meeting was called amid concerns that sanctions imposed on Moscow by Western nations could result in reduced flows of energy from Russia . Russia supplies one in 10 barrels of oil globally as well as one-third of the European Union’s natural gas .
There is a risk of a large portion of Russian oil exports being crimped as a result of the sanctions, analysts say . Western governments have said that they do not intend to disrupt energy flows, analysts said .
 If so, oil prices could go as high as $120 a barrel, analysts forecast . The price is expected to go up to $120 per barrel .
 So far, loadings of tankers of oil and liquefied natural gas from Russia are proceeding as normal, says Alex Booth, head of research at Kpler .
 Christophe de Margerie was killed in a plane crash in Moscow in 2014 . London barred Russian-linked ships from British ports after London barred them from UK ports . A liquefied natural gas tanker coming from a facility partly owned by TotalEnergies in Russia .
 The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and its allies are expected to meet on Wednesday to discuss the oil markets . Potential relief could come from the OPC, which is expected to discuss oil markets.
 There is little indication that the group is willing to do more than agree to go ahead with its usual 400,000 barrels a day of additional supply in April .
 OPEC Plus co-leader has been talking with Biden administration officials about the oil markets . A deal does not yet seem to have been reached .
 Russia is the co-leader of OPEC Plus. Discussions are likely to be complicated because Russia is co- leader of the group .
 It is uncertain if there will be enough support at the meeting for an increase in production beyond 400,000 barrels a day .
 The United Arab Emirates, which along with the Saudis, would be a source of additional oil supplies, recently abstained from the U.N. Security Council resolution condemning Russia’s invasion of Ukraine .
 The decision “underscores the likely unwillingness of some countries to bolster production at this time’s time, Ms. Ms. Kohn says .
 S.A. March 1, 2022 ‘ Michael Schwirtz An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood. S. iA.A March 1. 2022 ' Michael Schwirtsz An Explosion rocks Kharksiv'
 S Volunteers sorted donated items at an arts center in Lviv, Ukraine, on Tuesday . S Volunteers sorting donated items.
 Yuri Viznyak, the director of the arts center, now leads a logistical operation aimed at helping those on the front lines . He has trained soldiers to join newly formed territorial defense units .
 They are helping care for those displaced from their homes by war . They are also helping care of those displaced by war.
 Every day, more volunteers join the group as they pack and send supplies from Odessa to Kharkiv .
Volunteers and police work together to ensure supplies can be moved swiftly through dangerous battle zones . It is one center in an emerging network, where volunteers and police are working together to get supplies moving quickly .
 The camps are forming outside of the city for those fleeing their homes . That includes both the front lines and the camps that are formed outside the city . The camps have been set up in the past few months .
 By afternoon, there are usually so many people showing up to help that they have to turn people away . There are usually more than a dozen people turning out to help .
 He offered a quick tour, zipping between stacks of toilet paper, trash bags full of clothes and crates of foodstuffs .
Volodommr, 27, said that as more time had passed, people had moved from panic to action . Volodommer, a volunteer, said more time has passed .
Volunteers came together to provide relief to Russian Spies in their midst . Security people checking passports and identification were a reminder that even as the volunteers came together, they were on guard .
Volodomir, who works for a neighborhood watch group, said he found strange markings on a tree . He thought it could have been placed there by a Russian agent .
 A person can say “palinitsya’s’ — a word for a sweet bread — can trigger suspicion . But things as simple as whether a person can says ‘palinitya' can trigger suspicions .
 Volunteering was one of the ways he coped with the stress of the war, he said .
 The European Union has finalized the list of Russian banks that it plans to ban from using the SWIFT interbank transfer system . The EU has also announced a ban on Russian banks using the system .
 Seven people were killed and 24 wounded in the shelling of the regional administration building in Kharkiv on Tuesday morning .
 futures on Wall Street pointed to a drop when trading starts . Fears of rising inflation and supply chain issues have led to the drop .
Taiwan's interior minister said on Tuesday that the government would allow Ukrainians to extend their stays on the island . Opposition lawmakers and rights groups have criticized the government for not waiving visas.
 French oil company TotalEnergies said it would no longer provide capital for new projects in the country .
 BP, Shell and Equinor said in recent days that they would exit their Russian investments . But its announcement stopped short of following BP and Shell, which said they would leave their Russian investment .
 Ukraine's foreign ministry released a video of children in a bunker in Kyiv singing the city’s anthem . The video was released on Tuesday to bolster morale .
 Children are singing Kyiv anthem, while hiding 1n a bomb shelter during rocket fire . Sberbank, VEB and five other major Russian banks and their affiliates are banned .
 South Korea’s public and financial institutions urged to suspend any trading of Russian treasury bonds to be issued from Wednesday . The finance ministry also ‘strongly’ urged South Korea to suspend trading of Russia treasury bonds .
 South Korea had earlier said it supported the move to ban major Russian banks from the SWIFT system .
 The embassy said earlier that it had helped more than 1,000 students leave Kyiv for western Ukraine on Monday . The embassy says it has also helped 1,500 students leave the country .
 An enormous explosion hit central Kharkiv on Tuesday morning . A large fireball appeared in a video to engulf several cars driving through the area .
 Russian military vehicles and foot soldiers patrol a strategic city in southern Ukraine .
 The Hang Seng index in Hong Kong was down by less than 0. percent, while in mainland China the Shanghai composite index climbed by 0.% . New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as “unprov
 Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as ‘unprovoked and unjustified’ The New Zealand PM called for Russia's immediate withdrawal from Ukraine and for an end to the ‘pointless war’
 New Zealand PM Jacinda Ardern condemns Russia's attack on Ukraine as "unprovoked and unjustified" South Korean government plans to “actively contribute to resolving the humanitarian crisis in Ukraine’s crisis .
 Jieipteints Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia's attack on Ukraine as “unprovoked and unjustified’s actions as those of a bully .
 An explosion rocks Kharkiv a day after shelling in a residential neighborhood . The explosion happened in a neighborhood in a suburban neighborhood .
 Javier C Hernandez Valery Gergiev, a Putin ally, is fired as chief conductor in Munich . Anna Netrebko is dismissed from the Bavarian State Opera .
 Putin of Russia removed from his post as chief conductor of the Munich Philharmonic . He refused to denounce Mr Putin’s invasion of Ukraine .
 Anna Netrebko is one of opera's biggest international stars and has ties to Mr Putin . Her upcoming engagements with the Bavarian State Opera were canceled .
 Mr Gergiev’s abrupt dismissal was the biggest setback yet for the conductor . The conductor has been the target of widespread anger and condemnation for his long record of support for Mr Putin .
Mayor of Munich said Gergiev had failed to respond to a demand by Mr Reiter that he condemn Putin’s ‘brutal war of aggression’ by Monday or be fired . Dieter Reiter, the mayor of Munich, said Mr
 Mr Gergiev was also dismissed from his position as honorary conductor of the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra .
 The orchestra's managers said they had spoken with Mr Gergiev but could not resolve an ‘unbridgeable’ divide . The orchestra’s managers had also recently asked him to denounce Putin .
 Anna Nerebko, one of opera's biggest stars, lost engagements in Munich and Zurich .
 Netrebko also came under fire for her ties to Putin, who has awarded her prizes and praised her artistry .
 Netrebko endorsed his re-election bid, and has appeared to lend support to his policies . In 2014, she was pictured holding a flag used by some Russian-backed separatist groups in Ukraine .
 She had in recent days sought some distance from the invasion, issuing a Statement saying she opposed the war .
 I have decided to take a step back from performing for the time being . I have therefore decided to stop performing for a time being.
 Netrebko posted a picture on Instagram of herself with Mr Gergiev smiling after a concert .
 The Met performed Verdi’s ‘Don Carlos’ on Monday evening . The company performed the Ukrainian national anthem .
 The fast-moving events showed how quickly arts organizations around the world had moved to sever ties with some of Russia's most prominent cultural ambassadors since the start of Mr Putin’s invasion .
 Mr Gergiev had lost a number of engagements in the days that followed . The loss of his leadership position at the helm of a major European orchestra suggested much more serious ramifications for his career .
 The two have known each other since the early 1990s, when Mr Putin was an official in St. Petersburg . Mr Putin has been an official since the 1990s .
 Petersburg and Mr Gergiev was beginning his tenure as the leader of the Mariinsky, then called the Kirov . The Mariinsky was known as the "Kirov"
 Mr Putin has played an important role in Mr Gergiev’s success, providing funding to the Mariinsky Theater .
 Mr Gergiev’s international engagements began drying up last week . Carnegie Hall and the Vienna Philharmonic dropped him from a series of performances .
 Gergiev’s manager announced he was ending his relationship with his client on Sunday .
 The Verbier Festival in Switzerland has asked for and accepted the resignation of Mr Gergiev as music director of the festival's orchestra .
 Mr Gergiev served as honorary president of Edinburgh International Festival . He resigned his position after being asKed to do so, the festival says .
 Philharmonie de Paris cancels two concerts in April with Mr Gergiev and the Mariinsky Orchestra . The Mariinsky orchestra is a performing arts complex in France .
 The Lucerne Festival in Switzerland said it was canceling two performances in August with Mr Gergiev and the Martiinsky .
Mayor of Munich announced his decision on Tuesday . Elbphilharmonie in Hamburg, Germany, said it had canceled Mr Gergiev’s future engagements .
 Several other institutions are considering similar moves in Milan . Teatro alla Scala, in Milan, is considered to be a similar move .
 The donations will be transferred to the needs of victims of ms aggression . Donations will be sent to victims of aggression .
 Lee played a super-star role in the South Korean TV series ”Dae Jang Geum,” or “Jewel in the Palace’s Palace” Lee helped spread South Korean entertainment through Asia to Eastern Europe .
 Valerie Hopkins, Andrew E Kramer, Marc Santora and Michael Schwirtz Zelensky accuse Russia of war crimes . Kyiv braces for a renewed assault on Russia .
 President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine accused Russia of war crimes for deliberately targeting civilians . A huge convoy of Russian tanks and mechanized vehicles massed just north of Kyiv .
 Russian soldiers facing stiff resistance from the Ukrainian Army and confronting millions of furious Ukrainian citizens . Western officials warned that President Vladimir V Putin might turn to even more powerful weapons .
 Russian forces have already begun to employ siege tactics in their bid to take control of Ukraine’s second-largest city.
 On Tuesday morning, a huge explosion was reported directly in front of the city’s administrative building .
 Putin's forces struggle to encircle and subdue the nation's capital, Kyiv . There is a growing concern that he may step up his bombardment of the city .
 The Ukrainian military says it continues to have control over the outer borders of the city . Russian units are preventing Russian units from approaching the suburbs of the capital .
 The military warned that Russian agents were dressing in Ukrainian military and police uniforms in an attempt to penetrate Kyiv .
 It also said Russia was employing agents to sabotage and attack civilian and military infrastructure . Russia also said that it was employing agent to sabotage, attack civilian infrastructure .
 Kyiv's 2. million inhabitants huddled in bomb shelters as air raid sirens wailed through the darkness . Many of Kyiv’s 2.m. inhabitants huddled in bomb shelter .
 UKraine’s foreign ministry released a video on Tuesday morning of children in a bunker singing the city's anthem . The video is a bid to bolster morale in the UKraine .
 16 Ukrainian children have died as a result of the Russian shelling over the first four days of fighting . More reports of hospitals and other civilian structures damaged or destroyed by Russian forces .
 Moscow is facing increasingly vigorous global opposition, from both national governments and multinational corporations . Moscow is also facing increasingly robust global opposition .
 The ruble has cratered, losing a quarter of its value, and Russia's central bank shuttered stock trading in Moscow through Tuesday .
 Aeroflot canceled all its flights to Europe after countries banned Russian planes from using their air space . Russia banned its planes from flying in the air after the ban .
 Mastercard has blocked multiple financial institutions from its payment network . Shell, Volvo and Mercedes-Benz all took steps to cut ties with Russian business partners .
 Some 500,000 Ukrainians have fled the fighting in Ukraine to European Union member states that border Ukraine .
 Many have stayed to fight and have proven essential in helping an outgunned army frustrate the Russian war plans . Many others have been involved in helping the Russian army frustrates the plans .
 YouTube said it would block channels connected to RT and Sputnik across Europe . But Western military analysts say Mr Putin has yet to unleash the full ferocity of the arsenal .
 Australia will commit $50 million to Ukraine in lethal and nonlethal military support, in partnership with NATO . Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced the move on Tuesday .
 The "overwhelming majority" of that money will be used for lethal support, he says .
 An enormous explosion hit central Kharkiv on Tuesday morning, Ukraine's Interior Ministry says . The explosion hit directly in front of a government building in Ukraine's second largest city .
 The war is testing the power of tech giants . Adam Satariano and Sheera Frenkel will meet in March 2022 .
 Commuters checking their phones as they ride an escalator in the subway in Moscow on Saturday .
Ukrainian leaders pleaded with Apple, Meta and Google to restrict their services inside Russia . On Friday, Ukrainian leaders pleaded for restrictions on Apple and Meta .
 Google and Meta, which owns Facebook, barred Russia’s state-run news media from selling ads on their platforms . Then Google andMeta, which own Facebook, banned Russia's state news media.
 Sundar Pichai, Google’s chief executive, also spoke with top European Union officials over how to counter Russian disinformation .
 Meta said it would restrict access to some of those outlets across the European Union to ward off war propaganda . Twitter said on Monday it would label all posts containing links to stateaffiliated media outlets .
 Facebook, Google and Twitter have faced questions in recent years over privacy, market dominance and how they spread toxic and divisive content . The war is an Opportunity to rehabilitate their reputations, including Facebook and Google .
 Social media was cheered as an instrument for democracy in the Arab Spring in 2011 . The Arab Spring was the first time social media connected activists and was cheered for democracy .
 Any missteps could be costly, adding more momentum to efforts in Europe and the U.S. to regulate their businesses .
 Z The police detaining an antiwar protester in central Moscow on Friday .
 The protests are a remarkable display of defiance in a country where prosecutors sometimes seek prison sentences for demonstrators . The demonstrations are a show of defiance against the government .
 The opposition leader Aleksei A Navalny was arrested last year . There were nationwide demonstrations in the days after the arrest .
 Monday's unrest unfolded amid growing public alarm in Russia over how sanctions imposed by the West would affect the country’s financial stability .
 As currency cratered, some people rushed to withdraw cash from A.T.M.S.s. Some people also rushed to take out cash .
 Livia Albeck-Ripka Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand has condemned Russia’s attack on Ukraine as ‘unprovoked and unjustified’ The New Zealand PM described Vladimir V Putin's actions as those of a bully .
 The South Korean government will donate $10 million worth of humanitarian aid to Ukrainian government and refugees . The aid will be given to Ukraine and refugees.
 S March 1, 2022 & Mike lves Satellite internet terminals, sent by Elon Musk, arrive in Ukraine . S March 2, 2022, will be the first time the terminals have been sent to Ukraine .
 A SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket lifts off at Kennedy Space Center, Florida, in February . The rocket carries a batch of Starlink satellites .
 Ukraine's vice prime minister said on Monday that internet terminals sent by Elon Musk had arrived in the country . The terminals were designed to work with satellites orbiting in space to provide online access .
 Satellite internet services like Mr Musk's can be useful in parts of the world where people cannot easily access conventional internet providers .
 There have been a number of internet disruptions in Ukraine since the Russian invasion began last week .
 Ukraine's Vice Prime Minister Mykhailo Fedorov wrote to Mr Musk on Twitter to ask for Starlink stations . He is also the minister of digital transformation .
 Mr Musk, a billionaire entrepreneur who is also the chief executive of the electric-car maker Tesla, said the Starlink service was now active in Ukraine . He said he was sending more of the terminals users would need to access a Satellite internet signal .
 Mr Fedorov posted a photo on Twitter on Monday that appeared to show a military truck loaded with Starlink terminals .
 It is unclear as of early Tuesday how many Starlink terminals had arrived in the country . It was unclear how many had arrived .
 The global repudiation of Russia echoes the Cold War, says Mark Landler .
 In Australia, the national swim team said it would boycott a world championship meet in Russia . Australia's swim team says it will boycott the world championships in Russia.
 At the Magic Mountain Ski Area in Vermont, a bartender poured bottles of Stolichnaya vodka down the drain .
 The world is shunning Russia in myriad ways to protest President Vladimir V Putin’s invasion of Ukraine . From culture to commerce, sports to travel, the world is shunned Russia .
 Not since the frigid days of the Cold War have so many doors closed on Russia and its people . A worldwide repudiation driven by the impulse to show solidarity with besieged Ukrainians .
 The boycotts and cancellations are piling up in parallel with the sanctions imposed by the U.S., Europe, and other powers . The boycotting is piling up.
 Russia's economic restrictions on Russia's banks and mothballing of a natural gas pipeline leave millions of ordinary Russians isolated in an interconnected world . But these grass-roots gestures inflict less harm on Russia’s economy than sweeping restrictions on Russian banks .
 Some cryptocurrency exchanges say they are refusing calls to suspend Russian accounts . Some exchanges are refusing to suspend accounts .
 Hong Kong markets opened mostly higher on Tuesday after a day of turbulence over the Ukraine crisis .
 Russians face the anxieties of a costly war as sanctions batter their economy . Anton Troianovski and Ivan Nechepurenko will be killed in February 2022 .
 sanctions imposed by the West in retaliation for Moscow's invasion of Ukraine rattled the foundations of Russia's financial system . On Monday, those perks of modern life were abruptly disappearing .
 The ruble cratered, losing a quarter of its value, and the central bank shuttered stock trading in Moscow through Tuesday .
 The public rushed to withdraw cash from A.T.M.s, and Aeroflot, the national airline, canceled all its flights to Europe . Russia has banned Russian planes from using their air space .
 Some people rushed to book seats on the few international flights still operating . Concern about travel was so great that some people rush to book flights .
 The Russian Central Bank's access to much of its $643 billion in foreign currency reserves has been restricted by Western countries . The move is a blow to the Kremlin's careful efforts to soften the impact of potential sanctions .
 Shell, a company that helped Russia profit from its energy riches, said it was exiting all its joint ventures with Gazprom . BP announced Sunday it would sell its stake in the Russian state-run oil giant Rosneft .
 Volvo says it will stop production at its truck factory in Russia . Mercedes-Benz said it would drop its partnership with a Russian truck maker .
 Apple Pay and Google Pay stopped working at subway turnstiles operated by a bank on the American sanctions list .
 e Russia's attack was preceded by months of military buildup on the border with Ukraine and rising tensions . Explore the causes of the conflict and the history of the relationship between the two countries .
 The fate of Ukraine could have enormous implications for the world . Here is how the invasion unfolded .
 Russia-Ukraine war is at stake in Ukraine's conflict with Ukraine . The conflict has been raging for more than a decade . Russia's prime minister has called the conflict a "humanitarian crisis"
 e Ukraine’s army and a growing corps of civilian volunteers are mounting a spirited defense of the city of Kyiv . A grass-roots movement is underway in countryside villages. e Though some fear cryptocurrency could help Russia evade sanctions, it has also provided a way
 Russian artists are speaking out and signing petitions against the war, even though doing so could damage their career or lead to jail . Russian citizens are facing the anxieties of a costly war .
 Around the World e India has refrained from joining the West in condemning Ukraine's invasion .
 Several countries, including Switzerland, have adopted broad measures against Russia . Switzerland is traditionally neutral .