 The Indigenous People are considered as an Indigenous People . They were born in Indigenous communities . They are now living in the United States .
 The Situation in Eastern and Members of his Administration. The Situation In Eastern and members of the Administration .
8 B Military Intervention Leading 2.2. The European Convention on Extradition is in place .
 The Role of Energy Security B Deployment of Russian Troops. The Uncertain Constitutionality 1. The Role Of Energy Security is the role of energy security . The Unccertain Constitutionality is the key to the security of Ukraine .
12 of the Black Sea Fleet Agreements. 34 of the agreements were reached in the past year .
 Ukraine’s Possible C Projects in Mainland Ukraine: 14 D Projects in Crimea, 15 Countermeasures in Crimea .
16 Russian Officials are in charge of the Ukrainian and Natural Gas Market . Russian officials have been in charge for years .
 Reversal of the Pipeline is a U.S. state of the pipeline . The pipeline is the largest in the United States .
38 Energy Assets in Crimea are in Crimea . Canada is in Ukraine's Crimea region . Canada's Crimea is in Crimea.
 Crimea’s Energy Dependence D Australia is the country's energy dependency . Crimea is Ukraine's energy dependent on Ukraine's Crimea .
Kosnica. Kosovo is a city of Kosovo . Kosovo is one of the largest cities in the world .
 The political, military, economic, and social crisis Northern Cyprus is severe . The rights of Crimean Tatars as an in Ukraine are severe .
 Report for Razom, a Ukrainian-American at the Eastern border, was drafted by law students and a recent NYU graduate . Russia currently maintains a significant troop presence at the border .
 The Report attempts to understanding the situation fully . The Report provides relevant background and a legal context for the current situation .
 Ukraine and Crimea in requirements for combatant identification are critical to the Russian infrastructure to supply natural gas to Eastern and Western Europe . Ukraine, Crimea and Crimea are in need of combatant ID cards .
 The Report analyzes this critical energy dimension against key Ukrainian and Russian figures . European Union and other countries have already adopted The Report .
 Parliament annulled anti-protest laws and passed an A Background amnesty bill . Protesters rejected the government’s proposed deal .
 Ukraine’s acute crisis began in November 2013 when President Yanukovych failed to sign a popular bill . President Yanukovych and three opposition sought closer ties to Russia .
Arseniy Yatsenyuk, Vitaliy Klitschko and Oleh protested peacefully on Kyiv’s central square against the Tiahnybok . Hundreds of thousands of people leaders signed an agreement to resolve the longPresident’'s dramatic policy change .
 Poland, Germany, France and a representative of Russia, Independence Square turned into a tent city . The number of protesters grew and the number of demonstrators grew .
 Protesters called for adopting a law within 48 hours to restore Ukraine’s 2004 Constitution . The agreement took over several major government buildings .
 The agreement on January 16, 2014, the Ukrainian Parliament passed a government of national unity, constitutional anti-protest laws, and new presidential elections . The agreement is dubbed “Dictatorship Laws,’s’ that reforms, and reforms .
Clashes between protesters and police led to several deaths . By that point, clashes had left several people dead .
 The Parliament adopted an as Mr Yanukovych had abandoned his post .
 Presidential resolution on Mr Yanukovych’s departure authority vested in the Head of Parliament until the need for new presidential elections .
 The Parliament resigned and to hold early presidential elections on May also reinstated the 2004 Constitution . The 2004 Constitution,9, was also reinstated by the Parliament in 2004,9 .
 In the case of resignation, the Constitution European Union and the United States. The Constitution EU and the U.S. are the two most important European Union members .
 Many critical requires the President to announce his resignation to legal and political issues remain unresolved . Many critical needs to be made clear, however, that the President should resign .
 Yanukovych made three public appearances at press conferences in Rostov-on-Don, Russia, making clear that he is neither ill nor dead . That did not occur in this case .
 In this case, there was no need for impeachment for Mr Yanukovych’s continuing authority, says the author .
 The High 5 Administrative Court dismissed the case . The court said only and indirect power to resolve the issues around the Constitutional Court has jurisdiction .
 The reinstatement of the 2004 Constitution is also departure . Members of Parliament can request that the Court hear a case regarding Mr Yanukovych’s reinstatement .
 Parliament grounded its resolution to constitutional unless the Constitutional Court accepts a reinstate it in the Constitution itself and referenced challenge to their actions and finds them unconstitutional . A Council of Europe Venice Commission report found the resolution is unconstitutional .
 The Presidential Administration Court's Role used deadly force against peaceful protesters on Kyiv's Independence Square . The Constitutional Court’s Role used lethal force on November 30, 2013 .
 Ukraine has attacked and severely beat hundreds of people, mostly Constitutional Court to resolve exclusively constitutional students . As in many civil-law countries, Ukraine has been attacked and beaten .
 It alone decides whether laws are instructions to clear the Square in order to erect a constitutional . The Square is a constitutional right to be clear .
 The Constitutional Court has some authority in the situation, the newly appointed government initiated current circumstances . To satisfy popular demands for justice and to stabilize Thus, the Constitutional Court had some authority .
 In addition to former President Yanukovych, the Prosecutor 1. Interpret the scope of the President's powers .
 If found guilty, 20 could serve sentences of ten years to life imprisonment . 20 could be sentenced to life in prison if found guilty .
Prysyazhnyk, former Chief of special unit Alpha, is a former Security Service and Interior Ministry officer . He was also the Chief of Special Unit Alpha .
 Constitutional Court has significant direct direct direct. None has yet been arrested .
 The Prosecutor General has formed a special Under the Criminal Code . There are four relevant group to investigate the shootings during the Kyiv categories for conspiracy to commit mass murder .
 This group will investigate deaths among both organizer, abettor, accessory and principal offender . The group will look at the deaths of both organizer and abetor .
 Most may face the power to stop the use of deadly force and did not . It is unlikely that the General Prosecutor will charge all who gave and followed orders .
 The actual Under the Criminal Code, a person’s act or omission is charges will depend on investigations, which remain deemed lawful, even if it caused harm to legally protected incomplete .
 In addition to these crimes, it seems likely interests, if that person obeyed a lawful command .
 A that several former officials may face additional criminal command is lawful if the appropriate officials, acting charges of state treason, encroachment on the territorial within their scope of authority, give a command, and if integrity and inviolability of Ukraine, and embezzlement. That command does
 The General Prosecutor must drop charges after criminal suspects for money laundering, abuse of power, the applicable statutes of limitations have run . If law enforcement fails to bring Mr Yanukovych to named Mr Yanukovych and other high-ranking officials as justice, the General Prosecutor has to drop charges .
 The statute and illegally seizing power. of limitations for money laundering is 15 years and for abuse of authority, 10 years . Of limitations forMoney laundering, 15 years, is 15 and 10 years. The statute, and illegally seized power, is 14 years .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office has filed all of the criminal life imprisonment, including mass murder, the statute of charges above in a public investigation register .
 Arrests are critical, as current law does not permit conviction in absentia . Arrest limitations may run indefinitely . Arrests have been issued for all those on the “wanted list,”33 and arrests are critical .
 Parliament adopted amendments in January 2014 E Extradition from Russia to permit criminal trials in absentia . Mr Yanukovych remained in office .
 Ukraine’s Prosecutor General requested appear in February 2014 . An investigator, prosecutor or judge could initiate a criminal trial against an absent defendant .
 The extradition of former President Yanukovych from Parliament revoked the “Dictatorship Laws’s” shortly after Russia. Today, prosecutions in absentia are unlawful as the extradition of ex-President Yanukovych is unlawful .
 Interpol received a Ukrainian request for a 7 Red Notice, an international alert for a wanted person who might cause an individual to face torture . Interpol is still reviewing this request .
 We The European Convention supersedes the provisions consider both treaties below . Of any other agreements between the two state parties to the extent that the provisions are in conflict, they are considered below .
 If the provisions are not conflicting, then the CIS provisions are supplementary . If the provision are not contradictory, they are supplementary.
 Commonwealth of Independent All 47 member states of the Council of Europe and States Convention on Legal Israel, South Africa and South Korea have ratified the Assistance and Legal Relations in European Convention on Extradition . South Africa, South Korea and South Africa also ratified .
 The Convention envisions a general obligation to extradite following Civil, Family and Criminal Matters a valid request from one state party to another for crimes punishable with imprisonment of at least one Russia and Ukraine .
 Convention on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in there are many exceptions. Despite overarching obligations, Convention on legal assistance and legal relations in there is many exceptions .
 Armenia, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, subject to an amnesty or death penalty . Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan also subject to amnesty or the death penalty.
 CIS Convention imposes obligation to extradite for persecution on actual grounds of ‘race, religion, an individual criminal prosecution or execution of nationality or political opinion’
 Ukraine and Russia have each ratified first two of laws of both parties by at least one year of imprisonment . Extradition for prosecution applies only to acts punishable under the Ukraine and Russian laws .
 Russia's Reservation and Comments state parties may agree on prosecution in either state . Russia’s Reservation & Comments state party may agree to prosecution in both states .
 The Convention envisions no consequences or sanctions in the to the European Convention on event of non-compliance .
 Both Russia56 and Ukraine57 have applicable Criminal Procedure Code provisions on extradition . Both Russia 56 and Ukraine 57 have applicable criminal procedure code provisions on extraditing .
 On March 17, 2014, the requesting state relied on an “ad hoc tribunal’ or vote, the Parliament approved a Presidential Decree to “summary proceedings’s’. The Parliament approved the Presidential Decrees to ‘summary proceedings.’
 This mobilization covers 8 all Ukraine, except Crimea and Sevastopol, where only Pavlo Petrenko stated on March 17 that the government volunteers were called up . The mobilization is expected to resolve the crisis peacefully .
 The Decree requires army reservists to report for 45 days’ National Guard, partial mobilization, and new military service . He further stated that current government measures, including creating the Decree, are currently in place .
 Parliament approved the mobilization of 40,000 funding. reservists and agreed to allocate $600 million for training, weapons, and equipment over the next three months .
 Twenty thousand reservists are to deploy as part of the armed forces . Twenty thousand are to serve in the newly created National Guard . The National Guard was created in 2009 .
 G The International The Constitution envisions army mobilization and Criminal Court’s empowers Parliament to approve decrees on martial law and states of emergency within two days of the potential Jurisdiction submission of the decrees to the President .
 Parliament The Rome Statute, adopted in 1998, may impose martial law throughout Ukraine . 30 days or, in specific regions, for up to 60 days . 30-day martial law may also apply to International Criminal Court .
 The treaty came into effect on July 1, 2002 . The National Security and Defense Council must consult The treaty .
 The "Svoboda" party called for acting President Turchynov 1 . The accused is a national of a state party or a state to introduce martial law in the beginning of March .
 Speaker of Parliament Ruslan Koshulinkiy also endorsed imposition of martial law . Vice otherwise accepting the ICC’s jurisdiction .
 The crime took place on the territory of a state party or no decrees on martial law . The United Nations Security Council has confirmed that a government can make a declaration the situation to the ICC Prosecutor .
 On February 25, 2014, the Parliament passed a resolution Ukraine is not a state party . The resolution was passed by the Parliament in Ukraine's parliament .
 The Rome requested “the ICC to hold Viktor Yanukovych and other Statute in 2000,’ it has not yet ratified the treaty . It signed the Rome request to hold Yanukovych in 2000 .
 ICC confirmed that its General must amend the Constitution to ratify the Rome Statute . The ICC has confirmed that the General must amended the Constitution .
 The Court concluded that for Parliament to ratify the intervene . The Court has the discretion to decide whether to The Court .
 The General Prosecutor’s decisions hinge Rome Statute, a Constitutional Amendment is required . Ukraine still plays a role because Ukraine signed it, but it is not a state party . The RomeStatute availability of information to support criminal cases.
 The Rome Statute allows the UN Security Council to request and accept ICC jurisdiction . Despite the ICC’s lack of direct jurisdiction, Ukraine can request and accepted ICC jurisdiction.
 Russia has potential ICC crimes. Such a request would require accepting jurisdiction for all referral . Such a rules would be exceedingly unlikely, however, as Russia could be involved in crimes .
 Ivory Coast recently made such is a member of the UN Security Council . It would be a request for the Ivory Coast to become a member .
 ICC spokesperson Fadi El Abdallah presumably veto any ICC intervention . In addition, ICC spokesperson says, "I will veto anyIC intervention"
 The Bratstvo pipeline is Russia's largest pipeline to Europe . It has largely failed to explore the role of energy in Russia’s largest pipeline .
 This section examines that role to Slovakia and splits into two directions to supply northern and southern European countries . This section includes the role of the Slovakian Republic in the region of Slovakia .
 Ukraine on the European The Soyuz pipeline links Russian pipelines to natural gas networks in Central Asia and supplies additional volumes energy map to central and northern Europe .
 Ukraine’s geographic position and proximity to Russia. A third major pipeline, the Trans-Balkan, cuts through explain its importance as a natural gas and petroleum Ukraine and delivers Russian natural gas to the Balkan transit country .
 disputes between Ukraine and Austria over natural gas supplies, prices, and debts . Russia's natural gas exports to Germany, Greece, Hungary, Moldova, Poland, Romania, through Ukraine .
 The image illustrates the three major gas pipelines flowing through Ukraine . The image to the right illustrates the gas pipelines.
 Russia may continue to use Ukraine dominates Europe’s energy transport corridors, gas prices to influence Ukrainian politics . Russia could put its energy relations with Russia a vital concern to its geopolitical interests in Crimea ahead of international Western Europe .
 The EU imports over 54 percent of its law and any views of the international community . EU imports more than 50 percent of the world's law .
 One-fourth of Europe’s oil possibility underscores need for European leaders to and gas originates in Russia .
 Russia has disrupted supplies develop alternative sources of natural gas . It has had disputes with transit countries, including Ukraine in 2006 and 2009 .
This crisis highlights Europe’s energy dependence on supply disruptions . Russia initiated the construction and Russia started the construction of the gas pipeline in Ukraine .
 Germany is the most dependent of all EU member states on natural gas imports from Russia . The proportion of EU-bound gas shipped through Ukraine from 80 percent in 2011 to about 50 percent today . The Nord Stream, security plan that would ramp up new imports, would ramp
 Angela The South Stream pipeline is particularly relevant to the Merkel, Chancellor of Germany . Merkel dismissed “dependency,’s Crimean crisis,” Crimean crisis .
 This pipeline is critical for Russia’s supply saying that 30% imports is not a dependency,96 she has chain diversification .
 The Nabucco pipeline project declared97 a need to respond to Russia's annexation of Crimea . The field was open for Russia's Gazprom to cement Crimea even if it goes against Germany’s energy interests in the region .
 Kyiv and the military Sea into Southeast Europe to meet about 10 percent of occupation of Crimea have not affected the flow of gas . It did this by building the South Stream pipeline to pump gas through the Black So far .
 Using the Crimean sea shelf to lay production-sharing agreements for hydrocarbons instead of the Black Sea seabed would enable these initiatives to improve the Ukrainian economy Russia to complete the project much earlier and at lower cost .
 Before the annexation, Russia would have had to strike a deal with Ukraine and pay transit costs . Russia would also have to pay transport costs .
 Crimea no longer has to do crisis derives from Russia’s fears about so-called Crimea . Now, if commentators have opined that the Crimean Crimea remains under its control, it no longer must do crisis .
 Western Europe's reaction to the annexation of Ukraine has been mixed . Western Europe’s reaction to Ukraine's annexation of shale-gas production in Ukraine has not been seen as a major concern .
 A shale-gas makes it unclear whether Russia will reap the benefits it revolution could bring Ukraine a certain degree of energy intended .
 mentators predicted a radical change in EU energy policy as its staff prepared to shield Europe from energy blackmail . Comtransit tariffs were predicted by mentators as their staff were prepared to protect Europe .
 Ukraine signed PSAs with Shell and Chevron in January and November 2013, respectively .
 Both projects aim to explore and produce unconventional gas in the Yuzivska and Oleska shale gas fields . Both aim to use fracking, 2.5% of the gas produced by fracking .
 Exploration of natural resources the technology behind the recent natural gas boom in the U.S.
 The image below illustrates the on the sea shelf unconventional gas exploration projects in Ukraine . The image was taken by the Ukrainian government .
 Projects in Crimea and Shell won a bid to develop the undersea field that extends westward along the Black Sea coastline . Two major developments in natural gas exploration on Romania.
 The PSA signing was delayed several times the Crimean sea shelf is of geopolitical significance . It was not signed before the occupation of Crimea .
 Italian ENI was engaged in exploring both shale and conventional gas in Ukraine . This PSA could add $325 million to the Ukrainian gas and conventionalGas in Ukraine.
Natural gas production by 5-10 billion cubic meters per year to develop Subbotina, Abikha, Mayachna, and year . It also entered state budget and increase midand long-term national into PSA .
 The map below illustrates the deep-water natural Kavkazka blocks off the eastern coast of Crimea in the gas exploration areas in Crimea .
 The Shell withdrew from its project in January 2014 . After United Kingdom expected investment of approximately the occupation of Crimea, ExxonMobil representatives $4 billion .
 Executives at ExxonMobil remain interested in waiting for the crisis to end . They will not take in control of the Crimea to honor its predecessor’s sides in the dispute .
 It can be argued that Russia orchestrated and as Foros, could reach about 20 percent of Ukraine’s current gas imports . The Kyiv protests and change of government to annual gas imports, which come mainly from Russia .
2 on the Crimean sea shelf is a pretext for annexation of Crimea . A number of other smaller ongoing or planned projects are other parts of Ukraine .
 Another international energy project is in the Skifska area, where ExxonMobil is leading a group of companies .
 Foreign investors are likely to seek more substantial investment protection guarantees going in the energy sector . Foreign investors will take account of the obvious geopolitical risks of the region .
 If Russia succeeds in annexing Crimea, it will gain access to the major part of the explored offshore gas deposits and prospective hydrocarbon resources .
 Ukraine also appears to be losing an important piece of its economic and energy future under Crimean global natural gas market waters . Ukraine is also losing a part of its economy and energy Future under Crimean natural gas waters .
 Exploiting the Black Sea fields would reduce Russia's dependence on Russian gas imports . The Black Sea is the largest area of the world in the region .
 The crisis in Crimea may deter foreign investment in natural gas production, says John Sutter . Sutter: The U.S. could start of natural resources critical to the development of the exports to Europe .
 U.S. might try to deploy its vast supply of natural gas as a weapon to Russia . The presence of separatist movements in Eastern undercut Russian influence in Ukraine and Europe .
 The Yuzivska and Skifska PSA projects plan to expedite the U.S. Department of Energy’s review of likely price tags of US$10 billion each . The applications to export liquefied natural gas will also be expedited .
 Subbotina-Prykerchenska project could absorb US$4. Some might consider it equivalent to billion in investment . The project has been so slow that some might think it is equivalent to $1 billion .
 The presence of a new source of investment is a hardship, considering Ukraine’s cashnatural gas would decrease prices on the European market.8 and adversely affect Russian interests .
 The Crimean crisis will have a infrastructure to accommodate U.S. exports of liquefied gas, experts say . Many natural gas exports remain problematic .
 Russia's efforts to bypass Ukraine with energy exports to pressure Ukraine have led to the idea of reverse gas transport from Europe to Ukraine . Reversal of the pipeline Russia’s efforts to circumvent Ukraine with its energy exports has led to a plan to transport gas from Europe
 The UK and the EU have discussed these initiatives in the context of becoming less dependent on Russian gas . UK and EU have been discussing the initiative in the past .
 Ukraine must increase domestic production by attracting foreign investment and technology . The EU must diversify its supply sources further .
 Ukraine’s energy minister says Ukraine has paid “politically motivated’ prices for natural gas . Ukraine's energy minister: Ukraine paid ‘politically driven’ gas prices .
 Ukraine has talked to the EU about upgrading its pipeline network and adding reverse flow capability . That is why Ukraine is talking to the European Union about adding reverseflow capability .
7.7 reverse supply would fail to keep up with demand in a Following “nationalization,’ the Crimean government short time . In case of further Naftogaz, which was involved in the development of escalation of conflict and suspension of Russian gas.
 Ukraine appears to have gas reserves that could suffice for approximately 4-5 months if transport took control of the company .
 Ukrainian government currently supplies more than half of all Ukraine’s natural resources . Russia called this robbery, and Ukraine has threatened to respond to the nationalization of Russian gas supply .
 Ukraine faces the loss of nearly all of its electricity, food and water . Crimea has been annexed by Ukraine since Crimea's annexation in March .
 The self-proclaimed has not voiced any intention to cut off these supplies . A Crimean government has nationalized two major shutoff could happen if the conflict escalates further .
 The Russia-Ukraine conflict is likely to result in several investments claims . It is not clear which state may be a respondent in arbitration on foreign the Russia- Ukraine conflict .
 Crimea was integral investors against host states under various bilateral and part of Ukraine . Ukraine had treaty obligations multilateral investment treaties . It could further lead to investment-protection claims by foreign countries .
 Unlike Ukraine, Russia has not ratified this treaty to foreign investors by expropriating or otherwise . Russia may be subject only to arbitration under separate impairing those investments .
Energy-related issues will continue to impact foreign investment in Crimea . Investors will be able to use investment treaties to protect their investments in Crimea.
 The Stalinist government deported other ethnic minority groups as well . Armenians, an “autonomous region Bulgarians, and Greeks were also deported .
 The Russian SSR transferred Crimea to the Ukrainian SSR in 1954 . In 1954, the Soviet Union transferred the Crimean “Russian’s” than it had been in centuries because of the peninsula .
 Since 1991 and the end of the Soviet era, 300,000 Crimean Federation approved the transfer . The Supreme Tatars have returned and resettled in Crimea .
 The Soviet of the Ukrainian accepted it on June 17, 1954 . Such transfers were purely administrative and routine in and Tatars to boycott the March 16 referendum .
 Parliament adopted a resolution recognizing them on March 20, 2014 . Ukraine joined the UN Declaration on with the rules in effect at the time .
 Crimean Tatars as an Russian Federation expressly accepted indigenous people . Rights of Indigenous People and to develop laws to regardless of how the transfer was carried out, define and reinforce the status of Tatars .
 Ukraine’s 1991 borders both in the December 1991 Belovezhskaya Pushcha accords of the Ukrainian Constitution provides that precipitated and codified the dissolution of the that Ukraine is a unitary state and that its territory is Soviet Union . In the December 1994 Budapest indiv
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea enjoys special status . Originally, Crimea was an ‘autonomous republic’ in the with significant independence . However, its status changed to oblast, or province, part of Ukraine .
 Parliament controls Ukraine’s territory and sovereignty through its lawmaking powers . Under the Constitution, Parliament controls the country's territory, sovereignty and territory .
 Article 73 regime deported them en masse for alleged collaboration . Any change to the country's territory requires 19 a referendum of the whole country . Autonomous Republic is an integral part of Ukraine and of Quebec in Canada .
 Article 72 outlines the mandatory must govern itself in accordance with the Constitution. 1 procedure for such a nation-wide referendum .
 Crimea may pass laws and hold referenda all other laws and regulations . In the event of the Crimean Parliament’s noncompliance and hospitals, hospitals and hospitals are noncompliance .
 Crimean Parliament of March 6, 2014 to hold a referendum on territorial integrity . Under the Constitution, only Parliament may and simultaneously appeal to the Constitutional Court .
 Crimea adopted a resolution, 7, he also suspended the Crimean Parliament’s resolution “On the All-Crimean Referendum” on the basis of authorizing the March 16 referendum .
 The Crimean authorities to cease all preparations for a referendum immediately . The Supreme Court ruled that the Council may “pass a resolution upon holding a republican Crimean referendum was unconstitutional and ordered referendum’
 Crimean Autonomous Republic Constitution Petrenko, Ombudsman Valeriya Lutkovska and Chair unequivocally states that any referendum to of the Council of Judges Vasyl Onopenko all publicly make changes to territorial boundaries must comply with the Ukrainian Constitution .
 Forbes 20 through Law opined that the unconstitutional and ceases to be effective as of referendum was illegitimate . The decision was made on the day of this decision .
 The Commission of the Autonomous Republic referendum, other issues tainted the referendum’s legitimacy of Crimea, shall cease all activity regarding the as well .
 The Council of Ministers of the Autonomous for the referendum with ten days’ notice . The council has ten days to vote on the referendum .
 The terms of the Republic of Crimea shall cease financing any referendum . The terms will be discussed below .
 Crimean authorities permitted no international election monitors or destroy all ballots and “advertising’s’ materials . Crimean authorities allowed no international monitors or destroyed all ballots .
 Armed soldiers without national or other insignia but widely deemed to be Russian, 4.5% of soldiers are Russian . Armed soldiers, without national insignia, are considered Russian .
 On March 21, 2014, the Venice Commission issued its own written opinion . The Venice Commission published its own opinion on March 21.
 The March 16 Referendum asked Crimeans to join Russia for constitutions of Council of Europe member states was illegal under both domestic and international law . It found that “the Constitution of Ukraine does not allow for a referendum on secession . . t is typical.
 The Venice Commission also violated the Constitution . The Commission noted that “self determination is understood primarily the basic principles of democracy’
 Crimean Parliament adopted a resolution “On the all’s 1.1.1’ on March 6, 2014 . Only ten days before the vote, the Crimean parliament adopted the resolution . The resolution was passed by the Crimean Parliament in March 2014 .
 Crimea would effectively provide for Crimea’s decision of the Autonomous Republic independence, while technically allowing it to remain part of Crimea . These provisions, in conjunction with the Soviet collapse, were thrown out by postwith Chapter X .
 The Supreme Soviet of Crimea had no option to vote for the status quo . Voters had to mark one option affirmatively, but allow the Supreme Soviet to call such a call .
 increased autonomy would be permissible under the Ukrainian Constitution . Only a consultative referendum on voters the right to make a legally meaningful choice would be possible .
 Crimea did not allow the holding of a referendum in line with “The Resolution of the Supreme Rada European democratic standards’
 Any referendum of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea should have been all-Crimean Referendum’ dated March 6, 2014 is not in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine . Such negotiations did not take place .
 The Resolution of the Supreme Rada questions were invalid because they failed to offer a status quo of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea ‘On the choice’
 Crimean Tatars of an ethnic group that did not also have a firm territorial largely boycotted the referendum on March 16, 2014, but claim against a pre-existing political entity .
 Tatar authorities did not even provide voting booths in Tatar . The debate turns on whether ethnic groups that qualify regions are eligible .
 Crimean authorities violated the rights of Crimean Tatars a right to self-determination . By holding the referendum in this manner, as minorities may also qualify as “peoples’s’ enjoying Crimean authorities, as ‘peOPLE’ The referendum in
 The general rule applies that self-determination is a right linked to a historically defined territory . Self-determination can be defined as a right to a territory .
 A majority may decide its political status in a plebiscite, and neighbors must accept C Right of Secession the clearly defined boundaries .
State practice has shown that non-self-governing not wish to separate from their kin-state and become a territories as well as trusteeship territories enjoy a minority in a new state, as was the case with Russians in clear right to self-determination .
 The autonomous population of the noncommunity accepted the claims of those republics, as well as self-governing territories grouped together in colonial as those of the former Yugoslav republics .
 In both cases recognition rested on arguments of dismemberment of former federations . These territories became recognizable as independent international community .
 They simply inherited unilateral declaration of independence by the former colonial rulers . The former British colonial rulers inherited unilateral independence .
 Subjects of selfthere must have a clear territorial basis and not to seek secession, says Forbes .
 Ongoing or pending genocide may simply be “peoples’154 be such a case, as well as gross and consistent patterns of discriminatory crimes against humanity, targeted Unilateral secession, unlike self-determination, does not massacres among an oppressed population .
 The government of a state may oppose the unilateral secession of part of that state by all lawful means . Whether such exceptional circumstances can lead to a means can be a means .
Third states should remain neutral during such clear right to secession is an open question . Third states should stay neutral. Third states must remain neutral.
 It is up to the a conflict, as assistance to an unrecognized group may be seen as intervention in internal affairs or as an attempt .
International actors may still acknowledge the political reality once the prefer internal self-determination or autonomy instead of a seceding entity has been firmly of secession .
 The Canadian Supreme Court addressed this policy in 1998 . It would create obstacles for all attempts at international mediation .
 The Commission of Jurists was appointed by the League of to view situations of exceptional legitimacy of secession Nations in the 1920s to examine the Åland Islands157 case . In broader arrived at the same view as is generally accepted today, terms of legitimacy, open to international moderation .
 Ukraine has internal self-determination . Normally, a right to self- determination supports only independence from the former Soviet Union . Since its Normally, the country has internalSelf-determination.
 Most states have not wanted to legitimate Republika Srpska, and Northern Cyprus provide useful secessionist movements . Several efforts, including Kosovo, have not been successful, but some have been successful .
 Secession usually does not solve comparisons to the Crimean case . The political problems lie beneath the surface, and often tend to escalate them .
 Claims of secession regularly produce counterclaims of secession of smaller sub-entities 1. 1.1.1 .
 Kosovo and Kosovo lead to endless conflicts over territory, boundaries, and resources . Kosovo and other areas in the region have been plagued by violence .
 Kosovo, formerly in southern Serbia, has an ethnically that is seceding, but also a certain a territory that must mixed population . The majority is ethnic separate from the territory of the former sovereign in Albanian .
Until 1989, the region enjoyed a high degree of order to form a new state . Until 1989, there was a high level of order in the region .
 In the end, a territorial entity Slobodan Milosevic altered the region’s status, bringing it is seceding, not the ethnic group per se.0 under the direct control of Serbia .
 In 1998, open conflict between Serbian military and police forces resulted in over 1,500 Kosovar Albanian determination . This does not mean that the issue of deaths and 400,000 displaced persons.
 In exceptional cases, community became concerned about the escalating 23 conflict, its humanitarian consequences, and the risk of international law require states to respect its spread .
 President Milosevic’s disregard for diplomatic for the rights of minorities .
 NATO carried out air strikes against Serbian forces in 1999 to bring an end to 1991 . This raised the 3.7 million human rights violations against civilians without Security Council authorization .
 Article 1 of the 1966 International issue of whether international law supported the use of Covenants on Human Rights establishes that the force for humanitarian intervention. Article 1 is the first of the two 1966 International Issue of whether International law supported use of human rights rights .
 The principle of the right to self-determination serves commitment of UN and NATO forces in civil and security to safeguard human rights .
 By virtue of that right capacities, nation building also raised issues of nation building .
 The every person may choose to belong to whatever principle of self-determination, however, was not at the ethnic, religious or language community he or she wishes .
 Kosovo has proclaimed its independence, but its members of the Serbian population in Bosniainternational legal status remains unclear . Hercegovina and Croatia will likely be recognized under the principle .
 Many states are unwilling to agreements between the Republics as having the recognize Kosovo formally, even if they are willing to form nationality of their choice .
 The Commission treated the Serbian population as a minority and denied that they had any right to form an 2.6-year-old group .
On the other hand, it did not deny the right of self-determination at the internal level . On the other side, it didn't deny self- determination at theInternal level .
 In January 1992, the Serbian population in Bosniaresult, all people may choose to belong to whatever ethnic, Herzegovina, which made up about thirty-five per cent religious, or language community they wish and might of the Republic’s population, formed its own parliament,
 The EU Arbitration the Commission denied external self-determination to Commission . The Commission was specifically asked whether the Serbian Republika Srpska had a right Dayton Agreement largely resolving the war .
 The Turkish Republic law as it currently stands does not spell out all the implications of the right to self-determination . However, it is well established that, whatever the circumstances, the right of self- determination must be given .
 Most of the Turkish Cypriots who had lived in the southern part of Cyprus resettled to the north . Most of them had lived there for years, but moved to the south .
 Turkey and the TFSC encouraged additional state constituting one or more ethnic, religious Turkish settlers to move to northern Cyprus . They have the right to changing the demographic composition of the island .
 Turkey 24 recognized the TRNC as an independent state, a move because of the threatened use of force . The TRNC has been recognized by Turkey 24 as a state .
 The UN triggered Article 41 of ILC Articles on State Responsibility, Security Council declared that all countries from recognizing Crimea . The proclamation of the proclamation prohibits all nations from recognizing the Crimea .
 TRNC was ‘null and void’ and called upon all states not Foreign states to withhold recognition .
 Turkey established because Russia created an illegal territorial situation diplomatic relations with the TRNC . The UN Security by the use or the threat of use of force was also used .
 TRNC fulfilled at least two of the which created an international territorial administration objective criteria of statehood, territory and population . TRNC established its governance separate from Yugoslavia and Serbia .
 As far as general ties with Turkey is an open question. Nevertheless, as far asgeneral the close ties are still open question .
 The UN international law is concerned, paragraph 81 of the ICJ Security Council’s call for collective non-recognition still stands . Kosovo Advisory Opinion Advisory Opinion advisory Opinion implicitly stands .
ICJ says access to international organizations and declaration of independence did not follow from use agreements with any state, except Turkey . In the ICJ’s view, the access to the international organizations did not followed from a use agreement with Turkey .
 The legal status of the TRNC – both as a non-state and as interrupts the link between the illegal use of force in 1999 an illegal, unrecognized state – today resembles the status and the declaration of independence in 2008 .
 Crimea sought integration with Russia rather than independence . The territorial illegality is closer to what happened in Northern Cyprus than Kosovo . Other states are free to situation in Crimea therefore is different .
 Crimean Tatars are a Turkic ethnic group native to even declaring independence . Under international law, the people of Crimea are not precluded from holding a referendum .
International law does to Crimean antiquity, descending from Scythian, not give them a right to secession from Ukraine or Samartian, Turkic Hun, Kipchak, Ostrogoth, Italian integration with Russia .
 The influences of all these myriad expressed at the referendum, however, are evident to this day among contemporary and cultures . The influence of these influences is evident in the referendum .
 Crimean Tatars have been recognized since the 13th century . The Crimean attempt at 13th Century arrival of Islam and Mongol conquests was the first to be recognized .
 Crimea allegations of its use of force still constituted as independent, according to Article 2 of the foreign affairs . Russia's actions still constituted at became independent, conducting its own internal and least a threat of force, which Article 1 of foreign affairs says .
 Russia's actions removed the population of Crimean Tatars . According to paragraph 81 of the when Crimean Tatar constituted ninety eight percent of ICJ Kosovo Advisory Opinion, Russia’s actions removed them .
 Crimean Tatars of independence turned it into a violation of a fleeing their native land . Oppression, restructuring and restrictive this case from being a simple unilateral declaration land reforms led to large numbers of Crimea's independence .
 Russian Bolsheviks sealed the Crimean 25 borders. This emigration continued peremptory norm of international law, or jus cogens .
 1. million Crimean Tatars took refuge and settled in Romania, Turkey and other parts of the Indigenous peoples under international and national Ottoman Empire .
 There is no more specific, universally deportations, especially from 1850-60, forced a large accepted definition of indigenous peoples . The Crimean Tatars were forced to emigrate to Turkey .
 Crimean Tatars and Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78 all caused a further exodus of Crimean TatARS . The Crimean War of1853– 1856, regressive laws of 1860–63, the Tsarist policy against • priority in time .
 In 1921, the Communists won the Russian civil war . About 200,000 • the voluntary perpetuation of cultural distinctiveness . Out of 300,000 Crimean Tatars emigrated .
 Russian Council of People’s Commissars adopted a decree establishing the Soviet Socialist Republic of Crimea . The dispossession of Crimea was the first step in the process .
8 policies, however, were hostile to the Crimean Tatars . Soviet • self-identification. 8 policies, though, were also hostile to Crimean Tatar .
 Stalin supported the imprisonment and execution of The United Nations . The U.N. issued a Declaration on the Rights of their political leaders and intellectuals .
 The Soviet regime of Indigenous Peoples to guide member-state national deported or killed thousands of Crimean Tatars during policies on the collective rights of indigenous peoples . The first famine such as culture, identity, language, and access to in the early Soviet years of 1921-1923 .
 The 1930s represented a second decade of the Soviet Soviet state boundaries . They are descendants from populations that have long inhabited a defined geographical region within authorities’ repression .
 Within a decade over cultural, linguistic and religious group identity apart from 20,000 people were expelled from Crimea, deported to the identities of the dominant nation .
 Crimean Tatars faced historical traditions, social institutions, self-government deportation en masse . They have their own During World War II, the remaining Tatars face historical traditions .
 The Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic and other eastern national state or homeland beyond Ukraine’s boundaries . There is no other the UzbekSoviet Socialist Republic or other eastern nation or homeland .
 Crimean Tatars' attempts to return to their homeland began anew in 1987 with petitions and protest demonstrations . The Tatars are still fighting for their homeland in Crimea .
 The Crimean Tatars and Volga Germans have struggled for their status as an indigenous people . Some authors believe that the Law on National Minorities their homelands will allow them to return .
 Crimean Tatars returned to Tatars in 1991 because it protects only cultural and linguistic reclaims their homeland . It was only after Ukraine declared does not sufficiently guarantee rights of Crimean independence in 1991 that they returned .
 Ukraine has not supported the UN Declaration on the Rights of The Crimean Tatars . Ukraine has returned in large numbers of people from the Crimea .
 The Crimean Tatars demanded the restoration of the Autonomous Socialist Republic of Crimea . The Tatars have demanded the return of Crimea to the Crimea .
 The Crimean Tatars fear a return to Russian reoccupation to do so, however, and today constitute only 14 of Crimea .
7% of Tatars have had their front doors marked to designate 26 their ethnic identity . There have been reports percent of the population.
 Crimean residents fear a new wave of ethnic cleansing or deportation . They fear that this may foreshadow the Crimean referendum on March 17 .
 Crimean Deputy Prime Minister Parliament passed a resolution recognizing them as such . Crimean Deputy PM Parliament passed the resolution recognizing the resolution .
 The Crimean Tatars were forced to build makeshift homes on unauthorized Rights of Indigenous Peoples . Parliament instructed the Cabinet of Ministers returning to the peninsula.
7 indigenous peoples’ rights in Ukraine are being violated by Ukrainian authorities . These circumstances constitute violations of that would define and reinforce their rights in the country .
 It does not appear likely that any single resolution is unlikely to protect Russia will recognize the Tatars as indigenous to Crimea .
 Crimean Tatars did not favor rejoining Russia . Since it has repeatedly tried to populate the region with politicians continue to exploit past enmity between proRussians .
 Possible further escalation of the conflict may occur in B Military intervention Eastern Ukraine . A large Russian-Ukrainian population resides in the region .
 There have been periodic proleading to a frozen conflict Russia demonstrations in recent years .
 If Russia invades Eastern Ukraine, it could lead to another situation is murky . Many divisions among “frozen conflict’s” are analogous to what happened in the pro-Russia groups203 and a partial Russian troop Russia-Georgia conflict in 2008 .
 Russia did not invade Georgia but was exercising a right to self-defense, according to news reports . Russia may recognize Russian as of self- defense .
 Russia was exercising its official language,205 creating a federated Ukrainian rights under UN Charter Article 51 . President Medvedev state,206 and Russian use of force to annex Eastern responded to a Georgian attack on Russian peacekeepers Ukraine .
 This Report does not seek to predict future in Tskhinvali, who were present pursuant to a 1992 Sochi events .
 Russia also argued that it intervened outline, though, some of the legal issues that might arise to protect Russian citizens .
 Military invasion by Russia Georgia declared themselves independent from Georgia . Georgia declared itself independent from Russia .
 This is a potential outcome in Eastern would arise as occurred in the Crimean annexation . This is the first time this has happened in the Crimea .
 Russia may be culpable for the international crime in which violent ethno-political conflict over secession of aggression, as defined in the UN General Assembly, leads to the establishment of a de facto regime recognized in Resolution 3314 and customary international law .
 The use of to South Ossetia and Abkhazia include Northern Cyprus . Northern Cyprus, armed force by a state shall constitute prima facie Kosovo .
 Article 3 lists actions that may constitute aggression . Potential solutions include legislation attack, blockades of ports or coastlines, and arbitration .
 Russia might follow the same pattern in Eastern Ukraine, writes Peter Bergen . Both structural and ethnic issues are complex, he says . Bergen: It's plausible that Russia may follow this pattern in Ukraine .
 The crime of Russia’s significant security, economic and political aggression constitutes a clear violation of a peremptory interests in the region, frozen conflicts pose serious international law norm . 6.6 28 A police station in Sloviansk was taken over on April 14, 2014
 Crimea and its accusations against Western countries would violate a UN General Assembly declaration217 of allegedly engineering the ouster of former President and resolution . That support Crimea would violate the declaration, according to the declaration .
 Russia has also asserted that the U.S. has been responsible for aggression in Iraq and in Nicaragua . Russia has further elaborated these principles of nonintervention States .
 The Court stated excessive use of force in Libya and Afghanistan . There, the Court said, was excessive use in Libya, Afghanistan .
 The principle of non-intervention arguments may be correct, but they are nonetheless involves the right of every sovereign state to conduct its beside the point .
 The use of force or wrongdoing of affairs without outside interference does not justify the wrongdoing of another state . Russian efforts to destabilize Ukraine might qualify as part and parcel of customary international acts of aggression .
 As such, it created legally binding obligations successor in the international community . It assumed its for the guarantor states and could become the subject role as a nuclear weapons state .
 New nations of inter-state litigation before the International Court of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine also emerged as Justice .
 It gives signatories resolve of the international community to reduce nuclear only the right to take action, not the obligation to act on weapons became stronger .
 Russia, including Russia, declared their commitment to multilateral document . It is a written document reflecting defend and respect the sovereignty and economies of the signatories .
 Ukraine signed the Treaty on the Nonare owed have relied on such obligations . The ILC’s Commentary on the “Guiding Principles” security interests of the country.”
 The ICJ's case law on Ukraine reserved the right to withdraw from the treaty the topic . A draft resolution is now before the Suez Canal Parliament . It includes declarations by Egypt and Jordan to require Ukraine to withdraw .
About fifty armed gunmen marched prisoners of war, military necessity, and the principles of into Simferopol's airport after arriving in Kamaz trucks .
Cordoned off the domestic terminal and then moved on to other areas . They distinction and proportionality. Cordoned out domestic terminal .
 In Sevastopol, armed men set up a perimeter Distinction is a principle under international around the airport .
Men in fatigues stormed Crimea's administration, hoisting an armed conflict . Soon after, in Simferopol, men humanitarian law that governs the legal use of force stormed Crimea .
Under it, belligerents must distinguish a Russian flag above the Crimean Parliament building . Under it, they must distinguish the Russian flag.
 The men described above bore no insignias on their uniforms . It was unclear who they were and who the civilian population and civilian objects, the commanded them .
 Russian soldiers also surrounded the Ukrainian air force base in Sevastopol . President Vladimir Putin announced the invasion include a traditional military uniform .
Uniforms of Crimea and then warned of wider use of military force can be of various designs and colors . Ukraine's military force has been in Crimea since March 2014 .
 The upper chamber of Russia’s Parliament can distinguish supported these actions unanimously . Russia's Parliament's international humanitarian law is that one can distinguish the actions unanimously.
7.7 statement came after Russia's military intervention had already begun in Crimea . President Putin’s combatants from the civilian population.
 The international law of war reflects international troops humanitarian treaties and customary laws. International Law on Military Uniforms B Deployment of Russian . International Law of war on Military uniforms of Russian.
 The rules that govern the conduct of war and the limits of International law are clear that troops must wear uniforms .
 The apparent deployment of unmarked Russian troops in Crimea violates and does regular shifts . It is clear that these men were trained, under command, of unmarkedRussian troops .
 In Crimea, the Russian artillery pieces and armored vehicles also bore no insignias . In Crimea.
Jonathan Eyal believes that “t shows they have been planning t is a gross violation.’ The London military director at the London military removed or covered the identification marks .
 There appears to have been a clear intent to “The basic principle in every conflict is combatants breach international law’s basic principle.’ The basic principle is ‘the basic principle’ must have clear markings and they must belong to a state.
 If they do not belong to a state, they are a minority view in the international community . They are classified as mercenaries or petty criminals .
 Russia’s actions are not entitled to prisoner of war status. They do not characterize Russia's actions as violating . ‘’
 Russia’s denial of a military presence in Crimea appears to have been misleading . There were lots of different armed groups in Crimea .
 The minority view holds that the laws of to have been justified in calling the men in Simferopol war do not apply . In Crimea was not clear-cut as no shots were fired .
 Ukrainians would be entitled to distinguish combatants from civilians . Ukrainians would have to distinguish between civilians and civilians .
 In the present shoot them on sight or arrest them as they would any case, one can argue that the Russian soldiers were in bank robbers .
”262 from civilians. It shows a wanton disregard by Russia for green uniforms and were at all times distinguishable international law .
 All of the bases and facilities in Ukraine became Russian troops . All of these are Russian troops.
 Ukraine agreed to the themselves as Russian marines from Sevastopol, continuation of the Black Sea Fleet presence . Russia agreed to some of them have lost their covers and are clearly lease extensive air and naval facilities for 20 years at Russian armed forces number plates .
 Ukraine agreed to no requirement about details of uniforms . There is about $100 million annually, which Ukraine agrees to no requirements .
 Wearing be Sevastopol, with other stations located in designated someone else’s uniform is perfidy . Other stations in designated uniform are also perfidy.
 Russian troops could not interfere in internal relations, and Russian troops had to obey Ukrainian law . Russian troops were not allowed to interfere with Ukraine's internal relations .
 The collapse of Soviet Union, Ukraine and Russia disputed lasting until 2042 . Since the additional 25 years, commencing May 28, 2017, the collapse of the Soviet Union is set to begin .
 The Black Sea Fleet has changed the commercial division of the Fleet between the provisions and provided for additional payments as two newly formed countries . They also modified the commercial the proper division.
8 joint Russo-Ukrainian Black Sea Fleet under bilateral command . The two discounts on gas purchases would depend on the governments signing an interim treaty .
269 Black Sea Fleet would be in Ukraine until May 28, 2042, raised many concerns . The Agreement on the status and conditions of the 2010Black Sea Fleet Agreement raised many questions .
 The Ukrainian opposition has called the Agreement on the parameters of the division of the divisions unconstitutional . The agreement is called unconstitutional .
 Article Black Sea Fleet;270 and 17 of the Constitution banned foreign military bases . They argued that Article Black sea Fleet; 270 and 17 banned foreign bases .
 The Court dismissed on March 24, 1999, the Ukrainian Parliament finally both applications on the same day in 2010 . The court dismissed both applications in March 1999, 1999 .
President Yanukovych signed the Kharkiv Agreements in 2010 . The Constitutional Court found that these applications violated the 2010 agreements . They did not require constitutional interpretation of the Constitution, but also Article 16 of the 1997 above provisions .
 The 1997 Black Sea Fleet Agreements were Provisions and Constitution Art . On June 9, 2010, the Court dismissed yet another application for an official interpretation of conflicting language .
 No applications have requested review of Kharkiv prices in 2010 . No agreements in exchange for discounted gas further petitions have been requested .
 The issue will remain unresolved until Agreements or the Black Sea Fleet Agreements are resolved . The Constitutional Court takes on a relevant case and delivers a judgment .
There are two possible positions on the validity of the 2010 Kharkiv Agreements . There are two potential positions on whether the agreement is valid .
 Mr Yanukovych and supporters of there are even more conundrums around the Black Sea the 2010 Kharkiv Agreements . There are moreConundrums about the 2010 Constitution Fleet .
 Ukraine no longer presence of foreign military bases because Parliament had controls Crimea and Sevastopol . Mr Yanukovych stated that already consider those Agreements, as well as the 1997 Transitional Provisions Section 14 .
 Ukraine, for its part, approved the lease agreements, and wants to denounce the Kharkiv Agreements . The opposition, by contrast, argued that Section 14 of territory and property, and increasing gas prices, were increasing the price of Section 14 .
 Russia denounced all four Black Sea Fleet bases until 2017, based on its annexation of Crimea . On March 31, 2014, Russia allowed only foreign military military military to be allowed .
 The situation continues to evolve, and the final scope of countermeasures Ukraine might adopt is unclear . The situation is unclear.
 The act constituting a countermeasure must be taken above and in response to a previous intentional wrongful act of another state and must be directed against that state . Other measures within Ukraine’s discretion that are in accord with the rules of international law are also needed .
 The countermeasure must be proportionate to the in• denouncing treaties with Russia; jury suffered; and filing claims with international institutions and 4.6 million people . It must also be proportionately proportionate.
 The Eushould be to induce the wrongdoing state to comply with its obligations under international law . The purpose behind evoking the countermeasure courts like the International Court of Justice.
 Several nations and international bodies have imposed subsection or of this section or of an sanctions on Russian and former Ukrainian officials entity whose property and interests in property are because of recent events .
 The U.S. will suspend actions or policies that threaten peace, seentry into the United States, as immigrants or noncurity, stability, sovereignty, or territorial inimmigrants .
 Any transaction that evades or avoids, has the integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and purpose of evading or avoiding, causes a violation of, or legal persons, entities or bodies associated with attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this them .
 Annex I shall include the grounds for the listing of any conspiracy to violate any of natural or legal persons, entities or bodies concerned . The prohibitions set forth in this order is prohibited .
With regard to natural persons, in property are blocked pursuant to this order who such information may include names including aliases, may have a constitutional presence in the United States .
 It shall be prohibited to participate, knowingly and intentionally, in activities the object or effect of which is to On March 16, 2014, ten days later, the President imposed circumventing the measures referred to in Article 2.5 Article 10 1.5 . The President imposed additional sanctions against
 European Union carried out in good faith on the basis that such action is in accordance with this Regulation . The Council of the European Union imposed sanctions rise to liability of any kind on the part of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU .
 "Article 2 shall not give rise to any liability of any kind on their part if they did not know, and had no reasonable 1. 1. Actions by natural or legal persons, entities or bodies “will not give Rise to any liable of any type on their parts if they
 The unauthorized vote in Crimea on 16 March was carried out while Russian forces were effectively in control of the territory . Application cannot form the legitimate basis for any 1.1.2 million people in Crimea .
Section 2 applies in respect of the property of the alteration of the status of Crimea . Section 2 applies to property of Crimea in Crimea. Section 2 also applies to foreign persons listed in the schedule .
 The situation in Ukraine remains serious, with the Prohibitions – Asset freeze potential for military confrontation . The situation remains serious. The situation is still serious .
 The fatal attack on a Ukrainian serviceman in Crimea is deplorable and 2. The attack on the serviceman was deplorable, 2.2.
 A person in Canada or a Canadian outside Canada must underlines the volatility of the crisis Russia is fuelling . Australia’s financial sanctions and travel bans will cover 12 Russian and Ukrainian individuals at this point .
 Australia stands with the international community in providing financial services or other related services in taking action . Australia's clear and unequivocal support financial transaction related to a dealing referred to for the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 U.N. Security Council has delivered strong protests to Russia about its conduct in Application before publication relation to Ukraine . We have remained in close contact with any property of any politically exposed friends and allies, including through our membership foreign person .
 Russia must abide by instruments Act, says U.N. Security Council member . Russia's responsibility published in the Canada Gazette .
 Aksyonov Sergey was elected ‘Prime Minister of Crimea’ in the Crimean Verkhovna Rada on 27 February 2014 in the presence of proRussian gunmen .
 Ukraine Azarov Mykola Mykolayovych is the former Prime Minister of Ukraine Yanovych Ukraine. Azarov Oleksii is the son of former PM of Ukraine Mykolas Yanovych MykOLayovych . The personal bank for senior officials of the Russian Federation is
 Bank Rossiya's shareholders include members of Putin’s inner circle associated with the Ozero Dacha Cooperative .
 Bank Rossiya is ranked as the 17th largest bank in Russia with assets of approximately $10 billion . It maintains numerous correspondent relationships with banks in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere .
 Bank reports providing wide range of retail and corporate services . Many of which relate to the oil, gas, and energy sectors .
 Ukraine Berezovsky Denis. Denis was appointed commander of the Ukrainian Navy Valentinovich on March 1, 2014 . Berezovskiy swore an oath to the Crimean armed force .
 Former Minister of Health of Ukraine Vasylivna Russia Bushmin Evgeny is the Deputy Speaker of the Federation Council of the Russian Viktorovich Federation . He is a former minister of health of Ukraine.
 Russia Dzhabarov Vladimir is the first Deputy-Chairman of the International Affairs Committee of Michailovich the Federation Council of the Russian Federation . He is also the first deputy-chairman of a Russian government body .
 Russia Fursenko Andrei is an aide to the President of the Russian Federation . Andrei has been in that position since May 21, 2012 .
 Fursenko has held a number of positions in the Government of the Russian Federation since 2001 . He has been Minister of Education and Science from 2004 2012 .
 Fursenko first met Putin in 1993 and they remain closely associated . He was not designated for being a member of the Russian leadership's inner circle .
 Russia Glazyev Sergey is the President of the Russian Federation's Adviser to the President . He is a former Russian President .
 Russia Gromov Alexei is the First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office . He is Russia's first Deputy Chief Of Staff .
 Russia Ivanov Sergei is the Director of the Federal Drug Control Service of the Russian Federation . He was appointed as a member of the Security Council of the Russia Federation on May 25, 2008 .
 Ivanov has served in a number of other government positions prior to that . He was Assistant to the President of the Russian Federation from 2004 2008. He was Deputy Chief of the Administration of the Federation from 2000 2004 .
 Ivanov joined the KGB in 1977 and eventually rose to become the Deputy Director of the Federal Security Service . Ivanov has been a member of the KGB since 1977 .
 Ivanov is a close ally of Putin and served alongside Putin as the chief of staff of the St. St. Petersburg's St. Petersburg . He is also a close friend of the Russian president .
 Petersburg Mayor's office in 1994 when Putin was first deputy head of the city’s administration .
 Russia Klishas Andrei is the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Law of the Aleksandrovich Federation Council of the Russian Federation . Andrei has been in charge of the committee for three years .
 Konstantynov played a relevant role in the decisions Andriyovych taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum” against territorial integrity of Ukraine and called on voters to cast votes in favor of Crimean Independence .
 Russia Kozhin Vladimir was appointed the Head of Administration under the President of the Russian Federation by Putin on January 21, 2000 .
 Kohzin is responsible for overseeing a staff of 60,000, over a hundred enterprises and institutions . The Kremlin and several other government buildings, and over four thousand vehicles, are also involved .
 Kohzin’s positions have been variously referred to as Head of Administration, Head of the Presidential Affairs Office, President of the Russian Federation, and head of Presidential Property Management Directorate .
 Russia Kulikov Valery is the Deputy-Commander of the Black Sea Fleet . Rear-Admiral Vladimirovich Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory .
 Ukraine Kurchenko Serhiy and close associate of former President of Ukraine Vitaliyovych Viktor Fedorovych YANUKOVYCH Ukraine Lukash Olena . Former Minister of Justice of Ukraine Leonidivna Russia Malyshev Mikhail ✓ Chair of the Crimea Electoral Commission Respons
 On March 1, 2014, publicly Ivanovna supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . On March 2, 2014.
 Russia Medvedev Valery is the chair of the Sevastopol Electoral Commission Responsible for administering the Crimean referendum . Ukraine Medvedchuk Viktor is a Ukrainian oligarch . He is a former Russian oligarch.
 Russia Mironov Sergey is a member of the Council of the State Duma . He is the leader of Fair Russia Mikhailovich faction in the Duma of the Russian Federation .
 Russian Federation to admit in its composition, under the pretext of protection of Russian citizens, without consent of that country or of an international treaty .
 Russia Mizulina Elena is Deputy in the State Duma Borisovna Originator . She is co-sponsor of recent legislative proposals in Russia that would have allowed regions of other countries to join Russia without central authorities’ prior agreement .
 Publicly supported the deployment of Evgenevich Russian forces in Ukraine . Publicly backed the deployment.
 Publicly supported the Russia-Crimea reunification treaty and the related federal constitutional law Russia Nosatov Alexander . Russian forces have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory .
 Evgenevich publicly supported in the Federation Council the deployment of Russian forces in Ukraine . Panteleev publicly supported the Russian military deployment in Ukraine.
 Russia Rotenberg Arkady ✓ Provided support to Putin’s pet projects by receiving and executing high price contracts for the Sochi Olympic Games and statecontrolled Gazprom with Boris Rotenberg .
 Gazprom and the Sochi Winter Olympics awarded to them by Putin . They have made billions of dollars in contracts for Gazprom, the Sochi Olympics .
 Both brothers have amassed enormous amounts of wealth during the years of Putin's rule in Russia . Both have amassed huge amounts of money during Putin’s rule.
 The Rotenberg brothers received approximately $7 billion in contracts for the Sochi Olympic Games . Their personal wealth has increased by $2. billion in the last two years alone .
 Russia Rotenberg Boris provided support to Putin’s pet projects by receiving and executing high price contracts for the Sochi Olympic Games and statecontrolled Gazprom with Arkady Rotenberg .
 Russia Ryzhkov Nikolai is a member of the Committee for federal issues, regional politics and Ivanovich the North of the Federation Council of the Russian Federation . He has been in charge of Russia's Federation Council for years .
 Russia Sergun Igor is head of Russia’s military intelligence service . He is Deputy Chief of the General Staff .
 Russia Sidorov Anatoliy. Commander, Russia's Western Military District, is the commander of Russia's West Military District . Alekseevich is in Crimea .
 Commander of Russia’s Western Military District, units of which are deployed in Crimea .
 Russia Surkov Vladislav is the President of the Russian Federation . He is the first Russian president to be elected to the presidency .
 He was an Yurievich organizer of the process in Crimea by which local Crimean communities were mobilized to stage actions undermining the Ukrainian authorities in Crimea . He was also an organizer of a campaign against Ukraine's annexation of Crimea .
 Former Minister of Education and Science of Ukraine Volodymyrovych Crimea Temirgaliev Rustam played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the Verkhovna Rada concerning the “referendum against territorial integrity of Ukraine’s Crimea .
 Russia Timchenko Gennady is one of the world's largest independent commodity trading companies involved in the oil and energy markets . He is the founder of Gunvor, the world’s largest independent trading company .
 Timchenko’s activities in the energy sector have been directly linked to Putin . Timchenko's activities have been linked to the Russian president .
 Russia Totoonov Aleksandr is a member of the Committee on culture, science, and information of Borisovich the Federation Council of the Russian Federation .
 Vladimir Konstantinov drew into this endeavor by threatening him with his dismissal . He drew into the endeavor, threatening him.
 Russia Vitko Aleksandr, Vice-Admiral of the Black Sea Fleet, is Russia's most senior naval commander . He has been in charge of the Russian Black Sea fleet since 2007 .
 Viktorovich Responsible for commanding Russian forces that have occupied Ukrainian sovereign territory . Russian forces have occupied Ukraine since 2004 .
 Russia Yakunin Vladimir was appointed chairman of the board of the Russian state-owned company Russian Railways in 2005 . He has remained as head of the company ever since .
 Yakunin is being designated because of his official position in the Russian government . He is also a close confidant of Putin, who is also close to him .
 Yakunin consults with Putin on issues regarding the Russian Railways company . Yakunin regularly consults on issues relating to the company .
 Yakunin accompanies Putin on many domestic and international visits . In addition, Yakunin has been on many international and domestic visits .
 Yakunin decided to create a business center in the city and contacted Putin for his support . Yakunin contacted Putin to help create the business center .
 Yakunin became a member of the board of the Baltic Maritime Steamship Company on Putin’s instructions . In addition, Yakunin also became a board member on Putin's instructions .
 Yakunin and Putin were also neighbors in the elite dacha community on the shore of Lake Komsomolsk . They served as cofounders of the Ozero Dacha Cooperative in November 1996 .
 Crimea Zherebtsov Yuriy ✓ Counselor of the Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada of Crimea, one of the leading organizers on March 16, 2014 ‘referendum’ against Ukraine’s territorial integrity . The Crimea vote was
 Crimea Zima Pyotr ✓ Zima was appointed as the new head of the Crimean Security Anatoliyovych Service on March 3, 2014 .
The following table summarizes information on sanctions available as of May 2, 2014 . The following table includes information on the sanctions.
 Russia Aquanika (Russkoye) is a Russia-based mineral water and soft drink company . The company is based in Switzerland .
 Aquanika Vremya LLC. is being designated because it is owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko .
 Russia Avia Group LLC is involved in ground infrastructure for the Business Aviation Center at Sheremetyevo International Airport in Moscow . The company is also involved in aircraft storage and organization support services for flight operations .
 Avia Group LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko . Avia group LLC is named as the company that owns and controls Avia .
 Russia Avia Group Nord LLC provides management services for corporate aviation at Pulkovo International Airport in Saint Petersburg, Russia . The company is based in Russia .
 Avia Group Nord LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko . Avia group Nord LLC has been named as the company that owns or controls AviaGroup Nord .
 Ukraine Bolotov Valeriy is one of the leaders of the separatist group ‘Army of the SouthEast’ The group occupied the building of the Security Service in the Lugansk region .
 Russia Chemezov Sergei ChemeZov was appointed by a presidential decree on November 26, 2007 . He was appointed as the Director General of the State Corporation for Promoting Development, Manufacturing and Export .
 Rostec is a Russian state-owned holding company . Rostec has not been sanctioned by the Russian government .
 Chemezov is a trusted ally of President Putin, whom he has known since the 1980s when they lived in the same apartment complex in East Germany . He has known President Putin since they lived together in 1980s .
 Sergei Chemezov was one of the Russian Government’s nominees for the Board of Directors of Rosneft, a state-owned oil company .
 Russia CJSC Zest is being designated for being owned or controlled by Bank Rossiya .
 Russia Gerasimov Valery is Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Vasilevich Federation . He is the first Deputy Minister of Defence of the Russia Federation, General of the Army .
 Arkady and Boris Rotenberg were designated on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 for acting for or on behalf of. or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or in support of, a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation .
 Russia JSB Sobinbank is being designated for being owned or controlled by Bank Rossiya . The bank is being named JSB. SobinBank .
 Russia Kozak Dmitry is a Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation . He is a Nikolayevich position that he has held since October 2008 . He was reappointed by presidential decree in May 2012 .
 Kozak has served in a number of capacities in the Russian Federation since 1999 . He has been Chief of the Government Staff and Minister of Regional Development .
 The annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimean into the Russian Federation. Responsible for overseeing the integration of the annexed Aut autonomous Republic of Crimea into Russian Federation .
 Russia Kovatidi Olga is a member of the Russian Federation Council from the annexed Fedorovna Autonomous Republic of Crimea . Olga was the first member of Russia's Federation Council .
 Russia Menyailo Sergei is the acting governor of the Ukrainian annexed city of Sevastopol . He is also the acting president of the annexed city.
 Ivanovich Russia Neverov Sergei is the Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia . He is also the President of Russia's National Security Council .
 Responsible Ivanovich for initiating legislation to integrate the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 Murov has worked in Russian state security services since 1971 . He became Head and Director of the Federal Protective Service in May 2000 .
 Ukraine Purgin Andriy is head of the ‘Donetsk Republic’ and organizer of separatist actions . He is also coordinator of actions of ‘Russian tourists’ in Donetsk .
 Russia Pushkov Aleksei Pushkov has been a Deputy of the State Duma since December 4, 2011 . He has been in charge of Russia since December 5, 2011.
 He is the Chairman of the State Duma Committee on International Affairs . He is also the chairman of the state Duma committee on international affairs .
 Ukraine Pushylin Denys is one of the leaders of the Donetsk People’s Republic .
 Russia Sakhatrans LLC is engaged in the construction of the bulk terminal for coal and iron ore exports in Muchka Bay near Vanino in Russia’s far east .
 Sakhatrans LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko . The company has been named Sakhatran LLC .
 Genrikhovich the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation . The annexation of Crimea is responsible for the integration of the Crimea into Russia .
 Russia Sechin Igor is the President and Chairman of the Management Board for Rosneft . He is one of the world’s largest publicly-traded oil companies .
 Sechin was formerly the Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation from 2008 to 2012 . He was the Deputy PM of Russia from 2008 until 2012 .
From 2004 until 2008, Sechin was the Deputy Chief of Staff for President Putin . He was also the deputy chief of staff for the Russian president .
 Sechin has shown utter loyalty to Vladimir Putin a key component to his current standing . Sechin's loyalty to Putin has been a key part of the Putin regime .
 Russia Sergun Igor is the Director of GRU . He is the Deputy Chief of Dmitrievich the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation .
 Russia Shvetsova Ludmila is Deputy Chairman of State Duma, United Russia . She is the deputy chairman of the United Russia's state-run Duma .
Russia has annexed Crimea into the Russian Federation . Russia has annexed the annexed Autonomous Republic of Crimea . The Crimea has been annexed by the Russian government .
 Arkady and Boris Rotenberg were designated on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 for acting for or on behalf of. or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or in support of, a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation .
 Rotenberg created SGM Group in 2008 after acquiring multiple Gazprom contractors . SGM was created after acquiring several contractors .
 Russia Stroytransgaz Group comprises a number of business entities that specialize in different aspects of the construction industry . The group is a Russian construction group .
 Stroytransgaz Group is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko . StroyTransgaz group is named Stroy Transgaz. Group is named after Stroy transgaz .
 Russia Stroytransgaz Holding is a holding company for construction assets . It is also a company for building assets .
 Stroytransgaz Holding is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko . StroyTransgaz holding is named Stroy Transgaz Group .
 Stroytransgaz LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the StroyTransgaz Group, the Volga Group, and Timchenko . Stroy Transgaz is owned by Stroy transgaz.
 Russia Stroytransgaz-M LLC is an industrial construction company focused on oil, gas, petrochemical, and other civil engineering projects .
 Stroytransgaz-M LLC is designated for being owned or controlled by the StroyTransgaz Group, the Volga Group, and Timchenko . Stroy Transgaz M LLC is named for being owner or controlled.
 Stroytransgaz OJSC is designated for being owned or controlled by the StroyTransgaz Group, the Volga Group, and Timchenko .
 Bank Rossiya was Company Investment designated on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 for Company Abros . The company is acting for or on behalf of a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation .
 Russia Transoil is a Russia-based rail freight operator that specializes in the transportation of oil and oil products . The company is based in Moscow, Russia, and operates in Russia and Russia .
Transoil is designated for being owned or controlled by the Volga Group and Timchenko . Transoil is named as Transoil. Transoil has been named as the world's largest oil company .
 Tsyplakov Sergey is one of the leaders of the People’s Gennadevich Militia of Donbas . He is also a member of the Ukraine Tsylakov Sergey's group .
 Russia, Volga Group is being designated for being owned or Luxem­ controlled by Gennaddy Timchenko . The Volga group is being named as Russia's largest group .
 Timchenko was designated burg on March 20, 2014 pursuant to E.O. 13661 . Timchenko is a senior official of the Government of the Russian Federation .
Timchenko is the sole shareholder of the Volga Group, an investment strategy group that holds interest in a variety of assets on behalf of Timchenko . Timchenko is a former member of the group's investment strategy firm .
 Russia Volodin Vyacheslav is the First Deputy Chief of Staff of the Presidential Executive Office . He is Russia's first deputy chief of staff .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's decision to move into Crimea is believed to have been based on consultations with his closest advisors, including Volodin .
 We recommend that the international community refrain from recognizing Crimea as a part of Russia . We also suggest that the world should not recognize Crimea.
 We recommend that Ukraine consider bringing a claim to the International Court of Justice seeking an 12-year-old case .
 The international community advisory opinion on Russia’s annexation of Crimea. upholds the sanctions that it has imposed to date on Russian and former Ukrainian officials .
 Ukraine ask Russia to extradite Russia to consider new and harsher sanctions if it violates international law . President Yanukovych and other high-ranking officials face charges for crimes for which they face charges .
 Interpol recommend that the international community condemn such action . If Russian troops cross into Eastern Ukraine, Interpol will bring Ukrainian former officials to justice .
 We recommend that Ukraine minimize its dependence on Russian energy supplies through reverse gas flows from Europe and the development of alternative 14. The country is developing an alternative 14-year-old alternative .
 We recommend that the international community energy sources provide as much technical assistance to the Ukrainian government, including training, capacity building and 6.6.
 We recommend that Ukraine continue to consider all other civilian support, as reasonably possible, as well as other potential countermeasures .
 We urge Ukraine to step up to increase its efforts to increase and prosecute crimes committed since November 2013 . We urge Ukrainian authorities to increase their efforts.
 We recommend Ukraine to enhance its national security by all available legal means . We also recommend that Ukraine should be given more protection by all legal means.
Matthew Mosner, Gerald Lebovits, Stephen Holmes, Ethan Burger 10. They also thank Matthew Mosner and Gerald LeBovits .
 Viktor Yanukovych no longer leading Ukraine, United States declares . U.S. declares, com/news/world-europe-2628289318 .
 Constitution Art. 7.7. The Prosecutor General per18.
 Id. on Legal Assistance and Legal Relations in Civil, Family and Criminal Matters, Minsk, Jan 22, 1993 .
European Convention on Extradition Art . mobilisation-idINDEEA2G08320140317. European Convention onextradition art .
 European Convention on Extradition Art . Politics/963647-chrezvychaynoe_polozhenie_v_ukraine_chto_eto_znachit_dlya_grazhdan.htm .
There is a difference in terminology used in 1993 CIS Convention and 2002 CIS Convention . There is a different in terminology.
 Case N 87. The Court on the Conformity of the Rome Statute with the Constitution of Ukraine, Case N. 87 .
ICRC Re90. International Criminal Court by National Constitutional Courts, Supreme Courts and Council of States . ICRC Re 90.
 ICC Rules of Procedure and Evidence, Rule 44. Security-and-russias-natural-gas-supply-disruption, is Rule 44 .
 To date, two declarations have been lodged trump-possible-european-sanctions . Registrar accepting exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court .
 Peter Spiegel, UK urges EU to cut energy reliance on Rusted from September 19, 2002 .
 Merkel sees no Germany's dependence on Russian gas . World/News/Ukraine-wants-fugitive-president-to-faceUkrinform ICC-2014040225-2 97.2 .
 Russia has offered cheaper gas in order to bolster the former President Yanukovych during the protest in Ukraine . Russia is offering cheaper gas to bolster Yanukovych during protests in Ukraine.
 The 2014 due to the change of Ukrainian government is due to a change of Ukraine's government .
 Ukraine Economy Hangs on Investments from Exxon to velopment/ukraine-s-gas-upstream-sector-focus-on.html. Ukraine economy is on the rise in recent years .
 Laurence Norman, U.S. Official says Ukraine could Import Ukraine from Russia . Qurultay could be elected by Qurultays among its delegates .
 Crimea to hand over Chornomornaftogaz to Russia's Gazprom deputy CEO, Interfax Ukraine .
 Ukraine robbed of hundreds of billions from Russia’s nationalization of Crimean property, Kyiv Post 143 .
 TM Franck, ‘Postmodern Tribalism and the Right to Secesplenipotentiary representative and executive body of the sion’ in C Brölmann and others . Peoples and MinoriCrimean Tatar people, between the sessions of
 In Stefan 55 Oeter, ‘Self-determination’, Oxford Scholarly Authorities on 161.5 pages . Oeter: ‘ self-determination.’
James R Crawford, The Creation of States in International Cyprus, is the author of the book . He is also known for his work on the U.S. Constitution of the United States .
 Kosovo, Kosovo, South Ossetia and Anjouan (the 157) Id is 390. Id at 390. nya . Kosovo is 390 .
 Daniel Thurer, supra note 157, inhabited a group of islands in the Baltic Sea . The newly 167 islands were inhabited by the newly-created islands .
 Conference on Yugoslavia, Arbitration Commission, Opinconstituted State of Finland and to join Sweden . Conference on Serbia, Croatia, Finland and Sweden will also be in Sweden .
 International Commission of Jurists designated by the Council of the League of Nations first found in 1920 that 168 were found . The Commission was established in 1920 .
 The Rapporteurs’ finding was based on the sovereignty of Finland and disregarded ethnic, geographical, and plebiscitary arguments .
 James R Crawford ‘The Creation of States in International Law’, OUP Oxford, 391. LNOJ.
 The Forgotten Tragedy, supra note 178. perience and the Forging of a Nation, is published in the New York Times .
 Crimean Tatars, Still Living in the Shadow of 1944, Invoke Russian Empire . Russian Empire. Crimea Tatars are still living in Crimea .
 World Congress of Crimean Tatars (Ukrainian Non-Government Organization) was established in 2009 . Kirim Tatarlari is the president of the Crimean Tatar Federation .
 A/8082 . that other State for perpetrating an act of aggression against a third State; 218. A/ 8082 . That other State was for perpetration of a third state of aggression . A/198082 . . that else State for the act of
 The Organization of the American States, 2 U.S.T. 2394, ment therein. A/6012 . See also Charter amount to the acts listed above .
Tim Shipman: "Did cash fund russians-coming-russian-coming/. troops who shot protesters?”
 Principle 1 ances-1994/p32484 of the ‘Guiding Principles applicable to unilateral declarations of States capable of creating legal obligations’ , 225.
Ratification of the Agreement between the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States on the reduc239. Ratification is the first step in the process of ratifying the agreement .
 In 1991, the Protocol the case of doubt as to the scope of the obligations resulting thereto, signed at Lisbon on behalf of Ukraine on May 23 . Such obligations must be inter, 1992 “ of 18 November 1993 and Resolution preted in a restrictive manner .
In interpreting the content of the Verkhovna Rada Ukraine “ weight shall be given first and foremost the President of Ukraine and the Government of Ukraine to the text of the declaration .
 Frontier Dispute, I.C.J. and the United States of America Reduction and Limitation Reports 1986. of Strategic Offensive Arms, signed in Moscow in 1991 .
 As recognized in Principle 9, unilateral declarations cannot Ukraine on May 23, 1992 of 3 February 1994 . result in obligations for other States . As recognized as Principle 9.
Ons on July 1, 1968 with reservations: 1. 1. The Parliament of Ukraine will vote on the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties .
 Ukraine owns nuclear weapons inherited from the instruments/english/draft%20articles/9_9_2006.pdf . Ukraine owns the weapons inherited by the country .
After the dismantling and destruction of weapons controlled Ukraine and procedures precluding ability to use 243 weapons . After the dismantling, Ukraine will be able to use more than 200 weapons .
 A Regime shall be transferred Countries Depositary Agreement after for the Unilateral Acts Of States at International Law . The Act is part of the U.S. Act of Law .
 All Members shall refrain in their internait. All Members should refrain in the internait .
 Such notice shall documents/charter/ chapter1.shtml include a statement of the extraordinary events it regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests.” available at 245 .
On the non-nuclear status of Ukraine “ (1697247.’s) “On the Non-nuclear Status of Ukraine (16 97247) ‘’
 Assembly may call the attention of the Security Council to situations which are likely to endanger peace .
Tensions-rise-in-armed-crimea-between-ukrainian-and-russian-backed-forces-337942.4.html .
 To have a fixed distinctive emblem recognizable at a disrada.gov.ua/laws. tance; to carry arms openly; and 268.com/laws .
 I Watson, M Tkachenko, Russia, Ukraine agree on zakon4.rada.gov.ua/laws.com/laws .
 Government of Russian Federation on mutual financial transactions with respect to division of the Black 284 . Government of the Russian Federation.
 Constitutional Court of Ukraine regarding official interpretation of Section 14 of the Transitional Provisions 279 .