 The United States has increased its military support for Ukraine, which sends a message to Moscow . The U.S. has increased support for the country, which is in Ukraine .
 The Salisbury poisonings and unmasking of alleged Russian agents in the Netherlands suggest a return to Cold War-style spy games between Russia and the West .
 A hot war is continuing in the eastern Donbas region, and the conflict between Moscow and Kiev appears to be set to escalate .
 The Russian Orthodox Church broke ties with the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople on Monday . Ukraine secured approval last week to establish an independent Orthodox church .
 Russia says the decision set the stage for a potential split within the global Orthodox community . That move drew immediate condemnation from Russia, which said the decision was set to split .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin presided over a meeting of his Security Council on the matter on Friday .
 In 2014, Putin justified the Crimea intervention as defending the interests of ethnic Russians . Putin justified Crimea intervention in 2014 as defending Russian interests .
 The occupation of Crimea set in motion the war in eastern Ukraine has claimed the lives of more than 10,000 people .
 The U.S. maintains that Russia is the aggressor . The United States maintains that the United States is not interested in Russia .
 Trump administration's point man on Ukraine says separatist forces are "100% under Russia's command and control" Despite Moscow's insistence that the war in Donbas is a local uprising, Volker says .
Russian officers are embedded through the chain of command down to the company level . Russian officers are embeded through the Chain of Command down to company level.
 Russia pays for contract soldiers to then fill out the whole military force . This goes to a Russian firm -that then hires the soldiers and provides them to the Donbas .
 Washington has matched strong words with a deepening military partnership with Kiev . Washington has been in talks with Kiev for years .
 Last week, the United States Air Force kicked off a military exercise in Ukraine . The exercise was primarily at Ukraine's Starokostiantyniv Air Base .
 The so-called Clear Sky exercise will include F-15C Eagle fighters, KC-135 aerial refueling tankers and MQ-9 Reaper drones operating from Miroslawiec Air Base in Poland .
 Ukraine may not be a NATO member, but the Ukrainian government aspires to NATO membership . The Ukrainian government is seeking to join NATO .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said such exercises would bring Ukraine's military into closer cooperation with the transatlantic alliance .
 NATO membership for Ukraine is a red line for Putin, who has said he considers expansion of the alliance a form of aggression . Putin has said that he considers NATO membership in Ukraine a forms of aggression.
 The U.S. delivered Javelin antitank weapons to Ukraine to step up the country's military capability . The United States further riled the Kremlin earlier this year when it delivered the weapons .
 The Trump administration's support for Ukraine has undergone something of an evolution, however . The U.S. government has supported Ukraine in the past .
 The U.S. government and its European allies have maintained sanctions on Russia since the annexation of Crimea . Senior officials have consistently stated that the United States government does not see Russia's annexation as legitimate .
 President Donald Trump appeared to cast doubt on his commitment to Ukraine's claims over the peninsula . Both before and after taking office, both blamed the Obama administration for losing the peninsula, and suggested Crimea would rather be in Russia .
 Trump campaign officials watered down language about supplying lethal aid to Ukraine . The Republican presidential platform was being drafted in 2016 .
 He had done years of lobbying work for the pro-Russian political party of Ukraine's then-president, Viktor Yanukovych . He had been working for Ukraine's former president Viktor Yanukovych.
 Yanukovych fled Ukraine for Russia in February 2014 after street demonstrations toppled his government . Yanukovych fled for Russia after street protests toppled the government .
Manafort was convicted in August on tax fraud and bank fraud charges . His legal ordeal is not over, and his legal ordeal isn't over .
 Trump administration officials have been maintaining a harder line on Russia's role in Ukraine .
 The U.S. Embassy in Kiev posted a link to images taken with a drone over eastern Ukraine . The mission is an unarmed, civilian mission that monitors the conflict in Ukraine .
 The drone observed vehicles, including a truck carrying an armored personnel carrier, going in and out of Ukrainian territory through an unpaved road near the border with Russia .
 Moscow Patriarch Kirill convenes a synod to respond to Ukraine's move to distance itself from the Russian church . The move comes as Ukraine moves to distance its own church from Russia .
 Kirill met with Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko ahead of the meeting . Kirill is a close ally of Russia .