 Many states and international organisations have reacted to the ongoing war in the Donbass region of Ukraine . The war began in April 2014, and began in 2014 .
 In August 2014 when Russian troops in Donbass scaled up, many states condemned the action .
 The EU began imposing sanctions on Russia in March 2014, following the annexation of Crimea . The lists of sanctioned individuals and entities have been expanded multiple times .
 NATO published a statement on the war in Donbass and the Crimean Crisis in August 2014 . The statement was published by NATO.
 Russia attempted to debunk the Russian government's accusations against the Ukrainian government . It also attempted to justify its presence in Ukraine .
 NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen stated that this incident could only deepen the crisis in the region . Russia itself has created and has continued to fuel the crisis .
 NATO general Philip Breedlove said on 20 September that the ceasefire implemented as part of the Minsk Protocol was "a ceasefire in name only" He criticised Russia for allowing men and equipment to flow freely into Donbass .
 Ban Ki-moon stresses importance of "constructive and results-oriented dialogue between all concerned" Secretary-General urges adherence to terms of Geneva Statement on Ukraine .
 In March 2014, Australia's foreign affairs minister Julie Bishop said that international law does not allow one state to steal the territory of another on the basis of a referendum that cannot be considered free or fair" In March 2013, Bishop said the Crimean referendum which voted to secede from Ukraine
 Australia has a special responsibility as a member of the security council to join the international community in taking strong action to make clear our condemnation of the moves by Russia to annex Crimea and of the fatal attack on the Ukrainian serviceman in Crimea .
 Belarusian president Alexander Lukashenko encouraged peace talks from the start of the Ukrainian crisis . He hosted summits that produced the Minsk Protocol in September 2014 and Minsk II in February 2015 .
 Russian business and financial institutions observed "ambiguous position regarding Russian banks in the wake of United States and EU sanctions" from the Chinese financial institutions . In practice reduced willingness of Chinese banks to finance trade and execute interbank transactions.
 His words were at odds with statements by Prime Minister Bohuslav Sobotka and Defence Minister Martin Stropnický . Both said there were at least 5,000 Russian troops in Ukraine, both said .
 France was criticised at the time of the annexation of Crimea for continuing to prepare two Mistral class amphibious assault ships for delivery to Russia .
 France eventually decided to place the delivery on hold in September, following increasing escalation in the Donbass . France decided to put the delivery in September after Russian intervention there .
 In April 2014, Georgian president Giorgi Margvelashvili said in an interview, "I don't think it's a right choice to alienate Russia," he said .
 Merkel said that the war was never a conflict "within Ukraine" But a confrontation between Russia and Ukraine was not a conflict .
 Merkel said that if Ukraine had chosen the Eurasian Economic Union, the West would not have responded by making 'noise' on the Ukrainian-Polish border .
 In November 2014, she stated that Ukraine is fighting for peace in Europe, for all of us . She said: "We know that today Ukraine isFighting for peace"
 In April 2015, Polish president Bronisław Komorowski said, "Today, when the sons of Ukraine are dying in the east of their country, they are also defending Europe"
 Romanian president Klaus Iohannis condemned attacks on Mariupol . He said responsibility for the attacks did not fall only on the separatists, but also on the Russian Federation .
 Romania condemned the violation of Ukraine's territorial sovereignty, and supported further sanctions against Russia . He added that Romania condemned a violation of Ukrainian territorial sovereignty .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry accused Ukrainian authorities of "blaming" the Russian government for all its troubles .
 It also called for "real constitutional reform" that would turn Ukraine into a federation . It also stated it was "carefully observing" events in the east and south of Ukraine .
 The Investigative Committee of Russia published an insulting letter to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine with treats of the Nuremberg-2 trials against the government of Ukraine .
 In September 2014, then Swedish foreign minister Carl Bildt said that Putin's actions threaten the entire basis of the post-Cold War order in Europe .
 In May 2015, Turkish foreign minister Mevlut Cavusoglu said that "Nothing can justify what Russia has been doing in its neighbourhood"
 UK Permanent Representative to the United Nations Sir Mark Lyall Grant said: "The truth of the matter is that this is not an insurrection born in the Donbas"
 Defence Secretary Michael Fallon announced on 7 March 2015 that Britain would send an additional £850,000 in non-lethal aid following Ukraine's request .
 This included first-aid kits, night vision goggles, helmets, GPS units, laptops and laptops . This included night-vision goggles, night-goggles, helmets and laptops.
 Ukraine will receive 3,500 first-aid kits equal to £500,000 in April . British training of Ukrainian troops will take place in April before British training .
 The Queen pledged that her government will continue to work to resolve the conflict in Ukraine . The Queen said her government would continue to try and resolve the crisis .
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry said on 7 April 2014 that the events ""did not appear to be spontaneous" and called on Russia to disavow the activities of separatists, saboteurs and provocateurs .
 A spokeswoman for the U.S. National Security Council noted the separatists appeared to be supported by Russia .
 The U.S. government is sending military advisors to Ukraine to aid the Ukrainian government in its fight against insurgents .
 In April, the U.S. Defence Department shipped a 7 million United States dollar package of non-lethal military equipment to Ukrainian forces .
 Plans for another 8 million dollar million aid package were announced on 1 August 2014 . Plans for an additional 8 million dollars in aid were announced in August .
 The package was meant to include armoured personnel carriers, goods and patrol vehicles, binoculars, night vision goggles and small patrol boats . The package also included armoured personnel carrier, goods, patrol vehicles and nightvision goggles .
 Defence Department also proposed 19 million dollar aid package to help train the National Guard of Ukraine .
 This proposal required congressional approval, and would come into effect in 2015 . This proposal would require congressional approval . It would be the first time this proposal has been approved .
 Defence Department specialists in strategy and policy will visit Kiev to evaluate military needs of the Ukrainian government .
 On 11 March 2015, the U.S. government said it would send an additional 75 million dollars worth of non-lethal aid to Ukraine .
 A joint declaration on the Ukrainian crisis was released in Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten on 9 April 2015 . Denmark, Finland, Norway, Sweden and the foreign minister of Iceland released the joint declaration .
 Nordic countries will evaluate Russia on the basis of its actions, rather than on rhetoric promoted by the Russian government . The declaration stated that Russian aggression against Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea are violations of International law and other international treaties .
 Russia has increased military exercises and intelligence gathering activity in the Baltic and the North Sea, violating Nordic borders and jeopardising civilian air traffic . Nordic countries intended to face these threats with solidarity and increased cooperation .
 The document said that this collaboration would be extended to include solidarity with the Baltic countries, work with the EU, and to collaboration with NATO, to maintain the transatlantic link .
 European politicians representing euroscepticism criticised the role of western governments in allegedly precipitating the crisis . In some cases supporting Russian president Vladimir Putin's position .
 The shoot-down of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over the Donbass conflict zone in mid-July moderated these opinions . Malaysia Airlines flight 17 was shot down over the conflict zone .
 Reviewing votes in the EU Parliament on resolutions critical of Russia or measures not in the Kremlin's interests . Hungary's Political Capital Institute found that future members of Europe of Nations and Freedom voted ""no"" in 93% of cases . European United Left–Nordic Green Left in 78
 Russian opposition leader Boris Nemtsov said that Russian president Vladimir Putin sought to "punish" Ukraine to prevent an anti-corruption revolution like Euromaidan from taking place .
 Former Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili said Ukraine was a matter of principle for Stalin and the successful protection of which ultimately reversed the spread of communism in Europe . He said that Ukraine is West Berlin – the taking of which was a subject of principle.
 This is Putin's war, which was initiated by him, which has been supported by him . It is being implemented by him and which can only be stopped by him. This is a war that was started by Putin, which he has supported .
 In April 2014, historian Timothy D Snyder wrote that Russia's foreign policy was "based openly upon the ethnicization of the world"
 Former Czech president Václav Klaus said Ukraine was an artificially created state . Klaus said that Ukraine was in a state of civil war .
 Mariana Budjeryn also dismissed Mearsheimer's argument, saying that the Russians failed to design a model of development and a security arrangement that would be equally attractive .
 In April 2014, a survey by infratest dimap found that 49% of Germans preferred a "middle position" for Germany between the west and Russia . The survey also found 49% preferred a 'middle position' for Germany.
 Chancellor Angela Merkel espoused moderation over the course of the Ukrainian crisis . This was reflected in the policy of moderation and mediation that she espoused over the Ukraine crisis .
After war escalated, German public opinion turned against Russia, with 79% saying they had an unfavourable view of Russia . 82% said Russia could not be trusted in an August 2014 poll .
 Some minor organisations have been formed to support the pro-Russian militants in the Donbass region . The Donbass Association in Sweden is one of them .
 EU leaders warn Russia faces harsher economic sanctions if it fails to withdraw troops from Ukraine . EU leaders warned Russia faced harsher sanctions than the EU had previously imposed if it didn't withdraw troops .
 The Russian government announced a new round of sanctions after the summit . They later condemned the Russian actions at a summit in Brussels .
 The Russian government's decision to send what it called a "humanitarian convoy" into Luhansk without Ukrainian consent was condemned by NATO and several NATO member states . The United States, including the United States.
 NATO generals met and revised their assessment of the military situation in Donbass . Late in August, NATO generals meeting and revised the assessment .
 The Ukrainian government says the war is already lost . They said that, from the Ukrainian government's point of view, the war was already lost.
 It was anticipated that the late-August offensive could be used to create a Russian land corridor to Crimea . The offensive could consolidate the illegal annexation of the peninsula .
 Estonian president Toomas Hendrik Ilves called the situation an ""undeclared war" Ilves said Russia's actions violated the UN Charter, the Helsinki Final Act and the Charter of Paris .
 Chancellor Angela Merkel warned that Russian president Vladimir Putin was moving toward a military escalation that could threaten Latvia and Estonia . At an EU summit in late August 2014, Merkel warned Russia's president was moving towards an escalation .
 Her stance was reported to reflect conclusions drawn from extensive conversations with Putin over the preceding nine months . Her stance is said to reflect evidence of bad faith on the part of Putin .
 Lithuanian president Dalia Grybauskaite said Russia's actions meant it was at war with Ukraine . Lithuania's president said it was "practically" at war.
 The United States Ambassador to the United Nations Samantha Power commented on the invasion by noting that Russia has become before this council to say everything but the truth .
 In response to the August events, the U.S. government also said that it supported stronger sanctions against Russia .
 This organisation said that it considered the war to be "an international armed conflict" It presented independent satellite photos and analysis that proved the involvement of regular Russian soldiers in the conflict .
 Both Ukrainian and separatist forces are responsible for war crimes, says Ukraine . It calls on all parties, including Russia, to stop violations of the law of war .