 Russia seized three Ukrainian ships after firing on them near the annexed Crimean Peninsula on Sunday . Kiev has put its forces on full combat alert .
 The Azov Sea is a body of water north of the Black Sea shared by Ukraine and Russia . The standoff is the result of months of rising tensions over ships navigating the Azov sea .
 Kiev accuses Moscow of trying to impose a de facto economic blockade on its ports in the Azov Sea . Kiev has called for further Western sanctions against Moscow .
 The countries have been at loggerheads since Russia seized Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 . Russia backed an insurgency in the eastern Donbass region that has killed more than 10,000 people despite a ceasefire .
 The Azov Sea and Kerch Strait, which connects to the Black Sea to the south, are nothing new. Squabbles over control of the Azov sea and the Kerch strait have been nothing new .
Tensions flared in 2003 during Vladimir Putin's first term as Russian president . Tensions flared during his first term.
 Both countries could use the Kerch Strait and Azov Sea freely for commercial shipping . Both countries must notify each other while sending military vessels .
 Ukraine accuses Russia of detaining ships sailing to and from its ports on the Azov Sea . Tensions have increased in the area this year .
 Russia accuses Ukraine of harassing Russian ships . Ukraine says its own checks on Ukrainian vessels are lawful and necessary to ensure security .
 Mariupol was briefly seized by pro-Russian separatists in 2014 before being recaptured by Ukrainian troops and volunteers . It is a hub for exporting steel and grain and importing coal .
 Ukraine says trade to the ports has been cut by 30 percent since Russia began hassling its ships . Russia hassled its ships in recent months.
 Exports from Mariupol have fallen 6 percent and imports by nearly 9 percent this year, data shows . exports from Berdyansk fell by 12. percent, while exports from Mari upol fell by 6 percent .
 Ukraine was also incensed by Russia unveiling in May a $3. billion bridge from its mainland across the Kerch Strait to Crimea .
 The bridge is too low for certain vessels to pass through, Kiev says . Kiev says the bridge is also too low to allow some vessels to cross .
 Ukraine says it has now deployed more air, land, sea and artillery forces to the Azov Sea . The country plans to build a military base on the sea and build a new military base .
 Russia seized three Ukrainian vessels after opening fire on them . Several sailors were wounded . Russia seized the vessels .
 Russia's FSB security service said the ships two small Ukrainian amoured artillery vessels and a tug boat had illegally entered its territorial waters .
 Russia accused the ships of manoeuvring dangerously and ignoring its instructions with the aim of stirring up tensions . The ships are accused of ignoring instructions and ignoring instructions .
 Ukraine said it had notified Russian authorities in advance of the three ships' movements in line with the 2003 accord . Ukraine denied they had done anything wrong with the ships .
 President Petro Poroshenko has asked parliament to back his decision to impose martial law . Ukraine has put its forces on full combat alert and has asked Parliament to back the decision .
 Russia's Black Sea fleet is stationed in Crimea and outguns the Ukrainian navy . But any military response from Ukraine risks inviting a forceful reaction from Russia .
 Russia's rouble fell to a lower level on Monday . Kiev is urging its Western allies to push for more sanctions on Russia .
 The U.N. Security Council will discuss the crisis on Monday at the request of Russia and Ukraine . The crisis will be discussed by the United Nations Security Council .
 NATO and European Union urged restraint on all sides and urged Russia to restore full access to the Azov Sea for commercial vessels .
 Russian politicians have accused Poroshenko of deliberately instigating the standoff to boost his flagging popularity ahead of elections in March . Poroshenko is expected to win the election in March.
 Some Ukrainian opposition politicians have speculated that he is using the introduction of martial law as an excuse to postpone the elections .