 DOJ files appeal to overturn judge’s decision to void mandate .
 Work may begin this fall on redevelopment of Rentschler Field . The field will be redeveloped in the fall .
 Omo Klusum Mohammed, mother of Mubarak Soulemane, was shot dead in May 2020 .
 The state trooper who fatally shot a 19-year-old driver after a high-speed chase into West Haven two years ago has been arrested on a manslaughter charge . ‘Let this arrest set an example; civil rights attorney says .
 Trooper Brian D North was charged with first-degree manslaughter with a firearm . Inspector General Robert J Devlin Jr. said Wednesday .
 Mubarak Soulemane, 19, was fatally shot at the end of a high-speed chase in a stolen car on Jan., 2020 .
 Footage from the scene shows troopers and a West Haven police officer descend on the car after it was stopped off Exit 43 of Interstate 95 North and blocked by police cars .
 A video of the shooting shows North firing into the car after the trooper allegedly saw Soulemane with a knife .
 Neither North nor two other officers outside the car were in imminent danger of having deadly force used against them, Devlin says .
 Soulemane would not have been able to get out due to police car blocking his door . He added that due to the police car block his door, he would not be able to leave .
 The state police union extended condolences to Soulemane’s family in a statement on Wednesday . “No Connecticut state trooper ever intends to or has the desire to take the life of another human Turn to Charges,’ the union said . The sister of Mubarak Soule
 Use of deadly force ‘not justified’ by Taylor Hartz Hartford Courant at 5:04m.
 19-year-old veered the car he'd stolen from his Lyft driver off Interstate 95 North.
 The trooper who shot him could face up to 20 Turn to Force, Page 3 Seasonable tan Slight .
 Some out-of-state drug offenders can get handgun permits from Connecticut . The state Supreme Court has ruled that an out- of- state drug conviction can't prevent someone from obtaining a pistol permit in Connecticut .
 The permit would have been denied under state law establishing fitness requirements for gun owners . Had the applicant had been convicted of a similar, non-felony crime in Connecticut, the permit would be denied .
 The General Assembly did not include convictions for equivalent, out-of-state crimes as disqualifiers for obtaining permits . But the court said that because the General Assembly didn't include convictions, the pistol permit application was wrongly denied .
 Legislators were talking about plugging the apparent loophole in the law hours after the court published the decision .
 Another attempt to evacuate civilians trapped in the pulverized port city failed because of continued fighting . New bombing attacks are coming under punishing new bombing attacks .
 The number of people fleeing the country topped 5 million . The Kremlin submitted a draft of its demands for ending the war . The West raced to supply Ukraine with heavier weapons to counter the Russian drive to seize the industrial east .
 Connecticut legislators were debating Wednesday night on mandating fair rent commissions for all communities with more than 25,000 residents . With global tensions running high, Russia reported the first successful test launch of anew type of intercontinental Turn to Ukraine, Page 2 Lawmakers tout fair rent commission in larger
 Currently, the commissions are voluntary, and 24 municipalities statewide already have them, legislators said . 24 municipalities in the U.S. have them .
 Democrats said the mandatory commissions are needed now to help renters around the state . Many rents are increasing as the coronavirus pandemic continues .
 Bradley Breeze Airways will launch nonstop service from Bradley International Airport to Las Vegas beginning Sept. The service will operate Wednesday and Saturday . The commissions would have the power to investigate complaints about rents .
 Connecticut, Page 1 convene public hearings, issue subpoenas to force people to appear, and eventually force landlords to lower rents under certain circumstances .
 The commissions can be created in each municipality through action by the local city council or board of selectmen by July 1, 2023 . The commissions are created by the city council and selectmen .
 The debate was continuing past 9:15m, but a vote was expected in the following Rep. John Boehner's vote .
 Quentin Williams, a Middletown Democrat, said the bill strikes a balance of helping renters and providing protections for small landlords .
 Without a commission, Williams said, “Right now, their only option would be to hours.’ ‘The only option is to hours’
 The Hartford Courant is on Thursday, April 21, 2022 from Page 1 ciary committee . It is on the page of page 1 of Page 1.
 The court said that the legislature enacted a law with about dozen factors disqualifying an applicant from gun ownership . McDonald said the law was passed by the legislature .
 Since a misdemeanor drug convicUkraine from Page 1 ballistic missile, the Sarmat has been involved in a series of violent incidents . The Ukrainian government has been accused of using a ballistic missile .
 The Pentagon described the test as ‘routine’ and said it wasn’t considered a threat .
 Ukraine says Moscow continues to mount assaults across the east, probing for weak points in Ukrainian defensive lines . Ukraine said Moscow continued to mount attacks on the east .
 Russia says it launched hundreds of missile and air attacks on targets that included concentrations of troops and vehicles . Russia said it launched dozens of missiles and air strikes on targets .
 The Kremlin’s stated goal is the capture of the Donbas, the mostly Russian-speaking eastern region . The Donbas is home to coal mines, metal plants and heavy-equipment factories .
 Putin's failed attempt to storm Kyiv would give him a badly needed victory two months into the war . Detaching it would give Putin a badly need victory.
 Analysts say the offensive in the east could devolve into a war of attrition . Russia's most experienced, battle-hardened troops have been fighting pro-Moscow separatists for the past eight years .
 Russia said it presented Hartford Courant A TRIBUNE PUBLISHING COMPANY CONTENT in another state is not among them . The court said it must conclude lawmakers did not intend for it to be a bar to gun ownership .
 Ukrainians presented their own demands last month . He gave no details on the draft, and it was not clear when it was sent .
 The court based the decision on a state law requiring that laws be interpreted on the plain meaning of the text . The decision was made by a state court.
 The court effectively told the legislature that if it wants out-of-state, non-felony convictions to block the issuance of permits, it must write laws that say so explicitly .
 Out-of-state felony convictions already are a bar to permitting under the law . The law allows felony convictions in the U.S. to be allowed under the laws .
 Anthony Leo of Stratford applied to the local police department for a handgun permit about six years ago . Leo applied for the permit about 6 years ago. Anthony Leo is a resident of the Stratford area .
 Ukraine has said it would agree to that in return for security guarantees from a number of other countries . Ukraine says it would also agree to security guarantees.
 Russia dropped heavy bombs to flatten what was left of the sprawling Azvostal steel plant . The plant is believed to be the last pocket of resistance in Mariupol .
 A few thousand Ukrainian troops, by the Russians’ estimate, remain in the plant Hartford Courant . The plant is the equivalent of a Connecticut offense .
 Leo appealed to the state Board of Firearms Permit Examiners, which reversed the police department and granted the permit . Leo appealed the state board of firearms permits .
 The Superior Court also criticized the firearms board for its failure to consider “factors’ such as the danger posed by providing pistol on Wednesday in Moshchun, northwest of Kyiv .
 The labyrinth of tunnels and bunkers spread out across about 4 square miles .
 Russian side issued new ultimatum to the defenders to surrender . Ukrainians have ignored all previous demands .
 More than 100,000 people were believed trapped with little if any food, water, medicine or heat . Mariupol had a prewar population of over 400,000 .
 Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Iryna Vereshchuk said the latest effort to open a safe corridor for women, children and the elderly to escape failed because the Russians did not observe a cease-fire . The Russian government has not agreed to a ceasefire .
 Many previous agreements have fallen apart because there was no halt in the fighting . Many previous such agreements have fall apart because of the fighting.
 Western nations rush to boost flow of military supplies to Kyiv for this new phase of the war . It is likely to involve long-range artillery attacks and tank battles across relatively open terrain .
 President Joe Biden is expected to announce a new weapons package in the coming days . Canada, Canada and the Netherlands also said they would send more heavy weaponry .
 For same day redelivery, please call before 10 billing period when the section publishes . For same-day redeliverivery,please call before10 billing period .
 Mary Lou Stoneburner scheduled to date: 1/9/22,2/13,3/27,4/17,5/15/22. LUCKY FOR LIFE Vice President, Advertising SovaENE sess, 6/12/22,.
 Ee Mike Sheehan may increase home delivery rates with 15 days notice . We Ys' mats fi rst Ke: "We know ee Mike"
 Only publication of the advertisement shall 2 9 33 33 47 47 53 mMB:24 MP:3 NEWS ACCuracy and FAIRNESS CONCERNS constitute acceptance of the ad .
 The Hartford Courant’s liability shall be limited to the amount paid by the advertiser for the first insertion only .
 In no event shall The Hartford Courant be liable for consequential damages of any kind of kind .
 Suzzy Roche and Lucy Wainwright Roche have shared a life on the road . The musical duo are from a dazzling musical family . They are also from the same musical family.
 Their show is a fun filled evening of smart, thoughtful, songs with plenty of familial harmo .
 Vincent Van Gogh Delving deep into his fascinating and sometimes deeply troubled world comes this definitive documentary by David Bicker4 staff .
 Trooper North instructed another Trooper to switch from his firearm to his taser in an attempt to use less than lethal force to arrest .
 Trooper North was forced to discharge his duty weapon to defend the other officers who were attempting to enter the stolen vehicle .
 Force from Page 1 years in prison if convicted on the charge of first-degree manslaughter with a firearm . If convicted, Force would be sentenced to a year in prison .
 Brian D North turned himself in on a warrant Tuesday following an investigation by the Office of the Inspector General . Soulemane was fatally shot in the chest in 2011 . North's use of deadly force was unjustified .
 The Office of Inspector General assumed responsibility for the investigation on Nov., 2021 . The investigation will take place in November 2021 .
 It included body camera and dashboard camera footage from North and other state troopers, witness statements, surveillance footage from the AT&T store and a Shell gas station and an autopsy report .
 Soulemane was armed with a kitchen knife he'd taken from his girlfriend’s house, report says .
 troopers said the knife was tightly gripped in his fist as he sat inside the stolen car with the doors locked and the windows rolled up . The car was stolen from a car parked in the back of the car .
 Joe Polletta, the ranking House Republican on the housing committee, said the measure is “an unfunded mandate” that would generate extra expenses for towns .
 The commissions will need to gather a large amount of information before deciding whether the rent meets the standard of “harsh and unconscionable” when compared to similar properties, legislators say .
 Devlin was appointed as inspector general to investigate every use of force case and death involving police or correction officers . The former judge was appointed after the death of George Floyd .
 Soulemane's family had called for an independent investigation and for the trooper’s arrest after the shooting .
Lawyer Mark Arons said there was a cloud over the family’s head since the shooting . He said they look forward to Trooper North being convicted .
 Soulemane had been reported missing by his family that same morning, according to the report .
 The family told police he has been diagnosed with schizophrenia at age 14 . The family said he was diagnosed with the condition at 14 .
 Loved ones said he was acting erratic and paranoid and likely wasn’t taking his medication, according to the report . The report also said he may not be taking medication .
 Police in New Haven made contact with Soulemane over the phone around 8:15 a.m., according to the report . Police in the New Haven area made contact.
 His older brother told police they had gotten into a fight and he left their Blatchley Avenue apartment . He told police his older brother had left the apartment .
 Omo Mohammed's mother was out of the country and worried about him . His mother, Omo, was worried about his safety .
Multiple police cruisers surrounded him under a highway overpass. Ten hours later, multiple police cruiser surrounded him .
 The Sonata he stole was smashed in on the passenger side, dented and scraped on the driver side . He stole the Sonata from a family home in London .
 Multiple police cars blocked the car in, according to the report . One was pushed up against the driver’s side, preventing the door from opening .
 Troop G trooper Joshua Jackson commanded Soulemane to get out of the car multiple times, according to the report .
 Watertown Republican says he was sitting back in the reclined driver's seat with his hands in his lap and his in many ways .
 The NAACP and other groups joined the family in protesting the shooting .
 Al Sharpton said something about the killing didn't ‘smell right’ and he vowed to fight for answers for the family .
 McCall said he was with family members when they heard the trooper would be charged . McCall added that he was in the family when he heard he was charged .
 A report by North says an officer was going to get arrested is definitely in the direction of justice that they have been waiting for .
 West Haven police officer Robert Rappa smashed the passenger side window with a baton . Rappa had at least one firearm and a Taser aimed on Soulemane .
 The window shattered loudly, glass spilling into the car and onto the road . Body camera footage shows the glass spilling onto the car .
 North called to Jackson to switch to his Taser, according to the report and body camera footage . North called Jackson to turn on the Taser.
 According to North’s report, Soulemane was ‘startled’ when the window smashed . The window smashed, North says .
 The suspect, using his right hand, removed a silver-colored object from his pants pocket, North reported .
 According to the report, North stated he heard someone yell out, “He’s reaching. He's reaching,’ he said .
Other factors include whether state and local laws are being followed and how the money from the rent hike would be used . Other factors include if state andLocal laws are followed.
 Smaller towns under 25,000 would be allowed to establish a joint commission under the bill . The bill would also allow smaller towns to establish joint commission .
 The head of Connecticut’s NAACP, Scot X Esdaile, said he was pleasantly surprised to hear about the arrest . Currently, the towns with fair rent commissions include higher-income suburbs such as Glastonbury, Simsbury, Farming .
 Ned Lamont says he has not met with Soulemane's family . He trusts the judicial system to provide an independent outcome for Soulemene and North .
 Thirty six seconds passed between the time that North positioned himself near the driver’s side of the crashed car and the time he pulled the trigger .
 An autopsy performed by the Connecticut Office of the Chief Medical Examiner found Soulemane died from four gunshot wounds to his chest .
 The medical examiner retrieved three bullets from his body . The other three bullets were found at the scene .
 In his statements to investigators, Jackson said he thought he was in imminent danger . Jackson said that he thought his life was in danger .
 Soulemane had a knife in his fist and his gaze was fixed on him, according to the report . He said his eyes were fixed on the man .
 According to state statute, a police officer is justified in using deadly physical force on another person when the officer believes such force is needed to protect themselves or another person from deadly force . State statute: A police officer should use deadly force when the person is in danger .
 Devlin’s investigation found that North could not have reasonably believed that Rappa or Jackson faced an immediate threat to their lives . Devlin's investigation finds that North couldn't have believed that North faced a threat to its lives .
 North never claimed he used deadly force to defend himself, Devlin found . Devlin said the position of one of the police cruisers would have blocked Soulemane from getting out of the car .
 The investigation also found that even though Soulemane was holding a knife, he didn’t pose ton . West Hartford, West Hartford and West Hartford were also involved .
 Others include Hartford, New Haven, Bridgeport, Stamford, Bloomfield, Enfield, Manchester, New Britain, and Norwalk . Other cities include Hartford and New Haven .
 Lamont says his heart goes out to the Soulemane family . Lamont said he would say what he'd say to the family .
 New Haven Mayor Justin Elicker called Soulemane's death a tragedy in a statement released Wednesday .
 Inspector General says charges brought by the Inspector General have been reinforced . This is now reinforced by the charges, he says .
 It is critical that all our law enforcement officers are held to a high standard. And it is critical to all our officers to be held to the high standard .
 Claudine Constant, public policy and advocacy direcan immediate dangerous threat to Rappa or Jackson . Constant: Rappa and Jackson are at risk of death .
 The trooper and officer were outside, Soulemane was inside, the report says . All the car’s doors and windows were closed, it states .
 North claimed that he thought Rappa or Jackson was going to reach into the vehicle to pull Soulemane out . North said he thought he thought the pair would reach into his vehicle . North claimed he thought they would reach in and out .
 Soulemane said he was worried that if they did, he would use the knife on them . He said he would be worried if they used it, he said .
 If they weren't reaching in, they wouldn’t need protection from the knife, the report notes .
 North says he thought Rappa and Jackson were doing what he thought they were doing . No reasonable officer would have expected a colleague to do what North said he thought .
 On the off chance that they did, the report states, they would have told others on the scene what they were doing .
 The report also noted that North said he shot at Soulemane because he saw the knife . North was first questioned about his use of deadly force .
 If that had been his reasoning, Devlin said, the shooting wouldn’t have mony on the bill . If that was his reasoning. If that would have been his reason, he said, it wouldn't have been the shooting .
 The Connecticut Conference of Municipalities says it opposes the “unfunded mandate’s” bill . The bill would impose a ‘unfunded’ mandate, a longtime lobbying group says .
 ACLU of Connecticut believes that even with a conviction, justice can never be achieved in this case .
 North is on paid administrative leave, and his police powers have been suspended, pending criminal proceedings, state police say . North is also on paid leave, but his powers are suspended .
 First-degree manslaughter with a firearm is a Class B felony punishable by up to 20 years in prison and $15,000 in fines . First- degree manslaughter is a class B misdemeanor punishable by 20 years.
 Christine Dempsey may be reached at cdempsey@ courant.com . She says her actions were justified .
 In such circumstances, the shooting would not be defensive, he says .
 The report also critiques North for not trying to de-escalate the situation before using deadly force . North also criticises North for failing to use deadly force before using force .
 Devlin also said that the number of shots North fired was unreasonable . Devlin said that North fired more shots than any other shot .
 Devlin acknowledged that when investigating an officer’s use of deadly force, investigators should take into account the split-second decisions officers are faced with .
 They should consider whether the actions they do take are reasonable . They should also consider whether their actions are reasonable.
 Amy Eppler-Epstein testified recently at a public hearing in favor of the bill . She testified at the public hearing .
 Poland's capital is a huge convention center in Poland’s capital . Their dwelling for now is a massive convention center .
 The 40-year-old bookeeper thinks about restarting her and her children’s lives from square one .
 More than 5 million people have fled the country since Russian troops invaded Feb. 8, the U.N. refugee agency says .
 The exodus exceeded the worst-case predictions of the U.N. high commissioner for refugees . The number reached 4 million March 30 .
 U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grandi tweeted Wednesday . The millions of people who left Ukraine because of the war “have left behind their homes and families,’ he said .
 UNHCR says the conflict has displaced more than 7 million people within Ukraine . Ukraine had a pre-war population of 44 million, UNHCR says .
 Another 13 million people are believed to be trapped in the war-affected areas of Ukraine . The agency says another 13 million are thought to have been trapped in Ukraine .
 More than half of the refugees, over 2. million, fled at least at first to Poland . More than 2 million people fled to Poland.
 They are eligible for national ID numbers that entitle them to work and receive free health care, schooling and bonuses for families with children . They are also eligible for free schooling, health care and bonuses.
 The hotel is set to be sold in the coming days to a Florida investor group that will take down the Trump name and rebrand it as a Waldorf Astoria .
 The sprawling lobby turned into a gathering spot for Trump's Cabinet, Republicans in Congress, foreign dignitaries, religious conservatives and Trump fans .
 The hotel generated millions of DON’T SHOOT THE MESSENGER protests outside of court Wednesday in London .
 Trump's own inaugural committee paid the venue more than $1 million . Trump's inaugural committee also paid $1million .
 The hotel is being sold to a Miami-based investment firm, CGI Merchant Group, for $375 million . The Trump family pays off its debts and accounts for other money spent on the hotel since it opened .
 The sale is expected to close before the end of the month, an executive involved in the transaction says .
 The transfer of the lease has been approved by the General Services Administration, the federal government’s landlord . CGI and Hilton have the financial capacity to own and manage the hotel .
 The building, on Pennsylvania Avenue, is owned by the federal government .
 The hotel became a magnet for foreign officials, including from Saudi Arabia . The hotel spent $190,000 on its room tab and $78,000 for meals and beverages, lobbying disclosures show .
 Zach Everson created an online newsletter tracking social media posts from the hotel during Trump’s presidency . The hotel hosted events at the hotel, with representatives from 33 nations sighted there .
 In total, at least 29 Trump Cabinet members and at least 35 Republican senators were spotted at the hotel .
 Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin lived there for a while after he first relocated to Washington . An unknown number of people have traveled on to other countries .
 Savyichkina said she is thinking about taking her daughters to Germany . She is planning to take them to Germany.
 If “everything goes well, if the children like it first of all, then we will stay,’s author says . “Everything goes well. If everything goes well,. if it goes well ... then we'll stay, he says .
Out of more than 465,000 who arrived, some 16,400 have applied for protected status . They want to stay, meaning they want to remain .
 Hungary’s government says it has provided around $8 million to several charitable organizations . It is giving subsidies to companies that employ Ukrainians granted asylum .
 Migration Aid rented a five-story building in Budapest to provide temporary accommodation for people escaping the war in Ukraine .
 Tatiana Shulieva, 67, fled from Kharkiv in eastern Ukraine and wants to travel on to Egypt . She said the night she spent in the hostel was ‘like a fairytale’ after having sheltered in a basement for weeks .
 Oxana Cotus fled the southern Ukrainian city of Mykolaiv with her four small children . She initially decided to go to Denmark but ended up in Bucharest because she speaks Romanian and didn't want to be far from Ukraine .
 She praised the help she received from the International Red Cross in helping her relocate and get settled .
 Russia has intensified attacks in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region . European nations hosting refugees say they need international help to manage the challenge .
 About 300,000 war refugees are in the city of some 1. million . Most of them are staying in private homes, Trzaskowski says .
 Warsaw residents expected to host refugees for a few months, but not indefinitely, he says . Warsaw residents are expected to welcome refugees for several months, he said .
 Thousands of civilians, including children, have been killed or wounded in shelling and airstrikes . Thousands of people have been injured or killed in the attacks .
 The Trump International Hotel in Washington is being sold to a Miami-based investment firm for $375 million .
Members of the Secret Service stayed at the hotel to guard him . The government even covered the $33,000 tab for members of the secret service .
Historian Jon Meacham says that never before had there been a venue like the Trump hotel . He says supporters of a sitting president could effectively pay tribute to him by frequenting a business he owned .
 Eric Trump, a son of the former president and executive vice president at the Trump Organization, has repeatedly pointed out that the hotel donated to the United States Treasury any profits collected from foreign government officials .
 In an interview this week, Eric Trump said he could not discuss details of the sale . He said he would not discuss the sale.
 Trump family leased rundown gem of a federal building and turned it into what he called one of the most beautiful public spaces in Washington . But he said he remained proud of the work that the Trump family did after leasing the building .
During Trump's presidency, spending at the hotel became a target for legal action . Attorneys general in Maryland and the District of Columbia filed lawsuits citing the hotel as the primary exhibit in claims that Trump was violating the Constitution's emoluments clause .
 The cases were deemed moot by the Supreme Court once Trump left the White House .
 Judge sends Assange extradition decision to UK minister to UK Minister . Julian Assange will be extradited to the United States to face spying charges .
 The case will now go to Britain’s interior minister for a decision . WikiLeaks founder still has legal avenues of appeal .
 Supreme Court last month refused Assange permission to appeal against a lower court's ruling that he could be extradited .
 District Judge Paul Goldspring issued the order in a brief hearing at Westminster Magistrates’ Court . Assange watched by video link from Belmarsh Prison and his supporters rallied outside the courthouse .
 Home Secretary Priti Patel will now decide whether to grant extradition to the UK . Patel will then decide if the extradition will be granted .
 The move doesn’t exhaust the legal options for Assange, who has sought for years to avoid a trial in the United States on charges related to WikiLeaks’ publication of a huge trove of classified documents more than a decade ago .
 Patel's lawyers have four weeks to make submissions to Patel, and can also seek to appeal to the High Court . Patel has four weeks of time to make his submissions to the court .
 Assange lawyer Mark Summers told the court that the legal team had “serious submissions to make’s to make.
 The U.S. has asked British authorities to extradite Assange so he can stand trial on 17 charges of espionage and one charge of computer misuse . Assange is charged with 17 counts of espionage, including one ofComputer misuse .
 Prosecutors say Assange unlawfully helped U.S. Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning steal classified diplomatic cables and military files that WikiLeaks later published . The WikiLeaks files were later published by WikiLeaks .
 Supporters and lawyers for Assange, 50, argue that he was acting as a journalist and is entitled to First Amendment protections of freedom of speech .
 Assange has been held at Britain’s Belmarsh Prison in London since 2019 . He is being held at the prison in London.
 RALEIGH: ARTHUR Rocking: HighLeg . RaleIGH: Rocking Recliner Recliners .
 Fourth item purchased will be discounted 40%. 20%/40% discount pattern will be repeated as additional items are purchased .
 La-Z-Boy is committed to accurate advertising, but errors in product descriptions, photographs, pricing or dates may occur . La- Z-Boy has a reputation for accurate advertising .
 We reserve the right to correct them prior to any sale of merchandise . We are not bound by any such errors, and we reserve theright . to correct the wrong information .
 Diplomats are stepping up to do the dirty work. Government and social media companies have moved to suppress Russia’s state media and spread disinformation .
 Russian embassies and consulates around the world are prolifically using Facebook, Twitter and other platforms to deflect blame for atrocities . They are seeking to undermine the international coalition supporting Ukraine .
 Tech companies have responded by adding more labels to Russia's diplomatic accounts and by removing the accounts from its recommendations and search results .
 Diplomatic status gives them an added layer of protection from moderation . But accounts are still active and are disseminating disinformation and propaganda in nearly every nation .
 Russia’s diplomatic corps acts as a global network for propaganda . The same claims can be recycled and tweaked for different audiences in different nations .
So far, steps to substantially curtail that effort have fallen short . So far, the effort has fallen short. And, so far, it has been unsuccessful .
 Russian embassies are especially active, churning out pro-Russian propaganda and spreading falsehoods intended to support the invasion . Some Russian embassies, like those in the U.K. and Mexico for example, are particularly active .
 DOJ to appeal order tossing mask mandate on planes and trains and in travel hubs . Justice Department is filing an appeal seeking to overturn a judge’s order .
 The embassy claims they're actually Nazis operating under U.S. orders . They’re actually Nazis, the embassy alleged .
 The Russian Embassy in London tweeted out those and other conspiracy theories all on one day last week .
 Each post received hundreds or thousands of retweets, comments and likes . Dozens from other Twitter users pushed back on the propaganda .
 It requires censorship at home, and it requires your own messaging, both for domestic and foreign audience . It also requires you to send your own messages to your own audience .
 As representatives of their countries, diplomats have always been known for pushing their nation’s talking points .
 Russian diplomats in particular have long been known for spreading the Kremlin’s disinformation .
 Russian diplomats used social media to spread disinforAVANTE WACO ANYTUNN ICA April 21, 22, 22 & 23 .
 It remained unclear whether the Biden administration would ask the appeals court to grant an mation about the invasion of Crimea in 2014 and about the poisoning of Russian dissidents .
 Their status as representatives of a foreign government has given them the freedom to speak . Their status has often given them freedom to talk .
Tech companies and even governments have taken other actions to stop the flow of disinformation coming from Russia’s state-controlled media .
 Meta barred those outlets from platforms it owns, including Facebook and Instagram . The company also barred those platforms from Facebook, Instagram and Twitter .
 Tech companies cut off ad revenue and expanded efforts to label their accounts . Tech companies also cut off the outlets from ad revenue .
 A message seeking comment from the Russian Embassy in the U.S. was not immediately returned .
 A noticeable increase in pro-Russian propaganda regarding Ukraine began in the weeks and months before the invasion began in February .
 The accounts were tweeting about 2,000 times per week after the invasion, resulting in more than 1 million likes, retweets and comments . Emergency stay to immediately reimpose the mask mandate on public transit .
 An emergency stay of the lower court’s ruling would be a whiplash moment for travelers and transit workers .
 Most airlines and airports, many public transit systems and ride-sharing company Uber lifted their mask-wearing requirements in the hours following Monday’s ruling .
 A federal judge in Tampa struck down the mask mandate for public transit Monday . airlines and airports to repeal their requirements that passengers wear face coverings .
 The Transportation Security Administration said Monday that it would no longer enforce the requirement . The requirement will no longer be enforced .
 The CDC had recently extended the mandate until May 3 to allow more time to study BA . The BA is responsible for the vast majority of U.S. cases .
 The Russian Embassy in the U.K. blamed Ukraine for a recent rocket attack that killed dozens at a rail station in the city of Kramatorsk .
 Twitter accounts monitored by Schliebs are still earning about half a million likes, retweets and comments per week . Despite Twitter’s action, the accounts still earn about half an million likes.
 Twitter and Facebook have added “Russian government organization’s labels to many of these accounts to ensure users know the source of the information . The labels are meant to make sure users know that the information is accurate .
 Schliebs compared the response by tech companies to Russia’s invasion with their actions following the 2020 U.S. election, the January 6, 2021, attack on the United States Capitol and the COVID-19 pandemic .
 Then-President Donald Trump was kicked off Twitter for inciting violence ahead of the Jan. riot . The riot was planned to take place on January 1 .
 Russian diplomats have spread wild conspiracy theories and blamed Ukrainians for Russian atrocities . But they stay on, blaming Ukrainians for atrocities .
 After ter Hold, Diamonds, Silverware and Coins Was Now Instant Savings NIKKOR Z 28mm #/2 . After ter hold, Diamond's, Silvereware and Coins was now Instant Savings .
 Instant Savings Offers do not apply to any used, refurbished or reconditioned products . Instant Savings offers are not available for refurbished products .
 The phrase to this day hangs over the doors of Iran's Foreign Ministry .
 Russia's war on Ukraine has exposed just how much Tehran has tilted toward Moscow in recent years . The collapse of its nuclear deal with world powers stoked decades-old, hard-line anger at America .
 Members of Iran’s Revolutionary Guard train on Russian surface-to-air missile systems and aircraft .
Hardline President Ebrahim Raisi visited Russian President Vladimir Putin on one of his first trips abroad .
 The war also exposes deeper fault lines even within Iran’s domestic politics . The war has also exposed deeper faultlines within Iran's domestic politics.
 Among ordinary Iranians, there is a great deal of sympathy for Ukraine, a nation that staged a pro-democracy “Orange Revolution’s similar to the “Green Revolution” that shook Iran more than a decade ago but was forcefully put down .
 Iran's historic enmity with Russia has combined with a wider feeling among some that backing Moscow betrays the Islamic Republic’s often-stated message that it stands against the world's major powers .
 Iran’s state-controlled television network, Press TV, describes itself as “the voice of the voiceless,’ hews close to Russian talking points .
 It used Moscow’s euphemistic term ‘special operation’ to describe the early days of the war . It also used Moscow's euphemistic word “ special operation” to describe war's early days .
 Tehran denied for days it shot down the plane before saying troops made a mistake . Iran fired ballistic missiles at U.S. forces in Iraq in response for the killing of a top general .
 Tehran's Friday prayer leader, Kazem Sedighi, mentioned in a March sermon after Russia began its war on Ukraine . That’s something he mentioned in the sermon.
 Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has final say on all matters of state . Khamenei said his nation opposed “war and destruction” while blaming America for the conflict .
 He also brought up alongtime suspicion that he shares with Putin . He said the U.S. fuels what he described as the “color coups’ that back democracy . He also said that the United States, rather than ordinary citizens, fuel what he
 For Khamenei, it is memory of the Green Movement protests that followed Iran’s disputed 2009 presidential election .
 For Putin, it is Ukraine’s 2004 Orange Revolution and its later Maidan protest movement that dislodged the Kremlin-leaning Viktor Yanukovych .
 Others from within Iran's Shiite theocracy have raised concerns about Tehran’s stance on the war .
 Mohsen Aminzadeh, a former deputy foreign minister under reformist President Mohammad Khatami, was later imprisoned after the disputed 2009 election . He went as far as to call Iran’s position ‘very bad’
 On the streets of Tehran recently, 17 people were willing to speak to a journalist about the war . Others declined to speak, with others declining .
 Of them, 12 supported Ukraine, three reiterated Iran’s official stance and two supported Russia . Three reiterated Iran's official stance, and two of them supported Russia.
 He spoke on condition he be identified only by his first name for fear of reprisals . Like others, he spoke on Condition he was only identified by first name .
 Mehrdad called Russia’s reasons for the war ‘ridiculous’ and similar to those used by Saddam Hussein to launch a bloody eight-year war .
 Saddam at the time pointed to supporting Iran’s Arab minority in its oil-rich southwest as a justification for his invasion .
 Putin as “very brave’ for challenging NATO, also a new preoccupation of Iran’s hard-line government under Raisi .
 Iran has been living quietly next to Turkey, which joined NATO in 1952 . Iran joined the alliance in 1952, but it has remained quiet since then .
 Russia fought multiple wars against Persia, which ceded territory to the czar . In its imperial past, Russia fought several wars with Persia, including several wars against Iran .
 Russia invaded Iran alongside Britain in World War II to secure oil and trade routes in their war against Germany . Russia invasion was part of the war against the Germans .
After the war, Russia refused to leave, sparking the first global crisis of the newly formed United Nations . The first crisis was the first of the new United Nations.
 Russia’s brief use of an Iranian air base amid the war in Syria sparked widespread anger . Russia and Iran both backed embattled Syrian President Bashar Assad, in which both backed Assad .
 Iran may be feeling like a poker chip in a wider game rather than a player at the geopolitical table . Now, Iran may feel like a Poker chip in the wider game .
 Russia's demand by Russia for sanctions-relief guarantees threw negotiations in Vienna into disarray . Iran's tattered nuclear deal is in disarray.
 Russia’s demand seems to have eased, while now it appears American sanctions on the Guard remain the last hurdle . Russia's demand has been eased.
 The operation is underway in the operating room . The doctor collected the shoes that he and his colleagues had left outside .
 Kyaw Swar’s close call last month came as Myanmar's security forces intensify crackdown on doctors who oppose the military junta .
 Doctors have been at the forefront of a nationwide civil disobedience movement that has crippled the economy . The regime has targeted health care workers.
Security forces have arrested doctors at their homes and hospitals, revoked licenses of prominent physicians . They searched hospitals for wounded resistance fighters and threatened to close health care centers that employ doctors opposing the regime .
 Myanmar soldiers are notorious for stealing from citizens . Going after doctors is a convenient way to make money, since doctors are among the country's wealthier people .
 During arrests, soldiers have gunshot wounds in an emergency ward in Yangon, Myanmar . i Patients with gunshot wounds are being treated in the emergency ward .
 The staff had shut down the hospital as part of mass protests against the military coup weeks earlier . They were secretly treating injured protesters .
 Cash, gold, jewelry and vehicles worth tens of thousands of dollars were seized in the past .
 In some cases, army officers have demanded as much as $5,000 not to shut down a private hospital, officials say .
 The Tunnel Fire burns Tuesday near Flagstaff, Arizona . The country faces a continuing health emergency because of a severe shortage .
 The wildfire nearly tripled in size of doctors, a chronic lack of resources and the closing of many hospitals and clinics . The wildfire almost tripled in number of doctors .
 Fewer than 40% of the population is fully vaccinated for COVID-19 . Many patients are left without routine care .
 Doctors say health care in Yangon, Myanmar’s largest city, has improved somewhat in recent months . Many physicians have returned to work in the city, with many returning to work .
Anti-regime doctors estimate that hundreds of people are still dying each week . But anti-regIME doctors estimate hundreds of those still dying every week because of collapse of health care system .
 One regime tactic has been to release doctors from prison on the condition that they disavow the civil disobedience movement . Doctors say they will work at a military-controlled, government hospital .
 Wai Myo was fired from Mandalay General Hospital last year for joining the protest movement . He was fired for joining a protest movement in the Philippines .
 A wildfire nearly tripled in size as relentless winds pushed the flames through neighborhoods on the outskirts of a college and tourist town . Hundreds of residents fled their homes and destroyed more than two dozen structures .
 The blaze continued its run Wednesday through dry grass and scattered Ponderosa pines around homes . Roots underground can combust and send small rocks flying into the air, fire officials said .
 Fire managers are contending with tight resources as wildfires burn around the Southwest . Fire managers have to deal with the shortage of resources .
 The U.S. has 16 top-level national fire management teams . Four of those are dedicated to blazes in Arizona and New Mexico .
 Hundreds of people have been evacuated because of wildfires north of Flagstaff and south of Prescott in Arizona .
 In New Mexico, the Mora County Sheriff’s Office issued mandatory evacuations for more residents . The blaze has burned more than 14 square miles since Sunday .
 Red flag warnings were on tap across New Mexico on Wednesday and through the rest of the week . The warnings are expected to continue through the next week .
 Winds were expected to be lighter Wednesday in Arizona, but will strengthen Thursday and Friday . The National Weather Service says winds will be lighter in Arizona on Thursday, Friday .
 The number of acres burned in the United States this year is about 30 percent above the 10-year average . The figure has gone up from 20 percent just earlier this month as the fire danger shifted from Southern United States to the Southwest .
 Popular national monuments, including Sunset Crater Volcano and Wupatki, were closed because of the wildfire . The wildfire caused the closure of the popular national monuments .
 Some homes burned to the ground, though Coconino County hasn’t said how many have been burned .
 One man reportedly trapped in his home by the flames was able to get out, Coconino County sheriff’s spokesman Jon Paxton says .
 Firefighters expected to move through neighborhoods to cool down smoldering spots and assess what's at risk .
 Thousands of doctors refused to work for the regime and left jobs in government facilities after the coup .
 Many began offering their services free at private hospitals and underground clinics . Many are now offering services free to private hospitals.
 The military has shut down at least a dozen clinics offering free medical treatment . It demanded that private hospitals and clinics hand over the names of patients and their medical history .
 I want to be a good citizen, so I joined the civil disobedience movement, says the activist . "I want to do what I can do," he says .
 Mandalay General Hospital, amajor teaching hospital in Myanmar’s second-largest city, has been at the center of the protest movement .
 Doctors in Mandalay have been much slower than those in other regions to return to work at government-controlled centers . Doctors in the region have been slower than others in other areas to return.
 The licenses of 14 medical professors and leading specialists at Mandalay General Hospital would be revoked, according to hospital owners who attended the meeting .
 Any private hospital that hired doctors known to support the civil disobedience movement would be shut down . They warned that any private hospital who hired them would be closed down .
The loss of highly trained doctors can have life-ordeath consequences for some patients . The loss of high-trained doctors can lead to life-threatening conditions for patients .
 Mandalay General Hospital is the only place in the region where such surgery could be done . But the hospital no longer has a team of doctors capable of performing the operation .
 Lieu Shin, 64, was given only days to live, but continues to hang on with dialysis . His family's savings are exhausting his family's money .
 He blames the regime for his inability to get treatment, not the doctors . He blames his regime for not getting treatment .
 NM agency issues $136,793 fine in fatal Baldwin shooting in October . A cinematographer was fatally shot in October by actor and producer Alec Baldwin .
 New Mexico’s Occupational Health and Safety Bureau says Rust Movie Productions must pay $136,793 . The bureau says production managers took limited or no action to address two misfires on set prior to the shooting .
 The bureau also documented gun safety complaints from crew members that went unheeded . The bureau said weapons specialists were not allowed to make decisions about additional safety training .
 Ataranch on the outskirts of Santa Fe on Oct., 2021, Baldwin was pointing a gun at cinematographer Halyna Hutchins inside a small church when it went off, killing Hutchins and wounding the director, Joel Souza .
 Baldwin said he was pointing the gun at Hutchins at her instruction on the New Mexico set of the Western film when it went off without his pulling the trigger . Baldwin said in a December interview with ABC News.
 HONG/AP 2021 was handed to Baldwin by an assistant director, David Halls, without consulting with on-set weapons specialists during or after the gun was loaded .
 Regulators note that Halls also served as safety coordinator and that he was present and witnessed two accidental discharges of rifles on set . He and other managers who knew of the misfires took no investigative, corrective or disciplinary action .
 Director Joel Souza and cinematographer Halyna Hutchins were severely injured . As a result of these failures, Director Souza was injured .
 Rust Movie Productions said through a spokesperson that it would dispute the findings and sanction .
 At least five lawsuits have been filed over the shooting, including a wrongful death suit brought by Hutchins' family against Baldwin .
 The lawsuit on behalf of widower Matt Hutchins and his 9-year-old son alleges a “callous disregard of safety complaints on set’s set . The lawsuit was filed by the widower and his son .
 Environment Department dedicated 1,500 staff hours to its investigation . It examined hundreds of documents and conducted at least a dozen interviews with cast and crew members .
 Production managers placed tight limits on resources for a small team that controlled weapons on set and failed to address concerns about a shotgun left unattended twice . Investigators found that production managers placed strict restrictions on resources .
 Armorer Hannah Gutierrez Reed was limited to eight paid days as an armorer to oversee weapons and training . Reed was assigned otherwise to lighter duties as a props assistant .
 Gutierrez Reed warned a manager and was rebuffed. As her time as an armorer ran out, Gutierrez Reed told a manager she had been rebuffed .
Kenney says separate investigations into possible criminal charges are still underway . Kenney said the separate investigations are underway .
 The Santa Fe County sheriff and local prosecutors had no immediate comment . The SantaFe County Sheriff's office and local Prosecutors have no immediate comments .
 Gary Restaino is the top United States prosecutor in Arizona . He will be interim director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives until a permanent leader is confirmed .
 Steven Dettelbach served as a federal prosecutor in Ohio under President Barack Obama . He was nominated to run an embattled agency that has had one permanent, Senate-confirmed director in 15 years .
 Marvin Richardson will remain at the agency as deputy director to advise Restaino . Richardson drew criticism over an appearance in January with the head of the gun industry’s main trade group .
 Officials are cautiously optimistic that Dettelbach can be confirmed by the fall . Officials are optimistic that the fall will be confirmed.
 The Justice Department's Phoenix office has been underfunded in recent years . Restaino has led some of the highest-profile federal prosecutions from the Justice Department .
 It is unclear whether Restaino will remain at ATF if Dettelbach is confirmed . It is still unclear whether he will stay at ATF .
 White House and Justice Department view Dettelbach's nomination as highly unlikely . But he could remain at the helm if his nomination fails, which the White House says is unlikely .
 David Chipman, a fiery former agent turned gun control advocate, was forced to withdraw after Sen. Biden’s first choice to run the bureau .
 Angus King, I-Maine, who caucuses with Democrats, opposed his nomination . King, a Democrat, is a longtime supporter of the Democratic Party .
 Chipman accused Biden’s team of failing to defend him from attacks by pro-gun groups .
 Chief of the criminal division in Phoenix and head of the white-collar crime section . He has worked in the Arizona office for nearly two decades .
 In 2009, he had a brief stint at the Justice Department’s headquarters in Washington . He worked in the public integrity section of the department .
 The last stockpiles of adeadly chemical agent in the United States have been safely eliminated . Kentucky offcials are in charge of destroying the Cold War-era weapons .
 The final M55 rocket containing VX nerve agent was destroyed Tuesday at the Blue Grass Chemical Agent plant . The plant was destroyed at the end of the day .
 Officials at the Kentucky plant began disassembling about 18,000 rockets and draining the VX agent in July . The plant officials say the rockets have been disassembled .
 VX is considered the deadliest of the chemical agents that was produced by the U.S. in the 1960s . Much of it was produced in the 1950s and 1960s. VX was the deadliest chemical agent produced in America .
 It has a consistency similar to motor oil and even a tiny amount causes victims’ bodies to flood with fluids, producing a feeling of drowning before death .
 Law enforcement prevented the marchers from reaching dense Palestinian neighborhoods in and around the Old City . A similar event last year helped trigger an Israel-Gaza war .
 Arocket was later fired into Israel from the Gaza Strip, Israel’s military said .
 The brother of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un was killed in a Malaysian airport .
 South Carolina’s highest court issued a temporary stay blocking the state from carrying out what was set to be its first firing squad execution .
 The order puts on hold the planned April 29 execution of Richard Bernard Moore . Moore drew the death sentence for the 1999 killing of a convenience store clerk in Spartanburg .
 Attorneys for the 57-year-old inmate had sought a stay, citing pending litigation in another court . South Carolina's execution methods also include the electric chair .
 The most recent execution by firing squad was that of Ronnie Lee Gardner in 2010 in Utah . In 2010, Gardner was sentenced to death in Utah.
 Shop owners searched through the rubble of their shops afterward to collect their belongings . Shop owners found their belongings in the rubble .
 The Supreme Court ordered the removal of a mosque's outer entrance and stairs leading into a mosque . Officials continued to demolish structures for nearly an hour after the court order .
 Anti-Muslim sentiment and attacks have risen across India in the past 10 days . Stone-throwing between Hindu and Muslim groups during religious processions and demolitions of properties .
 The intruder was smashing windows at the residence of the Peruvian ambassador to the United States . U.S. Secret Service officers shot and killed the intruder .
 The ambassador and his family were inside the residence in northwest Washington when they heard several windows being smashed . The Secret Service called the Secret Service for a “burglary in progress,’ authorities said .
 The uniformed officers encountered a man armed with a metal stake . They deployed a Taser in an effort to detain him, but “those weapons appear to not have any effect on the person,’s chief says .
 President Joe Biden plans to attend the White House Correspondents’ Association’s annual dinner . The first time a sitting president will be at the event since Barack Obama in 2016 .
 The organization said it was pleased to host Biden and first lady Jill Biden at the dinner . The dinner will honor the First Amendment .
 The event was canceled in 2020 and last year due to the coronavirus pandemic . The coronav virus pandemic was caused by an outbreak of the virus .
 Trevor Noah, host of Comedy Central’s “The Daily Show, is serving as the event's entertainer . Noah is the host of the show's "Daily Show"
 This Window World Franchise is independently owned and operated by Window World of Connecticut LLC under license from Window World Inc. PES iel pai 4G serves most of the state of Connecticut .
 Mask mandate for passengers still popular 56% of Americans favor practice in survey taken before federal judge’s ruling .
 A federal judge had put the government’s transportation mask mandate on hold . A ruling by a federal judge has put the federal government's transportation mask on hold.
 56% of Americans favor requiring people on planes, trains and public transportation to wear masks . 24% opposed and 20% say they’re neither in favor nor opposed .
 Interviews were conducted Thursday to Monday, shortly before a federal judge in Florida struck down the national mask mandate on airplanes and mass transit .
 Airlines and airports immediately scrapped their requirements that passengers wear face coverings . The requirements were immediately scrapped .
 The Transportation Security Administration had stopped enforcing the mask requirement . The Justice Department announced Wednesday that it would appeal the judge’s ruling .
 45% of Republicans are opposed compared with 33% in favor, with 22% saying neither . Among Republicans, 45% are opposed. 22% say neither .
 The continued support among Americans overall for mandating masks on transportation comes even as worries about COVID-19 are among their lowest points of the past two years .
 Just 20% now say they’re very or extremely worried that they or a family member will be infected .
 That’s down slightly since 25% said the same just a month ago and from 36% in December and January as the omicron variant was raging . That's down slightly from 25% in January and 25% just one month ago .
 Another 33% now say they are somewhat worried, while 48% say they're not worried at all .
 The poll also shows about half of Americans favor requiring masks for workers who interact with the public . About 3 in 10 opposed masks, compared with about 3 in10 opposed .
 Support is similar to requiring people at crowded public events such as concerts, sporting events and movies to wear masks .
 Seventy-two percent of Democrats favor requiring people attending crowded public events to wear masks . Among Republicans, 25% are in favor and 49% are opposed .
 Employed Americans are divided on whether people working in person at their own workplaces should wear masks .
 Thirty-four percent say they’re in favor of that requirement, 33% are opposed . 33% say they're neither in favor nor opposed .
 Among workers who are Republicans, 53% are opposed and 18% are in favor . 18% in favor of Republicans .
 One seller offered 10 days access to Netflix in Ultra HD for $1 instead of $19.99 a month for a Netflix premium account .
 Another seller pitched access to HBO Max for just $1.09 amonth, compared with its $14.99 a month price tag . Another seller sold access to the network for just £1.9 amon fourth .
 Someone else was offering a Disney+ subscription (typically costing $7.99 a month) for as low as 90 cents .
Online marketplaces where passwords are being sold illegally at bargain-basement prices . Companies that manage digital content protection for Hollywood studios say passwords are sold illegally .
 Password sharing has become a growing headache for streamers that rely on subscription revenue to finance the rising cost of producing content . Such marketplaces have sprouted in response to the popularity of password sharing .
 Account sharing and piracy cost streamers and pay TV providers $9. billion in lost revenue in 2019, according to a report . Account sharing, piracy costs streamers $8.5 billion in a year.
 That’s expected to grow to $12. billion in lost revenue by 2024, according to market research and consulting firm Parks Associates . That's expected to rise to $ 12. billion by 2024 .
 A Citi analyst estimated streaming services lose roughly $25 billion a year due to password sharing . Netflix represents 25% of that amount, with Netflix representing 25% .
 Netflix last month took a major step to crack down on password sharing among people who don't live in the same home .
 The streamer is testing features that would allow subscribers in Chile, Costa Rica and Peru to add up to two users outside of their household . It is testing the features for $2 or $3 per account .
 Netflix also tested a prompt during the login process that would remind nonpaying viewers that if they don't live in the same house as the account holder, they would need to get their own subscription .
 Netflix on Tuesday reported its first subscriber loss in more than a decade . It is the company's first loss in 10 years .
 The company’s customer base fell by 200,000 subscribers during the January-March period, according to its latest quarterly report .
 Netflix's subscribers have fallen since the streaming service became available throughout most of the world outside of China six years ago . It's the first time that Netflix’s subscribers have fall since it became available across the world .
 The drop stemmed in part from Netflix’s decision to withdraw from Russia to protest the war against Ukraine . The drop resulted in a loss of 700,000 subscribers .
 Netflix is projecting a loss of another 2 million subscribers during the April-June period . Netflix is projected to lose another 2million subscribers in the same period .
 People who tend to share passwords are aged 18 to 24, according to a study . Advertising Research Foundation surveyed 10,400 adults .
 Younger consumers may be more cash-strapped and are looking for ways to save money from paying for multiple streaming services, industry experts say .
 CSX has agreed to start paying some of its employees more in advance of raises the railroad expects to agree to as part of ongoing national contract talks . CSX to hike pay ahead of expected raises.
 CSX said the payments of up to $600 a month are expected to start next month for members of the Sheet Metal, Air, Rail and Transportation Workers, Transportation Division union . CSX says the payments are to be made next month .
 The Jacksonville, Florida-based railroad plans to reach similar agreements with its other unions . The Jacksonville-based Railroad plans to reached similar agreements.
 CSX announced late Tuesday that it would be an encouraging sign for the larger contract talks between the National Railway Labor Conference coalition of railroads that has been negotiating with unions since the fall of 2019 .
 A spokesman for the NRLC group that is negotiating on behalf of more than 30 railroads didn't immediately respond to questions about the talks Wednesday .
 All the major freight railroads, including CSX, Union Pacific, BNSF, Norfolk Southern and Kansas City Southern, are involved in those negotiations . The negotiations are ongoing .
 CEO Jim Foote said the railroad decided to start paying its employees more to help them deal with skyrocketing inflation . Food and gas prices are driving prices of food and gas higher .
 A spokesman for the SMART-TD union didn’t immediately respond to questions about the union .
 The unions are reluctant to make significant concessions in the negotiations . The major freight railroads cut nearly one-third of their workforce over the past six years .
 The workers also remained on the job throughout the pandemic to keep freight moving . The pandemic is a pandemic that has seen more than 100,000 people die .
 Morgan Stanley has been calling banks and other potential investors to shore up financing for the offer . The investment bank has been working with Musk on the potential deal .
 Musk is first focused on raising debt and has not yet begun to seek equity financing for his bid, one of the people said . Musk is not yet seeking equity financing.
 Musk, 50, is evaluating various packages of debt, two people say . He is evaluating more senior debt known as preferred debt and a loan against his shares of Tesla .
 Apollo Global Management, a private equity firm, is among the parties considering offering debt financing in a bid for Twitter . Twitter is a popular social media site .
 Musk is aiming to pull together a fully funded offer as soon as this week, one of the people said . The company is aiming for a fullyfunded offer this week .
 The people with knowledge of the discussions were not authorized to speak publicly . The details are confidential and in flux .
 Musk, the world’s wealthiest man, made an unsolicited offer for the social media company . He said he wanted people to be able to speak more freely on the service .
 Wall Street was skeptical because he did not include details on how he would come up with the money for the deal . But his offer was regarded skeptically by Wall Street because he didn't include details about how he'd come up for the money .
 Twitter's board has not rejected Musk’s offer, but it responded with a “poison pill,” a tactic that would effectively prevent Musk from owning more than 15% of Twitter’'s shares . Twitter has not yet rejected the offer .
 Musk owns more than 9% of Twitter, making him its single-biggest individual shareholder . Musk owns over 10% of the company's Twitter account .
 Mexico's Senate OKs a bill to nationalize lithium mining and extraction . Mexico’s Senate passed a bill Tuesday to nationalized lithium mining .
 The bill was submitted by President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, who is expected to sign it into law . The bill has been submitted by the President and has been approved by the president .
 The law says a state-run company will have exclusive rights to mine lithium, a mineral used in electric car batteries . The mineral is used in batteries and other devices .
 The Mexican government has no experience in mining lithium . Such a company does not yet exist, and the Mexican government does not.
 Only one lithium mine in Mexico, operated by a Chinese firm, is anywhere close to starting production .
 It was not clear if that mine in northern Mexico would be taken over by the government . It is not clear whether that mine would be take over .
 Russia shunned at G-20 meeting WASHINGTON . Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen and Ukrainian Finance Minister Serhiy Marchenko walked out of a Group of 20 meeting . Russia's representative started talking .
 Several finance ministers and central bank governors also left the room, an official says . The event was not public .
 Some ministers and central bank governors virtually turned their cameras off when the Russia representative spoke, person says .
 The incident came amid the International Monetary Fund and World Bank spring meetings .
 The National Association of Realtors has been living in a houseboat while his home is being repaired . Ted Falgout points out the waterline from Hurricane Ida.
 When Hurricane Ida hit last summer, a storm surge overwhelmed a levee and gushed into Ted Falgout’s coastal Louisiana home . His furniture and framed photos of his twin sons kissing him were destroyed .
 Cities on the Louisiana coast and Mississippi River are hoping President Joe Biden's $1. trillion infrastructure package will provide badly needed funding to fortify locks.
Community groups and advocates fear smaller cities will struggle to navigate the maze of government programs and miss out on the rare chance to protect against rising waters and heavy rains . But community groups fear small cities will be unable to navigate government programs .
 The Upper Mississippi is part of a region where flood severity is increasing faster than in any other area of the country . The Louisiana coast has long been especially vulnerable to flooding .
 La Crosse, Wisconsin, is among the cities trying to figure out how to benefit as infrastructure funds start rolling out . The city's infrastructure funds are expected to be rolled out soon .
 The levees were built after devastating flooding in 1965 . They don't meet federal standards that would help lower insurance rates and make it easier for residents to fix up homes .
 Upgrading the levees would be so expensive it’s hard for the city to know how to get started, he said .
 Some advocates want agencies to make it easier for communities to learn about funding opportunities . They want to ensure that simple applications from small towns can compete against more sophisticated proposals from richer cities .
 The Biden administration wants more clarity on how the Biden administration considers factors like economic and environmental inequality . They also want more clarity into how the Obama administration considers economic andEnvironmental inequality .
 The Environmental Protection Agency also said it will offer assistance to disadvantaged areas . States have money to help small communities access funding for drinking and wastewater projects .
 Rural communities get special guidance on tapping into the money . Rural communities are also getting special guidance. Rural communities in rural areas are also being given special guidance .
 The scramble for funding is further complicating the debate about the best approaches for protecting against floods . But further complication is debate about how to protect against floods.
 Congress directed the Army Corps to consider natural solutions like levees and floodgates .
 Britain 1.3057 .7659.50 3.50 D tic Ind Canada .7996 1.2507 | 3-mo.T-Bill 0.83 0.76 omestic ingexes China 1558 6.4192 | 6-mo .
 Disneyland’s furry inhabitants have been off limits for more than two years since the pandemic began .
 When it reopened in April 2021 with extensive health-related modifications, Mickey and Minnie and their cohorts were kept at a distance from guests .
 Rory, 2, trained her eyes on someone coming around the corner in red trousers and big, white gloves .
 Squeal-screaming, she picked herself up off the pavement and ran toward him with arms outstretched . She ran toward the man with her arms out stretched .
 Her mother, father and uncle chased after her and scrambled to unlock their iPhones to catch a photo of their embrace . Her mother and uncle were caught in the embrace .
 Rory shouted toward her paparazzi, as Mickey knelt to rub noses with her . Rory shouted at Mickey as he knelt in front of her .
 The culture wars are the latest in a long line of culture wars .
 Employees revolted over the company’s initial silence on an anti-LGBTQ law . Rightwing protests broke out after the company did speak up .
 Both sides of the political divide have been pulling on Disney, leading to some not-so-magical moments around a brand that is supposed to symbolize happily ever after .
 Some people find Disney's extra-syrupy, tightly managed theme parks to be extra-creepy .
 The character hugging has been part of the Disneyland experience since its earliest days in the 1950s .
 A lot of American families consider it a rite of childhood to hug one of Disney’s cartoon characters . But a lot of Americans think it's a rite to hug a cartoon character .
 Some characters, including the Disney princesses, are so mobbed that the company has built indoor, heavily themed environments for them to inhabit .
 Disneyland has roughly 50 costumed characters in rotation, Vossen said . Disneyland has about 50 characters.
 operations have been almost fully restored at Disney’s domestic resorts after a lengthy period in which social distancing and other coronavirus safety measures took priority .
 The division of the company that includes theme parks had $16. billion in revenue last year . That's down from $26 billion in 2019, according to financial filings .
 Disney refers to its behind-thescenes areas. Mickey Mouse headed “offstage,’ as Disney referred to its Behind-theenes areas .
 Vossen has worked at Disneyland for 42 years . He frowned and offered a correction .
 Vacs J anki is, broadly speaking a Goldberg contest between good guys and bad guys . He is a broadly speaking Goldberg contest.
 The world is made up of nation-states with interests and those states act rationally on their interests .
Nations have interests, but the way they define their interests is not always strictly rational .
 History is full of examples of nations committing vast resources to causes that are extrarational . The United States is one of the most powerful nations in the world .
 For months, he's had the secondworst approval rating of any polling-era president at the same point in their presidencies . Only Donald Trump has the second worst approval rating in his history, trailing only Trump .
 Three of the four sitting presidents to lose a presidential election during the polling era . Three of four presidents have lost in the past four years .
 Biden began his presidency with a period of unusual approval stability . He may have entered into a second such stretch this year .
 His approval rating was at 41.9% on Jan. 9, marking the end of his first year in office . The president's approval rating is 41.8% .
 He's been within a percentage point of where he is now on almost every day over the last three months . It's 41.8%, as I write this, and he’s been in the top 40%.
 Biden's all-time low point was 40.4% at the end of February . It's possible to look at the day-to-day approval chart and see Biden hit bottom soon after .
 His numbers improved as the pandemic eased, only to be hit again by the big surge in gasoline prices in March . He's slowly recovering from as prices moderate, but he's slowly getting better .
 The numbers are compatible with that interpretation, but they’re also compatible with the view that he’s just held steady over the last three months . Any fluctuations are just statistical noise, according to the numbers .
 Biden would no longer be a major drag on Democratic candidates this fall . It's possible that Biden's low approval is soft, and that a few months of good news about the pandemic and inflation could produce a solid rally .
 It's possible that opposition has hardened, and that he's unlikely to rally even with a run of positive news . But it's also possible that he’s also likely to be hardened, as he's likely to rally .
 Four of his 13 predecessors had reached the 40% mark in their presidencies . Three others would hit before the end of their first two years in office .
 Maybe Biden is just as much at risk of reaching the 30s or worse as all presidents have been . Maybe this line will hold, even if there's further bad news .
 North Korea’s foreign and domestic policy is an expression of its rational self-interest. To claim that, say, North Korea is to declare you don’t know anything about North Korea, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Realists tend to conflate interests of rulers with the interests of the ruled . Realists often conflate rulers with interests of ruled .
 It's hard to find a sane analyst who thinks Putin invaded Ukraine solely in the name of Russia’s rational self-interest . It's even harder to find one who thinks the invasion is objectively in the interest of the Russian people .
 Putin's choice makes it easy to call him and his enablers the bad guys . Putin not to have committed this monstrous crime, his choice makes his choice easy .
Deliberately targeting civilians, sanctioning mass executions and rape, not to mention the intentional wholesale erasure of cities, is objectively evil . Deliberately targeting civilians is an act of evil, says the author .
 The Russian state tacitly admits this when it refuses to tell its own people what it is doing . The state refuses to say what it's doing to its people .
With media voices like Simonyan, it’s no wonder Putin allegedly polls well in Russia, it's no wonder he polls well .
 I think the realist case for doing everything possible to assure a Russian defeat is obvious . I think it is obvious to do everything possible for Russia to win the World Cup .
 It is Russian policy to undermine our interests and the interests of our allies around the world . It is a Russian policy. It is also a Russian Policy to undermine its interests and our interests .
 In the 1990s, we pushed Ukraine to relinquish its nuclear weapons in exchange for security guarantees . We pushed the country to give up nuclear weapons for security assurances .
 In 2005, a bipartisan effort resulted in Ukraine destroying vast amounts of its conventional weapons, on the assumption that security guarantees would be honored .
 Putin said those guarantees were null and void because the Ukrainian Euromaidan protests in 2013 ushered in anew Ukrainian state . Russia signed on to those guarantees, but Putin said they were null, void because of the protests .
 Putin’s betrayal of his commitments doesn’t release us from ours. Whether you buy that garbage is immaterial, Putin's betrayal doesn't release us, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is in our interest to be seen as a nation that honors its commitments. And it is in the interest of the U.S. to honor its commitments, we say .
 None of this is to say we should send our own troops into Ukraine — not that we wouldn't be morally justified .
 Ukraine is asking for the modern equivalent of the arsenal of democracy, and we should give it to them, fast . Ukraine is also asking for a modern equivalent to the modern version of democracy .
 Putin is now doubling down on his crimes in eastern Ukraine just to save face .
P.S. SEMANSKY/AP in a relatively narrow range during this period of intense partisanship .
 I’m among what I think is the minority who think very high and very low approval ratings are still possible . I'm among those who think high and high approval ratings still possible.
 Survey respondents said they would be happy to pay more for gasoline in order to support Ukraine and punish Russia . Survey: By wide margins, respondents said, by wide margin, that they would pay more to support the Ukraine .
 People aren’t good at predicting their own reactions to potential news events . The changes aren't large enough to prove anything, but this appears to be an example of the finding .
 That’s something to take into consideration when it comes to other areas as well .
 If inflation recedes they’ll be more favorable toward Biden regardless of whether he followed their policy preferences or not . People have all sorts of things they might say they want to do about inflation, but if inflation recede, they'll be more favorably toward Biden .
 People may say they want to keep or eliminate mask mandates, but it’s more likely that outcomes are more likely . Case counts, hospitalizations, deaths are likely to determine whether Biden has done a good job or a bad job in dealing with the coronavirus .
 Overall it is outcomes that heavily influence presidential popularity . But overall it is the outcome of the presidential election that heavily influences popularity .
 Lots of things have the potential to affect presidential popularity at the margins . It's a policy position or ability to give a good speech or how well this or that government agency functions .
 In many cases those are the things under the control of the president . But many big-picture outcomes may be far harder to influence than those under control .
 It makes sense for presidents to tout their accomplishments, give speeches, emphasize their popular policies and stay relatively quiet about their unpopular ones . So, all else equal, it makes sense.
 The White House can usually control how the president is doing on such things . We tend to spend plenty of time checking on how the President is doing .
Ill give you asurprisingly accurate guess as to how Democrats will do in November and in the 2024 election . Tell me what’s going to happen with the pandemic and with the economy .
 Aitchison's analysis is correct, and the party's prescription is a good one, says Aitchesison . The party’s analysis is right, and it's a good ones, says aitchison .
 Localities tend to overweigh purely local interests in their land-use planning and don’t approve enough new homes .
 This may help them avoid costs such as traffic jams and school crowding, but it imposes large economic costs on nonresidents . This may be a good thing for them to avoid traffic jams, but not for them .
 People who don't move to town because there aren't enough new homes don’t just vanish, they live elsewhere . This makes the savings in terms of infrastructure illusory, says the author .
 In Canada, as in the U.S., the federal government finances a fair amount of local government activity . In the United States, the government finances more local government activities than in Canada .
 If towns and cities want money for infrastructure, they need to do their share to add to the national housing supply . If towns want money, they should do their own share, say cities .
 President Joe Biden endorsed a version of this approach during his campaign . At one point it was part of his “Build Back Better’s” proposal .
 It's been the subject of a yearslong fearmongering campaign from the right. And it’s been a years long fearmongers campaign.
 Canada's conservatives are pushing more density . Earlier this month, Sen. Canada’s conservatives were pushing moredensity .
 Tom Cotton, R-Ark., went on Fox News to complain that Democrats “want to make us all poor.’
 In terms of the culture war, it’s easy to see where Cotton is coming from, says author .
 American cities are full of Black people, immigrants, LGBTQ people and people who like art galleries and weird food . American cities have a diverse population of people who love art galleries, weird food.
 To many people of a conservative temperament, that’s not very appealing to many .
 Cotton could learn a lot from his conservative friends north of the border . Cotton's conservative friends have a lot to learn from .
 An apartment building is a more efficient use of land and material than a detached single-family home .
 Walmart’s large and efficient supply chain helps it offer “always low prices,” which are appealing to lower-income people . Walmart”s large, efficient supply Chain helps it offers “ always low prices’
 No self-respecting Republican would think that allowing Walmart to exist makes people poor . But no self- respecting Republican wouldn't think that Walmart is good for people .
 Walmart has a downscale customer base, so banning Walmart would be bad for low-income people . The company says it has a "downscale" customer base .
City snobs benefit in the long run from the existence of efficient retail operations that raise productivity . And ultimately it would be bad for everyone, even fancy city snobs.
 Prohibiting the use of productivity-enhancing building types makes the country as a whole poorer .
 That's not a question of what kind of lifestyle people ought to prefer, or about whether city dwellers or rural folks are more virtuous . That’s not a matter of what type of life people should prefer .
 Housing accounting for more than one-third of household consumption spending . regulatory burdens on the housing sector are a huge deal .
 Harvard economist Edward Glaeser articulated idea years ago by conservative Harvard economist . It's an idea articulated years ago.
 It used to be difficult to get progressive-minded people interested in zoning reform, says John Sutter .
 That's the kind of thinking that poisons America’s political system and hurts the U.S. economy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says that's the type of thinking.
 Dark green American, Emeralds, Green Giants for beautiful privacy borders . The Green Giants are known for their privacy borders.
 You'll find opportunities that match your skills, your personality and your life . With our expansive network of distinguished employers from coast to coast and advanced Job matching technology, you'll find jobs that match you .
Construction of deck on piers in Avon, CT. Request within the 100’s regulated area .
 20% Sealed proposals for the services named above will be received at the Office of the Director of Finance until 11:00m., Tuesday May 10, 2022 . The Office of Finance will receive the proposals until 11.00m.
 Thereafter, proposals will be opened in public and read aloud or read aloud . The Governor’s Executive Orders will be read aloud and opened .
 The Town of Enfield reserves the right to accept or reject any, all, or any part of proposals, to waive formalities . The Capital Region Development Authority is seeking a qualified consultant to provide project coordination services in the Parkville neighborhood .
 The Middletown Water Pollution Control Authority will hold a Hybrid/Webex Meeting on Thursday, May 5, 2022 . A proposal package can be requested from dgurvich@mercyhousingct.org by April 28 2022 by 4:00 pm Connecticut .
 All public comments will be read into the official record of the meeting . The meeting will be held at the end of the month .
 Middletown Water Pollution Control Authority Special Meeting May 5, 2022 7:00p.m. Please send all public comments to joe.fazzino@middletsownct.gov.gov .
 The following billing schedule and use charges shall apply to all properties connected directly or indirectly to the Middletown sanitary sewerage system . All properties located within the limits of the City of Middletsown and all properties in the Town of Middlefield which are or may be connected
 Billing dates as of August 1, November, November and May . Will apply to Residential, Commercial, or Industrial units having a meter size 5/8 to .
 Billing dates shall be the 1 st day of the following month for Residential, Commercial, or Industrial units having a meter size 1/2’s and above . The following month is the 1st day for residential, commercial or industrial units with a meter 1
 The sewerage use charge shall be at the rate of $6.84 per one hundred cubic feet of water charged for by the City of Middletown .
 The Town of West Hartford Plan and Zoning Commission also acting as the Inland Wetlands and Watercourses Agency will hold its Regular Meeting at 7:00 PM on Monday, May 2, 2022 . Properties not using City water, shall be charge the said rate and shall be applied
 New Street — Petition for the honorary and historic renaming of a public street . The street is named New Street .
 Associated site improvements include construction of a gathering space area and entry to the fields . New parking for 21 cars, paved sidewalks, new retaining and seating walls, and a new scoreboard .
 Inland Wetlands and Watercourse Permit to conduct certain regulated activities, which may have an adverse impact on a wetlands regulated area . Joseph, requesting approval, requested approval of an Inland wetlands and watercourse Permits .
 The applicant proposes to replace an existing natural grass softball field with a synthetic turf playing field along with associated site improvements . The applicant has proposed to replace the existing grass soft ball field with the synthetic turf field .
 The minimum charge EOE/AA per monthly and semi-annual period shall 4/21/22 7196170 be $34.22 for consumption less than five hundred cubic feet .
 All previous sewer use charges established by the Water Pollution Control Authority of the City of Middletown are repealed effective as of the effective date of the new charges .
 Burnham Street and also known as lot no. on a certain map entitled, "Property of KATE A BURNHAM, East Hartford, Conn. The map was created in the 1990s .
 North: by Burnham Street, fifty five feet; Northeast: by a curve connecting the south street line of Burnham street and the West street line. East: by Pheasant Lane, one hundred thirty feet; South: by lot no. on a subdivision entitled ""Burnham
 Town of East Hartford and a 20' sanitary sewer easement in favor of the MDC as of record appear. Subject to building and zoning regulations of the Town ofEast Hartford .
 The Secretary reserves the right to adjourn the time and place of the sale by announcement made to those present .
 There will be no proration of taxes, rents or other income or liabilities, except that the purchaser will pay .
 If the successful bid is oral, a deposit of $17,695.00 must be presented before bidding is closed . The deposit is oral .
 The remainder of the purchase price must be delivered within 30 days of the sale . The Secretary may determine for good cause shown, time being of the essence .
 This amount, like the bid deposits, must be delivered in the form of a certified or cashier’s check . The amount must also be delivered by a certified check .
 If the Secretary is the highest bidder, he need not pay the bid amount in cash . The Secretary is expected to make a decision on the deal .
 The successful bidder will pay all conveying fees, all real estate and other taxes that are due on or after the delivery date of the remainder of the payment .
 The deposits of the unsuccessful bidders will be returned to them at the end of the sale .
 The Secretary may grant an extension of time within which to deliver the remainder of the payment . The Secretary of State may grant a time extension to deliver remainder of payment .
 All extensions will be for 15-day increments for a fee of $500.00, paid in advance . All extensions are for 15 days, with a fee for $500 .
 The unused portion of the extension fee shall be applied toward the amount due . If the high bidder closes the sale prior to the expiration of any extension period, the unused portion will be applied .
 The high bidder may be required to forfeit the cash deposit or at the election of the Foreclosure Commissioner . HUD will be liable for any costs incurred as a result of such failure .
 The Commissioner may offer the property to the second highest bidder for an amount equal to the highest price offered by that bidder .
 There is no right of redemption, or right of possession based upon a right of redeeming, in the mortgagor or others subsequent to a foreclosure completed .
 Foreclosure Commissioner will issue a Deed to the purchaser upon receipt of the entire purchase price in accordance with the terms of the sale .
 Tender of payment by certified or cashier’s check or application for cancellation of the foreclosure sale shall be submitted to the address of the Foreclosure Commissioner provided below .
 Joseph, requesting approval of a Special Use Permit for the replacement of an existing natural grass softball field with a synthetic turf playing field along with associated site improvements .
 Club Application of Peter timothy root 1662 Joyce on behalf of Wampanoag Country Club, Tyrell Hudson 1056 . Joyce requested approval of a Special Use Pedro Contreras 1070 Permit for the installation of platform tennis Starr Lee 1630 courts .
 At this hearing, interested person may Karen Jones 0112 be heard or submit written communication IONIE BECKFORD 1374 received . Doris Yasin 1048 at this hearing .
 Purchases to be paid for at the time of purchase, a $100.00 CREDIT OR DEBIT ONLY deposit will be needed on EACH room purchased . Purchases will be paid at the times of purchase .
 No U-Haul Storage customers, or their family or friends on their behalf, may participate in any auction proceedings . Auction service provided by www.storageauctions.com Absolutely NO U-haul storage customers .
 There will be no proration of taxes, rents or other income or liabilities, except that the purchaser will pay .
 The -emainder of the purchase price must be delivered within 30 days of the sale . The Secretary may determine for good cause shown, time being of the essence .
 The successful didder will pay all conveying fees, all real estate and other taxes that are due on or after the delivery date of the payment .
 At the conclusion of the sale, the deposits of the 4insuccessful bidders will be returned to them .
 The high bidder is unable to close the sale within the required period, or within any extensions of time granted by the Secretary . High bidder may be required to forfeit the cash deposit or, at the election of the Foreclosure Commissioner.
 The Commissioner may offer the property to the second highest bidder for an amount 2qual to the highest price offered by that bidder . The commissioner may also offer the secondhighest bidder for the property .
 The Foreclosure Commissioner will issue a Deed to the ourchaser upon receipt of the entire purchase price .
 Joan LaCroix-Alton age 88, Glastonbury Tolland 4:30m. There will be an life-long resident of Joan R Alton Alice L Smith informal gathering .
 Theresa Garbich Daniel P Sullivan Darcey passed away on January 9, 2022 . She was a school bus driver for many Daniel PSullivan West Hartford, Connecticut .
 As years for the Glastonbury Marlborough Andre Brodeur Theresa Garbich. As years as years for Glastonburys. Andre Bro de BrodeUR Theresa GarBich William P Mcgovern Newington Windsor Bryan W Hicks Gloria M Henry Other Towns in CT John
 Theresa Theresa Garbich, 77, of Marlborough, CT, passed away on April 18, 2022 . She was married to Theresa Theresa Theresa “Terry’s’S’Garbich’, 77 .
 She was born in Hartford, CT, the daughter of the late Henry and Anastasia Jarvis .
 She Spent countless hours at the hockey rink, softball sidelines and school functions proudly watching her grandchildren . She also spent countless hours watching her children at school functions .
 Terry enjoyed working on her family genealogy and most enjoyed her outings with her siblings to the casino . Terry enjoyed her trips to the casinos with her brother and sister .
 Terry's love of animals began at young age growing up on a farm with bunnies, pigs and chickens . Terry’s love of Animals began at age of 10.
 Roseann Pelletier is survived by her daughter Roseann and her husband, Bailey . She is also survived by daughter Victoria Flynn and her son Max Garbich . Grandson and United States Marine, Spencer, and Granddaughters Caitlyn and Anastacia .
 She was predeceased by her Brothers, Raymond and Henry Jarvis and Sister Bertha Sanzaro . She died at the age of 60 .
 Her graveside service will be Thursday, April 28, 2022 at 2:00pm at St. Mary's in St. George's Church .
 Daniel P Sullivan passed away peacefully with his loved ones at his side on Saturday, April 16, 2022 at the age of 77 . Sullivan was a loving father, grandfather, brother and friend .
 Dan Sullivan was born on June 14, 1944 in Milford, CT, one of four children of the late Daniel P Sullivan Sr. and Edith Sullivan . Dan was born in June 1944.
 Dan and his family lived in Newfoundland for several years when he was a young boy while his father was Director of Financial Services at the Argentia Naval Air Station . Dan and the family lived with his father in Newfoundland.
 Dan retired in 1997 and became the Director of Human Resources for the Town of Vernon, Connecticut . He served as Director of human resources for the State of Connecticut Department of Public Health .
 Dan was elected to the Vernon Town Council after his retirement in 2009 . He was elected in 2009.
 Dan loved Vernon and through the years he also proudly served on the Zoning Board and the Board of Education . He also served on Zoning board and Board of education .
 He was a past Trustee and lifetime member of the Rockville Elks . He is a lifelong member of a National Rifle Association and an avid military enthusiast .
 He is survived by his two daughters Tara Mendyka and her husband Andrew of Manchester, Shannon Sullivan and her son Christopher Rich both of Vernon, Vernon, his two sisters Barbara Walsh and Jane Crogle . His nieces and nephews include Dan’s godson Paul
 Dan Lizak was predeceased by his sister Sharon Lizak and her husband Paul . Dan was preded by his mother and sister Sharon and his father .
 Funeral services will be on Saturday April 23, 2022, at 10:00 am at the funeral home . Military Honors in Valley Falls Cemetery in Vernon, Vernon, will also be buried in the cemetery .
Every life story deserves to be told. To leave an Online condolence please visit www.carmonfuneralich CARMON Community Funeral Homes.com/obituaries .
Jack impacted the lives of many people. Share your loved one’s story at placeanad.com .
 There will be no formal agenda, but there will be an opportunity for anyone so inclined to speak about what their relationship with Jack meant to them .
 Arbor Day will be Arbor Day. Light refreshments will be served . A tree will be planted on school property in Jack's honor .
Gloria M Gloria Mavis Henry was born October 8, 1931 to the late Alexander and Estella Lewis of St. Louis . Henry was also born to Estella and Alexander and Alexander Lewis .
 She gracefully entered the kingdom of glory Thursday, April 7, 2022 peacefully surrounded by family and holding her daughter's hand . She gracely entered the world of glory.
 She was predeceased by her husband Seymour Henry of 18 years until his death in November of 1987 . She died of a heart attack in 1987 .
 Gloria worked as the secretary for the mayor of Montego Bay . Before migrating to the U.S. Gloria worked for the city's mayor and mayor .
After arriving to the states she held several positions of employment which began at Savitt Jewelry store . She was a member of the staff at the store.
 She was a faithful member of Faith Congregational Church . She served on various committees and served on several committees .
 Her husband was also one of the original founding fathers of the West Indian Social Club . Her husband is also a founding father of the social club .
 Gloria is predeceased by siblings Walter, Astley, Beres, Albert, Joe, Joe and Carmen . Gloria was born into a family of six children .
 Gloria Boswell is survived by her son Merton Boswell, daughter Chelsea Boswell-Neal and husband Thomas Neal . She also has step-daughter Shirley Taylor and husband Owen Taylor .
 Grandchildren Chantel Boswell, Chelsea Bianca Neal, Tony Taylor and Dr. Dr. Tony Taylor are all of the family's grandchildren .
 Along with a host of nieces, nephews, greatnieces, great-nephews and their families. Along with their families, there are also a number of other relatives .
 Gloria was known for her big heart and her caring spirit . She displayed this by entertaining family and friends with delicious holiday dinners .
 Gloria loved to donate to various charities as well as her time to those in need . She also loved to give to other charities .
 She would provide transportation, purchase groceries, and lend a helping hand . She was always willing to lend a help hand .
 Alice Boyce LaPoint Smith, of Framingham, MA, passed away at age 93, Surrounded by her loving family . She was a loving mother, grandmother and great-grandmother .
 Alice, also known as ‘Dabi’ or “Grammy’ to her grandchildren and countless others, made friends everywhere with her radiant smile, and warm, giving nature .
 Alice later married her childhood sweetheart, Richard Lawless Smith, of Leominster, MA, and they adored each other for 22 years until his death in 2006 . Alice later wed her childhoodsweetheart Richard Lawlessness Smith, who died in 2006.
 Alice and her husband were dedicated parishioners of Saint Matthew Parish in Tolland, where she served both as a Lector and Eucharistic Minister for many decades . Alice and husband are a longtime parishioner.
 Alice was predeceased by her parents, Charles and Hannah, and her brothers, Charles Jr., Ralph, and Donald . Alice was born on November 26, 1913, in New York City .
 A Mass of Christian Burial will be held at 10 AM on Saturday, April 23, 2022 . The Mass will take place at 10am on April 23.
 The Alzheimer's Foundation of America. For online condolences please visit www. pietrasfuneralhome.com.com .
 Joan was most happy when her family gathered for birthdays and holidays and weekend card games . Joan was also most happy with her family's card games.
 Alton was her rock and sisters Marjorie Barker, Pauline LaCroix and Susie Esposito . Alton, who was her sisters, was her mother and sister-in-law .
 She is survived by her sister Bonnie Sargent and brother Richard LaCroix and her 5 children Charles and Jeffrey Alton of East Hartford . She also has many grandchildren, great grandchildren, nieces and nephews . She is also survived by many grandchildren and great
 The family will be having a private funeral service followed by a Mass of Christian Burial at Ss. The funeral service will be held at S.S. Church .
 Isidore and Maria Parish at St Paul Church, 2577 Main St., Glastonbury, CT 06033 . The parish is located at St. Paul Church .
 Andre served his country as a mechanic in the U.S. Air Force .
 He was a security guard for the State of Connecticut and was a long-haul cross-country tractor trailer driver for many years .
 He enjoyed being in his workshop creating gifts and spiritual crosses for others . He enjoys being in a workshop creating gift and spiritual cross for others.
 Andre is survived by his mother Germaine Brodeur as well as numerous cousins in Connecticut and Canada . He was one of his many favorite places to visit .
Visitation is prior to the funeral from 9:00m. to 10:000m. at the Church . Visitation is before the funeral at the church .
 Sheehan Hilborn Breen. Myles departed this world peacefully on April 3, 2022, surrounded by loved ones .
 He was born on July 7,1940 in Ramble, in the parish of Hanover, Jamaica, WI to the late Morris Myles and Gertrude Arnold Myles .
 He worked for many years in the accounting department of the Water Commission section of the Saint James Parish Council . He later moved to the parish of Saint James and worked in the water commission section .
 Uriel, affectionately called Super by his siblings, proved that, indeed, he was super . Uriel's siblings called him 'Super'
 At the tender age of 12, he assumed the super responsibility of taking care of his younger siblings after the death of his mother .
 Due to his affectionate care and support of his siblings throughout their lives, he won their love and respect .
 The couple raised five children, Orrette, Andrea, Shaunette, Rochelle and Annya . Orrette and Shaunette raised their five children .
 His influence has helped to shape them into the kind adults they have become, he says . His influence is helping to shape the kind of adults he has become .
 While in the United States, he worked at various employments, including Sealtest . He also worked in the U.S. and worked in Europe .
 Although his marriage ended in divorce, his wife of 21 years was Supportive of him until his death .
 Uriel is an ardent reader of all types of genres and later developed into a skilled puzzle player . Uriel is also a skilled puzzles player .
 It was not unusual to see him reading the overseas edition of the Jamaican Gleaner and Star on weekends . He kept up with the latest political issues of the day .
 Uriel Myles leaves to cherish his memory, his exwife, Gweneth Myles, his son, Orrette, daughter, Andrea, Shaunette, Rochelle and Annya . Uriel leaves to be remembered for his loving ex-wife, his children,
 Shalaiyah, Naheem, Danesha, Javian, Nathaniel, Gwen, Jayden and Peyton are among those who have been involved .
Sisters, Verline and Eileen, a brother, Boysie, and a host of nieces and nephews .
 Uriel was predeceased by his father, Morris, Mother, Gertrude, sisters, Laurel, Carmel, Dorothy, Blossom, Pearl, Una, and brother Lloyd . Uriel was born on December 23, 1961, in New York City .
 Auletta Rochelle Bobo leaves to mourn her daughter, a son, Clyde Bernard Bobo of Willimantic, a brother, Charles E Bates and his wife Gail of Bloomfield . She also leaves a host of foster children, nieces, nephews, other
 Bryan W Bryan William Hicks, 57, of Newington went to be with his Sweet Lord on Monday, April 18, 2022 after a long battle with metastatic melanoma . Hicks, who was diagnosed with melanoma, died at age 57 .
 He worked most of his life in the ‘ automotive industry but his life's calling was to be the if rock of the Hicks family .
 He leaves his siblings, Dale and Tracy, who cared for him at home throughout this long journey . He leaves behind his loving siblings.
 He also leaves his niece Harleigh and her father Dane Wider and his goddaughter Nicole McCormack . He leaves his wife and many lifelong friends, and family .
 Calling hours will be held Friday, April 22nd from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00m. followed by a prayer service at the Duksa Family Funeral Homes .
Newingtonmemorial.com. To share a condolence with his family, please visit www. newingtonmemory.com . To share your condolences with your family.
 William P William P McGovern, 82, of West Hartford, passed away on Sunday, April 17, 2022, after a period of declining health. Y DUKSA Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries McGovern .
 Born December 6, 1939, in Hartford, CT, he was a lifelong resident of West Hartford .
 Bill retired from the State of Connecticut and enjoyed music, playing his records and boating .
 He enjoyed sharing this enthusiasm to the delight of family and friends . He enjoyed shared this enthusiasm with his family .
 Brian McGovern and Bonnie Bowes of West Hartford, Marie Hilliard and her husband Douglas of Westfield, MA, and Joan Barrieau and their husband Gerard of WestHartford . Brian Mcgovern and BonnieBowes are from West Hartford .
 Gib Barrieau and his children, Lulu and Max, Morgan and Max of West Hartford, West Hartford . His wife Danielle, Danielle and daughter, Whitley of Boston, MA, and Jackie lacovazzi, her husband Drew and daughter Paige, Paige.
 The McGovern family wishes to extend their heartfelt thanks to Richard and all the caregivers at Hughes Health and Rehab for their time, Kindness and compassion .
 Memorial donations in William's name can be directed to the CT Humane Society . Memorial donations can be made in the name of William or William.
 Sheehan Hilborn Breen, Jr., of Torrington, CT, passed away on April 8, 2022 . Sheehn Hilborn.com/obituaries Picard, Jr. Onezime Joseph Onezim Joseph Picard, Sr., ofTorrington.
 Ozzie was born in Caswell, Maine on November 28, 1937 . She was the ninth child of 11 children born to the late Onezime and Helen Picard .
Judy Shearer met Judy Shearer while dancing at the French Club in New Britain .
 It was always important that he did his best for his family and encouraged them to put one foot in front of the other . It was also important to his family to do their best for their family, he said .
 Ozzie loved his 1964 Mustang and enjoyed camping, fishing, throwing horseshoes, and bowling . He also enjoyed bowling, camping and fishing .
 He is survived by his wife, Judith Picard, three children, Onezime Picard Ill and his wife Gwen Spencer, Alan Picard, and Theresa Campanelli . He also has five grandchildren, Travis, Tricia and Ashley Picard .
 The Funeral Liturgy will be celebrated Friday, April 22, 2022 at 10.00am in the Church of St. St. Mary's Church in London .
 Arrangements are being handled by The Ahern Funeral Homes, Inc., www.ahernfuneralhome.com.com .
 Please sign guestbook at courant.com.com/obituaries . ¥ Vii the obituary section on courants.com fo share memories of loved ones .
 Elizabeth Robida, 81, passed peacefully at Middlesex Hospital on Monday April 18th after suffering a stroke . Robida was the wife of William J Robida Sr.
 Bette Jo was born in Oxford Maine, daughter of the late Frank and Stella Mills . She was also a daughter of Stella and Frank Mills .
 Bette Jo and Bill married in 1959 and raised their three children and centered their lives on their family and loved ones . BetteJo and Bill have been married for more than 30 years .
 Bette Jo hosted weekly Wednesday Night dinners for her extended family to keep the family close . For 37 years she hosted weekly dinners for the extended family .
 She was employed as a bookkeeper for decades with Nichols Bus Service prior to her retirement .
 Bette Jo enjoyed bowling, visiting with friends and family, doing needlepoint and hosting Holidays for the family . BetteJo enjoyed bowling and visiting with family and friends and friends .
 She spent many hours with her husband meticulously caring for their property . She spent the last few days caring for the property .
 Bette Jo is survived by two daughters, Vickie Lynch and her husband Jim, Debbie Shumbo and husband Stan . She also has six grandchildren, Abbey Lynch, Kyle Josephs, Brandon Shumbo, Cailyn Tischbein, Jack Beman, and Kristy Rob
 A funeral liturgy will be held Monday, April 25th at 10m at Saint Bridget of Kildare Church, 75 Moodus Leesville Road, Moodus .
 To share memories or express condolences online please visit www.biegafuneralhome.com. To share your memories or condolences online.
 George George “Dura’ Vukasinovic, 91, of Southington, known to his family and friends as Georgie, passed away on Monday, April 18, 2022 .
 One of his favorite pastimes was spending time with his beloved family . His favorite pastime was Spending time with family .
 He leaves his four children, Cynthia Kelleher and husband John of Avon, Vesna Violette and husband Henry of Southington . He leaves seven grandchildren, Philip, Andrea, Matthew, Rebecca, Mallory, Paul and Morgan . Four great-grand
 He leaves his sister-in-law, Betty Stewart of Plantsville, and two nephews, Jeremiah and Jonathan . He also leaves his wife, Betty, and three nephews .
 He always told his family and friends would be his final destination, as he always told them .
 Thomas Thomas Lee Wardell died Friday March 18, 2022 after a short and courageous battle with lung cancer . Wardell was born December 22, 1947, and died in December 1947 .
 Anita Wardell is a proud father of two daughters, Jennifer Edmonds of Wellesley, MA and Elizabeth Kaplan of Suffield, CT . Edmonds is a wonderful grandfather to his 4 granddaughters, Zoe and Phoebe Kaplan and Courtney and Alysse Edmonds .
 Thomas L Thomas Lee Wardell died Friday March 18, 2022 after a short and courageous battle with lung cancer . Wardell was born December 22, 1947, and died in 1947 .
 In Loving Memory Of CANLIS MCCREE Happy Birthday We have loving thoughts and memories of you every day . Please sign guestbook at courant.com/obituaries in Loving Memory of CANLis MCCree Happy Birthday .
 placeanad.com/obituaries Hartford Courant eeeee Media group In partnership with Legacy.com’ ” Stories liv ve on.com. Share your loved one's story.
 Breeze Airways pushes fast-paced expansion at Bradley International Airport . The elimination of the federal mask mandate will further the appetite for air travel that nosedived in the thick of pandemic .
 The destination is the seventh nonstop route added by Breeze this year at Bradley . Bradley is Bradley's seventh non stop route this year .
 Round-trip fares to Las Vegas range from $149 to $249 for first class . One-way fares start at $149, according to the airline .
 Introductory fares must be purchased by April 26 for travel by Nov., airline says . Fares must be bought by April 25 for travel.
 Only one other airline, discount carrier JetBlue, flies to Las Vegas out of Bradley, three days a week .
 The federal mask mandate for airplanes, trains and buses was struck down this week by a Florida judge . The judge ruled the Centers of Disease Control and PrevenTurn to Airport, Page 2 of a personnel matter involving a school nurse placed on administrative leave .
 A school nurse was placed on administrative leave for inappropriate comments about LGBTQ students posted using the nurse's personal Facebook account . Tuesday's meeting was the board’s first since the nurse was put on leave for the comments .
 In a March 28 letter to the school community, Superintendent Leslie Torres-Rodriguez said comments described private and personal details about a specific student .
 The incident attracted a wide range of media attention, extending from local outlets to The Daily Mail . The incident was reported by the Daily Mail.
 An article also appeared in The Blaze, a conservative online media outlet .
 District officials have since Turn to Allies, Page 2 i F tian, wield Al ok ie. The District has since turned to Allies .
 Frederick Law Olmsted was born in Hartford in 1822 . Known as the founder of American landscape architecture, he was a conservationist and creator of urban parks .
 Olmsted's father and a trip to Europe influenced his career path as a writer and editor . He later worked as the superintendent of Central Park and later as that park’s architect-in-chief .
 Olmsted made his mark at Walnut Hill Park in New Britain, Beardsley Park in Bridgeport and the Connecticut State House .
Pastoral scenes from his Connecticut boyhood inspired Frederick Law Olmsted's vision of public space as a calming and rejuvenating ‘third place’ apart from home and work .
 The Hartford Public Library's History Center is hosting an exhibit titled, “Returning From dumpster to display Works of Francis Hines will be on exhibit at Mattatuck Museum . The artworks were part of a stash rescued in 2017 from adumpster in Watertown .
 The trove of paintings, drawings and sculptures were found by George Martin of Naugatuck . The trove was found on the grounds of a barn that had recently been sold .
 Elements of the collection was exhibited in September 2021 at the Mattatuck . The collection was shown in September.
 The Art of Francis Hines,” will feature a complete series of five studies created for a Union Square Park public installation created by Hines .
 One of this series was shown at the museum in an exhibit in 2021, and the other four were not . One of the four was shown in a series of exhibits .
 John Alexopoulos is associate professor of landscape architecture at UConn . The opening program is set for Thursday from 4-6m.
 Gilberto DeLeon, 56, is charged with robbery, conspiracy to commit first-degree robbery and sixth-degree larceny . DeLeon is also charged with first- degree robbery and second-degree burglary .
 Police say they have identified two other suspects in the robbery . They expect to make additional arrests .
 DeLeon is being held in lieu of $500,000 bail . He is scheduled to appear in court in Hartford on Wednesday .
 Man charged with robbing same bank he robbed 5 years ago . He was charged earlier this month while in court for other charges .
 David Latino, 50, of Plantsville, was arrested on a warrant while appearing in New Britain Superior Court on April 7 . He was charged with second-degree robbery and fifth-degree larceny .
 He took an unknown amount of cash and then ran toward Town Hall, eventually escaping police . He led multiple schools and learning centers in the area to enter lockdown .
 Multiple residents called police to identify Latino as the robber, police said . Police said the suspect was Latino .
 DNA evidence and cellphone records also helped investigators connect Latino to robbery, police said .
 He has other cases pending in Connecticut criminal court, including charges of threatening, assault and breach of peace in Waterbury .
 He has been held at the Hartford Correctional Center since Oct., 2021 in lieu of a $245,000 bond . He is being held at Hartford Correctional Centre since Oct. 2021 .
 He is scheduled to appear in court next on May 10 in New Britain, court records show . He is set to be in court in NewBritain next week .
 Federal authorities charge Hartford man with drug dealing, gun crimes, federal authorities say .
 Federal prosecutors said that on April 5, members of a federal drug task force made undercover purchases of fentany and crack cocaine from Morrison in Bristol .
 After the drug sales, investigators followed Morrison as he drove to a condominium parking lot . Morrison was arrested after the drug sale .
 Airport from Page 1 did not have the authority to impose such a mandate . Airport fromPage 1 didn't have the power to impose a mandate.
 Soaring fuel prices are pushing fares higher throughout the airline industry, Neeleman says .
 Architect from Page 1 Emerald Necklace and many other parks, college campuses, cemeteries and private grounds throughout the nation .
 Olmsted’s sons carried on his work and the family firm‘s credits in Hartford include Goodwin Park, Keney Park, Pope Park and Riverside Park .
 Jobs from Page 1 jobs at a massive logistics center and accompanying high-tech research and development buildings . The logistics center is located in a huge logistics center .
 The planning and zoning commission this month unanimously approved National Development’s plan to create two mega-warehouses of more than 1 million square feet each .
 National Development isn’t publicly naming the two prospective tenants it’s negotiating with . It said they are well-known industry leaders drawn partly by the site's proximity to I-84.
Authorities allegedly found fentanyl, crack cocaine and a Polymer handgun . The gun was manufactured on a hi-tech copy machine, along with an extended magazine loaded with ammunition .
 Prosecutors say Morrison has a criminal record that includes felony drug offenses . Morrison has been charged with drug offenses that include felony drug charges .
 It is a violation of federal law for a person previously convicted of a felony offense to possess a firearm or ammunition that has moved in interstate or foreign commerce . Domestic, round-trip flights cost an average of $300 in late March, citing travel company Hopper .
 The fares were up 36% from the start of 2022, nearly in line with pre-pandemic levels in 2019, Bloomberg reported .
 Higher air fares come on top of higher priced meals, car rentals and hotels, Neeleman said .
 Neeleman said a resolution to soaring fuel prices is ‘more geopolitical’ So far, he said, “Demand is strong,’s strong, but demand is strong .
Breeze’s announcement Wednesday about the new route at Bradley was paired with the roll-out of Son of a successful dry goods merchant . Olmsted tried his hand as a seaman, farmer and writer before coming into park design .
 In 1850, a walking tour and visit to an English park was to prove life-changing, according to Olmsted 200 . The project is a project of the Washington, D.C.-based National Association for Olmstead Parks .
 Birkenhead Park in Liverpool was a rare public park, open to all . Olmsted concluded that park access should be a right of all Americans .
 The two warehouse buildings will take up acombined 2. million square feet of space . The property will also have two 100,000-square-foot buildings for research and development .
 There are going to be 1,800 to 2,000 jobs created out of the projects here, he said . It’s hard to find talented employees today, he says .
The indictment charges Morrison with one count of possession with intent to distribute, and distribution of, cocaine base and fentanyl . If convicted, if convicted, Morrison faces a maximum prison term of 20 years . The indictment will generate when it's fully built out .
 Neeleman said Breeze was not considering serving Tweed-New Haven Airport . The airport had been suggested at a press conference earlier this year .
 Charles E Beveridge said in a 2003 interview that he intended to serve as the setting for ‘unconscious or indirect recreation,’ he said . All but Nashville — currently designs, he said, “which he intended. to serve .
 Olmsted’s philosophy was the idea of “communitiveness,’ a belief that a healthy civil society brings people together in service to each other .
 Marsteiner said National Development’s Forge Park in Franklin, Massachusetts, has much of what the company envisions for Rentschler .
 "We developed a mix of R & D and technology buildings and logistics buildings,’ he said .
 Forge Park is a mixed-use project with 2.75 million square feet of commercial space, a retail center, a child care center and a hotel . National Development describes Forge Park as a mixed use project .
 New housing on the heavily industrial East Hartford site doesn't work because of the expense of environmental remediation, company says .
 Allies from Page 1 received a wave of violent threats, now under investigation by Hartford police . The threats included disturbing calls and emails calling for their lives .
 Torres-Rodriguez says the majority of threats have been directed toward her . She says she's been targeted by people who want to harm her .
 The threats appear to stem from inaccurate interpretations of the nurse’s comments, which have led to false allegations that Hartford school staff is indoctrinating students or providing puberty-blocking hormone inhibitors .
 Hartford school staff are prohibited from administering medication to students without the authorization of a medical provider and the written consent of a parent or guardian .
 Torres-Rodriguez insisted that the district's commitment to providing a safe, inclusive environment for students regardless of identity is unwavering .
 Connecticut Voices for Children's 2018 report on youth identity development found that adolescence is a critical time for the development of gender identity .
 Young people often lack supportive environments to develop and express their orientations safely . But young people often don't have supportive environments for them to develop safely .
In 2014, more served by Southwest Airlines were new nonstop routes for Bradley . In 2014, the airline's new routes were new routes for the airline .
 All the new Breeze routes announced last month will begin flying June 3, with the exception of Sarasota/Bradenton, which launches on June 4 .
Olmsted made landscape architecture a profession for the public good . New Haven-based landscape architect Oliver Gaffney said .
 Gaffney also noted that the pandemic brought a reawakening of the value of public spaces . The pandemic also brought aReawakening to public spaces.
 Large-scale retail development isn't financially feasible now, says Marsteiner . The roughly 200,000-square-foot Cabela’s currently on the Rentschler site will remain .
 In the foreseeable future there’s no goal of moving them along, he says .
 The Rentschler property is the best use of the sprawling property, he says . That leaves other commercial development as best use, he said .
 sexual orientation is one of several other primary risk factors for youth homelessness . Sexual orientation is also a risk factor for youth homeless .
 More than half of transgender and nonbinary youth seriously considered suicide in the previous 12 months . Support for transgender youth is particularly crucial, as the Trevor Project's 2021 survey on LGBQT youth mental health found .
 Ace Ricker, a transgender man and Q Plus board member, said he sees himself in those statistics . Ricker is a transgender woman and a Q Plus member .
 Q Plus founding director Cordner says suicide risk for transgender youth can be virtually eliminated . Cordner: Young people have at least one supportive adult in their lives .
Ricker and other speakers encouraged the Hartford school board to pursue education and trainings for students and staff . Ricker and others encouraged the board to focus on protecting transgender and nonbinary youth .
 Tuesday’s board meeting did include first reading on new curricular exemption policy . Parents can opt out of lessons on certain sensitive material .
 The policy would expand the current list of permitted exemptions to include substance abuse education, bilingual education and for religious or medical purposes . The current list would also include bilingual education, religious and medical exemptions .
 Board members did not discuss the policy, but Torres-Rodriguez said it serves as an example of the strong partnership between the district and families .
'We know that we need the support of our families to accomplish that,' Torres-Rodriguez said .
 The airline was founded with the strategy of offering “point to point’s service from smaller, secondary airports .
Kenneth R Gosselin can be reached at kgosselin@courant. com .
 Preservation Connecticut and the Connecticut State Historic Preservation Office teamed up to study Olmsted’s heritage in the state .
 Check preservationct.org/olmsted for a schedule of lectures and tours . Also, check Preservationct.com for a list of lectures, tours .
 Olmsted Legacy Trail maps out the work of the man and his firm throughout Connecticut . The Olmstead Legacy Trail is based on the Olmsts Legacy Trail .
 Jesse Leavenworth can be reached at jleavenworth@courant.com . He says his side has really taken off .
 The buildings will be a quarter to a half a mile away from the nearest businesses and residences . The buildings are expected to be in the middle of the city's downtown area .
 National Development emphasized that all traffic will reach the property from East Hartford Boulevard . No access from Brewer or Main streets will be allowed .
 The planning and zoning commission voted 7-0 to approve the master plan . The master plan was approved by the Planning and zoning Commission .
 National Development still needs to get wetlands approval as well as an OK for a detailed site plan . National Development also needs wetlands approval .
 Al Basha Market and Restaurant in Manchester sells foods from several Middle Eastern countries . It has a 30-seat restaurant .
 Omair Shalo saw customer visitation plummet in 2020 and 2021 at his Palestinian-Yemeni restaurant .
 Alcohol is against our religion, says Shalo, a devout Muslim who emigrated from Nablus, in the West Bank of the Palestinian Territories .
 Blue Moon Mediterranean restaurant was renamed Al Basha market and restaurant and reopened in March . The restaurant was re-opened in March.
 People come from all over the state and from Massachusetts and they are so excited and happy we are here, Shalo said .
 The market sells packaged foods from Palestine, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, Lebanon, Jordan, Sudan, Syria, Turkey and other countries .
 Among the groceries are hardto-find items such as maftoul, freekeh, lupini beans, shankleesh cheese, basbousa, mohalabia, sesame fudge and molokhia leaves .
 It also sells Middle Eastern sweets and snacks and enough medjool dates to filla small warehouse . The warehouse also sells snacks and medjools .
 Blue Moon restaurant re-imagined as a halal market, eatery combo of the Quran and Quran holders .
 The restaurant, in a walled-off section with six tables, is decorated with paintings of beautiful mosques .
 Appetizers, from $5.99 to $7.99, include hummus, baba ganoush, falafel, stuffed grape leaves, veggie skewers and other items .
 Entrees range from $14.99 to $19.99 . They are centered on chicken, beef, lamb, liver, shrimp, salmon, tilapia and Cornish hen .
 Palestinian dishes include shawarmas, kuftahs, kebabs, farouj chicken, chicken tawouk, gyros, lamb chops and musakhan rolls . Palestinian dishes are also known as shawaras,kuftah
 Yemeni entrees, for $14.99 to $16.99, are mandi lamb, chicken, haneeth lamb and chicken, and kabsa lamb and Chicken .
 An American portion of the menu offers burgers, from $6.99 to $8.99, in beef, chicken, vegetarian, falafel, shrimp, tilapia and sujak, a spicy fermented sausage . The menu includes burgers, chicken and chicken
 Breakfast is also available, with items ranging from $4.99 to $8.99, with hummus, pita, yogurt, veggies, fava beans, cheese, eggs, falafel and fruit .
 Shalo said he tried to keep his business afloat using third-party apps . Shalo says he used to use third- party apps to get his business on the ground .
Transitioning to his new arrangement has been a blessing, he said . He is surprised by the success of the new arrangement, he says .
 Alex Jones’ trial delayed as Infowars seeks bankruptcy protection . Jones' company sought bankruptcy protection this week .
 The delay comes days after Infowars and two other companies tied to Jones filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . The delay is ordered by state District Judge Maya Guerra Gamble .
 Hines’ work also will be shown at the Hollis Taggart cut over his comments that the 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre was a hoax .
 The first trial over how much he should pay the families had been scheduled to begin Monday . Infowars is headquartered in Austin .
 Attorneys for Sandy Hook families have accused Jones of trying to hide millions of dollars in assets . Jones has been accused of hiding millions in assets in the past .
 Creditors listed in Infowars’ bankruptcy filing include relatives of some of the 20 children and six educators killed in the 2012 school shooting in Connecticut .
 Pratt Street Salsa Socials return for five Friday nights during summer . Hartford Courant Pratt Street Socials are coming back for the summer .
 Events will take place May 27, June 17, July 8, Aug. and Sept. from 5 to 8m. Events will be free of charge .
 The series is presented by Hartford Business Improvement District and Hartford HealthCare. The series was presented by Hartford HealthCare .
 Hartford Business Improvement District started free summer dances to cater to the salsa community .
 Instructors from Arthur Murray Dance Center will be there to teach beginners .
 Pratt Street Salsa Socials are a celebration of civic and cultural pride . Hartford HealthCare.
 Instructors from Arthur Murray Dance Center will be there to teach the basics of salsa dancing .
 Towns in Connecticut’s richest area could pay to meet affordable housing goals . Critics say move could worsen segregation .
 Atown would be able to count certain housing units in other towns toward its own affordable housing goals under Section 8-30g of a decades-old state law . The law gives developers the ability to challenge towns in court if their affordable housing proposals are denied .
 Towns are exempt from 8-30¢ if at least 10% of their units are set aside as affordable or are government assisted . Towns will be exempt if 10% or 10% are affordable or government assisted.
 The payment suggestion would mean towns that haven't reached the goal could pay an undetermined amount . Stamford, Danbury and Norwalk could apply to their 10% threshold .
 Bethel, Bridgewater, Brookfield, Danbury, Darien, Greenwich, New Canaan, New Fairfield, New Milford, Newtown, Norwalk, Redding, Ridgefield, Stamford, Weston, Westport and Wilton .
WestCOG staff said the idea was included because of transportation costs and job opportunities . WestCOG said it included the idea because of transport costs and opportunities .
 Some municipalities have seen more demand for affordable housing because they have more jobs . Some municipalities see more demand because of more jobs and more jobs.
 The added transportation cost for low-income families to get to work from rural areas could make living in rural areas unaffordable .
 The policy would be applied retroactively to housing stock that the city already has . Pickering said details such as whether it would have to be built new have not been decided .
 renovating existing stock is cheaper than building new housing, he said . But he added, renovating old stock is less expensive than building a new house .
 Some towns will have to make real changes to address the problem. They say it will serve to increase segregation and allow some towns to avoid having to make changes .
 Pickering declined to respond to specific criticisms, saying they hadn’t been brought to the council yet .
 The council is accepting public comments on the document through Wednesday. The council will accept public comments through Wednesday .
 The plan includes measures such as evaluating inclusionary “zoning concepts, conducting an inventory of people experiencing homelessness . Other actions include developing an ongoing inventory of lowand moderate-income housing managed by housing authorities .
Council staff say plan aims to address need for more affordable housing in the region . 2017 law requires towns to develop fiveyear plans to address the need for affordable housing .
 The need for more housing for people with low incomes has gotten more attention nationally in recent years . Demand has outpaced supply and housing prices and rents have spiked .
 The legislature is considering a handful of bills that aim to increase the affordable housing stock or lower rents . One would have towns to plan and zone for a certain number of affordable housing units based on a regional need .
 Many advocates and experts say restrictive zoning laws in Connecticut make it difficult to develop multifamily housing . Many advocates say restrictive laws make it hard to develop housing for those with low incomes .
42.5% of renters in the region spend more than 35% of their incomes on rent . The WestCOG report shows that about 42.5%. The report also shows that the region's renters spend more.
 Some municipalities will develop their own plans that can incorporate some elements of the WestCOG plan . Others will adopt their own versions of the plan, Pickering said .
 Those strategies include suggestions to finance more housing, evaluate adjustments to zoning, increase home ownership rates and establish a regional housing authority . Those strategies also include suggestions for more housing.
 Housing advocates say it doesn’t include enough tangible steps to address the need . But housing advocates say there are no tangible steps in the housing crisis .
 A lack of access to affordable housing has reinforced segregation, advocates say . Families with low incomes are kept from accessing schools and other amenities in wealthier towns .
 Darien's school board recently rejected a proposal that would have allowed 16 Norwalk kindergarteners to attend school in Darien .
 The problem arises partly because schools and amenities are funded through local taxes . Dice Oh, amember of the group People Friendly Stamford, said the problem arises because schools are funded by taxes .
 Wealthier suburbs have better-funded schools, and if lower-income families can't afford to live in the district, children can't access the schools .
 Pickering said the council consulted with the Department of Housing on the decision to develop a regional plan . Council officials believe the regional plan will be more effective at addressing the need .
 Plan aims to address factors that influence home costs outside of zoning, including financing and building standards .
 The council also wants to consider access to transportation and transportation costs for low-income families when adding housing . The council is also looking at access to transport and transport costs .
 The plan includes information on funding for homeownership and Connecticut Housing Finance Authority programs that finance housing . The plan also includes information about funding for homes and housing projects .
 Staff said finding financing for accessory dwelling units can be challenging . Finding financing can be difficult for homeowners who want an accessory dwelling unit .
 Pickering added that the council plans to commission an affordable housing financing study to begin this year .
 Advocates said the plan doesn’t include enough specific targets to be effective . Advocates say it doesn't include enough targets for effective.
 Officials expressed concern with action items that said officials would “evaluate’ or “consider’s moves rather than make changes. They expressed particular concern with the actions .
 After the plan goes through its public comment period, the council will consider changes . municipalities can decide whether to use it .
 Some are developing their own plans and considering the suggestions in the WestCOG draft . Some are considering the proposals in the draft .
 Westport is drafting its own plan, although the Planning and Development Commission plans to use the WestCOG research and attach the plan as an addendum .
 Westport's mayor says he's not going to pretend there's some sort of moat around Westport . "We’re notGoing to pretend that there’s some sortof moataround Westport,’ Dobin said .
 Westport’s plan is going to be very granular with specific zoning recommendations for the town .
 The city likely won’t meet the deadline to submit its plan, says Steve Kleppin, planning and zoning director . The city will let the state know in the next few days, he says .
 Staff say they take the issue seriously and are more concerned with developing a plan that meets the need . The city won't make the deadline, but staff say they are concerned about developing a plans that meet the need.
 The city has a request out for a consultant to assist in developing the plan . It is about a year away from having a complete plan, Kleppin said .
 Danbury has already developed its own plan for the WestCOG plan . The city will use its own plans to develop its own version .
 There's a hearing set for next month on the Danbury plan, said Sharon Calitro, the city's planning director .
 Interested firms are required to submit one original copy via digital media of the proposal to Roger Rousseau, Purchasing Agent .
The successful bidder shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, gender, or national origin . The successful bidder will not be discriminated against any worker or applicant.
 The Contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated without regard to their race, color, religion, gender, or national origin .
 Bids received after the opening date and time will not be considered for award . Bids receive after the start of the year and time is not being considered .
 The City reserves the right to waive any informalities in the bid, to reject any or all bids, and to accept the bid that in its judgment is in its best interest .
 Each bid shall be accompanied by a Bid Security in the amount of 10% of the bidders base bid amount . Bid Bond made payable to the City of Bristol .
 Michael A Carrier, Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Berlin Probate Court, by decree dated April 14, 2022, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary .
 Failure to promptly present any claim may result in the loss of rights to recover on such claim . Failure to present any such claim may lead to loss of right to recover from such claims .
 Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Tolland Mansfield Probate Court, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary at the address below .
 These decisions have been filed in the office of the Town Clerk, Old Saybrook, Town Hall .
 Peter J Connerton seeks a variance of Par 10.8.8 (non-conforming lot size/12,500f. required/ 5,122 s.f. and Par 68.1.1 (tidal wetlands setback/50’ required/25.5
 H. H. of the Zoning Regulations to allow for the waiver of a loading dock . It is the first time this has been allowed to be allowed to happen .
Alice Kelly Chairman Dated in Cromwell, Connecticut this the 15th day April of 2022 . Alice Kelly Chairman of the Connecticut state of the state.
 Jennifer L Berkenstock, Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Region # 14 Probate Court, by decree dated April 1, 2022, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary .
 Purchases must be made with cash only and paid at the above referenced facility in order to complete the transaction . Purchases can be made only with cash and paid only at theabove referenced facility .
 Extra Space Storage may refuse any bid and may rescind any purchase up until the winning bidder takes possession of the personal property .
 Judge of the Court of Probate, District of Saybrook Probate Court, ordered that all claims must be presented to the fiduciary at the address below .
 30.7% of deaths occurred at home, compared with 29.8% at the hospital . In 2017, home surpassed hospital as the most common place of death .
 Haider Warraich, a cardiologist at the Veterans Affairs Boston Healthcare System, is the author of the study . He is also the lead author of a study on the Boston Health System .
 Some people who died in nursing facilities were long-term residents . Technically, the proportion was even higher, since some people died in the nursing facilities .
 Warraich credited the change to the rise of hospice care, for which Congress authorized Medicare coverage 40 years ago . The change was attributed to the change in Medicare coverage .
 By 2019, more than half of Medicare beneficiaries who died were enrolled in hospice . More than 50 percent of those who died in Medicare died in the hospice.
 Lynda Hollander, her niece, hired an aide to supplement the hospice staff . Lynda's niece, Lynda, has been a hospice worker for years .
Zeiontz’s pain eventually intensified and her older relatives were uneasy about administering morphine . But Zeiontz's pain ultimately intensified and she was eventually given morphine .
 Zeiontz was moved to an inpatient hospice unit at Mount Sinai Beth Israel Hospital . She died a day and a half later, at 70 .
 Alan Mironer had vowed to care for his wife, Lynne, with hospice help in their home in Edina, Minnesota, as she died of breast cancer .
 Alan Mironer, then 81, became overwhelmed. He said as she weakened and became unable to walk to the bathroom, "it was so much more work"
 Neighbors told them about a small hospice facility in Edina, with room for eight patients . The facility is located in a small town in the city of Edina .
 Melissa Wachterman, a palliative care specialist at Harvard Medical School, and her co-authors argue that alternative locations could better care for some terminal patients with difficult symptoms . They argue that free-standing inpatient hospice facilities and hospice units within hospitals could provide relief
Financial incentives play a role in where death occurs, they say . They also contend that financial incentives play an important role in the death .
 A handful of hospice patients receive “continuous home care,’ which means nurses and aides are provided eight to 24 hours a day . This accounts for 0.2% of Hospice days, according to the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission .
 Another handful receive inpatient services in a hospice facility, hospital or nursing home .
Inpatient care is hard to secure, accounting for just 1.2% of all hospice days in 2019 . Inpatient care inpatient care accounts for 1.3% of the time spent at the hospice .
 To be covered under Medicare, the patient must be diagnosed with a symptom that cannot feasibly be managed in any other setting . “That’s a pretty high bar,” Wachterman said .
About 30% of hospices or hospice units within nursing homes and hospitals have them .
 My mother died at 80, with uterine cancer and after a major stroke, in her own bed . Her mother died in her bed.
 He died at 90, when sepsis overwhelmed him in a hospital before he could arrange for hospice care at home . He died in hospital at 90 .
 She had been hospitalized with an uncertain prognosis . She was disabled by late-onset Tay-Sachs disease .
 As she declined, she developed such severe pain that, between sobs, she was calling for our long-dead parents . As she died, she called for her long- dead parents .
 Survey shows 1 in 5 Medicare patients use medical marijuana . Two-thirds say it should be covered by Medicare, survey reveals .
 Medical marijuana is legal in 37 states, four territories and the District of Columbia . It isn’t covered by Medicare, the federal health insurance program for older Americans .
 The poll of 1,250 Medicare recipients was conducted in April . One in five use medical marijuana and 23% have used it in the past .
 Respondents use it to treat a variety of physical and mental health conditions, including 32% for anxiety, 31% for chronic pain . Respondents also use it for anxiety and 31% to treat chronic pain, according to survey .
 Roughly one-quarter said they use it to treat depression, glaucoma, and symptoms associated with HIV/AIDS . One-quarter of those who use it say it helps with depression and other symptoms .
 Among respondents, support was strong for Medicare coverage of medical marijuana . Support for medical marijuana was strong among respondents .
 Two-thirds said they ‘strongly agree’ or “agree’ that medical marijuana should be covered . The majority of those surveyed said they would agree to cover the issue .
 Nearly six in 10 supporters of Medicare coverage said they do so because medical marijuana can be effective when other treatments fail .
 Support for Medicare coverage was lower among current medical marijuana users, compared with 63% of previous users . 71% of those who said they’ve never used it have never used the drug .
 Nearly four in 10 said they fear Medicare coverage would increase the price of drugs .
 Pollsters found that current users’ out-of-pocket costs were wide-ranging . Pollsters said current users' out- ofpocket costs are high .
 The online poll was commissioned by MedicarePlans.com, a group that examines Medicare issues .
 In the hospital, hospice nurses visited twice a day, constantly raising the dose of morphine . They switched to more potent medications .
 Having staff nurses always nearby allowed us to provide comfort, says author . "We never could have duplicated on our own," she says .
 It arranged for a private room with 24-hour access for my cousin and me . The room was set up to provide 24 hours of access for both the pair .
 We turned off the TV and the intercom, dimmed the lights, played soothing music, allowed family and friends to come and keep a vigil . We turned the TV off and the Intercom off, dimming the lights.
 My sister, 62, died after 24 days in the hospital and 14 in hospice care . Her sister, just 62, was just 62 .
More hospice patients and families could probably benefit from a similar option when home care proves too difficult .
 Harry and Megan visited the queen at Windsor Castle on April 14 . It was their first joint visit to the United Kingdom since they gave up formal royal roles . They moved to Santa Barbara in 2020 .
 Harry said like a lot of working parents, he and his wife found it hard to separate work and parenting . Archie, who is almost 3, and Lilibet, 10-month-old Lilibets, were born during pandemic .
 Harry and Harry visited Harry’s 95-year-old grandmother on their way to the Netherlands to attend the Invictus Games . The couple visited Harry's grandmother on the way to Netherlands to watch the Games .
 Harry is founder and patron of the international sports competition for wounded military veterans . Harry is also a founder of the International Sports Competition for wounded veterans .
 Harry said he wanted to return to the U.K. with his kids for the queen’s upcoming platinum jubilee . But he warned that “security issues’ could get in the way .
 Harry is suing the British government for refusing to let him pay for his own police security on his U.K. visits . The British government is refusing to pay for Harry's own police protection .
 Harry and Meghan Sept. had tea with Queen Elizabeth II on April 14 . Harry's lawyers say Harry wants to bring his children to visit his home country but that it is too risky without police .
 Harry has made solo trips to the U.K. to attend the funeral of his grandfather, Prince Philip, in April 2021 . Harry will unveil a statue of his late mother Princess Diana in July .
 He also said he has found himself thinking of his late mother even more . He said he also has thought of his mother more than once .
 More so in the last two years more than ever before, without question . But definitely more so in last two months more than before, according to experts .
 Rapper A$AP Rocky was taken into custody Wednesday at Los Angeles International Airport . He was arrested in connection with a shooting in Hollywood last year .
 The performer, whose real name is Rakim Mayers, was detained on suspicion of assault with a deadly weapon, the LA Police Department says .
 Mayers, 33, was wanted in connected with a Nov., 2021, shooting after an argument escalated, authorities said . Mayers is wanted in connection with a November, 2021 shooting .
 Mayers is accused of firing a handgun at an acquaintance, who sustained a minor injury, police said . Mayers allegedly fired a gun at the acquaintance.
 Ezra Miller has been arrested in Hawaii in recent weeks . He was arrested on suspicion of assault Tuesday . Miller is known for playing the Flash in "Justice League"
 Miller became irate after being asked to leave a get-together at a Big Island home . He threw a chair, hitting a woman in the forehead .
 Miller, 29, was arrested during a traffic stop and released pending further investigation . Miller was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
Animals get extreme close-up in ‘Our Great National Parks’
 Weighing in at less than 2 ounces, this small opossum has been around since dinosaurs roamed the Earth . Weighs in at under 2 ounces .
 The monito del monte is the only surviving species of the order Microbiotheria . A resident of Chile and Argentina, the monito de monte was born in Chile .
 The seeds of more than 20 plant species are spread in the forests of Chile and Argentina . It helps spread the seeds of over 20 plants .
 The monito is also one of the many animals getting an extreme close-up in "Our Great National Parks" Netflix series devoted to the eyepopping, heart-stopping, consciousness-raising wonders of the world’s most astounding national parks .
 The five-episode series focuses on just a handful of the world's more than 4,000 national parks . The series airs on Earth Day on April 22 .
 The series was executive produced and narrated by former U.S. President Barack Obama . It travels from Indonesia's Gunung Leuser National Park to the coves and beaches of the Monterey Bay Marine Sanctuary .
 The first footage of a 2-month-old orca taking part in the hunt of a gray whale calf was captured in Kenya . Chilean stag beetles locking jaws in a battle for a mate .
 "Our Great National Parks" cannot talk about the wonders of the natural world without acknowledging the many ways in which that world is under siege .
 No one here is pretending that climate change, habitat loss and pollution do not exist . No one is pretending to be pretending thatclimate change, climate change and pollution don't exist. No one in the U.S. is pretending.
Farmlands are being returned to the wild, and there are amazing views of the stars where light pollution used to be .
 The filmmakers worked closely with scientists, conservationists, local guides and other experts . There are no on-camera interviews with any of them .
 Even when one animal hunts and kills another, the deaths are not overly bloody . The deaths of one animal hunt and kill another are not over-fatal .
 Climate change and other threats are acknowledged but not dwelled upon . Climate change is acknowledged and not dwells upon .
 The series offers cleverly constructed, anthropomorphized vignettes of animals meeting the challenges of eating, mating and child-rearing .
 All of these vignettes are narrated in a friendly, but passionate way by Obama . Obama does not have to push too hard to get viewers invested in his stories .
 The narration occasionally ambles into Dad-joke territory, and some of the scenes area little over-scripted .
 It is a very small price to pay for such a life-affirming, wonder-reviving look at the world around us . But it is a small price for such an amazing look at our world .
 "Our Great National Parks" reminds viewers of conservation strides made since Yellowstone National Park was established in 1872 .
 Today, around 15% of the world’s lands and 8% of our oceans have been protected through parks and reserves .
 In “Our Great National Parks,” hope also has fur, scales, gills and claws . In ‘Our Great national parks,’ we hope also have fur and scales .
 My darling partner, “B,” has been a successful author, and has received a lot of satisfaction from it . ‘B’ has been an author for more than a decade .
 During a lull, B took a job to make ends meet, and has been doing the 9-to-5 slog ever since . B has been working 9- to-5 since the start of the year .
 I start thinking about how I can help, offering perspectives and praise, and then it fizzles, and we’re both sad . I started thinking about what I can do to help, but then it Fizzles. I start think about how he can help and then
 B grinds away at a job to pay the bills, pursues hobbies and friendships . It takes wonderful care of our household and takes great care.
 I wish I could figure out a way to help move all that enthusiasm toward action, instead of watching my partner stall out at the idea phase . I wish he could help him figure out how to help his partner move toward action .
 The pressure to both create and also succeed critically and commercially can be exhausting . The pressure on both sides of the line can be difficult and exhausting .
 Some successful writers give it all up and become garlic ranchers . This is why some successful writers have given it up .
 A day has passed, I find myself wondering what she has written about me . Now that a day has pass, I have been wondering about what she's written about him .
 Your impatience could get the better of you, but hold it back until you’re satisfied with your results .
 Your current lifestyle could be so constant that you can do your routine in your sleep . You can do it in the night.
 Consider letting your friends make suggestions on new things to have fun trying together .
 You may not have much help from others, but this is likely because youre being given an opportunity to prove yourself and show that you can work independently . You may also have a lot of help from other people.
 No matter how many people are willing to help you, trying to throw your weight around is not beneficial, says CNN.com's iReport .
 Even if you're on a good path, bragging can turn people off, especially when they're trying to make things easier for you .
 Samuel Langhorne Clemens, better known as Mark Twain, died April 21,1910 .
 That will allow you to look deep inside and ask yourself what’s encouraging you to settle for less .
 You deserve the best, and there is no reason to shortchange yourself. Seriously, you deserve to be the best .
 You have to let another person take part in what you’ve been waiting for. You received something that you've been working for, only to find that you have to allow someone to take part .
 Remind yourself that you don’t have to be afraid of help just because someone hurt you in the past .
 For current success, remember to be objective when setting expectations . Don’t let your fears blind you to reality, and don't let your fear blind you.
 Taking this time to figure out what sort of structure works for you can help you get organized . Take this time.
 South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu resigned after nearly 10 years in office and fled the country . In 1975, with Communist forces closing in, he resigned .
In 1976, clinical trials of the swine flu vaccine began . In 1976, the clinical trials began . I shared excerpts with family members where they were named .
 I did this because the relationships were more important to me than the excavation of family history . I did it because it was more important than the excavations of family histories . The relationship is important to him.
 There were also cases where I named people but did not invite them to weigh in . "I didn’t care about the impact of my writing on the relationship," he says .
 You have the right to ask your family member to see sections involving you . You can also ask them to see your family members' sections .
 If she refuses, or if you don’t like what you read later, you have the right to tell her so and to keep your distance .
 My husband reluctantly visited his absentee dad on his father’s deathbed .
 He got some information and history that helped him to understand everything that had happened around the time he was conceived .
 When it comes to complex and painful family histories, total resolution is rarely in the cards . Getting partway there is a goal worth reaching for.
 You never could fully get past may be forcing you to look at it and express how you feel about that point in your life .
Consider expressing yourself through journaling, talking or creating art inspired by it . Consider expressing yourself by writing or creating a piece of art .
 You might be more aware of the differences between you and your loved ones . You might also be moreaware of the difference between them .
 What’s important is that you are secure in who you are — that will let you represent yourself in the best way possible. What's important to be secure in your own life is to be confident in your identity .
 It’s OK to show a bolder side to yourself, one that allows you to feel more seen and heard . It's OK to be bolder to yourself .
 Do your best to share your opinions with others so they know how you're feeling . Don’t leave them or yourself in the dark. Do your most of your opinions to help others understand your feelings .
 Something might be eating up the attention of the person you were closest to, which could make it feel awkward .
 A new dynamic may take some getting used to, but let them have a chance to grow on you .
 Prince was one of the most inventive and influential musicians of modern times . He was found dead at his home in 2016, aged 57 .
 Play online at PlayJumble.com Hartford Courant . Visit the site for more information .
 The missing letter to complete an eight-letter BENCH GAVEL PLEA WITNESS: ——— — word reading clockwise or counterclockwise . — — — word read clockwise. — — – word readingclockwise or clockwise .
 Jacqueline E Mathews is the author of the 40 Star of ‘Dr. The Ranger’
 NAR AR A NOIDWW to form the surprise answer, as Y\V™N YN it Ce, suggested by a cartoon .
 Check out the new JUST JUMBLE app jm . Fill in the grid using the clues provided in the direction of the arrows .
 When complete, unscramble the letters in the circles to reveal a mystery word . The letters can be used to find out what the word is .
 All we need is a VOLUNTEER to pay for the PIZZA. 3 ° e > @SCOTTADAMSSAYS DILBERT.com 4-21-22 2022 .
 20U.S. needs to start SAVING 4OURSELF/ £2022 Grimmy, Inc. Distributed by Andrews McMeel Syndication .
 Distributed by King Features Inc, grimmy.com Hartford Courant .
 If East wins the first diamond lead, he can do no better than return a club, since he has no more spades . East has no 4 spades, but he can't do better than back a club .
South African diamond dealer has a contract beyond the South South dealer . If he does that, he will lead another diamond, ensuring the contract beyond him .
 It's virtually certain that West has the king when East does not play that card at trick one . It isn't necessary to win the first spade to assure two tricks in the suit .
 It seems natural to play low from dummy and win East’s jack with the queen, but if you do this, you go down one . If you do it, you will win East's jack with a queen .
 East wins your first diamond lead with the ace and returns a spade . West’s spades become established whether you take the ace on this trick or the next one .
 West still has the diamond entry that allows him to cash his spades . The diamond entry is the only way he can make nine tricks .
 When East returns a spade, you still have the suit doubly stopped, and now when you play a diamond, it does not matter which defender wins it .
 If West takes the diamond and returns a spade, you concede another diamond Unscramble . The diamond is one letter to each square, to form four ordinary words .
 The rabbits' first time sleeping in a tent, and they were — ‘HOPPY’ CAMPERS now arrange the circled letters to form the surprise answer .
 Each row, column and 3-by-3box T/SMMeE|m contains A.R|DIO|R| IDJAY| 1O| DE. every digit, 1 to 9. Every digit,1 to 9 .
 Ary S Hartford Courant gets recognized for what makes your company special . Get recognized for your company's special.
 Nets head coach Steve Nash delivered hours ahead of tipoff for Game 2 against the Celtics on Wednesday . It's exactly 10 months after Simmons last played in an NBA game .
 The new-look Huskies will put themselves on display for fans on Friday . The Huskies' spring practices are nearing the end .
When you get up here and get around these dudes, it’s special. I’ve been on this team through the spring now and there are a lot of players who are, like, gems, who are like, Gems, when you got up here
 Jim Mora’s first UConn team finishes its 15-session spring practice on Friday at 7m., on campus at Joe Morrone Stadium, the new soccer facility . UConn's first team will play its first game on Friday night .
 Rentschler Field hosts home games 35 minutes away at Rentshler Field . It's a chance to reconnect the program with students, with home games at the stadium .
 UConn's recent history, 7-48 the last four seasons, is not an issue to the many newcomers, like Bembry or Sokoya McDuffie, a redshirt junior from Old Dominion .
 The event was originally scheduled to be a Blue-White scrimmage, but the coaches have decided to organize it as a practice . The coaches have held some 11-on-11 drills .
 UConn has been missing from the TD Garden for more than a decade . UConn will be back in action for the first time since November .
 Hartford Athletic goalkeeper Jimmy Slayton makes a save against the Red Bulls during a United States Open Cup soccer . The Storm have had multiple Huskies leading the way.
 Simmons received an epidural in mid-March to alleviate the pain associated with a herniated disk in his lower back . Simmons has continued to make progress after receiving the epidural .
Bird, Stewart and Stewart will return for the 2014 season . Bird and Stewart joined Katie Lou Samuelson last season for the first time . The pair will play together for the second time this season .
 Gabby ~g Williams through a trade “gS with the Los Angeles Sparks mJ for Samuelson . That number bumps up to four this year with the addition of Westbrook through the draft .
 The Nets’ Ben Simmons watches play during the first half against the 76ers on March 10 in Philadelphia .
 At 7m. on Wednesday night, a sea of supporters donning blue and green apparel entered Trinity Health Stadium with cautious optimism .
 A crowd of 5,141 filled the stadium to watch the first official match against an MLS opponent . The match was the first of the season for the MLS.
 The Red Bulls came away with the victory over the Athletic . The Athletic were eliminated from the tournament .
 The match was an opportunity to show how the Athletic have expanded the sport in Connecticut . It was the first time the match was held in the state .
 Harry Watling felt the match showcased the growth of the club . The club has had over four years, he said .
 Zach Donohue and Nathan Chen were lucky to be on the Ice Tour in Hartford . The Olympic gold medalist Chen headlines Stars on Ice tour in Hartford.
 Chen won the gold in figure skating and Dononue the bronze in ice dancing with Madison Hubbell . The two skaters got to experience their Olympic medal ceremonies in Beijing back in February .
 Russian skater Kamila Valieva tested positive for a banned drug . Both were members of the silver medal-winning team . Neither they nor the other skaters received their team medals .
Valieva and her teammates won the team event before the December drug test was brought to light . Valieva's drug test is the first time the drug test has been revealed . The drug test took place in December .
 Giants, Diamondbacks, and Diamondbacks. Giants, Giants, at Diamondback, Saturday, 8.30m. Sunday, 8m. Saturday .
 The team is 9-3, off to the best start of any team in the league . Still, the team is off to a best start in any league .
There will be pieces of that hot start that deteriorate or cool off as spring turns to summer . There will be plenty of hot things to do to cool off this summer .
Nine wins in 12 games don’t happen accidentally, but some of the reasons for the Mets’ rising stock are obvious . There are some subtle adjustments that also seem to be taking hold .
 Jeff McNeil's plate discipline stands out, according to the data available so far . McNeil’s plate discipline is one major thing that stands out .
 The Flying Squirrel was in hell last year when he went from a career .319 hitter to batting just .251 with a glaring lack of extra base hits .
 According to FanGraphs, the Mets’ scrappy contact hitter swung at 33.5% of the pitches he saw outside the strike zone last season .
 Yankees pitcher Luis Severino throws during the first inning against the Tigers on Wednesday at Comerica Park in Detroit . McNeil is likely to trend back toward his career in the future .
 The right-hander has been through so many setbacks over the last three years . He would sometimes get discouraged, sometimes worry that he wouldn't make it back .
 A tear in his lat muscle kept him out for all but the last month of the 2019 regular season .
 Severino said of the times he doubted he would make it back . Severino says he was told he couldn't be a starter, that his arm couldn't handle that much work .
 Severino takes the mound on Wednesday night against the Tigers at Comerica Park . The Yankees have to be thrilled where Severino is.
 The 28-year-old is 1-0 with a 2.25 ERA in his first two starts of the season . He is the only player in the league to be in a top-two position .
 Through two starts, Severino has struck out 11 and walked two in eight innings pitched . He has also struck out 12 times in his first two starts .
 He is in the 78 percentile in strikeout percentage and 76 percentile in walk percentage . He has a .219 batting average against and is in 78 percent in strike out percentage .
 The Yankees took on the Tigers at Comerica Park on Sunday . The Yankees beat the Tigers 2-1 . The game was played in New York .
 Gallo has struggled since being traded to the Yankees from the Rangers at last year’s deadline . He has struggled with the Yankees since joining them from the Yankees .
 Aaron Boone said the Yankees expect Gallo to get on base and hit for power .
First-year hitting coach Dillon Lawson says Gallo is working his off . Lawson says he's encouraged by what Gallo has done so far this year .
 Lawson even used Gallo as an example of how the Yankees’ offense is ready to break out . The Yankees' offense is set to be a big hit for the Yankees .
 Yankees will have a full roster when they head to Toronto on May 1 . Boone says he expects the Yankees to have full roster for the game .
 Unvaccinated players were given an exemption last year to travel to Canada and play the Blue Jays at the end of the 2021 season . The players will be able to play in Canada and Canada for the next season .
 No foreigners are allowed to travel to Canada without being fully vaccinated . McNeil has shown a much more discerning eye in the habits of the pitchers .
 McNeil was a nuisance to Giants’ pitching. Even when going O-for-4 with a strikeout as he did in the second RED SOX game of Tuesday’s doubleheader .
 He saw an average of 5.75 pitches during his four plate appearances, including two that lasted seven and nine pitches before ending in outs . He saw a total of five.75 pitched in his four appearances .
 Lindor, Starling Marte and Pete Alonso are hitting behind him . There’s value to that, especially when the likes of Lindor and Marte are hitting back .
 Alex Cora has been at getting the most out of his young players, his bullpen management can get overlooked . The Blue Jays have been praised for their bullpen management .
 The Red Sox once again entered the season without any star relievers . Matt Barnes is now a middle reliever and the only sure-fire weapon at Cora’s disposal is sophomore superstar Garrett Whitlock .
 Boston relievers shut down one of the game’s premier offenses in the Toronto Blue Jays and preserved a 2-1 win at Fenway Park .
 Hansel Robles threw 1 % perfect innings to extend his scoreless streak to 19 consecutive regular-season appearances . Cora admitted he had no clear plan of what to do with this group entering the season .
Whitlock looks like the ace in the hole with Barnes as the defacto closer and perhaps Ryan Brasier and Darwinzon Hernandez as the set-up guys .
 Reliever Robles had an atypical spring as he prepared for this season . Robles picking up where he left off during scoreless streak .
 Robles signed a minor league deal late in spring, but his return wasn't simple . Robles emerged as one of Alex Cora's go-to arms down the stretch last season .
 Visa issues forced him to stay home in the Dominican Republic before he finally joined the Red Sox in the final week of spring training . He joined the team in the last week of the season .
 Robles earned the win for the Red Sox on Tuesday as he threw 1% scoreless innings as part of a dominant bullpen effort . The win increases his streak of consecutive scoreless appearances to 19 dating back to Aug. of last season .
When Robles arrived at camp in Fort Myers, his readiness was apparent to Cora Cora . Robles' readiness was evident when he arrived at the camp .
 The Red Sox didn’t have any further positive tests of COVID-19 on Wednesday . The Sox didn't have any more positive tests on Wednesday.
 Kevin Plawecki, Christian Vazquez and Jonathan Arauz tested positive at the beginning of the week . The three players who tested positive are feeling better .
 returning to coaching after a four-year absence, he's taken on the huge rebuilding task . He's sold incoming players on his vision and has been heavily engaged in the practices .
 He wants you to succeed, not only on the football field but in the academic part as well . He wants to succeed on the field and on the academic side .
 The Huskies will be showing their new offense, which will focus on a small number of plays with deception around them .
 Ta’Quan Roberson has been taking a lot of the snaps at quarterback with Steven Krajewski, a holdover from last season . Roberson is a transfer from Penn State .
 Tyler Phommachanh, recovering from a torn ACL, has been doing more in practice lately . He threw some passes Tuesday morning, throwing some passes .
 UConn's stable of running backs is still led by Nathan Carter, the most productive last season . UConn’s stable ofRunning backs is also led by Carter .
 Marquez Bembry is bringing veteran leadership to UConn’s defense as a grad transfer . The defense will be looking to compete with Mississippi State's Will Rogers .
 Castellanos, off Marquez; Bohm and Bohm are all off the field . Marquez is off the other side . Camargo is off Gilbreath .
 Castellanos, Bohm, Schwarber, McMahon, Grichuk and Camargo are among the top three men in the world .
 Dan Merzel: First, Bruce Dreckman; Second, Pat Hoberg; Third, Paul Emmel . Home, Merzel; First,Bruce D Reckman; First and Second, Bruce HoberG; Third and Fourth, PaulEmmel .
 Mark Ripperger, Tom Hallion, Phil Cuzzi and Cory Blaser are all named in the top three of the list .
 The Indians played their first game at League Park and lost to the Tigers 5-0 . The Tigers beat the Indians in front of 19,867, the Indians' first game.
 Brooklyn Dodgers beat the Phillies 14-4 at Ebbets Field for their 10th consecutive victory from the start of the season . A major league record that lasted until 1981 was held until 1981 .
 The Atlanta Braves beat the Cincinnati Reds 4-3 for their 13th straight victory . The Braves won their first game of the season against the Reds .
 Montreal pitcher David Palmer threw five perfect innings in his second start since August 1982 . Palmer's first start since 1982 was against the St. Louis Cardinals .
 Keuchel 11-1; Banks 5-2; Foster 0-1 ; Severino 4-1, Bieber 8-0; Shaw 1-2 . De Los Santos 1-0: Hentges 2-0. Keuc Hel 11-2
 Laz Diaz, Alex MacKay, Chad Fairchild and Shane Livensparger are all in the top three of the list .
 Lambert, Lopez, Sousa, McKenzie, Gose, Sandlin, Stephan and Crick among others . Lambert and Lopez are all in the same age of 18 .
 Brian O’Nora: First, Chad Fairchild; Second, Shane Livensparger; Third, Alex MacKay. Home, Brian O'Nora; First and Chadfairchild: Second and third .
 Milwaukee shared the major league streak of 13 straight, set by the Atlanta Braves in 1982 . The Atlanta Braves were the first team to share the streak .
 Brady Anderson led off the first inning with a home run for the fourth straight game for Baltimore . Anderson's home run was the fourth consecutive home run in the game .
 Randy Johnson struck 17 batters while giving up two hits in Arizona’s 7-1 win over Colorado . Johnson struck out 17 batters in Arizona's win against Colorado .
 Atlanta's Rafael Furcal tied a modern major league record and became the first Braves player in 46 years to hit three triples in a game . Atlanta beat Florida 4-2 in the first game of the season .
 Albert Pujols hit his major league leading 11th homer of the season and drove in four RBIs in St. Louis . He hit his 11th home in the last two days of his season . Pujol hit his 10th homer this year and drove
 Springer is Toronto's second-highest scorer in the Toronto-area . He is also a Toronto-based player .
 Mike Muchlinski, John Libka, Jim Reynolds and Todd Tichenor are among the top three men on the list .
 Phil Humber threw the first perfect game in the majors in almost two years . The White Sox beat the Seattle Mariners 4-0 in the first game of the season .
 Philadelphia's Roy Halladay threw one against the Florida Marlins on May 29, 2010 . It was baseball’s 21st perfect game and first since Halladay's first against the Marlins in 2010 .
 Nick Swisher hit a grand slam to help the Yankees erase a nine-run deficit . Swisher added a two-run double to give them the lead . The Yankees posted back-to-back seven-run innings to beat Boston 15-9 .
 Ike Davis became the first player to hit grand slams for different teams in the same April . Neil Walker had a game-winning single with two outs in the ninth inning for Pittsburgh .
 Gilbert 22; Poppen 5; Mantiply 3; Adon 24; Arano 2; Finnegan 3; Rainey 6. Gilbert 22: Poppens 5: Mantipley 3: Adon 4: Arano 3: Finnnegan 2;
Ted Barrett, Lance Barksdale, Nic Lentz, Stu Scheuwater and StuScheuwater are among the top three men in the world .
 Ellis 8-5; Baumann 3-0; Bautista 0-0. Pérez 1-0, Logue 8-3; Logue 3-1; Castellani 3-2; Moll 0- 0; Jackson0-0
Greg Gibson, Nick Mahrley, Rob Drake and Rob Drake are among the top three men in the world .
It was the fourth time in major league history two teams combined for three grand slams . It was the first time the two teams had combined for a grand slam in the major league . The grand slam was the third time in the history of the league .
Jake Arrieta pitched his second no-hitter in a span of 11 regular-season starts . The Cubs beat the Cincinnati Reds 16-0 in a rout . It was Arrieta's second consecutive no-Hitter in 11 starts .
 Sean Manaea tosses the twelfth no-hitter in franchise history and the first since Dallas Braden's perfect game in 2010 . Manaea keeps the opponents hitless in the team’s 3-0 victory over the 17-2 Red Sox at the Oakland-Al
 The 26-year-old's performance ends Boston’s run of 3,987 games without being no-hit . The streak dates back to Mariners’ Chris Bosio's no-no against the club at the Kingdome in 1993 .
 Dodgers 5, Atlanta 1 Philadelphia 1 Philadelphia 9, Colorado 6 San Diego 6, Cincinnati 6. Tampa Bay at Chi. Bay.
 Jose Altuve is on the 10-day injured list with a strained left hamstring . The Astros placed second baseman on the injured list Wednesday . Altuve has been out for 10 days .
 The 2017 American League MVP was injured legging out an infield single in the eighth inning of Monday night's win over the Angels . The roster move is backdated to Tuesday .
 The Astros hoped to avoid placing Altuve on the IL but did so Wednesday after deciding he likely will need more than a week to recover . The Astros hope to avoid putting him on theIL but decided he would need a week.
 Astros would split time at second base between Aledmys Diaz and Niko Goodrum while Altuve is out . Baker said the Astros would also split time between Diaz and Goodrum .
 Altuve, 31, is hitting just .167 with one home run and three RBIs in nine games this season . Altuve is hitting .167.
 Sean Doolittle was placed on 10-day IL with a sprained left elbow . Two-time All-Star reliever was placed with the injury .
 The left-hander was a member of the Nationals’ 2019 World Series championship team . He played for the Reds and Mariners last season and now is back with the Nationals bullpen .
 Doolittle, 35, has retired 16 of the 17 batters he has faced this season . The 35-year-old has faced 17 batters this season. He has also faced 17 other batters this year .
 The plane was carrying members of the U.S. Army Golden Knights, who parachuted into the Nationals’ stadium for a pregame demonstration . Capitol was briefly evacuated Wednesday evening .
 The Nationals were hosting the Diamondbacks at Nationals Park, which is located a little more than a mile away from the U.S. Capitol .
 Manager Scott Servais and 3B coach Manny Acta both tested positive for COVID-19 . They were away from the Mariners beginning with Wednesday's game against the Rangers .
 Negron managed Seattle’s Triple-A affiliate last season before joining the major league staff this year .
 Negron said before the game that the 54-year-old Servais was in good spirits and participated in morning meetings via video conference, and that decisions during the game will be collaborative .
 The Mariners are experiencing a growing number of COVID cases impacting the franchise . The Mariners have been hit by a number ofCOVID cases .
 Paul Sewald joins Mitch Haniger and C/DH Luis Torrens on COVID list . The team placed him on the list on Wednesday .
 Several other staff members had tested positive in recent days, Servais said Tuesday . The players and players were among those tested positive .
 Tony Gonsolin tossed six shutout innings, Freddie Freeman hit a two-run HR in the first and the Dodgers beat the visiting Braves 5-1 Wednesday . The Dodgers take two of three from the defending World Series champions .
 The only hit allowed by Gonsolin was Manny Pifia’s slow bouncer to the right side leading off the sixth . B Max Muncy's throw to the bag was slow .
 Mitch White gave up consecutive doubles to Matt Olson and Marcell Ozuna with two outs in the ninth . Mitch White also gave up two out in the 9th .
 Gonsolin went six shutout innings for the third time in his career and first in two years . He went six innings in his first two years as a batsman . He has now gone six shutouts in his second career .
 Freeman went 3 of 4 against his former team to close out an emotional reunion . Freeman's former team played out a 3-4 win over his former side .
 The 32-year-old who spent his entire career with the Braves until this year visited with his old teammates in their clubhouse before the series opener . The Braves won their first World Series title since 1995 .
 The Jets make sense, but team sources don't believe the 49ers will move him . The 49ers can control his rights for up to three more years .
 Ue has lia teu a AD as Ay ‘Day n i pote 2 M Hartford Athletic midfielder M and Russell Wilson are prime examples in recent years . Ue: ‘I have lia tea a AD.’ M and Wilson have been prime examples.
 The Jets have been in the market for a receiver to supercharge Zach Wilson’s development in his second year . The Jets are hoping to sign a receiver for Zach Wilson's second year.
 The team was interested in the Falcons’ Calvin Ridley until he was suspended for the year for gambling . The team would have pursued the Chargers’ Mike Williams but he was re-signed .
 Samuel is asking out of San Francisco, according to multiple reports . The Jets have the assets to make an attractive offer for Samuel .
 Samuel isn't only one of the best receivers in the league, he's one of his best players in the sport .
 Last season he finished with 77 catches, 1,405 yards and six touchdowns . Last year he had 1, 405 yards and 6 touchdowns . He also had 77 catches and 1,400 yards .
 Robert Saleh was the defensive coordinator for the 49ers from 2017-2020 . Saleh will be in charge for the next three years .
 Jets offensive coordinator Mike LaFleur was the passing game coordinator and receivers coach when Samuel was drafted in 2019 . He was drafted by the Jets in 2019.
 Second-year wide receiver Kadarius Toney has not reported to the Giants’ facility yet this month . Toney is expected to play for this week’s voluntary minicamp .
 Toney's commitment came into question behind the scenes during his rookie year . Toney’s lack of playbook study, poor meeting behavior and frequent injuries were among his problems .
 “The place was packed,’ he said . ‘The place is packed.’ He said .
 It’s really important we compete in Skating from Page 1 and never rescheduled. It's really important that we compete from Page1 and never re-scheduled .
 Donohue, who grew up in Madison, and Chen, who goes to Yale, will be in Hartford Saturday night at 7:30 at the XL Center . Other Olympians, including team silver medalists Madison Chock, Evan Bates, Karen Chen, Alexa Knierem and
 We get updates, letting us know it’s being looked into and they haven't forgotten about us . As of right now, we still have not heard about them reaching a decision .
 The decision to not give anyone a medal has a bigger effect on the sport long-term, he says . "What I care about is that the effect of this decision, of making such a public statement, and taking this into account, is that it has a larger effect"
 Donohue and Hubbell had planned to retire after the Olympics and came back one more time after finishing fourth in the 2018 Games . The pair finished in fourth place at the 2018 Olympics .
 The pair won the silver at the world championships in France in late March to end their professional careers . The pair will now retire from the sport after winning the silver in March .
 I think now that we're all back together for the first time since the Games we were all on different timing at the Games, so didn’t see each other too much . I think that we’re all back Together for theFirst time since Games we
 Chen did not compete in the world championships due to an undisclosed injury . Chen had not competed in the event due to a undisclosed injury.
 The Red Bulls applied pressure on the Athletic defense with their forwards . From the opening minute the Red Bulls apply pressure on their defense .
 He has two more years to decide what he wants to do, he said . "From there, I'll decide what I want to do," he said.
 Donohue said he had time to visit with his family, including his mother . After the Stars tour is over, he and his girlfriend Nathan Chen, of the United States, competes in the men’s free skate program at the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing .
 JAE C.HONG/AP are going on vacation, then coming back to the United States to start a business encompassing athletics and skating .
 The Olympic ice dancer wants to help other disciplines to evolve and tition . "I really want to affect the health, both physically and mentally of the athletes," he says .
 Celtics from Page 1 said the 25-year-old All-Star forward practiced in a four-on-four setting with contact for the first time since injuring his back . Celtics fromPage 1 said.
 The Nets' shootaround took place on the TD Garden court in New York City .
 Simmons participated in the four-on-four on Monday, then a five- on-zero walkthrough on Tuesday . Nash said the scripting is important so that Simmons knows what actions the team is trying to run .
Bird and Stewart both said they were excited when the Storm selected Westbrook with the 21st pick . Bird and Stewart were excited at the pick .
 The 6-foot guard has felt a bit out of syne at times as she gets the hang of each drill and how the team operates . As is the case for many rookies.
Williams is still finishing her season overseas. Bird and Stewart are both veterans . But having familiar veterans like Bird has helped the process .
 I just knew it was gonna be a big change. So I definitely felt ready to come in, I just know it was going to be a huge change .
Bird believes that Westbrook's versatility will help him become as familiar as possible with what we’re doing because things change from day to day .
 Itremains unclear whether Simmons has progressed enough to play in Game 3 at Barclays Center on Saturday . It remains unclear whether he will play in the next game .
 Nash did not rule out Simmons out for the Nets’ first home playoff game . The Nets may be cautious given how long the star forward has gone since playing an NBA game .
 The Storm have a lot in the rookie’s game that she hasn’t even tapped into yet . It's not as linear as the other in-season injuries.
 The 41-year-old Bird is about to enter her 19th season in the league . Bird has often talked publicly about how much she's grappled with the decision to retire .
 The WNBA’s all-time assist leader said she didn’t change too much in terms of her conditioning over the offseason . She said she has had to be more aware of how her body is changing .
 Stewart has been easing back into training camp after undergoing a minor preventative Achilles procedure last October .
 Lila Bromberg can be reached at Ibromberg @courant.com and @LilaBBromberg on Twitter . She can also be reach at @Bromberg and @lila BBromberg .
 The former UConn women’s basketball guard suffered a season-ending knee injury in training camp . The Washington Mystics announced the injury Wednesday .
 She earned the Ann Meyers Drysdale award asthe nation’s top shooting guard . She was named an All-Big East first-team selection in each of the last two years .
 Anett Kontaveit Kerber beat Angelique Kerber 3-6, 6-4, 4-4 . Kerber is the latest in a long line of women to win the title .
 ATP BARCELONA OPEN BANC SABADELL at Real Club de Tenis Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain .
 Novak Djokovic beat Laslo Djere 2-6, 2-7, 7-6. Djere won the first round at Novak Tennis Center, Belgrade, Serbia . The Serbian tennis star has won three of his last four matches .
 WTA TEB BNP PARIBAS: CUP at Garanti Koza Arena, Istanbul, Red clay-outdoors WOMEN’S SINGLES, Sorana Cirstea Arantxa Rus, 3-6, 6-1, 7-5
W.S. SINGLES: Rebecca Peterson, Elise Mertens, 7-5, 4-1, ret. Rebecca Peterson .
 Dallas at Edmonton, late Chicago at Arizona, late Colorado at Seattle, late Washington at Vegas . Pittsburgh at Pittsburgh, late Seattle at Washington at Washington . Boston at Boston .
 NWSL CHALLENGE CUP SATURDAY’S MATCHES Washington at North Carolina, 1p.m. Washington.
 Real Madrid face Real Madrid in the first leg of their Champions League semi-final clash on Tuesday . Real Madrid will be hoping to win their first leg at the Bernabeu on Tuesday night .
 Michigan at New Jersey, 8p.m. Sunday, 8 p.m., is Michigan's game against New Jersey . The game will be played at the New Jersey Stadium in New Jersey.
Pittsburgh at Philadelphia, Noon Birmingham at Houston, 7p.m. SATURDAY’s GAMES Pittsburgh at Philadelphia .
 The Mets are at the top of the league's top three teams . San Francisco is at the bottom of the line . Washington is at Washington -126 Arizona is at Miami .
Cubs off Pittsburgh off off AMERICAN LEAGUE atCleveland -120 Chi. Louis +110 atChi. Louis.Cubs — off Pittsburgh of Pittsburgh off AMERICLELEAGUE off American LeAGUE .
 White Sox +102 N.Y. Yankees -155 at Detroit -115 at Boston -105 Minnesota -130 at Kansas City . Baltimore -102 at Seattle -150 Texas +128 Texas -128 NBA PLAYOFFS THURSDAY FAVORITE LINE .
 Daniil Medvedev is among several players who won't be allowed to play at Wimbledon . All England Club banned players from Russia and Belarus from competing at the Grand Slam because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine .
 Wimbledon enacts ban over invasion Russians, Belarusians can’t compete at season’s 3rd Slam . Tennis players from Russia and Belarus will not be allowed to play at Wimbledon .
 Medvedev, Rublev and Pavlyuchenkova are from Russia . Sabalenka and Azarenka are from Belarus . Medvedeva, RubLev and Rublev are from Russian .
 The All England Club confirmed in March that it was having discussions with the British government about whether Russians should be able to play in the grass-court Grand Slam tournament . The World No. 1 is in talks with the UK government about the issue .
 Russian athletes have been prevented from competing in many sports following their country's invasion of Ukraine .
 Soccer, figure skating and track and field all banned Russian and Belarusian athletes and teams because of the war . The war is still raging in Russia and Belarus .
 The Russian men's national soccer team was excluded from last month's World Cup qualifying playoffs . They missed a chance to reach this year’s tournament .
 The seven groups that run the sport around the world decided March 1 that players from those countries would be allowed to compete in WTA, ATP and Grand Slam tournaments but not under the name or flag of Russia or Belarus .
 Russia had been the reigning champion in both the Billie Jean King Cup and Davis Cup team competitions . Russia had also been the winning champion in the tournament .
 The French Open will be the first Grand Slam tournament held since Russia invaded Ukraine in February . Russian and Belarussian players may not represent their countries .
 Villanova coach Jay Wright is expected to retire after 21 seasons as men's basketball coach at Villanova . Wright is a News services Hall of Fame coach .
 Kyle Neptune was Wright’s assistant coach for eight years before taking the top job at Fordham last season . Neptune will be named his successor at the end of the season .
 Wright, 60, is retiring from coaching for good and won’t pursue NBA or other college jobs . Wright is retired from coaching and won't pursue other jobs .
 Fox Sports reported that Wright “had been thinking about retirement for several weeks’ because of his family’s family .
 Since taking over Villanova in 2001, Wright has been lauded as one of the greatest coaches in the sport . He has been praised as a great coach for his work at Villanova .
 Villanova beat North Carolina in the final in 2016 and 2018 . He led Villanova to the national championship in 2016 . The Wildcats beat Michigan in 2018 .
 Wright was inducted into the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame in 2021 . He won a gold medal at the 2020 Olympics as an assistant coach . Wright won a silver medal in the Olympics in 2020 .
 UCLA junior G Johnny Juzang will enter the draft . The Bruins' run to the 2021 Final Four will be in the final four .
 In 2021, he averaged 22. points in six NCAA Tournament games . He was named to the all-tournament team .
 The USGA announced that the oceanside course in California will host four more U.S. Opens over the next two-plus decades . The course will be in California for the next 20 years .
 Kalabrya Haskins told a Florida Highway Patrol dispatcher that her 24-year-old husband had called from near Fort Lauderdale to say he was walking to get gas and would call her back . She was calling from Pittsburgh and unaware of the accident .
 Former Ohio State star didn't answer dispatcher when she tried to call him . She told dispatcher he wasn't answering .
 Witnesses told investigators Haskins was trying to cross the highway when he went into the path of the dump truck . The accident report said witnesses told investigators he was trying.
 Low — — — sprinkle late, pce and 45 40 46 45 45 48 courant.com/weather seasonable. Low — – sprinkle late.
 Temperatures in the en ae 060ClU De oe mid-50s to near 60 degrees . Temperatures will be a few degrees cooler than normal .
 peak gusts up to 30 mph are up to 60 mph in the afternoon . A 59/47 wacrecorp is possible .
 High pressure will bring sunshine, breezy and mild conditions on Friday . High temperatures will be in the 60s .
 S—Elena Bontatibus, Reece Willison, Sofia Smith, Liv Francis, Taylor Trutin, McKenna Pennington, Sarah Perlitz, Maliya Haddock and Emma Lamica all scored .
 STAFFORD 101, COVENTRY 34 GIRLS TRACK & FIELD NCCC BOLTON 98, EAST WINDSOR 47 BOLton 95, GRANBY 98, GRanby 98, CANTON 104.67, Canton 81
 Jacob Wojtkowiak and Matt LaFountaine both had 3hits, 2RBI, 2runs scored for Coventry .
 Matt Sinofsky was 2-for-4 with a double, RBI and Noah Schermerhorn had a double . The pair also had two runs for Suffield .
 Ambrose tossed 3scoreless innings of relief to get the win with 5strikeouts, including striking out the side in the 6th . Ambrose tossed three scoreless innings.
 Lyver was 5-for-5 with 4RBI and Olivia Stebbins was 3-for.5 with4RBI for Enfield . Lyver is 5- for-5.
 Caylin Blazys had a triple, 3RBI, 3runs scored and Lauren Czerwinski had triple, 2runs scored . Lauren Czerswinski also had triple.
 Laura Catellier hada double, 2RBI and Bianca Green was 2-for-3 with a double, RBI for Somers . The team also had a 2- for-3with a double and a double.
 Sydney Matz had 3hits, 2RBI, 4runs scored and Brynlee Eckles had 3Hits, 3 runs scored .
 Macyn Rosay had a double, 2RBI and Nataly Rodriguez was 1-for-3 with 2R BI for Innovation . MacynRosay hada double,2RBI was 2 RBI for Innovation and 2Rbi for Innovation.
 EW: Drew Rancourt, 13kills, 5aces, 4digs, John Bellafronte, 7kills and 3blocks . NB: Anthony Olmeda, 12kills,. 9assists, Davin Siharadh, 13 assists, 5k
 Onil Carrion, 20assists, 4aces, 2kills, Adnel Torres, 12kills and Dev Patel, 9aces, 8kills . The list includes 20assist, 4ace, 3kills.
 Tim Nugent, 27assists, 4aces, 3kills, Will Allen, 13kills and 4aces . X: Vinny Rappoccio, 8digs, 5digs and Peter O’Brien, 13digs. M—2-3;
 East Hartford at East Catholic NCCC: Somers at Suffield CRAL: Weaver at MLC, 3:30p.m. East Hartford.
 East Catholic at South Windsor CCC-Inter: Farmington at Maloney; Hall at Windsor NCCC. Stafford at Coventry; HMTCA at Rockville; Granby at East Windsor/SMSA, 4p.m. Berlin at Lewis Mills Ccc-East:
 Cromwell at Old Lyme; Morgan at Old Saybrook; North Branford at Valley Regional, 4p.m. Cromwell, Old Lyme, and Morgan atOld Saybrook .
 East Hartford at Rocky Hill; Bristol Eastern at Conard, 4:30p.m. Lyman Hall, Hillhouse at Sheehan BOYS TENNIS CCC-Inter: East Hartford, Rocky Hill, Bristol Eastern .
 Xavier at Hall; Granby at Lewis Mills; Manchester at Ellington GIRLS TENNIS CCC-Inter . Maloney at Newington; Simsbury at East Catholic; Platt at Bloomfield; Rocky Hill at Farmington . Enfield at Middletown
Lewis Mills at Granby; Bolton at Bulkeley/HMTCA FLAVOR Hartford Courant ab. ‘da 4 i : af 7 ast és ry H Adal merry’
 Cold sesame noodles are a refreshing delight — especially on a hot day or if you want a filling but flavorful on-the-go lunch .
 There are many versions of sesame noodles, notably ones from Sichuan and Taiwan . But they all contain Chinese sesame paste and other seasonings .
 There’s actually very little cooking to do — just boiling the noodles . prep is relegated to some chopping and mixing of the sauce .
 Good Chinese or Spice up your pork chops with a Cajun-seasoned pork chop rub adds a delicious smoky flavor .
 Taiwanese sesame noodles have a balance of sweet, savory, nutty and a little bit of heat . Here's an easy recipe that balances all those flavors into a slurp-able bowl .
 Thin, dried wheat noodles work best because they cook up chewy and don’t get too gloppy or gummy when tossed with the sauce .
 Modern versions of sesame noodles start with peanut butter . Modern versions start with sesame paste .
 The smooth peanut butter coats the noodles well and adds a great depth of flavor . The smooth butter is a great way to make the noodles feel .
 Sesame paste is a key ingredient to round out the sauce, even though you don't need alot .
 Chinese sesame paste is made from darkly roasted sesame seeds and tastes different than tahini . It is made of unroasted or lightly roasted seeds and has more bitter flavor .
 A good spoonSUPER BOWL ful of toasted sesame oil helps thin out the nut butter and adds a delicious toastiness .
The sweet notes in this recipe come from a spoonful of granulated sugar . The sweet notes are made with a spoon of granulate sugar .
 Soy sauce and rice vinegar help thin out the sauce, and add savory and acidic notes to balance everything out .
 Sesame seeds, scallion greens and roasted peanuts add some crunch and color to the finished CAJUN SKILLET PORK CHOPS with ASPARAGUS and CHEESY POLENTA Makes: 4 servings Total time: 35 minutes 4. cups water 1 cup corn
 You can toss in matchstick-cut cucumber for some refreshing bites . You can also toss inmatchstick- cut cucumber.
 To make sesame noodles, boil the noodles and then run them under cold water to stop the cooking and keep them from getting gummy . To make them, boil them and put them in cold water.
 These sesame noodles are eaten at room temperature or cold, making them a great makeahead or on-the-go dish .
 Sesame noodles are substantial enough that they can be eaten alone . You can serve them with some protein like poached chicken or seared fish .
 Taiwanese cucumber salad or as part of a hot pot meal. Cheddar cheese 4 scallions, sliced 1 tablespoon butter ¥, teaspoon ground pepper 1.1.2 tablespoons of ground pepper .
 Cook, stirring occasionally, until thickened and the cornmeal is tender, about 20 minutes . Cook, stir occasionally, before thickening and the Cornmeal is thickened .
 pork chops with Cajun seasoning and 4% teaspoon salt . Meanwhile, season pork chops are served with 4% teaspoons salt .
 Add pork and cook, turning once, until browned, about 1 minute per side . Add the pork and turn once, turning one side, until Browned .
 Thinly slice 2 medium scallions. Add scallion white and light green parts to bowl and reserve dark green parts for garnish .
 Cut % medium English cucumber into matchsticks (about 1 cup) and add to the bowl of sauce, if desired . Add a cup of sauce to the sauce if desired.
 Add 8 ounces thin, dried Chinese wheat noodles to the boiling water and cook according to package directions until tender .
 When the noodles are ready, drain and rinse under cold water until cooled . When the noodle is ready, Drain and rinse in cold water to cool down .
 Garnish with reserved scallion greens, peanuts and 1 teaspoon sesame seeds, if desired . Garnish the reserved scallies, peanuts, and 1 teaspoons of sesame seed .
 Thin, dried wheatbased Taiwanese noodles labeled kuan miao are best for this recipe . You can substitute dried udon or spaghetti noodles in its place .
 Tahini can be substituted for the sesame paste, but it has a slightly more bitter taste . Tahini is a very popular version of the paste .
 Add the remaining 1 tablespoon oil, asparagus, wine and pinch of salt to the pan . Add the other 1 tablespoon of oil, wine, and a tablespoon of salt. Add the final 1 tablespoons of oil and wine to a pan .
 Cook, scraping up any browned bits, until the asparagus is tender, about 3 minutes . Cook, scrape up any Browned bits. Cook, scraped up anyBrowned bits until theAsparagus was tender, until it's tender . Cook
 Remove the polenta from the heat and stir in cheese, scallions, butter, pepper and the remaining % teaspoon salt . The polenta is used in cheese and butter .
 The first strawberries of the year hit markets in early March in the South . That's because growing up in South, the first strawberries hit markets .
Early season berries weren't as sweet as those that came at the start of summer . But I always loved them more .
 Their sour flavor made them ideal for baking, since it helped to cook them down with sugar so as to make them as candy-like as late-season siblings .
 The last super-sweet berries leave in the summer . I mostly refuse to eat strawberries throughout the rest of the year .
 My current baking project is a cold pie that incorporates the cooked-down strawberries into a “Black Forest’s flavor profile .
Early season strawberries have the robust, tangy flavor I want . When cooked and condensed, the acidity balances all the sugar and allows for an exponentially greater berry-full flavor .
 A layer of chocolate pudding over the jammy berries, followed by a layer of whipped cream to cut all the richness . To complete the inspiration, I spread a layer over the pudding over a layer.
 In that last layer, I use cornstarch and gelatinto to help set the whipped cream and prevent weeping . Water separates from the dairy fat, which can happen as it sits, when water separates.
 It’s eatenchnique — to help set the whipped cream on the outside and keep it stable, sliceable and soft .
 First you make a pudding by cooking a small amount of milk with cornstarch and sugar . Then you dissolve gelatin into the pudding and fold it into the whipped cream to stabilize it .
 It may seem unnecessary, but when you work so hard on a pie like this, you want to ensure it sets up and comes out looking beautiful with each slice .
 This crust is refreshingly tame in comparison and a cinch to make since rolling out pastry would be overkill here .
 To garnish, I use some simple shaved bits of chocolate and if I want to impress, a sprinkling of ground freeze-dried strawberries . I always do.
 Make quick taco dinner on your busiest nights on your busy nights .
 It pairs beautifully with the tangy pulled chicken for a quick dinner you can make on your busiest nights .
 Combine yogurt, sugar, lemon juice, vinegar, salt, pepper and hot sauce in a large bowl . Combine yogurt and lemon juice in a bowl .
 Combine chicken and barbecue sauce in a medium microwavable bowl . toss until chicken is coated with sauce . Combine chicken, barbecue sauce and sauce in the bowl . Toss until chicken's coating is coated .
 Fill each tortilla with 4% cup of the chicken and top with 3 tablespoons of the slaw . Fill each Tortilla with a cup of chicken, top with 2 tablespoons of a slaw.
 In alarge bowl, add cracker crumbs, sugar, cocoa powder, salt and butter, and mix with your fingers until evenly combined . Add crackers, sugar and cocoa powder to your fingers .
 Transfer the mixture to a 9-inch metal pie pan and press evenly into the bottom and sides of the pan . The mixture is then placed in the bottom, sides and bottom of the pie pan .
 Transfer the crust to a wire rack and let cool while you make the strawberry layer . Let cool while making a strawberry layer and make the crust .
 There are no rigidly solid pieces left and there is plenty of syrup around them . Place over medium heat and cook, stirring every minute or so, until strawberries have mostly collapsed .
 Pour cornstarch slurry into the berries, and continue cooking until liquid thickens . Some of the berries will break down into the syrup about 1 minute .
Scrape the strawberries into the pie crust and spread into an even layer . Scrape the berries into the crust and then spread into a layer .
 In a small saucepan, whisk together the sugar and cornstarch, then mix in the egg yolks . In the small sauce pan, whisked together sugar and Cornstarch.
 Place the pan over medium heat and cook, stirring constantly, until the pudding begins bubbling, about 4 minutes, then keep cooking, stirring constant . The pudding is thick, about 1 minute more, until it is thick.
 Remove the pan from the heat, and stir in the chocolate and butter until both are melted and smooth . Stir in the Chocolate and butter to make the pan smooth and melt .
 Stir in vanilla and salt, then scrape the chocolate pudding over the strawberry layer . Stir in the vanilla andSalt then scrape over the chocolate layer .
 Sprinkle gelatin over 2 tablespoons of milk in a bowl . Let sit until gelatin softens, about 5 minutes .
 Whisk together sugar and cornstarchina small saucepan, then add remaining 2 cup milk and place over medium heat . Add remaining 2 cups of milk to the saucepan and then heat up .
 Cook, stirring constantly, until mixture thickens to the consistency of very thick pudding, 4 to 5 minutes, then remove pan from the heat, and stir in gelatin mixture until it dissolves fully . Cook, stirred constantly, then removed pan from heat and stirred gelatin mixture
 Scrape gelatin mixture into a large bowl and let cool, stirring occasionally, to room temperature . Let cool, stir occasionally, and let the gelatin mixture cool.
 Add one-third of the whipped cream to the gelatin mixture, and stir until smooth . Add a third of the whip cream to your gelatin mixture .
 Add the remaining whipped cream and gently fold with a rubber spatula until evenly combined . Add the remainder of the whipped cream to the top of the cream .
Cover loosely with plastic wrap and refrigerate for at least 4 hours or overnight . Cover loosely with Plastic wrap.
 When ready to serve, sprinkle the top with chocolate shavings and// or ground freeze-dried strawberries .
 Limit one per customer per day HC_4-21-2022 NOT combinable with other offers . limit one per customers per day . Limit one person per day.
 Visitors sampled Donkey & Goat’s newly released natural wines . Even the producer's most ardent fans would not recognize .
 The 2021 Donkey & Goat wines were either labeled with the generic “California’s appellation or came from vineyards that had not been part of the usual lineup . The wines stretch from Mendocino and Sonoma to El Dorado and Sierra Foothills .
 Wine fans who cherish bottles with asense of place look for specificity in appellations . They hope the wines will reflect the qualities of an area or vineyard .
 In the past, any of its wine labeled “California’s wine was made from inexpensive grapes and carried a modest price tag .
 This year, some of its most expensive grapes are going into those “California’s” wines . Some of the most expensive wines are going to be in California .
 Crops from multiple appellations were combined in an effort to make up for shortfalls after the 2021 fires in Northern California .
 The catastrophic fires of the past few growing seasons on the West Coast have turned what was once the relatively routine, annual ritual of harvest and SERIOUSLY SIMPLE New cuvees .
CarolYN FONG/THE NEW YORK TIMES winemaking into a period of fear and anxiety . Carolyn FONG: "I'm not afraid. I'm scared," she says .
 Growers and winemakers now must consider whether fires will come again and what to do about it .
 Fire damage, along with smoke and ash, is devastating to any vineyard and producer . Fire damage is devastating.
 Those wineries owned by billionaires or big corporations have the resources to withstand diminished harvests, or even a year or two with no wine at all .
 Small businesses face existential threats each year and wonder if they will be able to make enough wine to cover costs . Donkey & Goat now faces existential threats every year .
 West Coast wineries have had to innovate, turning grapes that might have been destined for one sort of wine into a completely different one .
 Tracey Rogers Brandt hopes unusual wines will not be demeaned because they are different or unexpected .
 She hopes that what she calls her “climate-driven creative wines’ will be recognized as inventive responses to disastrous events and valued accordingly . She says she hopes that her ‘climate- driven creative wines' will be considered inventive responses.
 Isabel’s Cuvee is a single-vineyard rosé made from grenache gris grown on the Gibson Ranch in Mendocino County .
 Rogers Brandt had plenty of grapes in 2021 to produce the usual amount of Isabel's grapes .
 The Caldor Fire ravaged vineyards in El Dorado, where Donkey & Goat obtains nearly 55% of the grapes for its annual production of red wines .
 Donkey & Goat was able to salvage roughly 40% of its red grapes, mostly syrah, grenache and mourvedre . The grapes were mainly syrah and grenache .
 When smoke and ash settle on red grapes, the grape skins must be discarded . The grape skins provide color and structure to the wine .
 Red wine cannot be produced without subjecting the wine to the sorts of technological manipulations . White beans and artichoke hearts are an inspired combo .
 Sweet peas, asparagus, ramps and Chinese peas are just afew of the greens I love to cook . The greens are a great way to cook, and I love them.
 Sometimes I like to combine unlikely but complementary flavors together . Sometimes I can combine unlikely and complementary flavors.
 Combining white beans and artichoke hearts turns out to be an inspired combination .
 The artichoke hearts add just a hint of the artichokes’ distinguishing taste .
 The artichokes provide the unique flavor in this soup . They're frozen, but have a unique flavor .
 Soak the beans overnight in enough cold water to generously cover or doa quick soak by bringing them to a boil in just enough water to cover . Then cover and let stand 1 hour, then boil for 2 minutes, then cover and stand .
 Ina6-quart soup pot over medium heat, heat the oil, add the onions, and saute for about 5 minutes or until softened . 4 This soup is easy to make into a full meal .
 DREAMSTIME wants to skip the straining step, since it creates a silky, frothy texture . The texture is a smooth, silky texture .
 Using frozen artichoke hearts cuts down an enormous amount of preparation time without sacrificing any flavor . Using frozen hearts reduces the amount of time spent on preparation .
 Serve warms chunks of your favorite rustic bread with plates of fruity olive oil .
I like to drink a light-oaked Chardonnay or a Beaujolais with this soup . I like to eat this soup with some stirring .
 Add the artichokes hearts and saute, about 2 to 3 minutes, until slightly softened . Add the Artichokes Hearts and sautes, about two to three minutes .
 Increase the heat to high and add the stock, beans, garlic and tomatoes are tender . Increase the temperature to high. Add the stock and beans, which are tender.
 When the soup comes to a boil, reduce the heat to low and simmer for about 1 to 1% hours . When the beans are 3.5% of the soup is covered, or until the beans 3.3% are covered .
 At this point, you can strain the soup through a finemeshed strainer into a large saucepan .
 Heat soup on medium heat and add the salt, pepper and 2 tablespoons of parsley and taste for seasoning . Heat the soup onMedium heat. Add the salt and pepper to the parsley to the soup and taste the soup .
 To serve, ladie the soup into bowls and garnish with optional croutons, the remaining parsley, and the Parmesan cheese .
 The soup can be prepared up to three days ahead through Step 3, covered and refrigerated . The soup is made up of three days and can be cooked up to four days ahead .
 Donkey & Goat abhors. ulations. Be sure to adjust the seasonings and add fresh herbs to the soup .
 Many wineries would use grapes to make a simple rose . In such cases, many wineries use the grapes to create the rose .
 Rogers Brandt could have made an innocuous rosé to sell alongside Isabel's Cuvée .
 She said that would not have been satisfying aesthetically, and she would have lost money on the wine . But she said it would have been pleasing aesthetically . She said she wouldn't have been satisfied aesthetically.
 The rosé was made from grapes made from these grapes . It was destined for Isabel’s Cuvee .
 The juice and skins are macerated together, adding texture and color . Some pinot gris from the 2020 vintage are made in the ramato style .
 Federal rules permit up to 15% ofa blend from a vintage other than the stated year . Federal rules allow up to 20% of a blend froma vintage other.
 The result is lively, tangy, refreshing and bone dry, with flavors of fruits and herbs . The result, labeled Gris Gris, is delightful .
 Rogers Brandt is selling the wine for $32 abottle, roughly equivalent to Isabel’s Cuvée . The wine is the same name as Isabel's Cuvé .
 Donkey & Goat vineyards must develop partnerships with growers to assure a steady supply of fruit . Many small wineries without vineyards of their own have no vineyards in their own .
 Rogers Brandt works primarily with organic and biodynamic vineyards . This is doubly important for producers like Brandt, who works with organic vineyards.
 Many winemakers bailed on growers or bought only a portion of their allotment . Faced with fires in both 2020 and 2021, many growers bailed on their allotments .
 Rogers Brandt said it was crucial to support growers . It’s a difficult situation for all concerned, but Brandt says it's important to support Growers .
 Family Owned and Run since 1932 . “You can’t just buy grapes in the good years,’ she said .
 Rogers Brandt faced a slightly different situation with the 2020 fires . The 2020 fires will be the first time the fires have taken place in the country .
Only during the winemaking process did she discover they had been affected by smoke . Only during the process she discovered they were affected.
 She made what she could, even if the results left her heartbroken, she said . She said, "I made what I could, and I made it"
 In the early part of 2021, she made a point of tasting many natural wines . She called Plan B Wines if again confronted with fires . She also called for inspiration for what she called PlanB Wines .
 Cannonball, an unusual blend of carienan and eriiner veltliner with dollops of chardonnay, grenache blanc and vermentino from Mendocino, Monterey and El Dorado, all knit together with a thread of tannin .
 Rogers Brandt took the pomace from the winemaking process and put it into a clay vat .
 She then filled it with a rose of grenache noir from El Dorado and let them sit together for 12 days . The pair then sat together for a few days before they got back together .
 One of the LARGEST Italian Specialty RY ln a On De&D Market is just minutes from Hartford, Newington, Rocky Hill, Cromwell, Glastonbury and West Hartford .
 Sirloin Steaks Boneless Leg of Lamb Bone-In Pork Chops 1"" & 1%"" cut House Made Lamb Sausage in Lamb Casing Bell & Evans Boneless & Skinless Chicken Breasts -10 lb. bag Our Seasoned Chicken on a Stick Cent
 The seashell-shaped topping is a delight when prepared right . The popular Mexican sweet bread is a great concha.
 Anyone who has tasted a wellmade concha will go weak at the sight of a fresh one in a panaderia . Food is sold throughout Mexico and Mexican American neighborhoods .
 The concha is a pillar of Mexico’s culinary identity . It is an integral part of everyday meals and family celebrations .
 They can be eaten for breakfast with hot chocolate, coffee or milk; snacked on as an anytime pick-me-up; or split in half to make sandwiches .
 There is a good chance that a concha bought at a bakery or store will have a stale bread base with a tasteless topping .
 Demand for the beloved quick bite is so high that bakeries sell out anyway . The fast-bite is so popular that some bakeries are selling out .
 There is so much competition that bakers strive to offer affordable prices and make sacrifices in the process . There is a lot of competition in the market.
Water is used instead of milk, and sometimes, sometimes, the eggs are skipped entirely . Butter is reduced or left out in favor of vegetable shortening .
 The good news is you don’t have to test out a dozen panaderias to find a great one . It's a good news.
 Consider fat content Be it butter or shortening, the less fat, the drier the bun . The drier bun is the more fat and less fat .
 Too much fat coats the gluten chains and can weaken them, impeding rise . But too much fat coat the gluten chain and can also weaken them . The gluten chains are still growing in popularity .
 Traditionally, conchas were made with fresh lard, Quiroz said . You can still find some prepared that way, rich and layered in flavor, in small towns in the Mexican countryside .
 Butter, a less heavy fat than lard, doesn't weigh down the rise, giving conchas a pillowy puff and delicate taste .
 Knead, knead, then knead some more Concha dough requires more kneading than might seem rational .
 Migoya recommends a stretchand-fold method before letting the dough rise . The dough develops gluten and achieves a smooth surface .
 You want a dough that is shiny and extremely soft; it should feel a bit like toy putty . The dough should feel like a shiny and very soft.
With a bit of patience to work the dough, it will be not only a vehicle for the topping, but also it will shine in its own right .
 The best part of a conchais is the topping, arguably, the topping . The top is the most popular topping in the world .
 The topping must maintain its signature seashell shape throughout the baking process . Concha means “seashell’s in Spanish .
 Those ridges encourage the topping to break off gradually as you take bites, rather than crumbling all at once . Those ridging encourage the top to break out gradually.
 A tender bun could collapse under its weight. A generous amount of topping is welcome, but a generous amount is welcome .
 Whisk the flour, sugar, salt and yeast in the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the dough hook . Whisk a bowl of flour and sugar in a bowl.
 Mix on the lowest speed to combine without the flour splattering out of the bowl, about 20 seconds . Mix on a low speed. Mix on one of the lowest speeds to combine .
 The dough slaps and pulls away from the sides of the bowl and forms a smooth, elastic ball around the hook, 10 to 15 minutes .
Stay close to your mixer because it will start jumping all over your counter. Stay close to you because it'll jump all over the counter .
 A very soft, elastic, silky and shiny mass that hugs the dough hook, 8 to 12 minutes . The dough is again pulling away from the sides of the bowl .
 The moment you stop beating the dough, it will relax into the bowl again . The moment the dough relaxes is the moment to stop beating it again .
 To activate the gluten further, stretch and fold the Pastry chef Irving Quiroz in Monterrey.
 A transcendent concha features a tender base, a flavorful topping and a balanced ratio of the two . The concha also features a tasty topping and balanced ratio.
 Using one or both of your hands, reach down between the greased side of the bowl and the dough . Lift the dough up from the bowl to fold the dough over itself .
 Cover the bowl with plastic wrap, place it in the refrigerator for the first rise and let it chill anywhere from 4 hours to 24 hours .
 Bring dough out of the refrigerator and, using your hands or abench scraper, cut it into 15 pieces, each about 76 grams . Each piece is about a ¥3-cup scoop, which is about ¥3 grams .
 One by one, pat each piece of dough into a flat shape on the floured surface . Then draw edges into the center, working your way around, pinching dough together .
 Turn the ball over, cup it with your hand and move it in circles, rolling it over the counter for a few seconds to make a neater round .
 place 5 equally spaced balls on each of the 3 prepared baking sheets . Repeat with remaining conchas and place 5 evenly spaced balls in each baking sheet . repeat with remaining Conchas.
 Make sure there is a bit of flour on the counter before pressing each piece of dough . Dough is very sticky, so make sure to make sure there's a little flour on your counter .
 Combine all the ingredients for the selected topping flavor in the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment . Mix on the lowest speed until the ingredients begin to combine, about 20 to 30 seconds .
 Raise the speed to medium and mix to form a glossy and smooth mixture, about 2 minutes .
 Fill asmall bowl halfway with warm water to wet your hands while you work to divide and shape the topping . Fill as mall bowl half a bowl half half a cup of water with warm warm water .
 Portion topping with soup spoon to create 15 portions that are about 30 grams each . Portion topped with a soup spoon is about 30g each .
 Wet your hands thoroughly and roll one portion of the topping into a ball . Wet your hand thoroughly. Roll one portion. Roll a portion of your topping into the ball .
 Set the ball in one palm and, using the other hand, pat it out into a3 ¥2-inch round . The ball is a thick tortilla .
 Place round disk over a concha and slide your fingers around the edges of the topping, pressing it lightly around the rim to gently adhere to the bun .
 The topping should not go all the way down to the parchment paper, but be at least about % inch from it .
 Repeat to top the remaining conchas, keeping your hands wet throughout .
 To make a shell pattern, dip aconcha mold into flour into flour to coat and very gently press the mold on the topping from one side to the other in a rolling motion .
 The mold should make a shell-shaped mark on the concha topping . Quiroz makes conchas using special concha molds, which can be purchased online .
 An ordinary dinner knife can also get the job done without breaking through to the dough . They make engraving the traditional seashell shape a breeze .
 If you don’t have aconcha mold, you can make the shape with a dinner knife by dipping it in flour and marking each concha with curves, lines or squares . But avoiding piercing through to the dough, avoid piercing through the dough .
 Cover the conchas with clean kitchen towels and set in a warm, draft-free area of your kitchen until they puff considerably, anywhere from 1% to 2 hours . Set in a cold, draft free area of the kitchen until you puff considerably .
 At this point, the shaped toppings may have spread slightly, opening a bit more into the indented shapes .
About 20 to 22 minutes. Bake conchas until golden brown and even more puffed, about 20-22 minutes .
 Conchas are best the day they are baked, but can be stored in an airtight container for up to 4 days . The airtight containers can be used to store them in a small container .
 Bread flour will yield buns with a more defined and taller round shape, a more doughy and chewy texture, and a slightly less sweet taste .
 Each of the three toppings yields enough to cover full recipe of 15 conchas . If you would like to try multiple flavor profiles, simply divide each topping by two or three .
 Due to the smaller amount, you’ll need to blend the ingredients using a hand mixer or a bowl with a spatula .