 Thesis Advisor: Uwe Hartmann Co-Advisor: Donald Abenheim Approved for public release . Thesis advisor: U We Hartmann.
 States use both conventional and unconventional methods of warfare simultaneously . U.S. uses both conventional, unconventional and unconventional ways of warfare .
 The most effective elements of Ukraine’s response are analyzed in detail, including military, economic, humanitarian, political, political and informational, and special/law enforcement services activities and methods .
 Ukraine should continue to increase its defense potential and raise the quality of life for its citizens . Ukraine should also continue to pursue lawsuits against Russia in international courts .
 NATO and the EU should extend and expand sanctions against Russia, increase resilience, and intensify cooperation in the information, energy, and cybersecurity areas . The EU and NATO should also expand sanctions and increase cooperation with Russia .
 The determinations can also assist other nation-states facing similar challenges in countering adversaries’ ‘help’ while maintaining sovereignty .
1 A MAJOR RESEARCH QUESTION......................................................... 1 C LITERATURE REVIEW .........................................................................4 1.1 C Literature REVIEW .
 Civil-Military Relations .........................................................4 2.2.3.4. 4.3 . 4.4 . 4 . 3.5 . 2.5.2 . 5.5%.
 WHY UKRAINE is so IMPORTant to RUSSIA, the RUSSIAN APPROACH to HYBRID WARFARE in UKRAine .
 Relations with the Russian Empire, 1700–1917, 1700-1917 ........................20 2.2. The Russian Empire was the first time the two nations had met .
 Relations during Soviet Times, 1917-1991. Relations during the Soviet Times.
23 B RUSSIAN USE of HYBRID WARFARE in UKRAINE. 29 1.29 1.23 B.
 Ways, Means, and Consequences. 29.29.
47 A CIVIL-MILITARY RELATIONS in UKRAINE from 1991 to 2013 . 54 1. CIVil-Military RELations in UKraINE after 2014 .
 The Volunteer Movement is a volunteer movement . It is a non-profit organization . It was founded in 2007 .
 CIVIL-MILITARY COOPERATION IN COUNTERING HYBRID WARFARE in UKRAINE . A CREATION of the system of CIVil-Military COOPERation in the UK.
 Activities of Ukrainian CIMIC include activities of the Ukrainian Cimic .
82 1.81 A HOW UKRAINE COUNTERACTS RUSSIAN HYBRID WARFARE. The CASE of UKRAine .........................................81 A How UKraine COUNteracTS R USSIANHYBRIDWARFARE .
 Military Developments ................................................................83 2.3.2.3 . 2.4 . 3.5 . 1.4.5.2 . 4.6 . 3 . 5.5%. 1.5 (2.5) 4.4 (2
 Economic Developments ..............................................................85 3.5% of the world's economic growth in the past year .
Humanitarian Developments. Humanitarian Development: "Humanitarian Development" Humanitarian Development: "We need to help others in the world"
 Political Developments. Political Development: "Political Developments" is a political event .
 Information Developments. Information Developed:   ’s '92 6.92, ‘92, ‘’
 Cyberspace Developments: 7.95, 7.99, 9.95 .
 Diplomatic Developments are a series of events in the Middle East .
105 C POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS. CURRENT APPROACHES to RUSSIAN IRREGULAR AGGRESSION . CURRENTAPPROACHes to R USSIANIRREGULARAGGRESSION.
 NATO has a total of 109 countries. NATO's total of 9,000 members are based in the region .
 Professor Donald Abenheim and Professor Uwe Hartmann. I would like to thank all the professors and staff of the Department of National Security Affairs .
I would like to thank my wife, Marina, and my son, Illia, for their care and patience . In addition, I would also like to thanks his wife and son for their patience .
 The Russian Federation started the armed annexation of a part of the Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula in February 2014 . The Crimean Peninsula is the Crimean Peninsula .
 This event launched the combat phase of Russian hybrid aggression against Ukraine . This event was the first of its kind to take place in Ukraine .
 Moscow established a strategic stranglehold via political, diplomatic, economic, and other types of pressure towards Ukraine . By using propaganda, subterfuge, covert operations, and strategic blackmail measures in the beginning, Moscow set up a strategicstranglehold .
 Russia started direct and irregular combat against Ukraine by supporting paramilitaries, locals, mercenaries, and intermixing Russian military troops and separate military instructors .
 A strategic community is overly fixated on jihadist violence and counterinsurgency operations in the Middle East . Such tactics came, in fact, from an old Soviet and Russian strategic “box of tools,’s”
 In 2019, Ukraine comprises a proxy battlefield on an epic scale in which a semi-frozen conflict/open battle unfolds between Russia and a coalition of Western countries led by the U.S.
 The battle between two geopolitical and ideological systems is a battle between democratic and authoritarian . The two sides are seen as a political battle between the two sides .
 Russia continues to try to separate the coalition of Western countries by the use of so-called hybrid methods . Russia, even under the influence of sanctions, continues to use hybrid methods.
 Russian subterfuge via digital means and links to American political figures in various modalities have spread this conflict from the Donbas and waters of the Sea of Azov to the heart of the United States political system .
 The speed with which the Syrian operation followed the Crimean coup de main included bloody witness to the Russian offensive and the more or less lame response of the Western security structure to this diplomatic and strategic revolution . The speed of the Syrian operations followed the Crimea coup deMain included bloody witnesses
 Vladimir Putin will surely not stop in Ukraine in his bid to revive Russian world power at the expense of the order led by Washington and Berlin .
 His concept of the "Russian world" is a threat to all democratic countries where the Russian-speaking population lives . But not solely those in the Baltic Republics .
 This thesis examines the question of how to retain robust democratic civil-military relations in a time of hybrid warfare . The thesis is based on a study of the relationship between the military and the military .
Research focuses on opportunities for the government and armed forces of Ukraine to effectively resist Russian hybrid warfare . Ukraine is an independent nation state amid a gathering prospect of world war and generalized ideological conflict .
 This thesis will help other nation states being eyed by Moscow and targeted by its doctrine of aggression to prevent and avoid Russian “help’ and keep their sovereignty as well .
 Since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Ukraine has gained independence . The country has gained its own independence .
 As an independent state, Ukraine has proclaimed a pro-European course of development . Ukraine has declared its own independent state as an independent country .
 Russia imposed and continues to leave its imprint on Ukraine’s actions in the international arena . But neighboring Russia continues to left its imprint.
 Russia has always regarded Ukraine within the sphere of its closest interests . Throughout the period of Ukraine’s independence, Russia has influenced the political life of Ukraine .
 Russia did not accept the loss of superpower status and with the coming to power of Putin as president has actively sought to restore this status .
 Russia has been able to restore the economy and regain some of its status as a great power . Thanks to high prices for oil and gas (the main Russian export products) Russia is now able to recover some of the country's power .
 Russia became a member of the G-8 and G-20, but was excluded from these organizations and economic sanctions were imposed against it after the annexation of the Crimea .
 Ukraine crisis is one of the most serious crises in Europe since the end of the Cold War . Ukraine crisis one of most serious since end of Cold War in Europe .
 The system of interstate relations created after World War II was changed by force . The interstate relations were created after the war .
 Ukraine has suddenly become an important research subject for U.S. and European scholars . Ukraine has become a key research subject.
 Scholars have debated whether it was active Western involvement or on the contrary, a weak Western foreign policy that prompted Russian aggression .
 Russia is trying to split the West and force it to sit down at the negotiating table with Moscow . Russia is using lies, denial, propaganda, cyberattacks, and interference in the internal affairs of other countries .
 The Liberal Delusion That Provoked Putin, September/October 2014, is the Foreign Affairs.
Robust civil-military relations during hybrid warfare is becoming one of the key factors for confronting the aggressor . Robust civil military relations is becoming a key factor for confronting aggressor.
 Ukraine's unity of the civilian and military can stop a stronger adversary, writes Peter Bergen . Kyiv did not surrender, but after retreating from the shock, continued its struggle for independence .
 Traditionally, these topics have been considered separately . So, I will also consider these topics separately . I will consider these issues separately .
 The works of Frank Hoffmann and Valerii Gerasimov are examined on the topic of hybrid warfare . Huntington, Samuel Finer, Gordon A Craig, Claude E Welch and Carl von Clausewitz are analyzed .
 Huntington gained recognition as the ‘founder’ of the modern theory of civil-military relations in 1951 . In the wake of the Truman-MacArthur incident in 1951, he gained recognition .
 He adapted the European concept of civil-military relations and outlined his own theory, however flawed, that has become a staple of this field of inquiry . He adapted his own idea, but it has become an important topic of inquiry.
 Huntington says such relationships are based on the professionalism of the officer corps as contrasted to civil society and officer's attitude toward the country's policy .
In a time of objective civilian control, the officer corps remains out of politics, says Huntington . Politicians should be excluded from military issues, he says .
 He clarifies that politics is beyond the scope of military competence . He says participation of military officers in politics undermines their professional competence .
 The actions of the military can exercise a significant influence on state policy, but also on the country as a whole . Germany and the U.S. can consider this issue in both Germany and United States .
 The United States supported coups abroad to bring to power leaders . It is especially notable in the case of the U.S. after it became a world power in 1898 .
 Another scholar of civil-military relations, Samuel E Finer, also does not deny the role of the officer corps .
 Clausewitz's theory about the nature of war pertains to a civil-military codicil . It says less about the Napoleonic era and more about the Cold War and the post-Cold War era .
 The “Trinity of War’s” set of features governing the running of war and relations between those factors .
 As a total phenomenon its dominant tendencies always make war a remarkable trinity . It makes it subject to reason alone, as an instrument of policy .
 These three tendencies are like three different codes of law, deep-rooted in their subject and yet variable in their relationship to one another .
 A theory that ignores any one of them or seeks to fix an arbitrary relationship between them would conflict with reality . For this reason alone it would be totally useless, says author .
 Their influence on the adoption of political decisions should be minimized . Their professionalism must be used to achieve political goals, says John Sutter .
 All authors agree with the assertion that the military is one of the most important layers of society without which the existence of the state would be impossible . All authors agreed that the state is a vital layer of society .
 The military not only protects the state from the external enemy, but also it is one of the most important factors supporting the functionality of the state and political system .
 The relations between the civilian and the military spheres should ideally be in harmony . The military does not interfere in politics and governance of the country while civilians shape the state’s policy, govern the state .
 Hybrid Warfare Clausewitz’s statement that war is “a continuation of political intercourse, carried on with other means’ 21 remains enduringly the case .
 hybrid warfare is seen from a combination of Eastern European and professional U.S. military perspectives .
 The goal is to make this term move toward a truth that is useful on the theoretical and practical planes relative to civil-military relations . The goal, however, is to move toward the truth, according to the author .
 There are numerous definitions of hybrid warfare in the contemporary literature . There are many definitions of hybrids in contemporary literature.
 The term is made current by the revival of irregular warfare and toxic ideological conflict . Soldiers of counterinsurgency have seized the high ground of writing and forming of doctrine .
Stephen Blank: "Russia, Hybrid War and the Evolution of Europe. Irregular warfare favors indirect warfare"
 He points out the complexity of modern warfare when an adversary employs combinations of capabilities to gain an asymmetric advantage . He says an adversary uses combinations of capability to gain a advantage .
 The trends of armed conflicts in the future were identified by General Valerii Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation .
Military actions are augmented by military measures of a hidden nature, including the implementation of information confrontation activities and the activities of special forces . These actions are augmenting military measures, such as information confrontation.
 Gerasimov in his work emphasizes the increased role of asymmetric actions, which can reduce the superiority of the enemy even before the beginning of active hostilities . Gerasimov also emphasizes the increase in asymmetric action .
 He predicts extensive use of special forces and the creation of internal opposition in the territory of an opposing state in order to apply constant pressure on the enemy .
Information confrontation opens wide asymmetric opportunities to reduce enemy’s combat potential, he says . The forms and methods of information impact should be modernized and improved .
 All these forms and methods were used during the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . preparation for this operation began long before 2014 .
Military experts now consider annexation of Crimea as a vivid example of hybrid warfare . The proportion of non-military and military measures was 4:1; that is, four times more non- military measures were employed than military actions .
 13 conduct of information campaigns led under a single plan allowed Putin to annex Crimea . Namely, non-military measures such as political and diplomatic pressure, the creation of political opposition, the activities of opposition forces .
 The question of civil-military relations is particularly pertinent during instability, insecurity, and war. POTENTIAL EXPLANATIONS and HYPOTHESES .
 Russia prefers acting not in the conventional military domain, but primarily focusing on non-military measures . The role of civil-military relations in this CHS is crucial, because Russia prefers not to act in the military domain .
 Russia has changed the 41 Clausewitz, 89. In addition to supporting and supplying the illegal armed groups, Russia has also changed its support for the armed groups .
 Russia's nefarious purpose is establishing internal conflict within Ukraine, conducting the information operations and propaganda campaigns, and destabilizing the country by perpetrating killings and acts of sabotage . From the Cold War to Putin, Russia's main vector of its actions is its nefarious purpose .
 Demonstrative killings of Russian and non-Russian citizens in Ukraine, Great Britain, and other countries should first show the Russians themselves that the current regime will pay for their actions, no matter where they hide from Russian special services .
People of Ukraine should struggle against Ukrainian oligarchs and people who have dragged Ukraine into a war with Russia. Instead of this, the ideology maintains, the people of Ukraine must struggle against the oligarchs .
 Russia's technique is the substitution of concepts, when one stands out for another, says Russian author .
 In these circumstances robust civil-military relations is a key to success in a time of fight against Ukraine’s hybrid neighbor .
 Ukraine’s top priority must be robust civil-military relations that unite the country in order to avoid annihilation of independence . In fact, the Ukrainian state as well.
 The absolute separation of military from political functions is ruled out as impossible to achieve . The military should be involved in political matters as a way to help solve the problems of civil-military relations .
 The key question is how to retain a civilian democratic control in a time of hybrid warfare . How to keep the balance between democratic freedoms and military necessity?
 The military should show the results of its expenditures to society. Correspondingly, the military should be shown the results.
 Ukrainian military has to inform the population about the real current situation to mitigate the influence of Russian propaganda and aspire to dominate in the information sphere .
 CIMIC Teams on the strategic, operational, and tactical levels must be made by CIMIMIC teams . The teams must also be on strategic and operational levels .
This must be carried out while enhancing civil preparedness and societal resilience . This must be done while enhancingcivil preparedness, societal resilience. This must also be done to improve the environment of the world .
 France in 1939–1940 had neither first, nor second and third; they did not prepare for a fight and did not want to fight . As a result France fell.
 The best advice is to keep calm, retain a clear mind, use critical thinking to reject Russian propaganda, and be ready to fight on all fronts . In a time of hybrid warfare, keep calm and keep critical thinking.
 This thesis considers comparative case studies of Crimea and Donbas in Ukraine . In order to prove the hypothesis mentioned earlier in this chapter, this thesis considers Comparative case studies .
Civil-military relations is one of the crucial factors for counteraction in a time of hybrid warfare . Using his own military experience, as well as local and international eyewitness accounts, I try to prove 16 the point that robust civil- military relations are important .
 The work relies on an examination of appropriate literature, open-source documents, as well as media materials in English, Russian and Ukrainian .
 Necessary materials may be taken from the policy documents and institutional reports . Evidence is reinforced by evidence in a variety of NATO, EU, and United States legal documents .
 Ukraine has shown to the entire world that a country with less military potential may not only stop a formidable aggressor, but also zealously fight and not give up . Ukraine has showed to the world that it can be a nation with more military potential .
 The unity of Ukrainian society and the unpredictable resistance of most Ukrainians in Donbas came as a surprise to Russia .
 The Ukrainian military got a clear order from the civilian Supreme Commander . They started to push back the separatists .
 Russia had no other choice but to begin a direct military invasion into Donbas . In this case, Russia had a choice to do so .
 The Russian horde stopped the Russian horde and prevented the collapse of the country .
 The military parade that took place on the main street of Ukraine on August 24, 2018, is an element of this hybrid war as well .
 For four and a half years the army of Ukraine has 44 Heidi Reisinger and Alexander Golts, “NATO’s Response to Hybrid Threats.” The Ukrainian army has been in Ukraine for four years .
 The majority of Ukraine's population is ready to fight against Russia on all fronts . Nevertheless, the fight is continuing .
 The first chapter has introduced the historical background of Russian-Ukrainian relations . It also explained why Ukraine is so important for the Russian Federation .
 The first chapter has also described the Russian use of hybrid warfare in Ukraine . It has provided case studies of Crimea and Donbas .
 Chapter II focuses on civil-military relations in Ukraine during Ukraine’s independence from 1991 to 2013 .
 Chapter IV clarifies what Ukraine has already done to counter Russian hybrid aggression . Chapter 4 clarifies the country's response to Russia's aggression .
 Chapter V provides policy recommendations for Ukraine, NATO, and the EU in the light of counteracting Russian hybrid warfare . Chapter V ties the thesis together, draws overall conclusions, and draws conclusions .
 Ukraine agreed to become a nuclear-free state at the time . Ukraine was the world's third-largest nuclear potential .
 Russia has broken this memorandum 20 years ago, 20 years later, at what it considers a convenient moment .
 The leadership of the Kremlin believes that Ukraine remains a significant part of the ‘Russian world’ and is in the sphere of Russia's most important geopolitical interests .
 Ukraine's desire to be part of the EU absolutely does not match the interests of Russia . Ukraine’s desire to join the European Union absolutely doesn't match Russia's interests .
 Moscow has always been convinced that if it does not control Ukraine, Russia will never become a world-leading state . A democratic and prosperous Ukraine will threaten the authoritarian power in Russia, Moscow says .
 Russo-Ukrainian relations are an important issue in a time of hybrid warfare in Ukraine . The source of the present situation between the two countries has spurred Ukraine’s development of CIVIL-MILITARY relations .
 Understanding this history will give insight into the motivations of one of the world’s leading hybrid threats, and is essential to countering it . Understanding history will help counter hybrid threats .
 Ukraine has protected the southwestern borders of Russia from diverse rivals . An independent Ukraine would have threatened Russia, as it could conduct an independent policy and become a potential ally in the struggle against Russia .
 This chapter explores why Ukraine is so important for the Russian Federation and why the world’s largest country over the centuries has aimed to destroy Ukrainian statehood .
 Ukraine is a regional gateway, a transnational intersection, and a hub of natural and human resources . Ukraine is valuable to Russia and to Russia’s intent to expand its empire .
 This chapter examines how the Russian Federation annexed and, in fact, captured part of Ukrainian territory . The Crimean Peninsula was captured and started hybrid warfare in eastern regions of Ukraine-Donbas .
 This chapter explains the situation in Ukraine and the future prospects of Russian-Ukrainian relations . Finally, this chapter explains how Russia's relationship with Ukraine is changing .
 This section explores historical review of Ukraine-Russia relationship from 18th century to nowadays . This section also explores the relationship between Russia and the UK .
 Ukrainian lands were a regional gateway that linked the Russian and Austro-Hungarian empires . Relations with the Russian Empire, 1700–1917, were between 1700-1917 .
 Eighty percent of the territory of Ukraine was subject to the Russian emperors . The rest of the Hapsburg Empire was inhabited by the Russians .
 The majority of the population of Ukraine at that time consisted of peasants, which allowed Ukrainian landlords who served the Russian Empire a means of control .
 Destruction of Ukrainian statehood in 17th century by Russian tsarism was accompanied by russification of the indigenous population .
 This colonial policy toward the Ukrainian people was carried out 20 both ideologically and administratively . The colonial policy towards Ukrainian people is carried out in 20 countries .
 Tsarist administrators displaced the Ukrainian language from imperial and educational institutions on all levels . The Ukrainian language was displaced by imperial and education institutions .
 At the end of the 19th century, Russia started actively exploiting rich natural resources of Ukraine . The country's natural resources are believed to be worth millions of dollars .
 In Ukraine, heavy industry such as coal, iron, steel, metallurgy, and machine-building began to develop rapidly .
 Donetsk Basin was the main coal base in Ukraine at the beginning of 20th century . Donetsk Basin provided almost 70 percent of the total coal of the Russian Empire .
 Ukrainian industry accounted for 70 percent of the total extraction of raw materials in the Russian Empire . Only 15 percent of finished goods were made in Ukraine .
 This imbalance was the result of Russia's colonial economic policy toward Ukrainian lands and its ruthless exploitation of Ukraine’s natural and human resources . This imbalance is due to Russia's exploitation of Ukrainian lands, says Peter Bergen .
 Russia became the Russian Empire thanks to Ukraine and the access it provided Russia to the Black and Azov seas . Russia became a Russian Empire because of Ukraine's access to the seas .
 Russia has expanded its territory and increased its influence in Europe and the Middle East . This access allowed Russia to expand its territory but also to increase its influence.
 Ukraine's natural and human resources gave the Russian Empire great benefits for further development of heavy industry during the industrial revolution . Ukraine’s natural andhuman resources gave Russia great benefits.
 In November 1917, a revolution took place in Russia and Ukraine, creating a source of natural and human resources . The new Soviet Republic evolved from this revolution .
 Ukraine obtained socialist industrialization and collectivization . Thus, Ukraine obtained socialism.
 Thousands of wealthy peasants in Ukraine were declared “kulaks,” arrested, and sent to Siberia .
 One of the most terrible crimes of the Soviet government in relation to Ukraine was the Holodomor, or artificial famine . The Holidomor was a famine in Ukraine, or a famine .
 Between 3 and 3 million people died in the Holodomor in Ukraine, according to the updated data . Between 3 to 3 million died in Ukraine.
 World War II had a great influence on the whole of humanity, and Ukraine was not an exception . Ukraine was a major part of Ukraine's history .
 For 40 months from June 22, 1941 to October 1944, the war took place in Ukraine .
 When Nazi Germany came to Ukraine, a regime of violence and terror began in the territory of the state .
 During the war years, every sixth inhabitant of Ukraine died . From 1941 to 1944, the deadly wave of war swept through Ukraine twice .
 The whole territory of Ukraine was liberated from the enemy on October 28, 1944 . It took place in several stages .
 In extremely difficult and unfavorable conditions, Ukraine returned to peaceful life . Ukraine has returned to normal life .
 The years of post-war reconstruction of Ukraine’s economy were difficult and debilitating . Soviet leadership implemented a system that concentrated on the reconstruction of industry and the military-industrial complex instead of raising the standard of living of the people .
 After World War II, there was a certain increase in the welfare of the people and in salaries . The welfare of people and salaries were increased after the war .
 As a result, tens of billions of rubles were not used to modernize the national economy as a whole . Instead used on development of military potential .
 The USSR had an equally devastating impact on Ukrainian social institutions, including the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, and Ukrainian newspapers and magazines . The USSR also had a devastating impact.
 The USSR launched a campaign against prominent figures of Ukrainian culture .
 Ukrainians were reminded that they were living in a state that was not interested in developing Ukrainian national culture . Ukrainians were once again reminded that the state was not keen on developing Ukrainian culture .
 It aimed at the unrestricted development of Ukrainian language and culture and the provision of civil rights . It also aimed at unrestricted development.
 The issue of change turned into a question of the life or death for the Soviet system . The question of life and death turned into an issue of life for the system .
 He initiated in the USSR the beginning of the restructuring of society, culminating in the disintegration of the USSR in 1991 . He initiated the start of the Soviet Union in the 1990s .
 There is nothing new in the fact that the real causes of war are rooted not in politics, but in economics .
 The famous Clausewitzian 55 assertion that war is “a continuation of political intercourse, carried on with other means’ 56 is still true, as it is true that politics is a continuation of the economy .
 The causes of wars usually reveal an economic reason, either the seizure of resources or the reduction or destruction of the economic potential of an adversary .
 Leonid Kuchma's 57-year-old book is also the whole process of awareness of Ukraine’s national and mental affiliation .
 The majority of ordinary foreigners perceive Ukraine as part of Russia . Even now, even now, the majority of people see Ukraine as a Russian state .
 It must be said that the initial position of Russia on the global stage after the breakdown of the Soviet Union was greatly superior to Ukraine’s .
 Moscow inherited a seat on the UN Security Council, obtained the Diamond Fund, Gold USSR currency reserves, and avoided claims that it possessed a nuclear weapons arsenal .
 In the early 1990s, other republics were almost deprived of the family of “brother nations’s’. In the late 1990s.
 Russia privatized a significant part of the common historical heritage of the USSR . Russia and Ukraine are “one nation,” and Russia used this argument as well when it annexed Crimea .
 Ukraine depended directly on decisions made in Moscow about the methods and mechanisms of mutual settlements . Ukraine depended on the decisions made by Moscow about how to handle energy supplies .
 After gaining political independence, Ukraine, 57 The President of Ukraine, 1994-2004, is now President .
 Ukraine remained virtually completely dependent on decisions made in Moscow . Until 2014, Ukraine remained largely dependent on Moscow's decisions on nuclear fuel and natural gas .
 It was also dependent on Moscow’s decisions for the loading of transit routes of hydrocarbons .
 This arrangement would ensure stability of the power and gas transmission systems . This arrangement will ensure the stability of power andgas transmission systems.
 The Russian Federation did not hesitate to use Ukrainian dependence on Russian gas to put pressure on Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has been accused of using Russian gas in Ukraine to pressure Ukraine .
 Ukraine exchanged part of its Black Sea Fleet ships for the cancellation of $800 million of its first gas debt to Russia . Russia used the “gas question’ for the first time in September 1993 .
 Russia understood the power of the ‘energy weapon’ and continued to use it as a lever in order to apply political and economic pressure on its opponents . Russia understood it as an energy weapon and used it to pressure opponents .
 Gazprom demanded a solution to the debt problem by transferring a part of the property rights of Ukrainian gas pipelines and enterprises . Gazprom demands a solution by transferring the rights of Ukraine's gas pipelines .
 Gazprom decided to continue supplying gas to Ukraine during negotiations with Russia . On March 10, during the Ukrainian-Russian negotiations, Gazprom continued supplying gas .
 Russia was once again convinced of the effectiveness of its “energy weapon’s’ energy weapon . Russia firmly consolidated it as an element of non-military influence .
 The first war in Chechnya in 1995 temporarily forced Russia to shift its vector of attention from external to internal problems . Russia's focus of attention is now on internal problems rather than external problems .
 Russia has increased its influence since Putin came to power in 1999 . The country is important for Russia, primarily in economic terms .
 Ukrainian Front” (Kyiv, National Institute of Strategic Research, 2017), 229. Ukraine Front’s.
 At the same time, there were constant allegations from the Russian side that Ukraine stole gas from a transit pipe .
 Analysis of Russia’s behavior since 2000 shows that it has continued to consistently utilize economic leverage based in energy as a weapon . Russia's behavior has been analyzed since 2000 .
 The most important and powerful applications of this instrument were the two “gas’ trade wars that Russia waged against Ukraine in 2005–2006 and again in 2008–2009 . Russia waged two ‘gas” trade wars in 2005-2006 and 2008-2009 .
 The first gas conflict against Ukraine started in 2005 and was a clear example that the economy was to be a continuation of politics . The first war against Ukraine began in 2005 .
 Ukraine held presidential elections in 2004, in which Russia supported the pro-Russian presidential candidate Viktor Yanukovych . Russia supported Yanukovych in the election .
 Russian authorities approved an additional agreement for a contract between Gazprom and Naftogaz (the Ukrainian state gas company) for a five-year term lasting until 2009 . Ukraine set for Ukraine a fixed price for Russian gas$50 per thousand cubic meters .
 Yanukovych could obtain benefits for the people of Ukraine on the very sensitive matter of gas . It would show Ukrainians that Yanukovych could get benefits. It would give additional benefits to Yanukovych as president .
 Viktor Yushchenko became the President of Ukraine due to the Orange Revolution . Instead of Yanukovych, he was President of the Ukraine .
New gas routes led to a decrease in the amount of gas transit through Ukraine . These new gas routes lead to a drop in gas transit in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's energy policy started to find ways to get rid of its dependence on Russian gas . At the same time, Ukraine’s energy policy was looking for alternative fuels .
 Ex-advisor to the Russian President for Economic Affairs Andrei Illarionov later called this conflict between Russia and Ukraine “a gas war’s” Russia had used “energy weapons’ against Ukraine, he said .
 Ukraine refused to sign contracts for gas supplies in 2006 . Under such dictation, Ukraine refused the contract .
 The conflict was suspended overnight between January 3 and 4 with the signing of documents that seemed to satisfy both sides . The conflict has been suspended until January 3 .
 The parties succeeded in signing an agreement that ended the practice of barter trade . As a result, these two things began to be considered separately .
 The five-year contract provided gas supplies to Ukraine through an intermediary company, RosUkrEnergo . Russia offered gas to Ukraine at a rate of $95 per 1000 m³ for first half-year .
 This conflict was preceded by a powerful Russian informational campaign. This conflict is preceded by an informational campaign, says the Russian government .
 Russia conveyed to Western states the idea that Ukraine continued 68 Institute of Energy Strategy . Through controlled media (both Russian and Western) Russia conveyed the idea to West states that Ukraine was continuing its energy policy .
 Russia halted the supply of gas to Ukraine from January 1, 2009 . Since January 5, its supply to European customers has decreased .
 transit of gas from Russia through Ukraine was suspended completely after January 7 . After January 7, transport of gas through Ukraine through Ukraine is suspended completely .
 At the same time, representatives of Gazprom cynically blamed Ukraine for blocking gas that was already paid for from reaching European countries .
 The supply of Russian gas was only renewed on January 20, after the relevant contracts were signed in Moscow . The supply was only renewed after the contract was signed by Moscow .
 The attack on Ukrainian interests started in January and was accompanied by a massive outreach program . Similar to three years prior, the attack on Ukraine interests started three years ago .
 The cessation of gas supplies to Ukraine took place according to the same scenario as in 2006 . In 2006, gas supplies were stopped in Ukraine .
 compressor stations that supplied gas to eastern Ukraine were shut down . The population was mostly friendly to Russia and critical of Ukraine’s authorities .
 Russia intended the absence of gas in Ukraine to play the role of a detonator for provoking East–West confrontation and political conflict in Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian government would not provide gas from the western gas storage facilities to the main industrial centers in the East .
 The development of the situation was supposed to provoke, according to the plan of Russian strategists, social protests and unrest in Ukraine .
 In 2009, the Russian Foundation used a “semi-rigid’ or “soft power” scenario in order to subdue Ukraine . The Russian Foundation has been criticized for its use of a ‘soft power' scenario .
This scenario provided for emergency deployment of Russian military contingents to Ukraine . This scenario provided a scenario for emergency deployments to Ukraine.
 Russian mass media broadcast publications on the subject of border revision and statements by Russian politician Konstantin Zatulin .
In 2014, Russia implemented an improved hybrid war scenario, which it had been preparing for in advance . In 2014, in 2014, the Russian government implemented a better war scenario .
 This section clarifies how Russia annexed Crimea and started war on Donbas, the eastern part of Ukraine . This section also clarifies Russia's annexation of Crimea and its war with Ukraine .
 The operation to seize the Crimea was being prepared not for some days, but for several years .
 Russia tried to implement a “peaceful’ invasion for the first time in 2003, when it began to pour an artificial dam from the Russian Kuban in the direction of the Ukrainian territory .
 Channel runs between Tuzla and Crimea and was completely under the control of Ukraine . It is the only channel where the sea is so deep that ships can pass from the Black Sea to Azov Sea .
 The Kerch Strait could prevent the entry of NATO warships into the Azov Sea .
 Ukrainian military aircraft began patrolling over Kerch straits . Ukrainian warships pulled up to the island . On the island a border outpost was immediately established .
 The President of Ukraine, Leonid Kuchma, interrupted his visit to Brazil and personally visited the island . The Ukrainian President was visiting the island for the first time .
 This was a clear signal to Russia that Ukraine was ready to fight for Ukraine’s land . This was the first time Ukraine had been able to take Ukraine's land .
 More than a month after the beginning of the conflict, Russia stopped construction of the dam and negotiations started .
 Russia stopped construction of the dam and Tuzla remained Ukrainian . No other countries’ military ships could pass through the Kerch Strait without Moscow’s consent .
 Russia wanted to share this part of the sea together and got what it wanted . Russia wanted the sea to be a part of its own . Russia wants to share the sea with other countries .
 The Ukrainian political establishment did not enhance Ukraine’s defense and information capabilities, says the U.S. Embassy in Kiev .
 Russia understood that blackmail, insolent lies and intimidation are effective tools to capture what belongs to another country . "They are not there," says Putin .
 The Russian Federation closely followed the new tendencies in the field of military science . Russian Federation followed new trends in military science.
 General Gerasimov describes the Russian vision of modern warfare . He says non-military methods in achieving political goals will significantly increase .
Military measures will start only during the crisis phase of a conflict and only to enhance and support non-military actions . According to Gerasimov, military measures will only start during crisis phase .
 The operation to capture Crimea was planned and carried out in full accordance with this chart . The operation was planned to take Crimea from Crimea .
 Pro-Russian political parties and movements in the southern and eastern parts of Ukraine were created and financed by Russia . Leading officials in Crimea and continental Ukraine were bribed; in 2013, people who had Russian citizenship and worked for Russia were appointed as Ukraine’s Minister
 The Finnish Institute of International Affairs wrote that “Dmitry Solomatin and Pavel Lebedev, Ministers of Defense in 2012–2014, were Russian citizens .
 In addition, it undertook corruption in highand middle-level Ukrainian politics and military . In addition to corruption, it also undertook corruption.
 It also engaged in political warfare and put economic pressure on Ukraine as well . It also put economic pressures on Ukraine and put pressure on Russia .
 Crimea's Russian-speaking population is one of the most powerful destabilizing factors in Crimea . Crimea's population has been the most destabilizing factor in Crimea's stability . Crimea is the region of Russia's Crimea.
 It is their descendants who supported the separation of Crimea from Ukraine in 2014 . It is these people at whom Moscow’s propaganda was aimed at .
 Russia used to influence Ukraine was the Russian Black Sea Fleet based in Crimea . Another form of leverage Russia used was the Russia Black Sea fleet based in the Crimea .
Both Ukraine and Russia ostensibly agreed upon the terms of stay of the Russian fleet in Sevastopol until 2017 . Article 17 of the Constitution of Ukraine prohibits the deployment of any foreign military formations on the territory of the state .
 The deployment of the Russian Federation Black Sea Fleet in Crimea was one of the factors preventing Ukraine from joining NATO . membership is prohibited to states in whose territory the military formations of non-NATO countries are located .
 Russia conducted a powerful propaganda/information operation to discredit Ukraine in the eyes of the international community . Russia also conducted apowerful propaganda/ Information operation to undermine Ukraine .
 Russia imposed sanctions against Ukrainian goods and used other economic levers of pressure on Ukraine . The two Russian-Ukrainian “gas wars” were previously discussed .
 Russian propaganda focused on Ukraine stressed that Ukraine and Russia are two ‘brotherhood nations’ with common Slavic roots, history, values .
 Russian propaganda produced movies, books, newspapers, and magazines in the Russian language in large volumes .
 Before turning to the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014, it is necessary to understand the situation in Ukraine at that time .
 The tent camp was demolished by Ukrainian police units on November 29 to 30, 2013 . The protesters were brutally beaten by police units .
 In response, immense protests began against the authorities in the center of Kyiv . Protesters demanded the resignation of government officials and new presidential and parliamentary elections .
 The confrontation between protesters and the then-current political powers lasted until the end of February 2014, when President Yanukovych of Ukraine fled to Russia .
 Alexander Turchynov, the newly elected Speaker of the Verkhovna Rada, was appointed as the Acting President of Ukraine . The next day, Alexander was elected as the acting President of the Ukraine .
 In Russia the protest was called another ‘color revolution’ and a special operation by the West to shift the legitimate authorities in Ukraine . In Russia it was called a “color revolution,’s call for a change in the Ukrainian government .
In full accordance with Gerasimov’s table, the massive information operation was launched and conducted in order to split Ukrainian society .
 A "normal" population wants to leave everything as is and prevent the seizure of power by neofascists . On the one hand, “nationalists’ were demanding change, on the other hand, a “normal” population wishing to leaveEverything as is .
 Russia successfully chose the time to start an invasion of Crimea . Russia very successfully chose to invade Crimea .
 The new government was just beginning to form. Clashes between supporters of Yanukovych and his opponents continued .
 A viable line of power was absent; at that time, it just did not exist . This absence allowed Russia to deploy its troops to the Crimea .
 Russian troops initiated pro-Russian unrest against the Ukrainian authorities . After negotiations with Crimean politicians, Russian troops started fighting in Ukraine .
 The Simferopol international airport and airport “Belbek’s” were captured . The Council of Ministers, the Parliament of Crimea, and Ukrainian air defense military installations were captured.
 Russian troops without insignias blocked the Ukrainian ground military installations in Crimea . Russian troops also blocked the Crimean naval base of Ukraine in Balaklava Bay .
 They disrupted radio and Internet connections and cut off all lines of communication . They disrupted the internet and radio. They cut off the Internet and disrupted all lines.
 The Russian military further established checkpoints on major roads leading to the Crimean peninsula from the continental Ukraine . The military also established checkpoints.
 The 810th Marine brigade, the 2nd, the 3rd, the 10th, the 16th and the 22nd Brigades of the Special Forces units of the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Russian Federation .
After these activities had been carried out, the Russian Armed Forces controlled the Crimean peninsula .
 The Russian Federation Council authorized the use of the Russian Armed Forces outside of Russia .
 For the same purpose, a so-called Crimean “referendum” was held, which the UN and the absolute majority of the countries of the world did not recognize .
 Vladimir Putin and Military Persuasion in Ukraine, 21 February – 18 March,’s Journal of Slavic Military Studies 27, no. 371 .
 Viktor Yanukovych took from Crimea the Commander of the Navy, Admiral Yuri Ilyin, and appointed him the Chief of the General Staff .
 Crimea did not have a regular commander of the navy until March 1, 2014 . His duties were instead fulfilled by his deputy, Sergei Yeliseyev . The Crimea navy commander's duties were fulfilled by the deputy .
 Chief of Staff, Dmitry Shakuro and Yeliseyev wrote reports requesting their release into the reserve . The pair wrote reports asking for their release .
 Denis Berezovsky betrayed Ukraine the next day . The new Naval Commander was appointed in March .
 It was hard to believe that a neighboring state next to which Ukraine had peacefully lived for 23 years was capable of doing this . It wasHard to believe. It's hard to think that a neighbor state next-to-which Ukraine had peaceful life for 23 Years was capable
 This started with military personnel who were in Crimea and then spread into all Ukraine . This was the first time military personnel had been in Ukraine .
Only representatives of the armed forces and border guards kept tenacious until the end . The Russian military said they did not agree to reconciliation .
 Russian units captured all Ukrainian military units and ships after more than a month's confrontation .
 Disguised as civilians the Russian military stormed the Ukrainian units, acting behind their backs and using them as a living shield .
 Under such conditions, Ukrainians could not open fire in order to prevent civilian casualties . Under such circumstances, the Ukrainians can't open fire under such conditions .
 This huge quantity of traitors was a result of the Russian information operation and political warfare . This huge number of traitor was aresult of the Russia information operation.
 Not one of the traitors believed that Ukraine would exist after the flight of Yanukovych . Not one believed that Yanukovych would be able to leave the country .
 Massive Russian propaganda forced them to abandon their oath and not hold allegiance to Ukraine . Massive, immense Russian propaganda.
 In the very beginning of the operation, Russia denied that its troops had participated in Crimea seizure .
 Putin completely denied the possible entry of Russian troops into the territory of Crimea . Putin, answering questions from Russian journalists on December 19, 2013, completely denied possible entry to Crimea .
 Putin acknowledged that “behind the back of the self-defense forces of Crimea stood Russian servicemen,’ he said in April 2014 .
 The Russian president has not faced any punishment for his lies . In short, he lied to the world, and he has thus far not been punished for his lie .
Russia used both conventional and unconventional methods of warfare simultaneously . Russia used both traditional and unconventional ways of warfare .
 It also conducted information and military operations, which were conducted under the same leadership and in 96 “How We Lost Crimea’s’S Crimea.’
 It also made active use of paramilitary groups, Cossacks, proxies, and local residents . Ukrainian military units were captured by Ukrainian forces .
 The international community was faced with plausible deniability at the highest political level . In addition, the international community, for the first time, was facing plausible deniable deniability .
 The West was not ready for Russian “knowhow’s” for which the West wasn't ready . The plausible deniability turned out to be Russian ‘knowhow.’
 Ukrainian General Staff developed a military operation to keep the Crimean Isthmus and take control of the bigger, steppe part of Crimea .
 It was a chance not to spread the gangrene of separatism in the Crimea. It was not a chance to spread separatism.
 Russia, inspired by its Crimean success, began to conduct operations under the same scenario in the southern and eastern parts of continental Ukraine . Russia's success in the Crimea was inspired by the Crimean success .
 Ukrainian authorities acted as rigidly, harshly, and decisively as in 2003 on Tuzla . Further victims could perhaps be avoided if during the seizure of Crimea the Ukraine authorities acted rigidly .
 Ukraine faced the question of its own existence as an independent state after the seizure of Crimea .
 Ukrainian soldiers and officers in Crimea remained loyal to their oaths more than a month . They hid in many ways the prevailing forces of the enemy and gave Ukraine time to prepare for Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 The Testimony of Senior Officials of Ukraine. 39 actions took place in the east and south of Ukraine, with the support of Russian Special Forces .
 Igor Girkin, a former KGB/FSB officer also known as “Strelkov’, captured the small town of Sloviansk . On April 6, 2014, as in Crimea, the Russian proxy captured the building of the Donetsk Regional State Administration .
 This day can be identified as the beginning of the Russian aggression on Donbas . This day is the first day of Russia's aggression on the Donbas.
 Russia tried to establish a new state, Novorossia, in southeastern Ukraine . Following these events, Russia attempted to establish the new state .
 Russia repeated the Crimean scenario with a “referendum’ to join these territories to Russia as well . In the realm of political leverage, Russia repeated a ‘refere referendum’ in the Crimea .
 On May 11, 2014, in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions controlled by separatists, such “referendums’ were held . In May 2014, the region was controlled by rebels .
 Russia tried to use these referendums to legitimize the “will of the people of Donbas’s people. To put it differently, Russia attempted to use them to legitimized the ‘will’ of people of donbas . Russia also tried to
 Russia sent reconnaissance and sabotage groups headed by officers of the Main Intelligence Directorate of the Russian Federation . Under the pretext of those “referendums’ and for the maintenance of DNR and LNR, Russia sentonnaissance and sabotage Groups .
 The escalation of the conflict in the east of Ukraine began in mid-April 2014 . Armed groups of pro-Russian activists, paramilitary formations of the Russian Cossacks, the notorious Chechen battalion “East,” and armed groups of mercenaries began to seize administrative buildings.
 In Kharkiv and Odessa, it was possible to prevent separatists from seizing power . It was also possible to stop separatists from taking control of the country .
 These groups attacked the Ukrainian Land Forces troops and aircraft of the Air Forces of Ukraine . In addition, these groups also attacked the Ukraine Land Forces forces .
 The National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine declared the beginning of a large-scale Anti-Terrorist Operation on April 13, 2014 . The Armed Forces of Ukraine have been involved in the operation .
 Russia wanted to shoot down the Russian plane Aeroflot . The plane was on the flight AFL-2074, Moscow-Larnaca .
 The Russian plan was to accuse Ukraine of this catastrophe and, in order to protect the Russian population living in Ukraine, to start a full-scale invasion of Ukraine . The Russian plans were to accuse the Ukraine of a catastrophe and to protect its population .
 When Ukraine started this ATO, the armed forces felt the whole power of Russian hybrid warfare . The ATO was the first of its kind .
 The units of the Ukrainian Army sent to participate in the ATO became a target for hybrid tactics .
 Ukrainian military forced Ukrainian military to hand over their weapons . They took over military vehicles and forced the government to hand them over .
 Russian artillery fire from the territory of the Russian Federation was unleashed on the Ukrainian positions . There were cases when information about the location of these army units was handed over to the separatists .
 There were also cases of local residents poisoning Ukrainian servicemen’s food .
 The group of locals established mass meetings and protests against the location of Ukrainian Army units near local towns and populated areas . They arranged to sabotage Ukrainian checkpoints .
 Protection of ethnic Russians has been a central justification for Russian invasions of Georgia and Ukraine . Russia has invaded Georgia, Ukraine and Georgia in recent years .
 Russia used Russian ethnic groups in the Crimea and Donbas in order to obtain support from the local population and legitimize the Russian invasion in Ukraine . Russia used the ethnic groups to get support from local population to legitimize its invasion .
 The Russian-speaking population living in Ukraine, particularly in Crimea and the Donbas region, is considered an ethnic minority .
 Donbas was one of the regions of Ukraine where in 1932–1933 the Holodomor occurred . In 1932-1933 it was a massive physical destruction of Ukrainian farmers by artificial famine .
 In place of Ukrainians who died in Russia, 3 to 5 million were relocated into the Donbas . Ukrainians died from 3 to5 million by different estimates .
 In three generations, these people would support the appeals of the Russian Federation to withdraw from Ukraine and join these territories to Russia .
 On May 25, 2014, an all-Ukrainian referendum was held, and Petro Poroshenko was elected the new President of Ukraine . The referendum took place in May 2014 .
 The next phase of the ATO began on July 11, 2014 . Russian troops began participating in the war, inflicting a rocket strike on Ukrainian troops from Russian territory .
 The entire line of Ukrainian formations near the border, from the Luhansk region to the Azov Sea coast, was under systematic artillery shelling .
 Ukraine could not respond to this shelling because Russia would have immediately blamed the Ukrainian side for unleashing a war, thereby giving Russia an occasion for moving its troops into the territory of Ukraine . Ukraine could no longer respond to the shelling .
 As a result, Ukraine lost control of part of the eastern Russian–Ukrainian state border .
 Various sources indicate that on the night of August 23 to August 24, approximately four BTGs invaded the Lugansk region, and four more BTGs in the Donetsk direction . The Lugansk area is in the eastern part of Ukraine .
 Fierce battles began between the regular units of the Armed Forces of Russia and the armed forces of Ukraine .
 Ukrainian forces captured Russian officers and soldiers, as well as the latest versions of Russian military equipment and weapons .
 Donbass has been in a position war since the autumn and winter of 2015 . The region has seen more active fighting in the past two years .
 Every day in the media there were reports of skirmishes, bombardments, injuries, and deaths .
 Russia invaded Ukraine to support separatists and restore its control over Donbas territories . When the situation became dangerous, Russia started a conventional military operation and invaded Ukraine .
 Five years after the war’s onset, the situation is more or less the same as in 2015 . The situation in Ukraine is more than the same.
 President of Ukraine signed the Law of Ukraine on February 23, 2018 . The law also referred to as the “law of the de-occupation’ of Donbas .
 According to this law, the ATO in Donbas is over and the Joint Forces Operation has begun . The Joint Forces operation has begun.
 The main tasks of this operation are the implementation of measures to ensure national security and defense, the rebuff and deterrence of armed aggression of the Russian 43 Federation .
 Russia has been forced to sit down at the negotiation table due to the resistance of the Ukrainian Armed Forces . Western countries condemned Russia’s aggression and their intensified application of sanctions against Russia .
 The Ukrainian side is preparing to repulse full-scale aggression by the Russian-terrorist forces . The Ukrainian government has been accused of using Russian forces to attack Ukraine .
 The Head of the General Staff points out that nowadays the total number of Russian and separatist troops in the occupied territories is about 32,000 .
 Russian military columns carry tangible goods into occupied territories . There, Russians are increasing their material stocks as they move into occupied territory .
 The 8th Russian Joint Army is controlled and headed by the 8th Russia Joint Army . They are regular Russian military units that are controlled by the Russian military.
 Russia continues its aggression and provocations toward Ukraine . On November 25, 2018, Russian ships and aircrafts opened fire on ships of the naval forces of Ukraine in the neutral waters of the Black Sea .
 Onboard the Ukrainian ships were 24 officers and sailors, six of them were injured, three severely . On board the Ukrainian vessels were 24 officer and sailors .
 Ukraine has indisputable evidence that this happened in neutral waters and not in the territorial waters of Russia . Ukraine has evidence that it happened inneutral waters .
 martial law declared for 30 days in ten regions of Ukraine on November 28 . In response to this act of undisguised aggression against Ukraine, martial law was declared for30 days in 10 regions .
 Ukraine, as a regional gateway, a transnational intersection, and a hub of natural and human resources, always has and will continue to be a target for Russia . Ukraine has been a target of Russia for years .
 Russia must either capture or control Ukraine. In order to be an empire and a great power, Russia musteither capture and control Ukraine .
 Russian rulers have imposed on Ukraine the Russian language and culture and other “Russian values,’s ‘Russian values’ and have attempted to break the unity of Ukrainian society as well . All Russian leaders have understood this fact.
 The historical importance of Ukraine for the Russian Federation is hard to overestimate . Ukraine is a key part of Russia's history .
 Ukraine has given Russia billions of tons of natural resources but also outstanding human resources . Many great scholars, inventors, sportsmen, engineers, writers, and cultural and art workers who have lived and worked in Russia were from Ukraine .
 Russia has been continuing its policy of destroying Ukraine as an independent actor of geopolitics . Even Siberian oil and gas fields were discovered and developed mostly by Ukrainian oil andgas specialists .
 The main aim of these hybrid actors is to destroy the civil-military unity of Ukrainian society, and control Ukraine directly or through pro-Russian politics .
 Ukraine, in turn, must rely on its own forces and continue to persuade European countries and the United States of the necessity for more rigorous sanctions against Russia .
 leadership in Ukraine understands that Ukraine should not only rely on its own forces, but also strengthen domestic civil-military relations .
 The next chapter describes civil-military relations in Ukraine before and after 2014, when hybrid warfare in Ukraine began . It is crucial for the defense against hybrid attacks, according to the next chapter .
 The next chapter also demonstrates how a volunteer movement became one of the cornerstones of the struggle against Russian hybrid warfare and enhanced cohesion between the Ukrainian state and its society .
 This chapter provides information about civil-military relations in Ukraine . It has become a key component of the Ukrainian response to Russian hybrid warfare .
 The first part of this chapter explains the civil-military relations in Ukraine from the time when Ukraine became an independent state in 1991 to the Revolution of Dignity in 2013 .
 The second part provides information about the civil-military relations in Ukraine after 2014 . War against the Russian Federation started in 2014, when war against the Russians started, until 2019 .
 Ukraine’s strong volunteer movement and the robust civil-military resilience of Ukraine's society became the unpredictable factor for Moscow . Moscow broke Russia's plans to subdue Ukraine, but Ukraine's volunteer movement became a factor .
 Ukraine began to form its own new state institutions in 1991 from the recently vanished USSR . After independence in 1991, Ukraine started to build its own state institutions and to build with the Soviet legacy .
 Civil and military institutions stood at the center of this process of reform, as Ukraine had to build its own national armed forces .
 Ukraine had to redefine its entire security and defense sector . Given the history of the soldier and party in the USSR, the country had to change its security sector .
 In the process, the government and society with it had to create effective mechanisms, as in the Western democracies, that would enable the security and defense forces to operate within the constitutional and international systems of a new independent nation state in Eastern Europe .
 The history of civil-military relations in the USSR was the origin of CMR in post-independence Ukraine . CMR was formed in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
Politruks appeared when the government did not trust its army and was therefore afraid of rebellion, betrayal, or desertion . Politruks were afraid to trust the army.
 A politruk was an officer assigned to a military unit by the government . His task was to ensure loyalty and execution of orders .
 Only “flawless’ revolutionaries could be appointed as military commissars . Those able in the most difficult circumstances to remain the embodiment of Soviet duty .
After independence in 1991, Ukraine had to re-build its CMR . It could not fundamentally change the system that existed for more than 70 years .
 The issue of CMR in the first years of Ukraine’s independence was not as acute as the re-foundation of the state and the economy .
 After the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, Ukrainian system of management and operation of enterprises and state institutions required a new foundation and fundamental reforms to adjust to the market . After 1989, the country needed to adjust its market and management system .
 There was no military housing for them and few resources to build such housing. First and foremost, there was nomilitary housing for the military .
 During the formation of the Ukrainian state, state authorities distanced themselves from these pressing problems of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, a process that had huge negative consequences .
 Salaries remained unpaid for months due to lack of funding . Military equipment gradually deteriorated and became obsolete . Military infrastructure deteriorated and was sold, destroyed, or stolen in the process of privatization .
 Many Ukrainians believe the military's sense of honor in serving one’s Motherland. These ills discredited military service in the eyes of many Ukrainians .
 This chaos caused spiritual, social, and moral deprivation in Ukraine’s new socio-political conditions .
 The Ministry of Defense of Ukraine and the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were formed in 1992 . The state undertook a markedly simplified combat training system of units and formations of the army .
 A Western model, if not yet a NATO model, had become desirable in the first half of the 1990s . The question arose about the model of the construction and functioning of CMR in Ukraine .
 The main idea of these reforms was to ensure democratic control by the elected bodies of political power over the components of the security and defense sector . The main goal of the reforms is to ensure democracy in the security sector .
 The so-called “ United States American’ and “Federal German’ variants of CMR were studied by the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian government chose the choice of the Ukrainian CMR development option .
 Neither the Russian nor the Chinese models held any appeal for those in a position of responsibility in Ukraine in the 1990s . Neither Russian nor Chinese models hold any appeal.
 The Politics of International Socialization after the Cold War . 367. 49 democratic culture; at the same time, they differ significantly as a result of different military and political experiences .
 The President is the commander-in-chief, while the Congress has the right to approve the military budget . Congress must require a report from senior military officials on the state of affairs in the armed forces .
Under this system, political rights and freedoms of service members are under significant legal constraints . The Secretary and deputies are usually civilians, who exercises direct political control of the troops .
 The German version of CMR is different, with the role of parliament being uppermost in response to the constitutional errors of the German and Prussian past, by the crown and later by the Fuehrer .
 Germany established a special office of the authorized Bundestag on defense for the protection of service members’ fundamental rights . The office also exercised parliamentary control in exercising parliamentary control of the parliament .
 The Commissioner is elected for a term of five years by the parliament, which is beholden only to him or her .
 The Minister of Defense is a civilian and member of the federal cabinet . The Minister’s deputies and other military leaders are professional service members and defense civilians .
 They are guaranteed equal rights with civilians, including the right to join political parties . It is prohibited to agitate in the party’s interests while in the service . They are also guaranteed right to participate in political events during non-working time .
 Agitation, political speeches, distribution of printed materials, and the combination of service with deputy activity are not allowed . Agitation and political speeches are also banned .
 The questions of the CMR in Ukraine were of interest of foreign scholars as well . The discussion about which model is better for Ukraine was not only for Ukrainians specialists .
Foreign scholars analyzed problems of the formation of CMR in Ukraine in its first years of independence .
 Civil-political institutions in Ukraine were relatively stable, while their level of political culture was low . Civil- political institutions in the country were relativelystable, while political culture is low .
 Most civil servants in the government and other power structures lacked the experience of managing an independent nation state . Most of the civil servants lack the experience.
 The question of the division of power between the three branches of the state was not established and ingrained as it is in the U.S. or Western Europe . The question is not established in the United States and Western Europe.
 Military institutions in Ukraine were also weak for reasons similar to those that explain the weakness of its civilian institutions . Military institutions also weak in Ukraine for reasons that explain its weakness .
 Both Ukrainian civilian structures and the Ukrainian Armed Forces were new government bodies that have been in the process of development since 1991 . The Ukrainian military has been in a process of developing its own civilian structures .
 Analysts assessed the effectiveness of democratic civilian control of the military in Ukraine . It is necessary to identify the type and scope of formal civilian control over the military .
 Regulatory requirements for its provision at that time sounded like a political wish .
 In 2003, the Law of Ukraine was adopted to resolve the problem of Ukrainian CMR on the legislative level .
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine are entrusted with the defense of Ukraine, the Constitution of Ukraine says . The armed forces failed to do so in the face of the Russian irregular offensive, the author says .
 This section describes what happened in a framework of civil-military relations after Revolution of Dignity in Ukraine . This section includes what happened after the Ukrainian revolution .
Volunteers in Ukraine prevented Russia from dividing Ukraine and destroying it as a separate subject of geopolitics . The volunteer movement in Ukraine was one of the main factors in 2013–2014 that prevented Russia dividing Ukraine .
 This levée en masse is a revival of the partisan ideal of menand women-atarms . It is a significant part of political culture in central, eastern, and northern Europe .
 The heritage of the levée en masse and other paramilitary responses to armed crisis found little attention among political scientists . CMR literature is poorly examined in much of the C MR literature .
 A more comprehensive species of civil response has emerged after the Revolution of Dignity . It is not only in Kyiv but also in other cities of Ukraine, it is also in Ukraine .
 The protesters brought the necessary materials to the protesters and even died in the fighting of the EuroMaidan for European ideals . They brought the needed materials to protesters .
 Representatives of volunteer associations during EuroMaidan accumulated such resources as food, medicine and household items .
 The protesters also personally performed social work, offering educational, medical, and other information to the protesters . They also personally perform social work .
 Information technologies helped to create a new quality of communication between like-minded people and reduce the time for volunteer projects to be brought to the level of their practical implementation .
 The volunteer movement in Ukraine continued when Russia annexed Crimea in February 2014 . Bypassing bureaucratic procedures saved time, which positively influenced the quality of volunteer services .
 The local concerned civilians of Crimea began to help Ukrainian servicemen who were blocked in their military installations by Russian military units .
 The range of assistance was very diverse, from providing batteries, food, and drinking water to collecting money for family members .
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine, not for the first time since their existence, understood that they were indeed part of the people . This relationship provided additional forces and motivation to Ukrainian soldiers .
 The cities of Kharkiv and Dnipro remained under the control of Kyiv and did not turn into “quasi-republics’ as happened with Donetsk and Lugansk . The cities were due to the rigid pro-Ukrainian position of engaged civil
 Many settlements in southeastern Ukraine are now free from Russian military presence and war . Odessa, Kharkiv, Dnipro, and many other settlements in Ukraine are free from Russia .
 The volunteer movement made the most effective contribution to strengthening the state’s defense capabilities . The state slowly provisioned the power units, even while lacking basic security systems, uniforms, and foodstuffs .
Volunteers are helping both security forces and civilians affected by hostilities . In a matter of months, volunteer initiatives had turned into powerful organizations . Their activities were aimed at providing almost the entire spectrum of needs of both security and civilians .
 Concerned people in Ukraine and abroad supported the call for their collection formed in social networks by volunteer groups .
 The Ukrainian diaspora sends money transfers, medical preparations, clothes, household goods, among other necessities to Ukraine to give tangible support to volunteer movement .
 In many countries where Ukrainians form a united diasporic cell, local volunteer organizations carry out numerous community actions in support of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 At the same time, they created their own teams and joined volunteer battalions . They provided medical care in front-line hospitals and provided them with the necessary equipment .
 The volunteer physicians carried out their functions during the fighting to establish a stable medical service .
 The psychosocial service organized in the time of EuroMaidan was transformed into a Psychological Crisis Service . It dealt with the wounded and the families of the dead .
 Individual groups of volunteer psychologists have been constantly in the ATO area . They conduct psychological training with Ukrainian military personnel and deal with rehabilitation of victims .
Ukrainian citizens use computer technology in volunteering . It is also important to note the significant contribution of Ukrainian citizens .
 During the course of EuroMaidan, they created sites that provided information support to the participants . They also helped to coordinate joint protest actions .
 Human rights activities of volunteers were mainly aimed at protecting the rights of those people who fell into difficult life situations .
 volunteer lawyers monitored and tried to counteract the illegal actions of the Russia-backed Ukrainian authorities during EuroMaidan .
Currently, they help internally displaced persons to arrange the necessary documents . Currently, they are helping internally displaced people to arrange documents .
 They are part of the negotiating groups that deal with the release of hostages and mitigate their conditions of detention . They are also part of a negotiating group that deals with hostages' release and mitigate conditions.
 One of the successful methods of volunteer assistance to the security forces is to provide targeted assistance to their separate/individual units . The security forces have been using this method to assist with their own units .
 The volunteer movement in some regions of Ukraine has its own characteristic features . They are service members of the operational reserve and assist the Ukrainian Army in various areas . They work as instructors in different disciplines, including tactical medicine .
Local businessmen have created a Foundation, “World and Order,’ which began to coordinate the activities of volunteers and Kharkiv's regional authorities .
 Volunteers nominated by the foundation became advisors to the head of Kharkiv’s state administration . They take care of the problems of the army, refugees, and wounded .
 The businesses took on responsibility and created an important dialogue platform for volunteer organizations and government structures . While this and other volunteer initiatives are often very effective, they sometimes lack a clear interaction with the state authorities .
 The Volunteer Council in the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine is helped by the Minister of Defense to rebuild the Ministry .
Volunteers have made the work of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine more open and effective . Volunteer organizations have helped improve the material support of troops .
 Representatives of volunteer organizations have received positions in the Department of Public Procurement and Supply of Material Resources of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine and other supply services .
 In 2014, there were no such initiatives, and weak and ineffective CMR was one of the reasons for war in Ukraine . There were no initiatives to build a New Civil-Military Relations in Ukraine.
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine has been in decline since 2010, and its power potential was decreased artificially . Since 2010, the armed forces of Ukraine have been in declining, according to the military .
 In 2018, a new law “About the National Security of Ukraine’s’ was adopted . The law was adopted in 2018 .
 The law took into account the experience of the latest hybrid war with Russia . Three existing laws of Ukraine were annulled .
 citizens of Ukraine participate in the implementation of civilian control through public associations of which they are members and through deputies of local councils .
 The Commissioner of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine on human rights or state bodies in accordance with the procedure established by the Constitution of Ukraine and other laws .
 The media ought to systematically inform the society about the activity of the security and defense sector of Ukraine . The media should also be aware of the validity of decisions of state bodies on issues of national security.
In order to inform society periodically, actors of the security and defense sector publish ‘White books’ or other analytical documents . Not less than once every three years, they publish “White books,’s reviews, national reports, etc.
 Currently, a new system of CMR and civil democratic control is being created in Ukraine . Currently, the new system is being developed in Ukraine.
 The main idea of the new civilian democratic control is not just controlling the actors of the defense and security sector . But strengthening parliamentary control over the Armed Forces of Ukraine, implementing the defense programs, and procuring in the sector of security and defense .
 Civilian democratic control is the transformation of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine into a civilian office . Professional service members are involved in the planning and management of the armed forces .
 The armed forces are responsible for the security of their country . Realizing this initiative will only be possible if a conscious civil society understands that it does not just elect a deputy in elections but take part in the life of the armed forces .
 The media will formulate requests for officials, based on the needs of civil society, for this information . The role of the volunteers is very important in this process .
 They are one of the main engines of this reform and a vivid example of the possibility of change . They are a vivid examples of the possible change in the country .
 weak CMR allowed Russian forces to annex the peninsula due to weak political leadership . The lack or sometimes absence of coordination and cooperation between the civil and military spheres can reduce the ability to resist Russian hybrid aggression .
 The military units of CIMIC of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were created . They were created to build and retain robust CMR in new conditions .
 Representatives of the Ukrainian CIMIC represent the position of the armed forces at diverse meetings with civilians on different levels . The next chapter discusses in more detail .
 The previous chapter described the creation of new systems of CMR and civil democratic control in Ukraine .
 The chapter begins with a discussion of different CIMIC approaches . It then examines the participation of CIM IC Teams in counterpropaganda and information operations .
 CIMIC Teams are focused on civil population . Unlike military intelligence, they focus on military adversaries’ capabilities .
 At the same time, some countries have developed their own national CIMIC concepts . Some countries have created their own concepts .
 Germany is focusing more on domestic CIMIC operations and suggests civil-military cooperation during cases of emergency triggered by natural disasters in the country .
 Civil-military operations are the activities of a commander performed by designated civil affairs or other military forces . Military operations are conducted by designated military forces that establish, maintain, influence, or exploit relationships with indigenous populations .
 The United States military states that civil-military interaction is vital to achieve the goals of military operations . CMO is essential to coordinate the integration of military and nonmilitary instruments of national power .
 Speaking in military language, they belong to the strategic, operational, and tactical levels, respectively . They belong to both strategic and operational levels .
 Civil-military relations are about civil democratic control of the military . These are relations on a high political level between civil and military decision makers .
Civil-military interactions encompass broad interaction between the civil and military spheres during military operations . Civil-military interaction encompass broad interactions between the military and civil spheres during operations .
 NATO introduced a new concept in 2014 underscoring the significance of the civilian aspect in all types of military operations . The concept was introduced by NATO in 2014 to highlight the importance of civilian operations .
 The experience of hybrid war in the eastern part of Ukraine shows that if a military formation wants to control the territory, its personnel should be involved in the process of restoring the normal working procedures of public administrations .
 The vital functions of life for the local population in Ukrainian territories liberated from separatists require mechanized and armored units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other military formations .
 Ukrainian CIMIC is working in its home territory in a time of combat actions . CIM IC is usually employed abroad in peacekeeping missions .
 CIMIC teams aim to establish liaison, avoid tensions between military and civilians, and conduct reconstruction projects . The main tasks are to establish a framework of “traditional’s” CIM IC teams .
 Ukrainian CIMIC teams do the same, but they make many additional missions . Ukrainian C IMIC teams make many more missions .
 There are coordination and participation in humanitarian demining, negotiations with separatists about local cease-fire agreements, as well as repairing electricity lines and water stations .
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine and other Ukrainian military formations participate in exchange of captive servicemen and bodies of persons killed in action, search and delivery to the burial place of killed soldiers and officers .
 CIMIC teams continuously search the sources and identity resources to help the affected local population . The military and civilians are involved in the interaction between the military, civilians .
 Ukrainian CIMIC is the “latest version’s’ latest version of CIM IC . It combines different approaches from different states and combines different CIMIMIC approaches .
 CIMIC Teams in Ukraine working in a time of hybrid warfare use a dynamically developing system that draws on the latest experiences of Western countries in the C IMIC domain . CIM IC teams in Ukraine use a dynamic developing system to create new forms and methods .
 Ukrainian CIMIC Teams can operate in uncertainty and ambiguity . They are very flexible, ready for unpredictable measures by rivals, and often act preemptively .
 The rebirth of the Ukrainian Army has given CIMIC the chance to be not only a military tool but also a mechanism that in a time of hybrid warfare can show tremendous results in the realm of interaction and cooperation between the civil and military spheres .
 These actions give military commanders an opportunity to focus on military issues and focus on planning and executing combat actions . The actions give commanders at operational and tactical levels an opportunity for them to concentrate on planning.
 All these CIMIC activities allow the citizens of Ukraine to know more about the real situation in Donbas, Ukraine .
 In the context of hybrid warfighting, the peaceful settlement of the armed conflict in the east of Ukraine becomes a long-term task, both politically and economically .
 As of 2019, Ukrainian CIMIC is successfully working on the lowest level, but also on the middle (civilmilitary interactions) and highest levels . It provides a strong connection between military commanders and high-level civil decision makers .
In order to work more productive, civilian decision makers at different levels must have special knowledge and education . That said, in order to be productive, military decision makers must havespecial knowledge, education .
 CIMIC participates in Counterpropaganda/Information operations . They should know and understand that fighting in hybrid conditions means fighting is not only on the battlefield but also in heads and brains . Civil preparedness and social resilience must be in Ukrainian hearts and minds .
 CIMIC units should plan and conduct or participate in counterpropaganda and information operations . Before 2014, no C IMIC doctrine in any country indicated that CIM IC units should conduct or participated in counter Propaganda and Information Operations .
 Ukraine continues to collect and disseminate, in real-time, facts and evidence of Russian hybrid and illegal activities in foreign territories . CIMIC Teams are playing a significant role in this process .
 CIMIC Teams are recording the results of shelling by Russian troops in areas where civilians live as evidence of the violation of the Geneva Convention by Russians . CIMIMIC teams are recording results of the shelling by Russians.
 Russian crimes in order to use it against Russia in the International Court of Justice in The Hague . This information is attached to other information about Russian crimes .
 The initial denial by Russian chief commanders of the presence of Russian soldiers in Crimea allowed Russia to gain time to take over strategic positions in Crimea .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has repeatedly denied that the ‘men in green’ were part of the Russian Armed Forces . Putin has insisted they were groups of a local militia who had obtained their weapons from Ukrainians .
 Most locals agreed that Putin lied and he would surely lie again . As a result of these discussions, most locals agreed Putin lied .
 One of these myths was the crucifixion of a small boy in the town of Sloviansk. One of the myths was that a boy had been crucified .
 Russian journalists wrote that the Ukrainian government promised every Ukrainian soldier and officer two slaves from the local Donbas population . Ukrainian military were mailing to their relatives severed heads of the local people of Donbas . CIMIC Teams provided modern Ukrainian newspapers and magazines to the people in the Donbas area
 Ukrainians organized broadcasting of Ukrainian radio in order to give people an alternative source of information . In addition, they organized broadcasting.
 CIMIC Teams are focused on Russian speakers in Donbas . They aim to persuade them that the Ukrainian military are not the invaders and horrible people .
 CIMIC Teams in Ukraine have provided food and first aid for old and disabled people who live in a zone of conflict . The Ukrainian warriors have fought and died during this hybrid warfare .
 CIMIC teams delivered items to military units (camouflage nets, medicine, clothes, and other things from the civil population of Ukraine. They brought them fresh Ukrainian newspapers and letters from Ukrainian children .
Soldiers have felt the support of the Ukrainian nation and increased their motivation to fight . Those letters have played a very significant role for soldiers .
 Another unpleasant but very important task of CIMIC Teams is the task of the Mortuary Affairs Team . Another unpleasant task is the job of C IMIC Teams .
 CIMIC Teams transported from the ATO area 1,464 bodies of the killed military servicemen of the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 Russia still denies its participation of Russian soldiers and officers in the war in Ukraine . Thousands of Russian dead military men are buried by Russia as unknown people .
 Ukraine officially declares its losses, and the dead soldiers have been buried with all military honors . By contrast, Ukraine officially declared its losses and buried its dead soldiers with all honors .
 The group has conducted counterpropaganda and information operations in very tumultuous times and areas of the country . They have conducted counter Propaganda and Information operations in the past .
CIMIC CIMIC’s work to assist the civilian population since spring 2014 to winter 2019 has led to tremendous results . The Current Achievements and Future Perspectives of Ukrainian CIMIMIC are the current achievements and future Perspectives .
 CIMIC will integrate a system of prevention of losses among civilians . In addition, as part of civil-military relations, CIMic will integrate system of Prevention of Loss .
 CIMIC Teams continue to work actively with military-civilian administrations and units of the State Border, National Guard . CIMIMIC teams also work actively to optimize the structure of checkpoints and crossing points .
 The effectiveness of the military Operation of Joint Forces in Donbas directly correlates with efficiency, says the author . The effectiveness. of the operation directly correlates to efficiency .
 The operation has had to be conducted extremely efficiently and effectively . Taking into account that Donbas is highly populated, in order to preclude plentiful civil casualties, this complex operation has been carried out extremely efficiently, effectively .
 Future urban military operations, as the historical record supports, will not just be about urban combat . Future military operations will be more focused on urban combat.
 civilian population is integral to the urban environment . Urban combat must be closely and effectively coordinated and synchronized with political policy .
 The success of the military operation in Donbas considerably depends on particular processes, one of which is the facilitation of the local civilian population of Donbas, as well as civil society in Ukraine on the whole .
 CIMIC in Ukraine is one of best examples of robust CMR in a time of hybrid aggression . CIM IC in Ukraine was one of the best examples.
Civilians are informed about actions of all members of the security sector via traditional and new media . Civilians must act ahead of time without allowing the enemy to impose its initiative .
 Several Ukrainian generals periodically inform society about the current situation in the Donbas region and other parts of Ukraine .
 Russia will continue using propaganda, forgeries, disinformation, and numberless agents of influence, conventional and unconventional military power in order to win this war . Russia will still use propaganda and forgeries to win the war .
 CIMIC is to unite the people and obtain their trust in a time of total distrust . The main task of the organization is to unify the people, and obtain trust .
 Politicians, journalists, and public figures should combine efforts to achieve peace, economic, and social recovery of Donbas . All military, public figures, all military, and civilians should combine their efforts .
 CIMIC is an essential part of military efforts during hybrid warfare in war zones on strategic, operational, and tactical levels . It is designed to prevent potential threats of hybrid aggression.
High-level decision makers have used information from CIMIC Teams in order to make effective and productive decisions and statements . From the military perspective, on a strategic level, high-level decisions have been made on the ground .
 Urban Warfare from Stalingrad to Iraq (Oxford, UK: Osprey Publishing, 2012), 215. 78 information for commanders of joint military units in order to better cooperate .
 CIMIC Teams are organized in cooperation with civilians in particular sectors . commanders and military commanders can use information about the civil environment to avoid collateral damage .
 In hybrid warfare, a vigorous system of civil-military cooperation can contribute to important growth of trust among the civil population toward the Armed Forces of Ukraine . It can reduce the effect of military action on noncombatants in combat areas .
7 CIMIC in Ukraine must give new opportunities not only for military commanders, but also for the civilian population as well as in counteracting hybrid threats . The system has helped to form positive public opinion about actions of military units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the zones
 The next level of development should integrate the use of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other actors of the defense and security sector into the planning process .
 CIMIC should be interconnected with civilian ministries and organizations and represent, explain, and defend the military’s point of view among civilians .
 CIMIC should participate in post-conflict settlement, including the task of restoring the destroyed infrastructure of the region .
 Ukraine is trying to build new robust CMR in a time of hybrid warfare . CIMIC is a very effective tool in this process, and CIM IC is avery effective tool .
 Russian aggression has evolved from direct military intervention in sovereign countries to ‘indirect measures’ such as information and energy wars and cyberattacks aimed at achieving the Kremlin's political goals .
 The Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federation General Gerasimov says military measures start only in the crisis phase and only to enhance and support non-military actions . Currently, Ukraine struggles not only for freedom of the Ukrainian people and state independence but also for Western values.
 The threat to the West from the Russian Federation is more serious than illegal migrants or international organized crime . It is necessary to remove the ‘rose-colored glasses’ and understand that the threat to West is moreserious than illegal migration .
 Ukraine became the first country in which the Kremlin tried to test this kind of aggression in its entirety . If the Russian ideology is not defeated, then the Euro-Atlantic territories will be in ruins and full of fugitives .
 The world should study the unique experience of Ukraine. The U.S. and the countries of the Euro-Atlantic community first of all will have to deal with hybrid threats .
 This chapter sets forth what Ukraine has already done to counter Russian hybrid warfare . This chapter also sets out what the country has done to combat Russian hybrid Warfare .
 In the fifth year of the war, Ukraine has shown the world how to withstand a much larger and more powerful adversary .
 52 dining facilities of the military units have been changed to a new food supply system under the new menu of food . The new menu is based on a new system of food supply.
 The role of Minister of Defense of Ukraine, formerly a military position, is now a civilian one . In addition, in the framework of democratic civilian control over the security and defense sector, the role of the minister of defense of Ukraine is now civilian one.
 Ukraine holds 29th position in the world rankings and tenth position among the most powerful armies in Europe . Ukraine is ranked 29th in the Global Firepower analytical report .
 Ukraine has produced good results in counteracting Russian hybrid aggression . In the area of economics, Ukraine also has produced a good result in counteracts Russian aggression .
 Ukraine is pursuing a series of countermeasures to reduce Russia’s share of capital in Ukraine . Ukraine wants to reduce its dependence on the Russian market and Russian energy resources .
 Ukrainian producers have redirected their markets and succeeded in geographically diversifying their exports . As a central part of this effort Ukrainian producers are trying to diversify their markets .
In 2017, domestic exports of goods to the EU grew by 29. percent relative to 2016, which allowed Ukraine to exceed the pre-crisis level of 2013 by 4.6 percent .
 Ukrainian producers have redirected their markets they reduced Ukraine’s dependence on the Russian Federation . It is significant for Ukraine because when Ukrainian producers redirect their markets.
 Ukraine has established itself as one of the leading suppliers of sunflower oil and cereals in the EU market . Ukraine has also established itself in the European market as a leading supplier of cereals .
 In 2017, Ukraine became the largest non-EU supplier of grain to the EU market with a share of 9. percent . France is the primary grain supplier to theEU as a whole .
 Ukraine is the third largest supplier of rapeseed to the EU market . It falls below only Brazil and Canada in iron ore, with a share of 12.4 percent . Another important direction for Ukrainian trade is Asia .
 In 2017, trade with Asian countries amounted to 25. percent of Ukraine’s foreign trade turnover . Second only to its trade to the EU, which has helped to diversify the geographical spread of Ukrainian foreign trade .
 Ukrainian companies have rebuilt their positions in the U.S. market, after a long decline in trade volume .
 Ukraine has also taken steps to distance itself economically from Russia . In addition to increasing its trade with other parts of the world.
 Ukraine has also successfully diminished Russian imports . Besides expanding its export market, Ukraine has expanded its exports .
 Ukraine has continued the practice of filing lawsuits against Russia . At the same time, as a part of economic countermeasures, Ukraine has also continued to file lawsuits .
 Russia illegally expropriated the property of the plaintiffs, “Everest Estate LLC’s” and 17 other Ukrainian business-structures . The plaintiffs include a former head of the Ukrainian bank, Oleksandr Dubilet, in Crimea . The
 The court ordered that Russia must compensate the Ukrainian businesses for their lost assets with interest payments and cover the costs of legal services and court proceedings .
 To date, the appeal was not officially filed . At least, the lawyers of the Ukrainian side do not know anything about it .
 The second stage of the case will soon begin, the seizure of Russian property abroad in favor of Ukrainian businessmen .
 Economic sanctions imposed on Russia by Western countries have also helped Ukraine in its fight against a hybrid aggressor .
 The first sanctions imposed against the aggressor were applied after the annexation of Crimea by Russia .
 The international community has deemed the Crimean referendum and its results illegitimate . The further incorporation of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation is illegal .
 Russian businessmen have already lost in excess of $16 billion since the introduction of the United States’ sanctions alone .
 trade relations between the Russian Federation and the EU decreased by more than $150 billion . During the four years of anti-Russian sanctions, the trade relations with the EU dropped by $150billion .
 Humanitarian Developments. Even with military and economic countermeasures, combating Russian hybrid aggression is impossible without rallying around humanitarian considerations . Humanitarian Development.
 Russia wants to use the internal tensions and contradictions of society in Ukraine and complete its conquest and occupation by the hands of local traitors . Russia has been accused of using internal tensions in Ukraine as an excuse for its occupation .
 Ukraine is counteracting Russia in all these areas, most successfully in the area of church occupation . Currently, Ukraine is countering Russia in these areas .
 The priests of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church refuse to perform church ceremonies for Ukrainian patriots or people who are critical of events in eastern Ukraine and Crimea .
 President Petro Poroshenko appealed to the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew with a request for Tomos . The church decree of the Patriarchate on the granting of autocephaly of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church has been granted .
 The receipt of Tomos by Ukraine, Russia loses another powerful lever of influence.
 Political Developments is located in the political area of Ukraine . Ukraine's political area is a key threat to Ukraine's stability .
 Russia formed a legal political lobby in parliament and the executive branch, openly promoting and supporting the pro-Russian politicians and political parties at the local and regional levels in a time of nationwide elections .
 Russia is trying to destabilize the internal situation in Ukraine. Russia is using irredentists and proxies for these nefarious purposes, says the author . Russia is also using proxies and proxies in Ukraine, he says .
Pro-Russian politicians must gain power with the aim of resolving the conflict through favorable considerations for Russia . The next presidential elections and parliamentary elections are in Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian people are tired of the war and want peace and prosperity . All this will be presented to the Ukrainian people and the world community as a democratic choice .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and the Donbas area are under the control of Russia . But now, looking at Russia’s annexation, one can say that no prosperity is being achieved .
 The lack of freedom of speech, the complete suppression of the individual by the state, and the tyranny of law enforcement authorities are just a few vivid characteristics of Putin’s Russia .
 Russia has rich experience intruding in the political issues of Western countries . Russia has a history of intruding on political issues in the West .
 The main purpose of Russian political warfare is the formation of favorable public opinion of Russia in a particular state or region . Russia's main purpose is to form favorable public opinions in particular states .
 The United States, France, Germany, Great Britain, and the Netherlands comprise a short and incomplete list of countries where Russia has used political warfare . The U.S. and France are among the countries that Russia has been involved in political warfare.
 Russia is using overt and covert actors and different methods in order to achieve its goals . Russia is trying to achieve goals by using covert and overt and overt actors .
 Russia is also using bribery of political consultants and experts who can form the opinion of leading political forces . Russia is using bribery to bribe political consultants, experts and experts .
 Russia is bringing into play individual politicians and informational and financial support of radical parties that profess intolerance to non-natives . Russia is also promoting authoritarian methods of government .
 To counteract Russian political warfare effectively a country should explain to people the ends, ways, and means of Russian leadership .
 The head of the BfV publicly warned Moscow against making the political decision to interfere .
 The next area of battle against the Russian hybrid menace is the information space. Information Developments is to say.
 The information war that Russia has activated against Ukraine has set new challenges in the sphere of information security . Russia's information war against Ukraine is a new challenge for information security, says CNN .
 Russia uses the media to discredit Ukrainian authorities, to sow seeds of discord between the authorities and the citizens of Ukraine . Russia uses media to undermine Ukraine on the international scene, and to discredit Ukraine on international scene .
 Russia instigates an internal political explosion, including using tensions between Ukraine and some neighboring states . Also, Russia instIGates a political explosion in Ukraine.
 The doctrine of information security was adopted by the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine in December 2016 and signed by President Petro Poroshenko on February 25, 2017 . All of them are actively involved in attempts to counteract the emergence of Ukraine as a united, independent, sovereign state .
 In 2017, two Russian social networks, “Odnoklassniki’s’ and “VKontakte’, were closed in Ukraine . As a result of the instatement of this doctrine, in 2017, the two
 The appearance of the doctrine does not mean that the information space of Ukraine will radically change, says the author .
 The information war, like any other, depends largely on the financial component . As experience shows, the information war is often based on financial information .
 Ukraine will have a chance to win on the information front. If Ukraine adopts the doctrine, it will be able to use financial resources to implement it .
 Ukraine has begun to understand that information warfare is very important. In the meantime, the obvious positive is that Ukraine is beginning to understand it .
 A particularly important area of informational confrontation with the aggressor remains cyberspace . Cyberspace Developments is a particularly important part of the fight against the aggressors .
 Russian cybertroops have impeded the operation of large business companies, energy and transport infrastructure, and banking institutions to weaken the Ukrainian economy . One of the most dangerous of these challenges is protecting the Ukrainian electoral process, at all stages, from Russian cyberattacks .
 Russia has already begun a largescale information campaign aimed at influencing the results of Ukraine's elections . The cyber component of the information operations plays a key role in the elections .
 The information operation is likely to include manipulating social sentiment and shaping the behavior of potential voters . The Kremlin may be trying to change the political course of Ukraine to Russia, not to the EuroAtlantic direction .
Ukraine is preparing for such developments in advance and developing preventive decisions and actions . Ukraine is preparing to take action against such developments .
 Security Service of Ukraine says attack was being prepared for both cyber-intelligence activities and cyber-sabotage . Attack was being planned for objects of critical national infrastructure .
 The diplomatic area is another very significant area in which Ukraine must counteract Russian hybrid aggression . Russia must counteract Russia's hybrid aggression in Ukraine .
 Ukraine intensifies the processes of European and Euro-Atlantic integration . Ukraine has a legally established foreign policy course designed to bring Ukraine back to a united Europe . Ukraine is a member of the European Union and European Union .
 Ukrainian citizens have been able to travel to countries of the European Union without visa documents . Since June 11, 2017, Ukrainian citizens can travel to Europe without visas .
 The provision of visa-free travel by the EU has a historic significance for Ukraine . It demonstrates the final break of Kyiv with the post-Soviet past .
 Despite all Moscow’s efforts to split the Allied countries that support Ukraine, these Western countries continue to implement a policy of countering the aggressor .
 A vivid example of this steadfastness is the prolongation of sanctions imposed on Russia . Russia has been in the midst of a series of sanctions against the country .
 The European Union has repeatedly prolonged anti-Russian sanctions over the past years . The EU has repeatedly extended anti-Russia sanctions over past years.
 The Russian delegation did not participate in the PACE meetings in 2018 . It was therefore not able to achieve the lifting of restrictions imposed in 2014 against it .
 The use of diplomacy to ensure the supply of U.S. lethal weapons to Ukraine is the clearest example of this contribution to Ukraine .
 The U.S. armaments have already arrived in Ukrainian territory . Soldiers of the Armed Forces of Ukraine have begun to familiarize themselves with the equipment .
 The crisis of the modern international environment and the presence of direct and hybrid threats to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine require the continuation of this hard work . The Ukraine crisis requires the continued work of the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine is leveraging to counteract Russian hybrid warfare, and by no means the least important, is the activity of special services . Developments in Special and Law Enforcement Services are the last area Ukraine is using .
 The special services of Russia were heavily involved in planning, organizing, and implementing a set of measures to create the necessary conditions in Ukraine at the “pre-war stage’s “ pre-war” stage .
 Their role remains significant during the active phase of the hybrid war against Ukraine . They have been involved in the conflict for more than two years .
 Russia's level of readiness to resist the object of aggression is vitally important, says Russia . The main task of the aggressor is to reduce the level of resistance within the country it is targeting .
 Russia needs information regarding the situation in Ukraine in the area of national security and defense, combat capability of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, etc. Thus, Russia needs intelligence information about Ukraine .
 Russian intelligence services had a sufficient number of sources of information to influence the situation in the security and defense sectors of Ukraine . Ukraine did not resist Russian troops at the time of Crimea's annexation .
 Russian special services have focused on exaggerating the slightest mistakes of Ukrainian authorities through the pro-Moscow media and purchased politicians in Ukraine .
 The idea is that, systematically, broadcast by broadcast, Russia will create a picture of total “hopelessness’s’ and “betrayal” until the people, tired of deception and disappointment, “pumped over” with
 Theresa May accused Russia and expelled 23 Russian diplomats and their families from the country . As a result, Theresa May, the Prime Minister of Great Britain, accused Russia of expulsion .
 The man who organized this murder was detained by Ukrainian special services .
 Irrefutable evidence of involvement of Russian special services in the organization of this murder has been obtained . Russia's special services have been involved in the murder of a woman in Moscow .
 In addition to Babchenko, the organizer of the assassination attempt planned to kill 30 more men and women in the territory of Ukraine .
 Russia denies involvement of Russian special services in this plot . Russia denies Russian interference in the affairs of another sovereign and independent state .
 The goal of Russia is the total destruction of the Ukrainian state as a subject of international law and as a geopolitical actor . Russia's goal is to destroy the Ukraine state as an international law.
 The most important and dangerous for Ukraine are 1, armed aggression and 2, humanitarian aggression . This hybrid warfare has several components, but the most important is the humanitarian aggression.
 The purpose of humanitarian aggression is the destruction of the national identity of the Ukrainian population . The destruction of its will to resist is the purpose of the humanitarian aggression .
 The physical seems little more than the wooden hilt, while the moral factors are the precious metal . The real weapon, the finely-honed blade, is the real weapon.
 Three hundred Spartans, who preferred death to disgraceful humiliation, are one of the vivid examples of such identity . The Spartans were one of three hundred Spartans.
 If a country loses its identity, it will never recover and never again become an independent state . However, if a nation loses its name, it would never become a independent state.
 If humanitarian aggression is successful against any state, then the state simply disappears . If the state is successful, it simply disappears, according to experts .
 Ukraine needs a robust and adequate humanitarian policy, which will become an instrument against the destruction of Ukraine’s identity . Ukraine continues to need a comprehensive approach.
 It is necessary to repel and counteract Russia in other areas, such as economic, political, information, cyber, cyber and diplomatic. In addition, it is also necessary to counteract Russia.
 Ukraine can survive only when it conducts round-the-clock and purposeful work in all these areas . Ukraine can only survive when it does round- the-clock work in these areas.
 Western countries must study the experience of Ukraine, not only helping Ukraine, but also relying on the Ukrainian experience to develop its capabilities .
Despite the Russian Federation’s use of intimidation, subterfuge, and irregular combat to annihilate Ukraine as an independent geopolitical actor, the nation has resisted at great cost and in a kind of martyrdom for the West .
 Ukraine has been able to defend itself with mechanisms to negate the most aggressive manifestations of the Kremlin’s hybrid warfare . Ukraine is a David sustaining warfare with a much stronger Goliath.
 Ukraine’s efforts to build new robust CMR in a time of hybrid warfare. Ukraine has been trying to build a robust robust C MR in time of Hybrid warfare .
 CIMIC as conceived in NATO countries is a very effective tool in Ukraine's resistance . Ukraine has been in the midst of a long-running conflict with Russia .
 This chapter reviews the current situation in Ukraine and gives an overview of its regional implications . It also provides policy recommendations for Ukraine, NATO, and the EU that will be useful to Ukraine and other states and allies engaged in the process of countering Russian hostile hybrid actions .
 The Kremlin's main efforts are focused on undermining the basic principles of Ukrainian nationhood .
 To that end, the internal destabilization and discredit of Ukraine and the gradual weakening of Ukraine are today the main goals of the antiUkrainian policy of Russia . Russia's military strength and its military strength are today's main goals.
In the modern world, this task is impossible to achieve without partners and allies . Nevertheless, in theModern world, in a modern world this task can be achieved without partners .
 At the same time, Ukraine is not the only target for the current Russian Federation’s leadership .
 NATO and EU should also heed the warning about Russian hybrid warfare and how to counteract it . NATO and the EU should be aware of Russia's hybrid warfare .
 Ukraine, as a potential NATO and EU member, could provide for both organizations the full spectrum of effective counteracting measures . Ukraine is a potential member of the NATO, EU and NATO .
 NATO and the EU should change their activity to enhance counter hybrid warfare capabilities . NATO and EU should increase their activity.
 Ukraine is not the only country targeted by Russian aggression in its many startling forms . Russia continues to intervene in the internal affairs of numerous foreign nations .
 Russian intervention in the election process in the United States, Netherlands, France, and Germany can be regarded by the international community as an act of aggression toward these countries .
 The Russian Federation continues to export hostile irregular, concealed warfare to destroy the European anti-Putin coalition and unity and stability in Europe as well .
 Ukraine is a vivid example of what could happen if a state does not react immediately and forcefully to hybrid war stratagems . NATO and the EU understand these threats; Ukraine is an example of a state that could react immediately .
 NATO and the EU focus on resilience as a key concept of countering hybrid threats . The organizations subscribe to Clausewitz’s classic will to defend themselves by maintaining a sense of national and moral identity in combatant populations .
 For the North Atlantic Alliance, resilience is primarily related to the principles of military cooperation and deterrence to assure collective defense against threats .
 NATO allies struggle to increase the resilience of its treaty signatories in both the military and civilian spheres . Russia’s large-scale and diverse aggressive actions across the international arena.
 The amnesia that afflicts the West relative to the epoch of total war. To be sure, this aspect of defense has merely revived an old factor of defense, which had been obscured since 9/11 .
 Ukraine under attack since 2013 offers NATO allies an example of toughness and combat spirit in the face of overwhelming force . In this respect, the example of Ukraine under attacks since 2013 gives NATO allies a example of strength and toughness .
 The EU has used the concept of resilience in the context of social preparedness versus combat power in the conventional sense .
 The EU emphasizes rightly good governance, human rights, and development of states . The European Union emphasizes right governance and human rights .
 There has been an attempt to develop a security component of the EU, as well as a tendency toward expansion of cooperation with NATO, in particular .
 Hybrid threats to peace and security in Central and Eastern Europe are an increasing problem across the globe . containing Russian and other possible hybrid aggression will require the efforts of many nations effectively countering them .
 These recommendations focus on reducing the risks associated with Russian hybrid warfare for Ukraine, NATO, and the EU, and for global security .
 Ukraine has successfully withstood Russian hybrid warfare at great cost to itself . Ukraine has been a challenge to the statecraft of the Western democracies .
 Russia Today balderdash about state, society, their economies, and culture . The latter are themselves under assault by the unseen invader via the Internet .
 Ukraine needs to further develop security governance on the Western model for counteracting Russian aggression . Ukraine is a key part of the West to protect Ukraine from Russia's aggression .
 It is impossible to defend Ukraine’s national interests from hybrid threats solely via military methods, says the Russian military .
 Coupled with military means, a significant role should be devoted to non-military means . Military means include economic, humanitarian, political, informational, diplomatic, cyber, and other realms .
Robust CMR increases civil preparedness, societal resilience, defense spirit, and persistence of society . Robust C MR increases human preparedness and societal resilience .
 It provides the will to fight even if the conditions for fighting are not favorable. It provides a will to fighting even if conditions for fight are notavorable .
 CMR is the one of the first tasks of the adversary, especially in hybrid warfare . That is why destroying truly strong and robust C MR is the first task of the adversaries, especially, in hybrid war .
 The successful struggle of the Ukrainian state and the Ukrainian people against Russian aggression requires, first of all, the unity of the Ukraine nation, the preservation of internal stability, and the improvement of all forms of state policy .
 The Ukrainian state must be pursued simultaneously with the maximum possible activity in the foreign policy arena, as well as with the development and further strengthening of the defense capabilities of our country . This complex task, which ensures the strength of the Ukrainian state from the inside, must also be
 CMR in Ukraine should focus on promoting the unity of the Ukrainian nation, CMR says .
 CIMIC is one of the best mechanisms to reach this goal. Building and retaining such relations in a time of hybrid warfare is a hard task . Without such robust relations, Ukraine will not achieve unity of society, says the group .
 NATO and its leading allies understand the necessity to counter hybrid conventional and nuclear threats . Currently, the leadership of NATO and their leading allies are aware of the threat .
 The present efforts, from a Ukrainian perspective, are not sufficient, according to the Ukrainian government . The present effort is not enough, says the U.S. government .
 NATO should focus on developing the resilience and readiness of its military forces to resist hybrid threats . NATO should also focus on improving the decision-making process, on a constitutional basis .
 It is necessary to increase the number of Very High Readiness Joint Task Forces . In addition, it is also necessary to expand the numbers of NATO units .
 NATO states should meet commitments to finance defense needs at 2 percent of the states’ gross domestic product . NATO states must meet their commitments to fund defense needs in the future .
 Ukraine and NATO should create a Membership Action Plan for several years, says CMR . CMR must be a significant part of this plan, CMR says .
 NATO fully understands the necessity of robust CMR, especially in the time of hybrid warfare . NATO, as a political-military organization, fully understands its need for robust military operations .
 The relationship between NATO, the EU, and other international organizations should be reviewed in the direction of their strengthening and improvement . Overall, the relationship between the NATO and the EU should be review in the future .
 The new strategy should have a more active and offensive character . It is impossible to win this war by sitting alone on the defensive, says the author .
 NATO members should identify mediumand long-term goals and tools for achieving these goals, writes John Sutter .
 The EU should improve its security architecture to include strategic communication, cooperation between civil and military spheres, myth-busting, and preventing interference in the electoral processes of the EU states .
 The EU should continue and perhaps even tighten its sanctions policy against Russia . Russia is a state that only understands the language of power .
 Current hybrid threats require comprehensive responses from all EU members, strong cooperation between all actors, and synergy of all efforts .
 It is necessary to ensure proper financing of measures to respond to hybrid threats and to increase and control the efficiency of financial expenditures . It is also necessary to be able to control and control financial expenditures.
 Russia spends a great deal of money on bribery of politicians in European and other countries . Russia spends money on propaganda and the formation of Eurosceptic and pro-Russian opinions .
 In these programs, it is necessary to explain in simple words and images how the Kremlin factory of disinformation and propaganda works .
Specialists will be able to help countries and organizations in shaping measures to combat hybrid aggression . They will also carry out appropriate educational activities to inform the target audiences .
Nongovernmental organizations should be actively involved in the fight against hybrid threats, according to a report .
 Passive observation of hybrid threats will not lead to any positive results, says CNN.com.com .
 The problem of hybrid threats from Russia or other countries will not be resolved by themselves . Russia and other countries may not be able to resolve the problem by themselves.
 The EU should involve all the available forces and means in this process and act in cooperation with all states and actors .
 Putin and his entourage are trying to build a system of international relations in which they and their country will have a place in the international order that corresponds to their view .
 Putin partially manipulates the European states and exploits the reluctance of individual countries and their leaders to take necessary but unpopular decisions to enhance military budget and counteract Russian hybrid warfare .
 This manipulation is accompanied by the lack of critical vision, corruption, and helplessness of the European elites . This manipulation has been accompanied by a lack ofcritical vision and corruption, says the author .
 The majority of NATO and the EU populations have lived for decades without a war on their territory . This is accompanied by the reluctance of most NATO and EU populations to change their consumer lifestyle or to recognize the hybrid threat from Russia .
 It is possible to combat this threat now by implementing the recommendations described in this thesis, but they will not necessarily be sufficient in the future . It's possible to implement this recommendation by implementing it now.
 Hybrid threats are persistent and unpredictable. People have to understand the consequences of these threats, says the author .
 NATO and the EU countries need to understand that the war has begun, according to the EU .
 It is a hybrid war, but a war nonetheless, one that has already come to Europe and the United States in the 21st century . It is not a war that has come to the U.S. and Europe.
 It is up to the European and other peoples who are the targets of Putin’s regime to decide what they want . Nobody will make this choice for them.
 Putin’s regime has the support of Russian society in Russia itself and among the Russianspeaking population beyond its borders . The main cause of this hybrid war is Putin's regime, thanks to the disinformation, militarization of society, propaganda, and suppression of the opposition and freedom of
 Much of the Russian population supports Putin’s idea of revenge and revision of the established world order .
 This word comes from the Russian word mrakobesie . Pobedibesie is the obscurantism of the victory .
 The phenomenon of pobedibesie involves using the symbols of victory in the war and the attributes of the war in the context of other manifestations of Russian culture .
 Agreement between Ukraine and the Russian Federation on the Black Sea Fleet of the Russia Federation on Ukraine, Pub. Ukraine .
 Coats, Daniel R Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community. Coats is the director of the Intelligence Community's Threat Assessment . Coats says the intelligence community is aware of the threat of terrorism .
 Decision dated December 29, 2016 “On the Doctrine of Information Security of Ukraine,” Pub. Pub.
 Kohn, Richard H. Kohn. The United States Military under the Constitution of the United States, 1789-1989 . Kohn: The U.S. military under the constitution of the U. S.