 Oleksandr Khara held a number of positions in the central office of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . He also worked as deputy head of the Department of Foreign Policy Aspects of National Security of the Office of the National Security and Defense Council .
 A lot is said about the threat of the country’s annexation by Russia . The dependence of the Belarusian dictatorship on the Russian resources is stated .
 Are Ukrainians starting to wake up and realize what the Lukashenka regime really is? This is a hot topic for the Ukrainians .
 Ukraine has not been properly thought of, elaborated, according to the Ukrainian government . Ukraine's government says it cannot take any pther steps for the time being .
 I do not think that the first person in our country understands the essence of your regime. I don't believe that the agreements with it are not airtight .
 The Russian Federation, the occupied territories of Donetsk, Lugansk and Crimea are the occupied part of Moldova the so-called Transnistrian Republic . The great border with Belarus is the most important direction to the capital .
 Belarus is trying to prevent any actions on the part of Belarus. I can understand this from the point of view of an attempt to prevent anyone from taking part in the country .
 Belarus is a platform that can be used against us by Russia, and this is absolutely obvious . But Belarus is also a platform for Russia to use against us, says the Russian government .
In strategic terms, all statements and documents on security issues in Belarus indicate that NATO is its adversary . NATO expansion to the East is a threat, and so on.
 The entire philosophy of the Lukashenka regime is the opposite of what Ukraine claims . That is on the one hand, there is no potential for confrontation between Belarus and Ukraine, in fact .
 Ukraine's defense department and special services were headed by citizens of the Russian Federation . Russia's citizens weakened our ability to resist Russia's influence in 2014, says Ukraine's deputy minister .
 Belarusian army remains a part of the Russian armed forces, NATO says . It is difficult to say what level the infiltration of Russians into the Belarusian special services has reached . Lukashenka will be able to oppose Putin in his desire to use the territory of Belarus
 Belarusian special services are part of the Russian ones . Correspondingly, they are also part of Belarusian Special Services .
 Perhaps that is why our government publicly can not act more decisively. Perhaps that's why we can't do more decisively?
 Petro Poroshenko says Minsk is a platform for negotiations with the Russians . But he also says there are certain trade and economic interests .
Security issues are number one, but security is number one . If we are talking about Maslow's pyramid, then security issues will be number one.
 Poroshenko is trying to minimize the likelihood of deterioration in relations and any aggressive actions on the part of Belarus . It is clear why Poroshenko wants to minimize likelihood of deteriorated in relations .
 The Belarusian army is actually part of the Russian armed forces. You absolutely correctly said that the Belarusian Army is part of Russia's armed forces .
 The essence of the Russian and Belarusian regime, as well as Mr Poroshenko himself, is actually the same . Ukraine cannot be safe until such a person as Lukashenka and the like lead this state, says the author .
State activities without a corruption component, we say . They can not think of their state activities, let us say, state activities without corruption component .
 The Belarusian regime benefited from the conflict between Ukraine and Russia, according to the Belarusian government .
 Russia was called to release our sailors without mentioning that they were prisoners of war . For example, in a recently adopted resolution of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
 This war gave the Lukashenka regime the opportunity to get out of the blockade, no one remembers the last dictator of Europe . This war was the last time Europe had a dictator.
 It is clear that these “tricks’ will not lead to any change or mitigation of the regime . But it is clear it will not be changed or mitigation. It will be clear that this will not change or mitigate the regime.
 The man was lured into the territory of Belarus, and then he ended up in a Russian prison . He was lured back to Belarus, where he was arrested .
 Ukraine lost Crimea and Donbas also due to the lack of serious informational work in that region . I'm not talking about Belarusians, about the arrests of oppositionists and the persecution of independent journalists .
 Russia’s influence was very significant there at the very beginning, and the Ukrainian authorities did not try to counterstand it . Russia's influence is very significant at the start, and Ukraine did not attempt to counter it .
 Belarusians learn about the events in your country mostly from the Russian television .
 Ukraine has a key security strategy with regard to Russia, but there is none . Ukraine has no such strategy, according to the Ukrainian government .
 There are some political statements, but there are some legal proceedings . Some political statements are political statements .
 Russia is strengthening its army, since we are buying more from the Russians and taxes are being paid there . Now it turns out that we are strengthening the Russian army .
 trade with Russia means that the authorities of the country do not need to invest in innovations . In addition to the presence of the Russian business in Ukraine, the authorities don't need to look for new markets for goods, says the author .
 The backwardness and raw materials orientation of our economy are being conservated . The backwardity and raw material orientation of the economy is being conserved .
 The most important thing is the delay in solving key issues of reforming the economy . Ukraine would be pulled out of the post-Soviet state and give impetus to the development of new spheres of the economy.
 The standard of living in Ukraine, which collapsed after the annexation and the war, will be at the same level .
The Russian Federation squeezed Ukraine out of all areas where possible, and dealt with import substitution where it was critically dependent on us . The Russian Federation squeezing Ukraine out.
 If today there is no investment in new technologies and innovations, there can be no wage increases . There are no investments in new technology and innovations and there are no increases .
 The second important point is the presence of the Russian business in the most important sectors . The Russian business is the second most important sector in the world .
 Renat Akhmetov consolidated his assets and bought from the Russians, who are under sanctions, their assets . The Russians are also under sanctions .
 Roughly speaking, gave them the opportunity to withdraw money from here. Roughlyspeaking, they were able to withdraw cash from here .
 Akhmetov's role in the occupation of Donetsk is absolutely obvious . He has ties with Russia, his role in Donetsk is obvious .
 If we take the two largest mobile operators in Ukraine there is also the Russian money there . If we took the two biggest mobile operators there are also Russian money.
 In addition to this purely economic dependence, there is a corruption component . There is also an economic dependence.
 Russian business connected with Putin and oligarchs. We would introduce new technologies, but also eradicate corruption .
 Ukraine has no strategy towards Russia and accordingly, there can be no separate strategy towards Belarus. Therefore, I affirm that today Ukraine hasno strategy toward Russia .
 Belarus has no uniform information policy, broadcasting of any special content to Belarus in order to play on the territory of the sphere of influence of Russia .
 Kazakhstan should have developed an information policy for the regions of the Russian Federation in order to transfer the informational war to the territory of Russia and Russia as such .
 The president should not be engaged in the economic activities of individual enterprises, he says . This is just pure logic, and I’m not even talking about the fact that the president shouldn’t be involved in individual enterprises .
 Yanukovych recently received his deserved 13 years in prison . Yanukovych is Ukraine's own “strong manager,’s own ‘strong manager’
 Ukrainian citizens have more domestic and foreign policy issues that are more important for the majority of Ukrainian citizens .
 In general, skepticism about the power is probably a distinctive feature of Ukrainians .
 Belarus is not a priority in the programs and speeches of candidates due to the fact that there are more important topics that worry most of the citizens . Belarus war, economic problems and internal issues are important topics for candidates .
Presidential candidates Anatoliy Hrytsenko or Ihor Smeshko know what is a potential threat to Belarus, he says . The Belarus people clearly understand the problems of Belarus and know what's possible, he adds .
 Belarus is a satellite of the Russian Federation . If these candidates come to power, the policy towards Belarus will be changed .
 The chaos in which we live will soon increase in the region. Lukashenka would not talk about “friendly relations’s” with Lukasenka .
 The Russian Federation will destroy the foundations that formed the order, founded in 1945 and 1991 . The order was formed in 1945.
 I think destructive forces will act in both developed societies and those developing or living under authoritarian regimes . There is still no light at the end of the tunnel, he says .
 Russia will use this to show itself as a center of power that the West must reckon with, above all the United States . The West will not make deals with Putin about “selling’s Ukraine or redistributing spheres of influence .
 American politicians, primarily the Congress and the military, will not do this, regardless of Trump's opinion, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the president's opinion will not change what he says .
 I do not know whether 2019 or 2020 will bring financial or economic crisis for the Western system . I don't know whether this will affect us, but how this will affected us .
 Some economists say that this is exaggerated, the European financial system has a margin of safety . The lessons of 2008 were taken into account .
For Ukraine, the year will definitely be a crisis, because there will be large payments on foreign debts . For Ukraine, there will also be a crises, because of the country's debt crisis .
 We do not see fundamental changes in the internal economic life, which would give us a reason for optimism, says the author .
 In any case, whoever the new president is, there will be some reconfiguration of the economy .
 Belarus will not remain out of conflict, because authorities have already taken the side of the Kremlin . In this sense, the country's authorities will not be out of Conflict, because they have already been taken by Kremlin .
 Lukashenka says that he is trying to act as an intermediary . We do not see his independence or pro-Ukrainian nature .
 All Lukashenka's rhetoric is anti-Western, there is no independent brokerage here . There is noindependent brokerage here, says Lukasenka .
 Belarus will be involved in this conflict, no matter whether it wants to or not . Belarus will not want to be involved, but it will be in the conflict .
 Lukashenka is at power, but the country will definitely not be on the Ukrainian side . The Ukrainian government is currently in charge of Ukraine .
 If Lukashenka tries to more actively oppose the Kremlin’s desire to swallow Belarus, he may lose his place in the Kremlin .
 I do not really believe in defending the independence by the Belarusian dictator . I don't believe in defense of the country's independence .
 Ukraine can hardly come to the rescue and confine itself exclusively to diplomatic statements . But if there is a conflict, Ukraine can barely come to a rescue, it can't come to an end .
 The probability of the loss of independence by the country remains extremely high . In this possible large-scale conflict between Russia and Ukraine, Belarus will not be involved .
 Lukashenka has no support of the population, the level of life has seriously dropped . The level ofLife has been seriously dropped by the population .
 In this situation, the people can fight for both freedom and independence, he says . "I believe that people will protest," he adds .
 The Russians do not want war, they understand that it was not the Ukrainians who brought the war into their own home, but the Russians . They do not wants war, but they understand it was the Ukrainians.
 Ukraine should build influence instruments to change the perception of Belarusians, says former PM . Belarusian leader Lukashenka may lose power in 2019, he says .
 Belarusians do not yet understand that in any case they will be at the epicenter of the conflict . The life, which was until 2019, will not continue. It seems to be that the Belarusians don't yet understand their fate .
 There is a factor of the exhaustion of Russian resources, unwillingness to share these resources with Lukashenka and reluctance to support his ‘economic miracle’ at own expense . There is also a factor.
 Belarusians are ready to take to the streets to defend their constitutional rights . It all depends on how well Belarusian are prepared to take the streets .
 The West should talk about the inadmissibility of the use of force against participants of any potential street protests in Belarus .
 This is necessary now to overcome the impending crisis, engage in dialogue and plan a bloodless transfer of power. This is needed now, says David Cameron .
 democracy is based on the turnover of power, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Lukashenka came to a deaf impasse and the fact that he had to leave was already an open question . Lukasenka's decision to leave is already anopen question .
 If he loves his country, he must go away, without leaving Belarus in ruins, without driving to bloodshed . He says he must leave Belarus without leaving the country in ruins without driving.
 If he does not want it to be like on the Maidan, then he should not prepare for a forceful confrontation, says David Cameron . He should create political grounds for transferring presidential powers in a democratic way, he says .
 Both Europeans and Americans should talk about the need to create in Belarus a favorable platform for the democratic transit of power .
 Ukraine has missed a lot of time without creating leverage over Russia through its allies . Ukraine has not been able to create leverage over its allies through allies .
 Belarusians want to live in a different way, not in a pseudo-social camp, says author . "It would not be worth informing the citizens of Belarus about what is happening in Ukraine," he says .
 All these dictatorial pseudo-socialist regimes are not successful anywhere, they live at the expense of external resources . We see that in fact all these pseudo-Socialist regimes aren't successful anywhere .
 The soft power of Ukraine should be in the Belarusian direction, in the interests of not only Belarusians, but also ourselves, in order to weaken Belarus’s dependence on Moscow .
 Poroshenko had no desire to somehow anger Lukashenka and undermine his position . It could be due to the fact that Poroshenko didn't want to anger his boss .
 The dictator is not a reliable partner in a long-term game. But this is a short-sighted policy, says CNN's John Sutter . The dictator's regime is not reliable partners, he says .
 Minsk today is, first of all, a trading platform, and in the long run this will not turn out to be good. In the short term, we have provided mediation with Russia, Minsk . In the long-term, this will be good,
 The Lukashenka regime has been in power for more than a decade . The regime is currently in charge of a regime that has been described as the most powerful in the world .
 Belarus will be democratic and replaceable when Belarus's regime does not exist . It will be possible to talk about our sympathies and the similarity of cultures to build relations .
 The pyramid is turned, and there are interests of the regime, which subjugate all these friendly undertakings . Now the pyramid is turned, and the regime is turned .