 The Carnegie Moscow Center and the Carnegie Endowment do not take institutional positions on public policy issues . The views represented here are the author’s own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Endowment, its staff, or its trustees .
 The Carnegie Moscow Center or Carnegie Endowment. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means .
 He has authored works on Russian civil society and protest activity, as well as on the regime’s techniques for engineering and maintaining high approval ratings .
 The Russian elite has grown increasingly guarded and circumspect during the 2000s . However, information about the Russian elite is hard to come by .
 aggregate data analysis suggests some conclusions about key features of elite opinion following Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 .
 The views of Russian elites in the post-Crimea era mostly resemble those prevalent among the general public . Both groups support the regime of Russian President Vladimir Putin and his foreign policy .
 Between 2011 and 2012, they largely managed to impose their agenda on the rest of the elite . Between 2011-2012, they mostly managed to imposed their agenda.
No Russian elite group appears to be as organized and influential as the siloviki . No Russian elite groups appear to be more influential than the silviki .
 Elites use public expressions of anti-Americanism and support for the annexation to affirm their loyalty to the regime . Elites also support the annexation of Crimea .
 The political system’s legitimacy crisis, of which the mass protests of 2011-2012 were an indication, was finally resolved . The political crisis of 2011–2012 was resolved.
 Protest leaders and activists do not pose a threat to the regime as of early 2016 . Protest leaders, activists and activists are not considered a threat by the regime .
 The elite will not yet openly defy the regime, some elite groups and individuals may quietly sabotage official decisions in reaction to stepped-up moves .
 The annexation of Crimea in early 2014 proved to be a turning point for Russian President Vladimir Putin's regime .
 The Kremlin was able to reverse the downward trend in its approval ratings that had persisted for the preceding four to five years . The Kremlin's approval ratings had been on a downward trend for the previous four-five years .
 In April–May 2014, Putin’s rating soared to territory in excess of 85 percent . In April-May 2014.
Ordinary Russians expressed greater satisfaction with their lives and the work of all state institutions . Ordinary Russians said they were satisfied with the lives of all states .
 The public became convinced for the first time since the collapse of the Soviet Union . The public also became convinced that Russia was becoming a great power again .
 There was a brief dip in public assessments of the country’s economic situation and future prospects in December 2014 . Oil prices and the exchange rate of the ruble decreased dramatically .
 By the spring of 2015, public satisfaction with the economy had practically returned to its pre-December 2014 level . But by the spring 2015, it had almost returned to the pre- December 2014 level.
 In early 2016, the public’s evaluation of economic performance and prospects for the future came closer to levels observed in late 2014 . In late 2014, the economic performance of the U.S. was seen to be improving .
 It appears that people have had time to adjust to a new, far less comfortable situation . If anything, it seems that people are having time to adapt .
 All these changes in popular sentiment are reflected clearly in public opinion polls. All these are reflected in public polls .
 The political-military establishment appears to be the most influence on Russia’s future trajectory . Although opinions vary to a degree among the elite, the group that continues to have most influence.
 Elite Researchers differ as to what exactly ‘elite’ means in the Russian context and who is included in the category .
 In the mid-2000s, leading Russian sociologists Yuri Levada, Lev Gudkov, and Boris Dubin wrote about “positional elites” or ‘ersatz elites’ to describe groups of people whose place in the Russian power vertical is determined by
 These scholars generally defined the elite as a cluster of figures who wield 3 4 . They say they hold government positions or positions of authority among key segments of the population .
 Political scientist Nikolay Petrov pointed to the key role that administrative resources play in the formation of the Russian ruling class and preferred to use the term nomenklatura to describe Russia’s elites .
 In Kordonsky’s system of classification, the bureaucratic estate is the most privileged position . About 5 percent of the population, or 7. million people, occupies the position .
 Olga Kryshtanovskaya classified only around 1,000 people as elites . For her part, she classified only 1,00 people as elite .
 The broader category labeled the “political class’s” accounts for approximately 0. percent, the broader category is ‘political class'
 It is easiest to classify elites by spheres (for example, political, economic, military, and the like) and other subcategories of various sizes .
 Another approach divides them by function, that is, administrators, legislators, politicians, ideologists, diplomats, and so on . Another approach is that of administrators and legislators .
 There is also the clan model, or Petrov’s ‘Kremlin towers’ model, which emphasizes business, familial, career, and other ties .
 The Politburo model first proposed by Kryshtanovskaya and developed by political consultant Evgeny Minchenko . The political consultant studies shifts in Vladimir Putin's inner circle .
 The very top section of the elite consists of a few dozen people, according to the report .
 Olga Kryshtanovskaya was the first to point out the large number of security service veterans in Putin's inner circle .
 Denis Volkov also talked about the mass recruitment of military personnel for government positions . She also spoke about the recruitment of the military personnel .
 Nikolay Petrov stressed the fact that the “internal corporate rules and norms characteristic of the military-security sector’ have gradually come to characterize the Russian regime .
 Lev Gudkov believed that many people with a military-security background who were once subordinate to the political leadership became holders of power .
 Gudkov’s conclusion was based on a 2006 study of the elite . It remains relevant in 2016, according to the Russian expert .
 The executive branch is not accountable to the other branches of government or to other groups and estates, such as the media and civil society .
 This reality continues to hinder the country’s future strategic development. This reality is still a problem for the country .
 Representatives of the liberal economic bloc over time have lost the positions of power that they held in the 1990s and have been suborned gradually by the military-security establishment .
 New members of the elite are not recruited from the ranks of civil society . This is likely because there is practically no overlap between civil society and the political system .
 As such, civil society and protest leaders find themselves on the system’s periphery or outside the system .
 The December 12 Roundtable is trying to formulate alternative scenarios for Russia’s future social development . At the same time, it is precisely these kinds of civil society organizations, says Peter Bergen .
 Russian elite believed this phenomenon was a result of weak differentiation among the Russian elite . They believed it was due to weak differentiation between the elite .
People are promoted to positions of power based on loyalty to higher authorities rather than their competence or professional accomplishments . More specifically, they saw this as the result of a negative selection .
 The result is a largely mediocre group of elites, people with so-called average ideas, who have the same fears that average people have .
 There is little reliable information on opinions among the elite as of 2016 . The sphere has become extremely closed. There is no reliable information.
 The last openly conducted quantitative surveys of Russian elites date back to the beginning of Dmitry Medvedev’s presidency .
Only indirect assessments of elite opinion are possible by analyzing public statements or research interviews with government officials and experts .
 Empty Talk of Liberalization The 2008 Nikkolo M survey is one of the last available surveys of the Russian elite .
 Afanasyev concluded that almost half of Russia’s elites held liberal views .
 Representatives of the security sector were the only ones who advocated more conservative policy shifts .
 majority of respondents believed that strengthening the power vertical had failed to yield more effective governance . The security sector was unable to offer a guiding idea that could consolidate Russian society .
 Perhaps elites are simply ready to support the dominant ideology of the time, whatever it may be .
 A significant number of respondents by their own admission had only a very vague understanding of this concept . To be fair, some of the respondents were very vague .
 It appears that elites treat separation of powers, liberalization, and political competition as slogans devoid of any substance .
 A small fraction of elites did in fact support the gradual liberalization of the Russian regime during the Medvedev era .
 Institute of Contemporary Development was close to Dmitry Medvedev and led by Igor Yurgens . They rallied around ideas propagated by the institute .
 The institute’s development program, Strategy 2020,23, was widely discussed and warmly received by key elements of the elite . The institute's development program was also widely discussed .
 There were plenty of figures who merely paid lip service to Medvedev’s tenets of liberalization . But there were many figures who only paid lipservice to the tenets of the liberalization.
 It is conceivable that the views Mikhail Afanasyev portrayed as the liberal opinions of elites were simply their expression of a general preference for a relaxed and carefree existence that would allow them to escape the pressures of the power vertical .
 If such hopes existed in the late 2000s, they were eventually dashed . If such hope indeed existed, it was later dashed .
 In 2016, both public officials and human rights activists who work with government employees regularly reported that government officials, judges, and other public sector employees were intimidated by prosecutors, special committees, security services, and their superiors .
 Campaigns to expose the corrupt practices of local mayors and governors in various regions of the country can be interpreted as an effort to keep elites outside Moscow under constant pressure .
 The small military-security establishment is in forcing its agenda on Russian elites . Such tactics do little to increase these officials’ love for the federal center, but they appear to demonstrate how effective they are .
 It is striking that throughout the Putin era, elites have failed to form groups or lobbying bodies that are as organized and influential as the siloviki .
 The Nonexistent Split Within the Elite Putin’s return to the Kremlin in 2012. The increased assertiveness of the siloviki are often attributed to reverberations from the Arab Spring and the fall of authoritarian regimes in Egypt, Libya, and Tunisia .
 The real or imaginary role that Western countries played in these events and the behavior of the local elites, some of whom sided with the protesters, must have alarmed Russia’s rulers, says CNN's John Sutter .
In many cases Middle Eastern government officials and top brass switched their allegiance at just the right moment and captured key government positions .
 Similar processes unfolded during the color revolutions of the mid-2000s and Ukraine’s Euromaidan revolution in 2014 .
 The Russian leadership has increased pressure on the public in recent months . The Russian government has been under pressure from the public to increase pressure .
 The Russian government has launched an assault on international foundations and nongovernmental organizations . First, the color revolutions drove the Russian government to unleash an assault upon international foundations .
 The Arab Spring and the 2011–2012 street protests in Russia influenced Putin’s decision to return to the presidency . The events of the Arab Spring, the 2011-2012 street protest in Russia also influenced Putin's decision to re-enter the presidency.
 The collapse of Viktor Yanukovych’s regime in Ukraine provided the impetus for a new round of government pressure on society . It included a massive television propaganda campaign, the closure of independent media outlets, an ongoing campaign against so-called foreign agents, and the creation of aggressive
 This sentiment intensified following Putin’s decision to return to the Kremlin in 2012 . The sentiment intensified after Putin's decision to returned to theremlin in 2012.
 A series of political scandals and the unexpected swapping of posts between Putin and Medvedev fed the protest vote in the December 2011 parliamentary election . A sentiment that soon morphed into mass street protests.
 The ruling United Russia party saw its popular support dwindle and lost roughly one-quarter of its seats in the State Duma .
 The election results provoked vigorous debate in the Just Russia party, and various members joined the protest movement .
 Oligarchs, government officials, prominent writers, and journalists all participated in the first few protests . It led to speculation about a possible split in the elite .
 The protest movement was quickly crushed by the authorities . It sent a message to the general population and elites that there could be no alternative to Putin's rule .
 Discipline in the Just Russia party was restored . Unruly members Gennady Gudkov and Ilya Ponomarev lost their seats in the State Duma .
Prominent bloggers and political activists were forced to leave the country to avoid criminal prosecution .
 The creative elite had lost hope for democratic change in the country . They were soon followed by hundreds of members of what was dubbed the creative elite who had lostHope .
 Elites who may have sympathized with the protest movement or sought to exploit it to earn political capital had learned their lesson . Elites had learned the lesson from the movement.
 It was not until the annexation of Crimea that popular and elite support for the regime was fully restored . However, it was not before the annexation was complete .
 It qualified as one of those small, victorious wars that have so often eluded Russia in the past . It qualified for one of the small, successful wars that has so far eluded the country .
 Crimea operation also boosted the morale and prestige of the army and security services . The Crimea operation was also boosted by the Crimea operation .
 As an added benefit, it helped solidify these groups’ loyalty to the regime, it has been said .
 The ruling class and the general population seemed to link of the international community . The majority of Russia’s population was happy with the annexation .
 The self-satisfaction and self-importance of elites who gathered at the Grand Kremlin Palace on March 18, 2014, for the formal ceremony to commemorate the annexation .
 Ordinary people who discussed the event in focus groups expressed similar feelings . Levada Center conducted the event.
Not all elites were happy with the annexation, but some could anticipate the reaction of the international community .
 One Russian official complained in a private conversation on the sidelines of an international conference that the Crimean referendum had been rushed and sloppy .
 Neither the authorities nor Denis Volkov made a single public comment criticizing the annexation .
 Russia’s enormous bureaucracy has so far functioned as a unified machine when it comes to Crimea . Russia's enormous bureaucracy is so far functioning as a united machine .
 The steps to integrate Crimea into the Russian Federation have been relatively effective points to a high degree of unity among elites on this issue .
 The violation of international norms has only reinforced the belief in Russia’s resurgent power among elites, as well as the general population .
 A Russian official said his co-workers had been using the term "rival" for many years when discussing Europeans partners .
 Public statements that would have previously been considered improper became permissible and were even encouraged . Public statements were allowed to make public statements that were previously considered improper .
 Members of the Russian elite had felt uneasy about living in a world where they had to take their partners' opinions into account .
 Representatives of the elite were more uncomfortable about this position than the general population . The elite were less uncomfortable about the position than general population.
 Crimea tensions were lifted in the most primitive of ways because of Crimea . Crimea is the region of Crimea in Crimea .
 A series of interviews conducted in 2015 by the Levada Center with Russian government officials, journalists and journalists . Experts revealed that the main source of tensions has nothing to do with gay rights or other social issues .
 conflict arises when official representatives of Western countries go over the heads of government officials and talk about values directly with the Russian people .
 The regime is less disturbed by differences of opinion than it is by the sense that outsiders are encroaching on what it considers its exclusive purview .
 This same aversion is apparent in Russia’s approach to international relations . Russia's approach to foreign relations is also apparent in its approach to diplomacy .
 The Kremlin will not tolerate foreign influence in territories that it sees as its zone of vital interests, such as the former Soviet republics .
Anti-U.S. sentiments displayed by Russian elites are not merely the product of populist pandering .
 The upper echelon of the Russian ruling class suffers from the same phobias, myths, and complexes as the general population . These opinions are deeply entrenched in the ruling class, according to the author .
 Many of the complexes stem from the traumatic collapse of the Soviet Union . Many of these complexes are linked to the Soviet collapse .
 Moscow's loss of great power status has caused the pain of a phantom limb caused by Moscow’s loss of power .
Expressions of anti-Americanism and support for the annexation of Crimea also serve as a ritual through which many members of the elite affirm their loyalty to the regime .
 Russia and the West have increased the power of the siloviki, allowing them to justify the use of force . The ongoing confrontation with the West, the regime of mutual economic sanctions between the West and Russia, has increased their power . Russian support for the Donbas separatist republics in
 External confrontation has spurred a hunt for enemies within the country . They are dubbed foreign agents, national traitors, or members of the fifth column .
 The annexation of Crimea had a distinct impact on the nonsystemic opposition . Crimea's annexation had a significant impact on its opposition .
 Petersburg, the creative elite formed the nucleus of the protest movement that peaked in 2011-2012 .
 At the movement’s high point, this core included several thousand people . The movement's high point was in New York City .
 The protests never managed to articulate an alternative political agenda that might appeal to broad segments of the population . Yet the protests never manage to articulate a political agenda .
 The regime then launched a series of propaganda campaigns that largely succeeded in discrediting the protests, isolating their leaders and driving a wedge between them and Russian society as a whole .
The role of civil society and opposition leaders in these protests was limited to ensuring that marches remained peaceful . The role of the protesters was limited.
 The protest vote in the December 2011 State Duma elections and street demonstrations were a reflection of general dissatisfaction with the authorities . The street demonstrations that followed were the result of dissatisfaction with authorities .
 Support for the regime had plummeted by the end of 2011, with at least one-third of the population voicing disapproval for its policies and behavior .
 The opposition and a significant part of the population simply happened to share the same views for a brief period of time . They parted ways once again, after which they parted ways again .
 The annexation of Crimea drastically increased popular support for the regime .
 The extent of that change should be a source of major concern for the leaders of the protest movement, says the author .
 Public opinion research shows that the regime’s approval ratings are a better indicator of the likelihood of protests than direct questions .
Only isolated protests will take place if approval ratings remain high . It is probable that only isolated protests are possible .
 The Crimean operation and the war in Ukraine were of the protest movement from within . No matter what tactics opposition leaders might opt to pursue, mass protests are unlikely to occur .
 In a sense, they have been divided into vatniks, a derogatory term for supporters of the Donbas separatists . The term is a reference to cotton-padded jackets worn by members of the Soviet-era working class .
 For a time, this split stood in the way of any feeling of solidarity between protest leaders and the majority of the population . The split was seen as a sign of solidarity.
 The majority of the population does not care about the regime’s approval ratings and is not interested in politics, says the author .
 Many members of the Russian elite are among the "most informed" about current affairs . They rely on multiple sources of information, including online publications .
 Any significant fluctuation in the regime's approval ratings is bound to have a pronounced effect on this stratum of society .
 The Levada Center has received a barrage of criticism from Russian liberals for publishing polling results showing high levels of support for the Putin regime .
 Critics say data helps sustain the regime and demoralize decent members of the public .
 If the regime’s high post-Crimea ratings demoralize one segment of the Russian elite, the converse is also happening . The polls help consolidate the other section of the elite.
 As long as the vast majority of the population supports the president, elites are unlikely to rebel .
 A precipitous drop in the regime’s ratings will embolden elites, but as of 2016, protest leaders and activists simply do not pose a serious threat to the political system .
 Some representatives of the elites are already showing some anxiety, but others are benefiting from the new situation . Some representatives have already shown some anxiety .
 For some senior regime figures with business interests that they do not want to sacrifice, the threat of sanctions is a tangible issue .
 Novaya Gazeta published an alleged transcript of a meeting of the Russian Football Union . Some of the members of the union are among the wealthiest people in Russia .
 precious few individuals are willing to risk challenging the party line . However, precious few people have been willing to do so .
 The sanctions regime has created a number of opportunities for profiteering or accessing state budgetary support for certain well-positioned members of the elite .
 Agrokompleks, which is affiliated with Agriculture Minister Alexander Tkachev, became the top domestic milk producer in 2014 .
 The company benefited directly from the food embargo that the Kremlin imposed on European producers . The Kremlin imposed a food embargo on European produce .
 A firm controlled by businessman Arkady Rotenberg was commissioned to build a bridge . The bridge will connect Russia's Krasnodar region to Crimea .
 The firm owned by Igor Rotenberg became the operator of the newly introduced Platon electronic toll collection system for heavy trucks that will be paid for with reportedly more than 10 billion rubles from the Russian budget . The firm owns the company that owns the firm that operates the system.
Public statements by key government ministers. Public statements by government ministers include their speeches and interviews .
 Petersburg International Economic Forum also shed some light on elite opinion . The forum also shed light on some of the world's most influential figures .
 interviews with representatives of Russian officialdom provide additional insight . Research interviews with officials provide more insight into Russia's officialdom .
Government technocrats and members of the economic elite are generally reasonably familiar with the current economic situation, they say . They suggest that government technocrats are generally well aware of the current situation .
 The elite could have come up with a strategy to deal with or prevent the current crisis . Had they not been constrained by their leadership, these parts of the elite could be able to solve the crisis .
 The deepening economic crisis has encouraged a tougher and more open debate among the elite about the country's economic performance and possible economic reforms .
 High-level policy is aimed at maintaining social stability, fulfilling leaders’ geopolitical ambitions, and helping them stay in power for as long as possible . But as a rule, high-level policies are meant to maintain social stability .
 This gives the impression that economic decisions are delayed until the very last possible minute . This gives an impression of economic decisions being delayed. This gives a sense of the delay in economic decisions .
 The regime is willing to compromise on various principles for the sake of self-preservation . This suggests that the regime may be willing to compromises on various rules for self-Preservation .
 The regime is forced to accept certain economic recommendations should not be Denis Volkov . Volkov: "It is a sign of openness to democratic reforms. Thus, the fact that the regime is forcing to accept some economic recommendations shouldn't be Volkov"
 All in all, the system shows no signs of openness to making fundamental changes to the status quo . The system is not open to changing its status quo, according to experts .
 The outlook of today’s technocrats is similar to views held by so-called bourgeois specialists during the early days of Bolshevik regime .
 They realize they cannot change the government’s course and are ready to do their job as directed in order to minimize risk to themselves . They realize that they cannot changed the government's course and that they can't change it .
In other words, they feel like paid servants of the state . As it happens, they receive competitive salaries that help them overcome numerous moral dilemmas .
 There is no reason to assume that technocrats are making key political decisions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Countrywide polls carried out on a regular basis by the Levada Center can offer a rough idea of the opinions held by the ruling elite . The exception of those people at the very highest levels.
 The group that can be identified as the decisionmakers includes managers, directors, and officials . The group also includes managers and directors .
 The affluent, affluent, and information-savvy segments of society make up one of the most successful, affluent segments of the society . They make up a majority of the population .
 They read newspapers and online news sources twice as often as the general population . They also watch independent television channels . Media that promote the official agenda are still their primary source of information .
 This group supports the regime and its key decisions as much as the general population . This group is based in London, London and Paris .
Like the average respondent, it also holds Putin accountable for both successes and failures .
 As for this group's behavior during elections, it is more likely to vote for the ruling United Russia than any other party .
Members of the rukovoditeli segment of the elite are slightly more favorably inclined toward opposition figures than the general public . On the whole, rukvoditel are even more hostile to the opposition than the rest of the population .
 opinions among the rukovoditeli are quite polarized . As in other wellinformed groups, opinions are quite polarization .
Members of the rukovoditeli are primarily concerned with economic issues, such as inflation, unemployment, and devaluation of the ruble . They mention this panoply of issues twice as often as other respondents .
 On the whole, these people are better informed than the general population and are thus able to assess problems more accurately .
 Russia's economy, politics, and international achievements are skeptical about Russia’s achievements . They are rather skeptical about the state of Russia.
Despite their understanding of the present situation, they are not particularly concerned about it . But despite their understanding, they aren't concerned about the situation .
 The group has no illusions about the current state of affairs and does not believe that the situation will improve . Its members also feel that they will be able to adjust to declining living standards better than others .
 Russia's leadership has the situation under control and will be able to weather the storm. They still appear to believe that Russia is heading in the right direction .
 The regime uses various monetary incentives to buy the loyalty of a significant part of the elite . It should also be noted that the regime uses several monetary incentives .
 It does this through salary increases, and other forms of financial assistance, says Russian official . It's both at the top of the pyramid and at the very bottom, he says .
 As the federal budget grows leaner, the regime risks losing the support of entire segments of its base over the long term . The regime is likely to lose support of the elite and the broader public .
 Inter-elite conflicts are likely to multiply if the economic slump continues. Inter-Elite conflicts likely to continue if the economy continues to suffer .
 The government's main strategy will likely be to reduce spending in areas where it feels it can afford to do so and to pay for things that it thinks matter the most .
 The security services and state sector employees will probably be among those least affected by spending cuts . The government cannot afford to lose the support of these groups, it says .
 It also appears that if the regime is unable to stem discontent among and fragmentation of the elite, it will try to make sure that any dissatisfied elements are those who pose the least danger to its survival .
There is a great deal of speculation whether sanctions and economic decline could conceivably lead to some form of regime change .
 President Putin even found it necessary to address the prospect at one of his press conferences . This issue has been actively debated for the last few years .
 The military-security establishment appears to be the most organized force in the Russian political system . The Russian military- security establishment is most organized in the country's political system.
 Theoretically speaking, members of this group are the most capable of carrying out a coup . Theoretic speaking, they are the ones most capable.
Recent developments have provided siloviki with additional power and clout, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The confrontation with the West, the endless information warfare, and the lukewarm conflict in eastern Ukraine have provided the silovki with extra power .
 The driver's seat is effectively in the driver’s seat already, and presumably has little interest in making radical changes . That means they are effectively in that seat already .
 Putin’s popularity ratings remain high, but significant cross-sections of the Russian elite will likely continue to see him as a suitable arbiter .
 It is possible that the siloviki will choose to increase a host of repressive measures aimed at independent media, civil society, and independent political organizations .
 The majority of elites prefer quiet and comfort over confrontation, according to the report . But further attempts by the state to impose such repressive policies could encounter resistance from elites .
 Few if any of them will voice their discontent openly, even if some end up quietly sabotaging the government's decisions .
As far as the liberal sections of the elite are concerned, the events from 2008 to 2011 demonstrated they are no match for the resurgent military-security establishment .
 Most liberal elites are agitated about the state of the economy and connect their personal well-being and financial interests with the outside world . They are wary of jeopardizing their positions in the system through public shows of discontent .
 Its members neither make key decisions nor have the ability to act in unison . The group's members are not able to make a key decision .
 dissidents will likely be purged from the government. They are well aware that dissidents are likely to be purges from government .
 Those who supported the 2011-2012 protests lost to those who backed the 2011–2012 protests .
Only a protracted economic crisis might conceivably change the political situation in Russia if it managed to undermine elites’ faith in the government’s ability to deal with outside factors such as sanctions .
Deteriorating living standards and a lack of confidence in the future will inevitably reduce popular support for the regime . The likelihood of protests will increase the likelihood of demonstrations, according to experts .
 Under these circumstances, elites will likely feel freer to express their views, but it is unlikely that they will lead to regime change from within the system .
 The decay of Russia's administrative apparatus is more probable, especially under the circumstances of a protracted economic crisis and diminishing resources .
 The military-security establishment will remain decisive. But even then, the military- security establishment will be decisive .
 The future of Putin's regime will primarily hinge on the establishment’s loyalty. The future will be determined by the establishment's loyalty .
 The 2006 Levada Center survey was conducted by Gudkov, Dubin, and Levada, Problema “elity’s v segodnyashney Rossii .
 For the 2008 Nikkolo M survey (1,003 respondents), see the results of the 2008 survey . For the 2009 survey, see the 2008 results.
 The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace is a unique global network of policy research centers in Russia, China, Europe, the Middle East, and the United States .
 Our mission, dating back more than a century, is to advance the cause of peace through analysis and development of fresh policy ideas and direct engagement .
Working together, our centers bring the inestimable benefit of multiple national viewpoints to bilateral, regional, and global issues .