 The presidential campaign is receiving wall-to-wall coverage from Russia's federal channels . It's election season on Kremlin TV .
 Moscow’s obsession with all things Ukrainian is well-documented . It reflects the centrality of information operations to Vladimir Putin's five-year hybrid war against Ukraine .
 The absence of a preferred pro-Russian candidate is interesting, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Kremlin is focused on discrediting the electoral process itself . Instead, the Kremlin is focusing on discredititing the election process itself.
 The spectacle of a dictatorship accusing its neighbor of democratic shortcomings may at first glance seem absurd . But this strategy makes perfect sense, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia is simply getting its excuses in early. With no chance of achieving a favorable result, Russia is just getting its excuse in early . Russia has a history of getting excuses.
 There was a time in the not so distant past when Moscow was guaranteed a leading role in any Ukrainian election . Moscow was not so far from the past when it was guaranteed the leading role.
 Viktor Yanukovych secured 49 percent of the vote to win the Ukrainian presidency less than a decade ago . The Kremlin ally won the presidency in 2008 .
 Russia's current leading candidate Yuriy Boyko will be happy if he secures more than 10 percent in Sunday’s first round of voting . Such figures are beyond the wildest dreams of the current lead candidate .
 Ukraine's three leading presidential candidates denounce Putin’s war while burnishing their credentials as opponents of Kremlin aggression . Meanwhile, Russia must watch from the sidelines as Ukraine's leading presidential candidate denounce Putin's war .
 Putin has made it clear that Russia does not want incumbent Petro Poroshenko to secure a second term . Putin has said that Russia is not interested in Poroshenko .
 Volodymyr Zelenskiy is probably the preferred Kremlin choice due to his support for the Russian language and stated readiness to negotiate bilaterally with Moscow . The comedian is likely to be the preferred choice for the Kremlin .
 Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has spoken of the need to wage a Russian-language information war against the Kremlin . He has repeatedly ruled out any compromises that would sacrifice Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Yulia Tymoshenko is seen as a potential improvement due to her past readiness to cut murky gas deals with the Kremlin . She has spent much of the campaign promising the return of occupied eastern Ukraine and Crimea, while lambasting Poroshenko over alleged defense sector corruption .
 Both Zelenskiy and Tymoshenko have faced campaign trail attempts to portray them as Kremlin stooges . But in reality they are a million miles away from openly pro-Russian politicians who once dominated the Ukrainian electoral landscape .
 They are also operating in a drastically changed political environment . Crucially, they are operating in an extremely different political environment.
 Ukrainian public opinion strongly opposes anything even hinting at capitulation to the Kremlin . Even if either of Poroshenko's chief rivals were personally inclined to seek a negotiated compromise with Russia, they would find their room for maneuver severely restricted .
 Russia has become so toxic to Ukrainian voters. It is not difficult to understand why Russia has been so Toxic to Ukraine .
 Moscow's hybrid war has killed over 13,000 Ukrainians and left millions of lives in tatters . Since the outbreak of hostilities in 2014, Moscow’s ongoing hybrid war.
 The Kremlin’s fateful decision to attack Ukraine has proven a geopolitical blunder of historic proportions . It has fractured what was previously one of the most closely entwined bilateral relationships on the planet .
 Moscow’s miscalculation has its roots in the lingering imperial hubris that prevents many in Russia from thinking of Ukraine as a separate country .
 The Kremlin genuinely believed local populations would welcome the Russian seizure of Ukrainian towns and cities in spring 2014 .
 Ukraine's volunteer war effort came as a nasty surprise that led to the current stalemate . The grassroots opposition Russia encountered from Ukraine’s volunteer war efforts .
 Moscow now finds itself trapped in its eastern Ukrainian enclaves, unwilling to advance due to the prohibitive costs this would involve . Moscow is unable to retreat for fear of sparking a nationalist backlash inside Russia itself .
 The Kremlin has occupied enough of Ukraine to inflict national trauma, but not enough to dictate terms to the rest of the country . The Kremlin is in charge of the Ukraine, but has not yet dictated terms for the remainder of Ukraine .
 Putin's invasion has effectively disenfranchised the Kremlin’s traditional electoral base of Ukrainian supporters . As well as turning Ukrainian public opinion decisively against Russia, it has also turned public opinion against Russia .
 The three Ukrainian regions currently under Russian occupation provided the lion’s share of votes for Yanukovych in the 2010 presidential race .
 Russia's removal from the Ukrainian democratic process dramatically reduces Russia’s ability to influence the outcome of future Ukrainian elections . The removal of Ukraine's democratic process reduces Russia's influence on future elections .
 With the loss of Crimea and part of the Donbas, 3.75 million fewer Ukrainians can vote . In 2010, 87 percent of these voters backed pro-Russian candidate Yanukovych .
 A quarter of Yanukovych's voters cannot vote on Sunday . This means that a quarter of the Yanukovych’s voters can’t vote for the president .
 Moscow has lost ground since 2014. There is no reason to believe Moscow can eventually regain the ground it has lost since 2014 . Moscow has been struggling to regain ground since then .
 Russia’s remaining Ukrainian voters are overwhelmingly pensioners clinging to increasingly anachronistic notions of a shared Soviet past .
Post-independence Ukrainians with no personal memory of the Soviet era will inevitably be informed by the current conflict .
 The removal of Russia as a leading electoral force in Ukrainian politics is arguably the most significant geopolitical outcome of Putin’s war . Russia's removal of the country's leading political force in Ukraine is a major geopolitical outcome .
 Ukraine has broadened its economic horizons while cutting religious, cultural, and social ties to the former imperial master . It is part of a broader process taking shape over the past five years that has seen the erosion of Russian soft power tools .
 Trade with Russia has withered to a fraction of its former levels as exports to European and Asian markets have boomed .
 Ukrainians now enjoy visa-free travel to the European Union and have their own Orthodox Church . Ukrainians can now travel to Europe without a visa to visit the EU .
 Millions have ditched Kremlin-controlled social media platforms in favor of Facebook . Russian serials no longer dominate Ukrainian TV schedules .
 Russian aggression has been the catalyst for Russia's aggression . Russia has been accused of aggression in recent years .
 Ukraine’s nation-building odyssey is still a work in progress . It may take decades before the divorce from Russia is complete .
 Moscow’s bystander status in the current Ukrainian presidential race illustrates how rapidly the split has escalated since 2014 . Nevertheless, Moscow's bystander Status in the presidential race shows how rapidly it has escalated .
 Kremlin pundits rave about rigged votes and falsification as much as they wish, but the fact remains that Putin’s dreams of informal empire have suffered a decisive defeat .
 Three hundred years of Russian dominance over Ukraine are drawing to a close, and the Kremlin has nobody to blame but itself .