 US intelligence has told how the Kremlin is preparing for new sanctions . U.S. intelligence says the Kremlin has been preparing for a new sanctions.
 Russia is ready for the introduction and gradual expansion of the UN mission in the Donbas . The UN mission is currently in the region of Russia .
 Private intelligence in the United States named the names of officials and oligarchs . The names of U.S. officials were also named .
 IMF considers unacceptable the President's bill on anticorruption trial . IMF considers it unacceptable to the President. IMF considers the bill unacceptable .
 Protesters were arrested for actions under the ""Strike of Voters"" in Russia . They spoke about the consequences of future U.S. sanctions against Putin's environment .
 WADA told about the involvement of the Russian president in the doping system . WADA said that the president had been involved in doping .
 Servicemen of Ukraine, the USA, Great Britain, Canada, and more than 10 countries of NATO and partners began preparations for the ""Rapid Trident-2018"" exercises .
 Ambassador Volker says U.S. makes preparations to supply Javelin systems to Ukraine . He says United States makes preparations for supply of systems .
 As a result of the actions of Russian troops in Syria more than 5.000 civilians were killed . More than 5,000 people were killed by Russian troops .
 The Government of the Russian Federation held a series of meetings to develop strategies to protect elites and oligarchs from new U.S. sanctions .
 The Kremlin has dismissed large state-owned firms from the need to disclose their counterparties . Less people are included in the list of United States sanctions, so that less people are listed .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin called on the elite and the oligarchs to return their assets from abroad .
 The Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank of the Russian Federation offered methods of anonymous money transfers . The Russian Federation also offered methods to transfer money .
 The government also allowed the purchase of eurobonds worth € 3 billion to Russian business elites . The purchase of Eurobonds was also offered anonymity .
 In recent months, many Russian companies have involved international capital markets and issued bonds worth hundreds of millions of dollars . Many oligarchs fear state control and the propensity of the authorities to nationalize assets, says the material .
 Moscow called the list of prepared oligarchs an attempt to destabilize the country financially and politically in the year of elections . It is noted that Moscow called it an attempt by Moscow to destabilise the country financial and politically .
 The Kremlin has laid the foundation for sanctions against the United States in response to the U.S. The Kremlin is waiting to see how far Washington will go .
 Russia is ready to ensure that the UN peacekeeping mission in the Donbas is located not only on the clash line, but also in its broader territories . Russia is prepared to ensure the mission is located in the region .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker announced the results of the meeting with Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov . This was announced during a telephone conference with journalists .
 In his view, when a peacekeeping mission begins to work, it may eventually expand . The mission may eventually be expanded .
 In the end, we will have a peacekeeping mission throughout the entire territory "," says Volker .
 The previous meeting between Surkov and Volcker took place in mid-November 2017 in Belgrade .
 Russia has agreed on three of the 29 paragraphs of the U.S. proposal to deploy peacekeepers in the Donbas . Surkov said that Russia had agreed on 3 of 29 paragraphs in the United States proposal .
 Special Representative U.S. Volker: I do not believe Russia has decided to withdraw troops from Donbas .
 Russia has not taken any steps to end the armed conflict in the Donbas and stop the aggression in Ukraine . Russia is not taking steps to stop the conflict in Ukraine and end the aggression .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker spoke about Russia and Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov . Volker was speaking to journalists during a telephone conference with journalists .
 Surkov discussed the return of Russia to the Joint Center for the Control and Coordination of Fire . They also discussed the restoration of mobile communications in the Donbas .
 Surkov stressed Russia's concern about problems with mobile communications in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 Russians and Ukrainians exchanged before Christmas . There was a successful exchange before Christmas.
 In the Donbass today, there is very limited access to the Red Cross mission . In addition, he added that in the Don Bass today there are very limitedAccess to the mission .
 Interfax: Volker and Surkov had not reached a common position on the law on the de-occupation of the Donbas . Earlier Interfax, referring to sources, reported that Volker, Surkov hadn't reached acommon position .
 The previous, third meeting on the settlement of the situation in the Donbas took place in mid-November last year in Belgrade .
 The United States is expected to introduce new sanctions on Russian elites . Russian elites are expected to be divided into four categories .
 A great interest in the alleged contributors to the list of oligarchs is supported by the assumptions that his publication could mean for the administration of the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin and Russia as a whole .
 The first category of elites that may be subject to sanctions are higher Kremlin officials . They are directly involved with Putin's administration and mechanisms for implementing foreign policy .
 According to intelligence officers, the Russian oligarchs have huge treasures and assets . They basically rose in the 90's, according to the intelligence officers .
 New U.S. sanctions against Russia will not be as powerful as to change Russia's policy in the Donbass and Crimea, but over time they can make the Russian side more compliant . New sanctions will not have the same impact on Russia as new sanctions .
 Former Polish ambassador to Ukraine. Jacek Kluczkowski is now coordinator for Ukraine at the Institute for Eastern European Studies in Warsaw .
 New sanctions will hardly be able to significantly affect the change of attitude towards Ukraine and the occupied territories . But they may in some way make the Russian side more inclined to partner conversation.
 The main thing is not the difference between the U.S. and the EU, but the settlement of the conflict, says Jacek Kluczkowski .
 Most of the detainees were released from police stations without protocols . Most of them were released without protocols. Most were released by police stations.
 16 people were detained in Moscow, including the organizer of the shares of Alexei Navvalny and member of his federal headquarters Nikolai Lyaskin .
 On Lyskina they made a report on violation of Article 20 of the Code of Administrative Offenses . Navalny was released without a protocol under the obligation to appear .
 4 people were arrested in Arkhangelsk, 4 were in Astrakhan, 6 were in Veliky Novgorod, 23 were in Murmansk, 13 were in Petrozavodsk, 16 were in Tula, and 5 were in Saransk .
 The largest number of detainees was in Ufa, Volgograd and Cheboksary . 31 people were detained in Kemer . 31 were detained.
 "Strike of Voters" took place in dozens of Russian cities on the eve of January 28 .
 Navalny called on Russian citizens to boycott the presidential elections . Earlier Navalny said Russian citizens should boycott the elections .
Moravetsky stressed that the previous interpretation of the law did not satisfy Poland . Moravetsky stresses that the current interpretation did not satisfied Poland .
"This is a very important moment for us in our negotiations with the United States," says the head of the Polish government . "It's not just about our energy security, but also about the security of the entire region," adds the Polish the government .
 "North Stream 2" involves the construction and operation of two strands of the gas pipeline . The pipeline is from the coast of Russia through the Baltic Sea to Germany .
 Poland, the Baltic States and Denmark argue that North Stream 2 will increase EU dependence on Gazprom . Gazprom already supplies about one third of the EU's gas volume .
 Germany is the lead beneficiary of the North Stream 2 project . Germany says the project will add resources to the market and reduce prices .
 The construction of the new North Stream 2 gas pipeline through Gazprom through the Baltic Sea will cause Ukraine significant losses, which may amount to 3% of gross domestic product, which is about $ 3 billion in 2017 .
 Gazprom completed the construction of a part of the "Turkish Stream" in Russia . The construction of the Turkish Stream in Russia was completed in the summer .
 North Stream 2 project will increase Europe's vulnerability to supply shortages in Russia and cause economic damage to Ukraine . State Department spokesman Heather Naurer said that the North Stream2 project will increased Europe's vulnerable to supply shortage .
 Former head of Moscow anti-doping laboratory, Grigori Rodchenkov, told about the involvement of Russian President Vladimir Putin in the state doping system .
 I report in front of the Nagorny, NagornYh before Mutk, and Mutko . I report on Putin's visit to the Russian capital .
 Putin can not deny that he knew about the doping system, "Rodchenkov said .
 Recall earlier Rodchenkov also told that the RF government asked him to substitute the Ukrainian champion .
 The Kremlin is convinced that the preparation of the so-called Kremlin report is an attempt to influence the presidential election in Russia . The report is due to come to the United States Congress in the near future .
 The press secretary of the Russian President Dmitry Peskov answered journalists' questions firmly . Peskov said the report is not an attempt to destabilize the situation before the presidential elections in Russia .
"We really believe that this is a direct and obvious attempt to confine some actions to the elections so as to influence them," Peskov said . Peskov: "This is adirect and obvious attempts to influence the elections"
 The Kremlin intends to analyze the consequences of the preparation of the "Kremlin report" in order to protect companies that may appear on this list .
 The U.S. Department of the Treasury is preparing a report on individual sanctions against Russian oligarchs and officials . The report is expected to be released in February 2018 .
 Russia's intervention in the 2016 U.S. presidential election, in particular the annexation of Crimea, and bombing civilians in Chechnya and Syria . The murder of Yuriy Shchekochikhin, Anna Politkovskaya, Alexander Litvinenko, Sergei Magnits
 He also expressed hope that cooperation with Russia on key global issues will continue . He said sanctions imposed against Russia will no longer be needed .
 The document reduces the maximum term of lending to Russian banks subject to sanctions, up to 14 days, and for oil and gas sector companies up to 30 days . The document also reduces the minimum term of loans to Russian banking companies .
 The U.S. president can impose sanctions on individuals who intend to invest more than $ 5 million per year or $ 1 million in construction of Russian export pipelines once . The sanctions can be imposed if they want to invest $5 million or $1 million.
 The law obliges the U.S. president to agree in advance with the Congress any mitigation or abolition of sanctions . The law also obliges President Obama to agree to a mitigation or abolish sanctions .
 The head of the White House will not be able to remove the restrictive measures by a personal decree .
 The United States President's ability to lift sanctions is limited, according to a new document . Previous restrictions are fixed at the law .
 The General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine is the head of the military's press service . The Ukrainian army is the largest military force in Ukraine .
 During the planning process, British and Canadian military personnel, as well as army officers from more than 10 NATO member countries and North Atlantic Alliance partners, are actively involved .
 During the week, participants will work on developing and practicing common documents that regulate each stage of training future .
 The Ukrainian-American military exercises take place on the territory of the International Center for Peacekeeping and Security in Lviv region since 2006 .
 The purpose of their conduct is to prepare the military of different countries for joint actions within the multinational forces during the coalition operations .
 In different years, from 1 to 3 thousand troops from different countries participated in the exercises . The exercises took place in different years .
 Ukrainians and Ukraine supporters around the globe join the campaign to boycott FIFA World Cup 2018 in Russia .
 The rally was held outside the Russian embassy in London .
 FIFA's decision to hold the World Cup was bought by the corrupt regime with blood money," the rally participants said . FIFA said the decision was made by a corrupt regime "with blood money"
 The activists also urged Putin to stop the war in Ukraine’s Donbas region and take his troops away from the soil .
 Ukraine and U.S. authorities make joint efforts to deliver Javelin anti-tank missile systems to Ukrainian Armed Forces . It takes time to make necessary preparations for the missile systems .
 The United States has started preparations for the transfer of the Javelin anti-tank missile systems to the Ukrainian Armed Forces, U.S. Special Envoy for Ukraine says .
 It takes time to prepare everything the facilities where everything will be stored . It takes place in the days ahead of the start of the transfer process .
 The Armed Forces are working together on how to transport them and involve them in the work of the Armed Forces .
Volker: "We only hope to fill some ""white spots" in Ukraine's defensive capabilities . The Ukraine conflict continues to escalate .
 This is precisely a defensive weapon, not for attack and not for use on the contact line . So this is not for attacking, but for using contact line. This is exactly a defensive weapons, not a defense weapon .
 U.S. negotiator on Ukraine says Ukraine "largely shares this position" "I think that Ukraine largely share this position," he says .
 Dinara Idrisova was brutally beaten up in Russia's St. Petersburg on January 28 . The human rights defender was beaten up by a police officer .
 A human rights activist decided to remove him from the altitude during the opposition rally . He rose to the house at the intersection of the Tver and Odessa streets .
 When he decided to leave the house, he was shot down by three men standing on the staircase .
 The blow came from the tangent, and I did not lose my consciousness . Fortunately, I managed to react, and the blow came out of my head .
 The camera was fixed on the chest on a microscope, and everything went on without words . Then he began to methodically beat his head, mostly legs, with the help of one of them .
 I tried to defend myself, has substituted a hand it has been broken," says Idrisov . "I tried to defending myself," he says . "My hand has beenbroken," he adds .
 He has fracture of the left shin with fragments, hematoma of the temporal region, closed craniocerebral trauma, concussion of the brain .
 Idrisov notes that he will try to find the guilty, but does not believe in the success of this venture . Idrisova says he will attempt to find out the guilty .
 Paulafort, chief political strategist to Ukraine's ex-President Viktor Yanukovych, had an inside man in every country's ministry .
 As reported by Censor.NET citing The Atlantic, The Atlantic's work, the source of the status he cherished, had taken a turn .
 For nearly a decade, he had counted primarily on a single client, albeit an exceedingly lucrative one . He had counted mostly on a one client, but he had a lucrative one.
 He'd been the chief political strategist to the man who became the president of Ukraine . He'd developed a highly personal relationship with the president .
afort would swim naked with his boss outside his banya, play tennis with him at his palace . He would generally serve as an arbiter of power in a vast country .
Only a small handful of Americans could claim to have ever amassed such influence in a foreign regime . Only a small few could claim that they had any influence .
 The power had helped fillafort’s bank accounts, according to his indictment . He had tens of millions of dollars stashed in havens like Cyprus and the Grenadines .
Manafort had profited from the sort of excesses that make a country ripe for revolution .
 In the early months of 2014, protesters gathered on the Maidan, Kyiv’s Independence Square, and swept his patron from power . In the past year, he was swept from power.
Manafort avoided any harm by keeping a careful distance from the enflamed city .
 Kyiv's office was filled with papers that he would not have wanted to fall into public view or the wrong hands . But in his Kyiv office, he'd left behind a safe filled with documents he wouldn't have wanted .
Manafort had cut a trail of foreign money and influence into Washington . He built that trail into a superhighway .
 When it comes to serving the interests of the world's autocrats, he's been a great innovator . He's been an innovator.
 Special Counsel Robert Mueller alleges money laundering, false statements, and other acts of personal corruption . He was indicted in October after an investigation by Mueller .
Manafort's role in Mueller’s broader narrative remains carefully guarded, and unknown to the public .
 His personal corruption is less significant, ultimately, than his lifetime role as a corrupter of the U.S. system .
 That he would be accused of helping a foreign power subvert American democracy is a fitting coda to his story .
Sytnyk announced the start of identification of all persons indicated in the documents . The NABU will take measures to prevent their possible escape from the country .
 5783 civilians died in Syria as a result of Russian military actions from September 30, 2015 to December 31, 2017 . The involvants will be charged under the "offering of undue profit" article of the Criminal Code of Ukraine .
 According to Tsensor.NET, the Syrian Observatory on Human Rights is based in the United Kingdom .
 The Russian military campaign in Syria began on September 30, 201 .
 The coalition repeatedly accused Moscow of supporting the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad . Western countries are accused of massive human rights violations .
 The occupation administration on the territory of the occupied part of the Donetsk region turned into a site of mass denial and hatred . Vodafone was disconnected in a few days due to the disconnection of mobile communication .
 Russian propagandist Andriy Babitsky actively supported the separatists and settled in occupied Donetsk . He said that such an opinion was expressed by the propagandists .
 Vodafon became the object of mass denial and hatred, and they are cursed by thousands of people, "he wrote in social networks"
 Ministry of Communications says connection is not due to Ukraine . No one, of course, believes in the statement of the ministry of Communications that the connection is.
 The whole republic, all the elderly are convinced that Phoenix took advantage of the situation in order to establish monopoly on the market, the Russian propagandist writes .
"This is really a social collapse, a tragedy for hundreds of thousands of our elderly people," he says . He appeals to the occupation authorities of the occupied part of the Donetsk region .
 The United States Special Representative for Ukraine, Kurt Volker, has handed over to Russia lists of those who are still hostage to militants in the Donbas . Volker is the U.S. Special Representative.
 He announced this during a telephone conference with journalists . He told about a meeting with Putin's assistant Vladislav Surkov .
Suriname Russian side recorded names during meeting with Suriname. In addition, he added that during the meeting, he recorded these names .
 Vladislav Surkov and K Wolker met in Dubai on January 26 . Surkov is a aide to the Russian president .
 V Surkov and K Walker did not reach a meeting in Dubai for a single position on the law on the reintegration of the Donbas .
Concrete decisions based on the results of the meeting are not accepted . Concrete decisions are not made based on results of meeting .