 After invading on February 24th, Ukraine's troops quickly advanced on Kyiv, Ukraine’s capital .
 Russia says its war aim is now to “liberate’s Donbas, a region in eastern Ukraine . They have since retreated, and Russia says it is now trying to "liberate" Donbas .
 Ukraine's president says Russia's renewed assault on the region has begun . The Donbas region comprises Donetsk and Luhansk, two provinces in eastern Ukraine .
 Roughly one-third of Mariupol has been controlled by pro-Russian separatists since 2014 . Since the war began in February Russian troops have taken a lot more.
 In April, hostilities erupted in eastern Ukraine, where a patchwork of poorly co-ordinated militias began seizing government buildings in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic declared independence in May 2014 . These groups were almost entirely composed of disgruntled locals and sympathisers .
 The would-be statelets regarded themselves as “Novorossiya’ — a revived term for southern Ukrainian territory conquered by the Russian empire in the 18th century . They appeared poised to retake the separatist-held territories .
Russian reinforcements rolled in from across the border, knocking the Ukrainians back . But Russian reinforcements rolled into Ukraine, knocking them back .
 A hasty peace deal between Ukraine, Russia and the separatists halted the onslaught . The peace deal was a hasty deal between the two countries .
 The agreement, known as Minsk I, soon broke down, and by January 2015 full-scale fighting had broken out again . By January 2015, the agreement had broken down again .
 Germany's chancellor, Angela Merkel, and France's president, François Hollande, stepped in to revive the ceasefire . That left large swathes of Donbas under the separatists’ control .
 A 500km ‘line of contact’ bristling with trenches and landmines, cut through the region . The region has a 500km line of contact.
 Mr Putin recognised the entirety of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent entities in February .
 Russia has given up on taking all, or even most, of Ukraine and re-focused on the east of the country .
 Ukrainian forces are advancing south from Izyum, north from Mariupol, and pressing in areas like Severodonetsk . That would mean advancing south. That would also mean advancing in areas where Ukrainian forces have been trapped .
 The proximity of Donbas to the border means Russia’s air force should prove stronger than it was around Kyiv .
 The Donbas region comprises Donetsk and Luhansk, two provinces in eastern Ukraine . Russia's renewed assault on the region has begun, says Ukraine's president .
 The trouble in Donbas dates back to the ‘Maidan Revolution’ in February 2014, when Viktor Yanukovych, Ukraine’s Russian-backed president, fled from Kyiv .
Ukrainian forces went on the offensive, and appeared poised to retake the separatist-held territories . Together, the would-be statelets regarded themselves as “Novorossiya’ — a revived term for southern Ukrainian territory conquered by the Russian empire in the 18th century
 Germany's chancellor, Angela Merkel, and France's president, François Hollande, stepped in to revive the ceasefire . That left large swathes of Donbas under the separatists’ control .
 Russia has given up on taking all, or even most, of Ukraine and re-focused on the east of the country . Russia has distributed hundreds of thousands of passports to residents of Donbas .
 Ukraine's president says Russia's renewed assault on the region has begun . Viktor Yanukovych fled from Kyiv in February 2014 after months of street protests .