 Russia's annexation of Crimea three years ago was formalized through a carefully staged process which quickly created facts on the ground . Russia’s annexation of the Crimea was formalised through a closely staged process .
 The occupation of the peninsula by Russian special forces in February 2014 was followed by a regional referendum under Russian control on 16 March 2014 . The Crimean authorities have requested to become a part of the Russian Federation .
 International law was violated and subsequent Western sanctions have done little to change the situation . International law has been violated and Western sanctions are not being implemented .
 The anniversary of the 2014 events brings into focus how the discourse surrounding them has evolved . The 2014 events were the first to mark the anniversary of their first anniversary .
 Crimea's "rightful place" in Russia is no longer limited to Russian circles. The narrative of Crimea’s “rightful places’ in Russia has been limited to Russia .
 Gwendolyn Sasse Sasse is a nonresident senior fellow at Carnegie Europe . She is also a senior fellow senior fellow.
 Her research focuses on Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, EU enlargement, and comparative democratization .
 A return of Crimea to Ukraine is impossible for the foreseeable future, at least not until the political dynamics have changed inside Russia . But it is generally accepted that a return to Crimea is impossible .
 It is deliberately left out of the protracted Minsk negotiations aimed at managing the war in the Donbas . It is deliberate left out in the protracted negotiations.
 A sub-text has developed in the media and in political and public perceptions that is misleading, it has developed . The Crimea issue has been postponed and postponed .
 Even those who condemn the annexation of Crimea as an unacceptable violation of territorial integrity make allowances for Russia’s historical claims to the peninsula .
 Russia’s three-hundred-year-long association with Crimea is a widespread topos in non-Russian circles too . The incorporation of the peninsula into the Russian Empire under Catherine the Great in 1783 is a wide-ranging topos .
 Russia took back what historically belonged to it, that Crimea is really Russian . Crimeans have always wanted to be part of Russia anyway .
 Russian discourse legitimizing the annexation of Crimea is reverberating widely . The annexation is legitimizing Russia's annexation.
 This narrative disregards Crimea's multiethnicity and the region’s history as an outpost that was contested by many different rulers .
 The Crimean Khanate gets too little attention, as do the deportation of the entire Crimean Tatar population to Central Asia and Siberia under Stalin in 1944 and the Crimean Tatars’ mass return since 1991 .
 The deportation cemented the idea of Crimea as a national homeland for the Crimean Tatars .
 Russian literary works, most notably by Pushkin and Chekhov, have anchored Crimea in the Russian cultural mindset . This literature has been more accessible than the oral and written literature of the Crimean Tatars .
 The transfer was pursued in an ad hoc fashion and did not follow the entire procedure for border changes as spelled out in the Soviet constitution .
 In the post-Stalin period ad hoc border changes were no longer the norm . In the past, border changes are no longer a norm .
 Crimea was already a special case in 1954 but the notion of the ‘present’ adds emotional force to what was essentially a Soviet administrative procedure .
Historical perceptions cloud the memory of the 2014 annexation of Crimea. Not only do these historical-cultural perceptions cloud memory of Crimea's annexation .
 The sequence of events in February-March 2014 is now often presented in Western media and public discourse as something that happened in response to the demands of the local population .
 In 2014 there was no regional mobilization for reunification with Russia or regional independence . However, in 2014 there were no regional mobilizations for reunization .
 Crimea was integrated into the Ukrainian state in the mid-1990s . Russia under Yeltsin chose not to back, Crimea had been integrated into Ukrainian state .
 The region was firmly integrated into the power base of the Yanukovych regime . It enjoyed a largely symbolic but constitutionally enshrined autonomy status .
 In 2014, a political context allowed for the mobilization of a latent pro-Russia sentiment in Crimea after the occupation had already occurred, not vice versa . In 2014.
 The Euromaidan and Yanukovych’s decision to leave Ukraine created an opportunity for Putin to enact a pre-prepared contingency plan unanticipated in the West . Putin has been given the chance to prepare his own contingency plan in Ukraine .
 Such events have to be analyzed and presented with great care, but otherwise fact and fiction get muddled in Western perceptions too . Such events must be analyzed.
 Crimea has a long and varied history of annexation and annexation . We can't buy into the current Russian narrative that is legitimizing the annexation of Crimea .