 It is contended that aggression in international affairs has different causes and consequences . It's contended that aggressive behavior in the world has different consequences .
 The paper examines the crisis posed in Ukraine following the flight of President Yanukovich and the institution of a pro-NATO and pro-European Union government .
 Russia's economic and military strengths and weaknesses are outlined against the background of the development of the Eurasian Economic Union . Russia’s economic andMilitary strengths and weakness are outlined in a report .
 It is contended that Russian policy under President Putin has been defensive and reactive . It's contended that Putin's policies have been defensive, reactive .
 Following the flight of President Yanukovich from Ukraine in February 2014, Russia has been widely condemned and regarded as a threat to political security in the West .
 One might distinguish between two ways of analysing a threat posed by a state in its conduct of foreign affairs .
First, there are aggressive actions resulting from a state's active policies . First, there is aggressive action resulting from the state’s active policies.
State leaders are motivated to attack other states for purposes of their own or their countries’ economic or political advantage . These stem from the actions of state leaders who are motivated by their countries' economic orpolitical advantage .
 Such policies may be driven by national or universalistic ideologies or the ambitions of leaders . Such policies are driven bynational or universalist ideologies or ambitions of leader .
 Second, there are actions that are reactive to the policies of other states . Third, there is a response to other states' policies .
 These actions are driven by anxiety derived from a belief that other states are behaving, or likely to behave, maliciously, says author .
 States with such perceptions may react aggressively to defend their interests . U.S. may react to such perceptions. States may respond aggressively to those perceptions .
 Cuba claimed that they were purely defensive missiles . U.S. perceived this as a threat and retaliatory action to defend its interests .
 The debate about “Russia as a threat to the international order hinges on which of these two approaches determines Russia’s behaviour .
 The Russian leadership as well as some Western commentators adopt the second approach . Some Western commentators have taken a second approach to Russia .
 The case for an active "threat" has been put by academics, political leaders as well as journalists writing in the quality news journals .
 Behind a smokescreen of lies he has renewed his drive to carve out a puppet para-state in eastern Ukraine .
 Putin regime is stoking mentality with its nationalist, anti-Western propaganda . The Putin regime has been accused of anti-West propaganda .
 Russian bombers nosing up the English Channel with their transponders off, potentially endangering civilian flights . In his war against the West he has deployed heavy military equipment, energy-supply blackmail, cyber-attack, propaganda by sophisticated, well-funded broadcasters, covert operations and
 In the academic sphere, Michael McFaul provides a more coherent analysis . McFaul's analysis is more coherent than in the academic spheres .
 Putin blamed the U.S. for demonstrations in Ukraine, the flight of President Yanukovich and the institution of a new pro-Western government .
 By ‘tilt the balance of power in his favor’ he annexed Crimea and supported mercenaries in eastern Ukraine . By “tilt’s’he annexed Crimea, he also supported mercenaries.
 Putin's geo-political goals include maximising his own power. In addition to maximising power, another theme driving Russian action in foreign affairs is Putin’s geo- political goals .
 The objective here is to halt the spread of Soviet norms into the post-Soviet period, which contaminate the preferred Western views of liberal democracy and the market .
 The manifestation of Russia’s geo-political aims is to be found in its geographical expansion .
 Russia has “contributed to’s emergence of four breakaway regions and left them as unrecognised states situated in frozen conflicts. Russia has also “directly supported’ the emergence of the four breakaways regions .
 Jeffrey Mankoff concedes that these ‘frozen conflicts’ are a legacy of the Soviet Union’s federalism . Many concentrated ethnic minorities within the Soviet republics .
 Moscow, in its annexation of Crimea, is seen to be making a deliberate strike against the West, as well as Ukraine . The annexation of the Crimea is seen as a deliberate attack on the West .
 Putin apparently believes he and Russia have more to gain from open confrontation with the U.S. and Europe than from cooperation .
 The fault, as perceived by Markoff, is rooted in President Putin’s ambition, says Markoff .
 The Economist can be relied on as a major source of Russian phobia . Of Western print media, the British weekly, The Economist is the most popular .
 Opposition to Western globalisation and his insistence on state sovereignty is only a means to enable Putin's personal power .
 Putin in this discourse is motivated by a thirst for power and imperial glory, says Putin . Putin in his discourse is inspired by the desire for power, he says .
 The ideology of Eurasianism and the formation of the Eurasian Union are indications of the desire to reinvent the Soviet Union .
 The antidote prescribed by Putin’s critics is to escalate economic, political and military sanctions .
 The Russian Federation is an “active’s threat to the international order, according to the Russian media . The country's political rhetoric would define the Russian Federation as an ‘active” threat.
 Russia is a destabilising force in Europe, which is illustrated by its initiation of aggression in Ukraine . Russia is also seen as a destabilised force in the West .
 Russia is expansionist and seeks to extend its power through the Eurasian Union . Russia is expanding its power and seeking to extend it through the Union .
 Eurasianism has been devised as a counter ideology to the West and rejects its values . The West has been criticised for its anti-Estonianism .
 Russia is hypocritical in its dealings with foreign countries when its interests are threatened . Russia's interests in foreign countries are threatened by its own interests .
 President Putin’s concern for personal power drives his internal and foreign policy . President Putin is concerned for his own personal power .
 I address these assertions by considering four major issues underlying Russian policies . I address them by considering three major issues.
 Russia's action is embedded in the political context and history in which Russia's actions are embedded . In doing so, I consider the politicalcontext and history of Russia’s action .
 Russian Federation has reacted in a defensive mode to Western policies, says author . Russia’s policies are to defend its own priorities, he says . Russia's policies are perceived as threatening, he adds .
 First, in its actions, we should consider if Russia has promoted a military build-up and whether it has recently engaged in unprovoked external aggression .
 Second, whether its ideology entails any threat to other states, nations or groups. Third, whether it is a threat to others or groups . Third, if it is an ideology that threatens other states.
 Third, whether its leaders are motivated to promote their own interests by de-stabilising the international order . Third, if its leaders want to promote its own interests, if they want to help others in the world .
 Russia’s transformation and decline in foreign policy has to be understood in the context of the dismantling of the Soviet bloc and its political and foreign networks .
 President Putin took over an economically and militarily weak state, which was politically divided, and lacking an integrative ideology . Putin took control of the country's economically and politically divided state .
 Russia’s move to open global markets, a private-property market economy and competitive electoral politics did not lead to the economic and political advances anticipated . Russia's move to opened global markets and a private property market economy didn't lead to economic advances anticipated.
 Privatisation involved the theft of public property on a vast scale accompanied by rampant corruption . The theft was carried out by a vast number of people.
 The anticipated ‘creative destruction’ of state socialism resulted in demolition of the former Soviet Union’s manufacturing industry and research capacity, but not to the promised renewal and innovation . The anticipated destruction of the state socialism led to demolition of manufacturing industry .
 Failures in electoral democracy led to widespread disenchantment among elites and people, says CNN's John Sutter . Failures of electoral democracy in the U.S. resulted in widespread disenchchantment, he says .
 The population had expected pluralistic capitalism to lead to significant improvement in well-being . But the result was economic decline, gross inequality and moral decay .
 Russia was widely regarded, domestically as well as abroad, as a failed state . Russia was regarded as a failing state .
 Commonwealth of Independent State was an association of states having little economic or political cohesion . The Commonwealth of independent State was a state with little economic and political cohesion.
 The policy of the leadership of the Russian Federation is to reverse these tendencies . The Russian Federation has a policy to reverse the tendencies of its leadership .
 This is the background for the widespread popular support in Russia for the assertive policy of President Putin . This is also the background to the widespread support for President Putin's policy .
 The rise of NATO and European Union enlargement Russia in foreign affairs was faced by two major challenges . The rise in NATO and the EU enlargement of Russia in the foreign affairs is faced by the rise of the EU .
 Russia was in decline and its regional bloc was moribund, the former adversaries of the Soviet Union had been considerably strengthened . Russia's regional bloc had been significantly strengthened .
 The expansion of NATO to the areas of the former USSR was framed in the context of a possible Russian move to seize former territories .
 NATO expansion was presented in terms of maintaining the security of Europe . NATO did not publicly consider Russia to be a “threat” and its expansion was justified .
 The expansion of NATO poses a serious threat to Russia’s security, according to the Russian government . The expansion is a major threat to the country's security .
 The enhanced security of the New Member States is at the cost of less security to Russia . Russia is the country's most important ally in the world .
 Putin objected to NATO enlargement and its plans for missile defence deployment in post-Soviet states of Eastern Europe .
 Visegrad countries, Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary joined in 1999 . In 2004, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia, Slovakia and Slovenia joined .
 Economically, politically and military, ‘the West’ had arrived at Russia’s borders . The West had arrived in Russia's borders .
 NATO membership is an indication of a future members' political orientation . NATO membership often precedes full membership of the European Union .
 NATO considered the addition of Ukraine and Georgia in April 2008 . At the urging of the United States, in 2008, in Bucharest, NATO considered adding Ukraine andGeorgia .
Germany and France disagreed with offering NATO membership to countries experiencing internal strife . Germany and France were not admitted to offer membership .
 The enlargement was not justified publicly in terms of the need for defence from an aggressive Russia, but to provide security in Europe .
 The policy of the Russian Federation under President Putin and President Medvedev entailed a major change towards the West . The policy infringed some established Western interests .
 In its Foreign Policy Concept, Russia’s objectives were to preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country . Russia's objectives are to preserve its sovereignty, territorial integrity and sovereignty .
 It identified attempts to create an international relations structure based on domination by developed Western countries in the international community . The structure was designed for unilateral solutions to key issues in world politics .
 Russia has joined the WTO and welcomed foreign direct investment . Economically, Russia has welcomed foreigndirect investment .
 The current political leadership offers a critique and an alternative, phrased in terms of a corporate state and economy predicated on national sovereignty .
 Russia has sought cooperation with Western powers, particularly the U.S. Russia is seeking cooperation with the United States .
 Russia sought an alliance with the U.S. in its war “on terror’s war ‘on terror,’ and allowed planes to use Russian airspace to fly to Afghanistan . The United States allowed U. S. planes to fly in Russian airspace.
 Russia voted to support the UN Security council’s sanctions against Iran . Russia voted in favor of the sanctions .
 Russia abstained from voting on the UN Security Council resolution authorising the use of force against the Qaddafi regime in Libya in 2011 . Russia also abstained on the U.S. vote on the resolution .
 Russia has been reactive and defensive in recent years, despite the incorporation of Crimea into the Russian Federation . In the light of its recent history, Russia is reactive and defensively .
 Putin emphasised the need to respect the interests of Russia . He said collaboration with the West should be acceptable . But he said it was necessary to respect Russia's interests .
 Russia is only respected and has its interests considered when the country is strong and stands firmly on its own feet . Russia's interests are considered when it is strong.
 Russia has generally enjoyed the privilege of conducting an independent foreign policy and this is what it will continue to do . Russia will continue its independent foreign policies, says the Russian government .
 Global security can only be achieved through cooperation with Russia rather than by attempts to push it into the background, weaken its geopolitical position or compromise its defences . I am convinced that global security canonly be achieved by cooperation.
 The second major challenge facing the states of the former USSR was the enlargement of the European Union to include the post-Soviet countries of central Europe .
 The European Union regarded enlargement as bringing not only economic wealth but also democratic European values . The EU regarded it as bringing economic wealth and democracy .
 The European Economic Community was founded as a union of democratic states . Its initial objective was to preserve peace in Europe by containing possible aggression by enveloping nation states within a common economic unit .
 The east was then under the Soviet sphere of influence . Enlargement to the east was not anticipated .
 The European Union helped in the dismantling of the Soviet bloc . Later, the European Union pursued a policy of cumulative addition to its membership .
 The development of a supra national state, the European Union, has outgrown the original conception . The European Union's development of the supra-national state has been outgrown by its original conception.
 It is now effectively a federal state composed of 28 member states, including 11 post-communist states . The state now has a total of 28 members, including eleven post- communist states .
 Membership requires the subordination of sovereignty of member states to a common economic, political and social policy framed in terms of neo-liberalism and competitive electoral polyarchy .
 New states have to conform to 31 chapters of the Acquis, which range over the whole area of economic and political life . New states must comply with 31 chapters.
 Foreign and defence policy must also be in keeping with EU norms and policy. Foreign and defense policy must be in keep with EU norm and policy .
 The enlargement of the European Union limits Russia's economic markets by changing the pattern of trade and narrows Russia’s political and economic space . The enlargements of the EU limits Russia.
 Russian companies are losing their decades-long positions in local commercial markets . Companies are being deprived of large commercial contracts .
 The niches thus vacated are being filled by the economic operatives of the states that had a hand in the change of the ruling regime .
 EU enlargement has been a quest for widening the market for EU commodities as well as a source of labour . The dismantling of the former industrial and research base of the New Member States has been released .
 It is the effects of EU policies of enlargement and the free movement of labour and capital that explain the rise in populist parties .
 The hand of President Putin is again at work, according to the Western media . Russian President Vladimir Putin is still in charge of the Kremlin .
 It requires a conspiratorial imagination to link the success of such fringe parties to the strategy of President Putin .
 Aims to discuss austerity programmes introduced as a consequence of the banking crisis of 2007 and the decline in confidence of voters in the main parties in Europe .
 Joining the European Union brings with it not only internal competitive electoral politics, but also a common foreign economic and political policy .
 Policies are limited by treaties, regulations, laws and forms of ownership as well as financial and fiscal requirements of the European Union .
The sovereignty of nation states has been undermined as political decision-making has passed to the federal union . The sovereignty of the nation states is being undermined by the union .
 As a customs union, the European Union fixes common tariffs with outsiders . The European Union is the world's largest customs union .
 The inclusion of the central European and Baltic post-socialist states in NATO was regarded as a threatening move by the Russian Federation .
 The policy of colour revolutions involving regime change was also a threat to incumbent leaders . The policy was also threat to incumbents, according to CNN .
 The process of ‘coloured revolutions’ was designed to topple incumbent authoritarian leaders and replace them with others disposed to EU membership . The process was designed by the EU to topple authoritarian leaders .
 National Endowment for Democracy has funded more than 60 projects in Ukraine . The association's ‘biggest prize’ was Ukraine, says Carl Gershman .
 The United States invested heavily in funding opposition groups, and coordinated efforts to bring about regime change . The U.S. also coordinated efforts from their embassies to bring down the regime .
 System change was promoted and supported by such organisations as the German Marshall Fund, the Westminster Foundation and the International Center on Nonviolent Conflict .
 The protagonists of coloured revolutions not only delegitimated the existing regimes . But they provided an ideological rationalisation of radical change .
 This involves influencing elections and backing those parties approved by the West’s leaders . This involves backing those party approved by West's leaders .
 What is ignored in much of the “diffusion of democracy’s literature is the power of Western governments and international organisations to influence political outcomes in host states .
 In the Eurasian Union, there is no propensity to expand aggressively either militarily or economically . In the ideology of the Eurasians, there's no propensity for expansion .
 The Eurasian Union seeks the advantages of economies of scale provided by a larger market . The European Union and North American Free Trade Area have done for several decades .
 The Eurasian Union idea is the autonomy of a Eurasian civilisation . What underpins the Eurasian idea is that it should be able to govern itself .
 Eurasianism does not claim universalism for its values but respect as a form of civilisation .
 There is a deep suspicion of the universality of Western values manifested in Western demands for electoral democracy, a liberal economy and autonomous civil society .
 There is a tension with the West in the ideological framework which opposes the Western ruling elites and their moral universalism . But there is also a tension over the freedom of privately owned media, social “diversity’ and electoral democracy .
 Its religious Orthodoxy ideology does not legitimate a Christian crusade, says the Orthodoxy . The Orthodoxy is not a legitimate Christian crusade .
 It is essentially cultural and geographical and is capable of coexistence with other civilisations such as Islam . It is also able to coexist with othercivilisations like Islam .
 It has no concept of class conflict or any racial and national ideas of its own supremacy or any missionary zeal . It is not class conflict, it has no idea of any racial or national ideas or missionary zeal.
 It can be expressed in different modes of production, such as capitalism and socialism . It can also be express in different mode of production.
 The idea that Eurasianism is an ideology precipitating a war with the West is unfounded, says the author .
 The Russian leadership has continually advocated cooperation between the European Union and Russia . This has continued in the context of the Eurasian Union, says the Russian leader .
 Many misinterpret the objectives of the Eurasian Economic Union which was formed between Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan in January 2015 .
 Some, like Hillary Clinton, see this union as a first step in the Soviet Union reconstitution .
 This assertion has no foundation in the philosophy of Eurasianism or in the political actions of the leadership of the Union, says the author .
 The Eurasian Economic Union is to be built on the laws of the market . The project originally saw the project as part of a Greater Europe .
 Such a regional bloc would potentially be a serious competitor to NAFTA . It might drive a wedge between the countries of the Atlantic Alliance .
After the dismantling of the USSR, Ukraine found itself positioned between the European Union and the Commonwealth of Independent States .
 Ukrainian governments have sought agreements with the European Union, which would not prejudice relationships with its major trading partner, Russia . Ukraine's government has sought agreements.
Things began to change following the Orange Revolution when Yushchenko came to power with a pro-EU policy .
 The leaders of the proposed Eurasian Economic Union sought to maintain and enhance links with Ukraine . Ukraine would have precluded Ukraine from joining the European Union .
Tariffs with the European Union would have been dismantled to form a free market . The European Union has been dismantled.
 The EU's proposed ‘free trade area’ would have important economic and political ramifications . The EU’s proposed “ free trade area, however, would have significant economic andpolitical ramifications .
 Like other EU states, there would be free movement of labour, goods, capital and services . Like other European states, the EU would be open to labour and goods .
 Acceptance of the economic conditions would be inconsistent with Ukraine’s existing free-trade agreement with Russia .
 The European Union and other states were increasingly embedded in conditions which sought to make their institutions and processes compatible with EU norms . Even without becoming a member, agreements between the EU and other countries were increasingly in place .
 Washington Consensus ideology defined in terms of free markets, private property, the rule of law, multi-party politics and electoral competition .
 A free trade area would come into effect over a 10-year period . Economic changes in Ukraine would not occur immediately .
 Ukraine would have to incorporate the relevant content of the EU Acquis into its legislation . Domestic regulations affecting production and service provision would also be brought in line with EU standards .
 Such agreements would have repercussions on the relationship with the Eurasian Customs Union . It would nullify Ukraine's favourable links with Russia, its major trade partner .
Trade and commerce would have to conform to policies of the European Union . Not only does it affect trade but also defence and foreign affairs .
 The long-term prospects were portrayed by the European Union as favourable . In the short-term there would be considerable dislocation as adjustment to EU standards would certainly lead to the death of many Ukrainian firms .
 EU strategy is to weaken gradually the sovereignty of states and to promote the power of the Union over member states . EU strategy to weaken slowly the sovereignty.
 These developments clearly compromised Russia’s interests and led to confrontation between the European Union and Russia over relations with Ukraine .
 The upshot of negotiations between Yanukovich and the European Union was that the conditions it offered to Ukraine were inadequate to meet the costs of restructuring and to compensate for the anticipated closure of uncompetitive Ukrainian firms .
 Yanukovich did not rule out signing the agreement at some future date . He expressed a wish to achieve an agreement which would maintain Ukraine’s relationship with Russia .
 Ukrainian business people concerned about future economic challenges . Yanukovich promised Russian financial support underlay Yanukovich’s decision to withdraw from EU proposal .
 This became the fuse for the Maidan demonstrations in favour of EU membership supported on the streets in person by some prominent U.S. and European statesmen .
 The European Union supported the opposition of the Maidan to make the decision . When Yanukovich did not take the right decision, the EU backed the opposition .
 The demonstrations turned to violence and the President's and Parliamentary buildings were occupied by armed insurgents .
 Deaths occurred following shooting in the streets, which is discussed below .
 The context of armed uprising, of intimidation of pro-Yanukovich deputies in the Rada, leads one to define change of political power as a coup d’état legitimated by mass demonstrations .
 The Maidan uprising is widely projected in the media as a peaceful demonstration in favour of the democratic European Union and its values . It is in contrast to an autocratic Russian-leaning Ukrainian President .
 The dark side to the Maidan were nationalist and neo-fascist interests seeking to depose Yanukovich . However, the dark side was nationalist interests seeking the occasion to deposed Yanukovich.
 The sniper fire led to at least 49 deaths, which were attributed to Yanukovich's forces . Yanukovich’s forces denied that the sniper fire was linked to the sniper attack .
 Estonian foreign minister Ivan Katchanovski opined that the deaths were the work of right wing agitators . The research shows quite convincingly that this was work of groups within the Maidan .
 The various evidence analyzed indicates that armed groups and parts of leadership of the far right organizations, such as the Right Sector and Svoboda, were directly or indirectly involved in various capacities or likely knew about actual perpetrators of this massacre .
 The evidence indicates that the far right and oligarchic parties played a key role in the violent overthrow of the corrupt and oligarchyic government in Ukraine . The evidence suggests that the government was democratically elected .
 On the one side, it signed agreements with the European Union, on the other it was confronted by the secession of Crimea and civil war in the eastern territories .
 Procedure also called for review by the Constitutional Court . The membership of which was illegally changed by the government .
 The Verkhovna Rada, the Parliament of Ukraine, adopted a resolution on 24 February 2014 . Twelve of the eighteen judges of the Constitutional Court were to be dismissed by the institutions which appointed them .
 The Rada recommended that the Acting President and the Congress of Judges consider dismissing the other seven judges . The other seven were also recommended by the Rada .
 These measures are inconsistent with respect for the independence of the judiciary and the rule of law, says the judge . The judge says the measures are "incompatible with respect" for the judiciary .
 The order to start criminal proceedings against the judges was issued by the Verkhovna Rada on 24 February . It appears to have been a violation of Article 126 .
 The constitutional position regarding the declaration of independence by Crimea Autonomous Republic must be considered as void . The Constitutional Court on both the legality of the appointment of an “Acting President’s” as well as the constitutional position.
 The acting prime minister should have taken the president's place, not Yulia Tymnoshenko, then the parliamentary speaker .
 The political provisions of the Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement treaty were signed on 21 March 2014, and the economic ones on 27 June 2014 . The drift to civil war followed the Maidan events and installation of a pro-EU government .
 The new regime had to face internal consequences of civil war and the secession of Crimea .
 The Maidan activities were hailed positively by the U.S. and the European Union . Senator John McCain was also involved in the demonstrations .
 The action of the American and European political leaders appears to be part of a policy to bring Ukraine into the European alliance and weaken Russia’s economic and strategic position .
 Ukrainian people stand up to a regime awash in unchecked cronyism, corruption and violence against its people . It took guts for the Ukrainian people to stand up for the country's people .
 The U.S. stands with Ukraine in its efforts to forge its own path forward to a freer, peaceful, and unified future .
 She condemned Russia’s ‘aggressive actions’ and gave her “unwavering commitment’ to NATO . She gave the alliance ‘unwillingness to NATO’ should the alliance decide to intervene .
 Nuland expressed support for regime change and Arseniy Yatsenyuk for prime minister . Later in a leaked telephone conversation, Nulan expressed support of regime change .
 The European Union’s ‘Fact sheet on EU-Ukraine Relations’7 recognises the popular support in Ukraine for the European Union . It endorses the emergence of the leadership of President Poroshenko .
 Nowhere does it mention the violent and illegal overthrow of the Yanukovich regime . Nowhere also mentions the attempts in the Rada to prevent voting taking place .
 A poll conducted between 4 and 18 March by the GfK Ukraine company found that less than half of the Ukrainian population supported the course taken by the government .
 31% said they “wholeheartedly supported the change of power in Kiev in February 2014’s poll . 18% were strongly critical and 16% “unlikely’ to support it.
 The lack of any policy of negotiation or compromise with the rebel leaders in Lugansk and Donbass is the most important of all .
Confrontation and problem solving by military means became major courses of action of post-Yanukovich governments . Confrontation, problem solving and problem-solving by military mean became major course of action.
 Western media explain the underlying causes of Ukraine's break-up as a consequence of Putin's policies and define Putin as the villain . Russian media emphasise the role of Ukrainian nationalist interests stoked by the West .
 Both sides in the dispute regard each other as aggressive threats .
 The task of scholars in international relations is to distinguish the objective basis of such perceptions . The task is to differentiate the objective based of these perceptions .
 The demonisation of Russia, often derived from statements originating in the Kiev pro European Union lobbies, can be dismissed or disqualified .
 There is no evidence that the Russian Federation sought to destabilise the country . The putsch replaced the Yanukovich government in Ukraine .
 The Russian minority suffered language discrimination by the authorities .
 In the period following the Orange Revolution of 2004, Yushchenko's administration moved closer to the European Union . There were no actions from Russia destabilising Ukraine .
 There was no designation by the media of the “corrupt president’s” president when he was predisposed to sign the association agreement .
 The Ukrainian civil war was precipitated by the illegal removal of Yanukovich and his government . The putsch of February installed a government hostile to Yanukovich’s supporters .
 The uprising was defined as an act of “terrorism’ by the Kiev government . The attempt to crush it by armed force led to civil war. The use of Ukrainian army troops against Ukrainian citizens led to a civil war .
 Terrorism is directed randomly against the civilian population to incite fear . Terrorism was not directed randomly, as terrorism is directed against the civilians .
 In this case, the separatists had a clear purpose to dissociate from the Kiev government rather than to deploy aggression against Ukrainian people . The separatists had the clear purpose, says the writer .
 Russian Federation supported anti-Kiev movements but they were not part of a planned policy to “destabilise’s Ukraine .
 Ukraine was already destabilised by the actions of insurgents who had illegally replaced the elected president with acting president, Alex Turchinov .
 Kiev leadership has consistently refused to consider negotiating with the rebel “terrorist leaders’s” leaders and sought a military solution . However, the Kiev leaders have repeatedly refused to negotiate with the rebels .
 Ukrainian army containing volunteer battalions shelled civilian areas in Ukraine .
 A clear majority were in support of the separatists . There is a sizable minority in favour of the status quo .
 Russia’s intervention in the Crimea, as well as earlier in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, had majority support in the breakaway areas . Russia's intervention in Crimea has been seen as a key part of the Crimea crisis .
 There is a substantial majority support in Crimea for union with Russia. Even if one concedes that the vote could not be entirely representative, all accounts concur that there is a majority support .
 The official line of newly elected President Poroshenko was to pursue war by all means . Poroshenko has been elected as President of Ukraine .
 Our children will go to school, to kindergartens – their children will sit in cellars . Their children will also sit in cells.
 Liberal international interventionalism and political realism are two competing ways of interpreting the civil war that has arisen .
 Liberal internationalists are driven by moral sentiments or a legal code, which they consider to be applicable to all peoples at all times .
 Such moralising demonises enemies and puts halos over friendly powers in foreign affairs . Such moralises demonise enemies and put halos on friendly powers. Such moralise demonises opponents and puts them over friendly power .
 From this point of view, moral principles are superior to state interests, says John Sutter . Sutter says moral principles should not be used against state interests .
 Russia's actions may justify its bombing in Kosovo, just as NATO justified its bombing . However, other factors have to be taken into account .
 Action is considered in the context of the political chaos in Ukraine following the illegal seizure of power as well as the sentiments of the Crimean population . Action is seen as a response to the recent events in Ukraine .
 Crimea had been part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic until 1954 . Its citizens never had any opportunity to vote for or against joining Ukraine as a constituent republic .
 Following the putsch in Kiev, the local population declared independence . Russian troops were already there under Russia’s Treaty with Ukraine .
 Russia’s intervention in Crimea from a realist perspective is interpreted as securing its geo-political interests in the face of possible future NATO enlargement .
 Geo-political considerations and the defence of the interests of Russia were undoubtedly of great importance and led Russia to accept the outcome of the referendum .
 McFaul's argument that Putin was motivated to act in response to ‘internal political dynamics’ is not very convincing . McFaul’s argument that Russia was motivated by “internal political Dynamics” is not convincing .
 If this was the case, he could have taken Crimea sooner . He would have incorporated Georgia into the Russian Federation following the earlier invasion there .
 The Russian Federation was criticised by the leadership of the Russian Federation . There were no retaliatory threats to any of the states .
 The Russian Federation sought to incorporate these territories . It would have been some indication of this policy in official pronouncements .
 President Putin adopted a realist political policy to preserve state interests . Putin adopted the realist policy to protect state interests.
 Realists look first to the effects of policy to secure political objectives . Realists are looking first to effect of policy on political objectives to secure objectives .
 Russia was restrained in its policy in the face of attacks on the Russian speaking population in Ukraine. One could make an argument that Russia was restraint in its policies in the wake of attacks .
 A trade union building in Odessa was set on fire and its occupants burned alive . The occupants of the building were found alive .
 The assault on the trade union offices in Odessa was a blood bath . The subsequent burning and death of some 39 people was a bloody bath .
 Unlike the anticipated “bloodbath’ in Benghazi, this did not happen in Ukraine . It was not in Libya, which led to “preventative intervention” by the Western powers .
 Putin has pursued a realist political position within the framework set by the dominant Western powers . Putin’s political course has been described as a 'realist' political position .
 He recognises that these principles are derived from and enforced by the dominant powers of the West led by the U.S. But he also recognises the principles are based on the West .
 He reserves the right to defend the sovereignty of the Russian Federation when it is undermined, he says .
 He accepts the tenets of WTO in free trade and those of the European Union (freedom of mobility of labour, services and capital) The state is a collective actor, he says .
Western dominant states secure their own interests by deploying values in declarations of human rights, electoral procedures and the rule of international law to justify liberal internationalism . Western dominant states use human rights and electoral procedures to justify their policies .
World Bank and IMF are instrumental in forming international institutions such as the World Bank and the IMF . They are also instrumental in enforcing the rules of international institutions like the IMF and World Bank .
 dominant Western states which make the laws less likely to break them can more often take the high moral ground as well as call on other states to accept their rules of the game .
 It is possible to incorporate ‘Putin’s Russia’ in a system of international rules, but not if the rules are applied in the interests of the U.S. and European Union .
 Putin's policy is to shift to a multipolar world with respect for national sovereignty . Putin’s policy will be to shift from a militant world to a multipolar world .
 The wider Russian political and economic elites are also committed to it . The wider political, economic and political elites are committed to the Putin regime .
 The Russian leadership supports international law, but will break it if political sovereignty is threatened . The Russian leaders support international law but will not break it.
 Russia would not be unique in breaching the conventions of international law . Russia would be not unique in breach of the conventions.
 All major players in international politics break laws if they believe that their interests are threatened . In practice, all major players break law if they think that their interest is threatened .
 The question which should be addressed is whether states act hypocritically but whether their hypocritical actions can be justified or not .
 A pacifist’s sentiments might legitimately be broken if he or she is confronted by an unprovoked attack .
 In certain cases, moral values are higher than international laws . One might support international law and also claim that moral values can be higher than those of other countries .
 The argument was that the protection of the Albanian minority was a higher value than the law as interpreted by the U.N. The United Nations said the law was more important than that of the EU .
 The problem with many of these cases is whether the values are higher or not and whether the real goals of action are hidden by the appeal to moral values .
 NATO’s enlargement to the east was legitimated as a means to secure an area of peace in Europe, not as a necessary defence mechanism against an aggressive Russia .
 NATO's previous secretary-general Anders Rasmussen said in January 2015 that there was a “high probability’s that Mr Putin would test NATO's Article 5 . Article 5 regards an attack on any member as an attack.
 As Ukraine is not a member of NATO, an attack would not have triggered a NATO response . As Ukraine isn't a member, it wouldn't have triggered the response .
 The “threat’ to NATO from Russia is regarded to apply to the Baltic States . It is assumed that destabilisation would be achieved through the Russian minority in those countries .
 NATO's response, announced in February 2015, was the formation of a “rapid reaction force” formed by the UK, France, Spain, Italy and Poland . NATO’s response was the form of a "rapid response force" formed by
 Some 5000 troops would be ready for deployment in areas where NATO countries were threatened or seized . Such a force of some 5000 troops could be ready to deploy in areas of NATO countries threatened or seize .
 The geo-political goals of strengthening the hegemony of NATO underpin this policy . NATO's goal is to strengthen its hegemony in the region .
 Russia's defence expenditure has increased in recent years, but the increase was from a low base . Russia’s defence expenditure indeed has increased, but it has been in the past years .
 Given the size and population of the country, comparatively its defence expenditure per capita is not excessively large . The country's defence expenditure is not excessive .
In 2014, the defence budget for Russia was just over 10% more than that of the United Kingdom . In 2014, Russia's defence budget was just 10% less than the UK's .
 Russia is a nuclear power and certainly more than a match in conventional forces for its immediate neighbours . But not for NATO countries .
 It is pure speculation to suggest Putin is planning to test NATO’s resolve .
 Russia has shown no intention or willingness to support the Russian minorities by the use of force . Despite the denial of citizenship rights to Russian speaking people born in Latvia and Estonia .
 Despite Western insistence on Russian military involvement, there is no firm evidence of the involvement of the Russian army . There certainly are volunteers in east Ukraine, though there are volunteers .
 General Viktor Muzhenko said only individual Russian military personnel and citizens of the Russian Federation are participating in military activities . The head of the General Staff of the Ukrainian Army said that “only individual Russianmilitary personnel’s are participating.
 The economy underpinning Russia’s defence effort is relatively weak and has a lop-sided development . Economic power is the economy underpining Russia's defence effort .
 Russia’s gross domestic product in 2016 was 1132 billion United States dollars . The United States had a GDP of 18,558 billion dollars with China following at 11,380 billion dollars .
 Foreign affiliates in post-socialist countries are principally investments by companies from the advanced capitalist countries . Foreign affiliates are mainly investments by firms from advanced capitalist nations .
 A characteristic of the semi-periphery is the presence of companies originating in the core . The semi-Periphery has a characteristic of a semi-pariphery .
 The development of large indigenously owned companies in the European post-socialist societies lacked domestic and foreign political and financial support . Some notable exceptions, with some notable exceptions.
 Few post-socialist companies are comparable to the very large Western transnational firms . The companies are not comparable to those in the West .
State-owned corporations and others with no publicly available accounts are excluded . An element of caution is necessary as wholly state-owned companies are excluded from public accounts .
 The CIS countries possess considerable assets in the material extraction sector . Their manufacturing and particularly high tech manufacturing are in decline .
 Russia is the only serious player of any of the European post-socialist societies in the world economy . It only had 28 companies in 2012, but it only has 28 companies .
 Russia's largest group was composed of oil and gas companies, followed by those in raw materials . There was a tail of banks, telecom companies, and utility, consumer durables and chemical firms .
 Russia has neither the military nor economic power to be a significant political threat to the world powers. One might conclude that Russia is not a significant threat to world powers .
 Russia under President Putin has challenged the universalistic moralising of the West . Putin has condemned its policy of democracy promotion .
 Russia has intervened to promote its own interests in Georgia and Ukraine . Russia has also intervened in the Ukraine and Georgia .
 It is contended in this paper that Russian policy has been reactive rather than aggressive . The paper says Russian policy is more reactive than aggressive than aggressive.
 The evolving ideology of Eurasianism is considered to lack any theoretical base to generate political conflict . The evolving ideologies are considered to have no theoretical base.
 The formation of the Eurasian Economic Union is a means to strengthen Russia as a regional power . Russia is a member of the European Economic Union .
 Russia is shown to have insufficient economic and military power to pose a serious danger to the Western powers . Russia is a potential “threat’s” to the West, according to the Russian media .
 President Putin has shifted Russia's foreign policy to a more active and assertive role . The political objective is to seek respect and acknowledgment as a regional power .
 The way to reduce international tension is for the dominant bloc of the U.S. and European Union to acknowledge greater levels of plurality and accept the divergent interests of states and regional blocs .
 To do so, they would have to revert to a more realist, and less liberal interventionalist, political position . The political position would be less liberal, and more liberal .
 Such a policy would be facilitated by a multi-polar Europe with different areas of autonomy . The European Union would be able to make such a policy possible .
 Such a multi-stage and multi-pace European Union would be more conducive to internal cohesion and to the maintenance of good relations with those excluded . Such aMulti-stage European Union could be more comfortable to maintain internal cohesion .
 The leadership of the BRICS countries respects the existing world order including the hegemony of the U.S. The leaders of the countries respect the current world order .
 Economically and politically, a Eurasian or a BRICS bloc can be contained within the world system led by the U.S.
 They form a “counterpoint’ rather than an opposing bloc, coexisting rather than competing with the dominant Western countries . They are a "counterpoint" rather than a ‘counterpoint,’ instead of an “opposition’
 Currently, Eurasianism is a contradictory mixture; its leaders advocate collective solidarity and concurrently subscribe to the virtues of the free market .
 The Russian Federation is on the path to a national form of capitalism, which could be absorbed into the world system . Social-democratic capitalism is an alternative to AngloAmerican capitalism .
 The dominant Western powers have to make concessions to maintain peace . The dominant West powers must make concessions.
 He has published in a wide range of journals including Sociology, Political Studies, Europe-Asia Studies and in Russia . He has also published in other journals such as Sociology and Political Studies .
 He has written extensively on development, particularly in state socialist societies . He has also written on development in the United States .
 His recent writing has been on Eurasia, employment and unemployment and alternatives to capitalism . He has also written on Eurasian, employment, unemployment and other alternatives .