 The Ukraine crisis captures the essence of gray zone conflicts in which parties and strategies are not easily identified . mediation efforts prove difficult, given the complexity and number of competing stakeholders .
 We see this most clearly at crisis onset with the spread of protests and demonstrations from Kyiv to L’viv and Odesa, and from there to Crimea, eventually culminating in outright rebellion in Donbas .
 Crimea has declared independence, and then its integration into Russia . Crimea is now part of Russia and Crimea is part of the Crimea region . The region has been in conflict with Russia for years .
 Putin has declared his intent of protecting the Russian-speaking peoples of the region . He has also stated no interest in reclaiming Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia’s ultimate goal is undeclared. Not surprisingly it is the latter conflict in Eastern Ukraine which exhibits ongoing gray zone techniques .
 The Ukraine case also fulfills the requirements for a foreign policy crisis for Ukraine, a situation with three individually and collectively sufficient conditions, says the Ukraine case .
 All three perceptions – a threat to basic values, an awareness of a finite time for response to the value threat – are held by the highest-level decision-makers of the actor concerned .
 mediation has proved ineffective in gray zone crises like this, says the author . actors on both sides anticipate being able to use mediation to control the actions of their opponents .
 The conflict in Eastern Ukraine is more enduring and the mediation process more complex . The two main geopolitical players in this conflict are Russia and the US, who are engaged in war through proxy .
 There is an estimated total of 2000 Canadian, American, and British advisors deployed in Ukraine proper .
 There is an increasingly active organized criminal network controlling trafficking and smuggling along the line of separation . There is also a growing organized criminal organization controlling trafficking .
 Regularized paramilitary forces, such as the notorious right-wing Azov Battalion, fight alongside the Ukrainian army .
 The U.S. has focused most of its efforts towards threatening Russia, or punishing it, specifically targeting its leader, Vladimir Putin . The United States has taken the diplomatic lead in challenging Moscow .
 The United States has implemented a strict sanctions regime against Russia . The U.S. is trying to minimize Russia's assistance to the separatists .
 Russia is taking action with an eye towards its foreign policy crisis with the US . To illustrate these points, our chapter unfolds in four sections .
 We examine the gray zone literature and its relevance to those factors that hinder mediation in the mitigation of violence and resolution of conflict .
 In the second section, we identify historical characteristics and sources of the recent conflict as well as the key actors . We also identify the issues which have shaped and influenced the course of events in the context of the conflict in Ukraine .
Third, we look at mediation efforts in light of the relevant literature on mediation strategies . Third, we examine mediation efforts and mediation efforts .
 We consider both state-based and multilateral mediation efforts . The European Union and the U.N. consider both states-based or multilateral .
 We conclude by highlighting implications for both theory and policy and identify three scenarios for managing and resolving the conflict .
 This absence of a formalized alliance structure and security guarantees provides a permissive environment for gray zone conflict to take root, says the author .
 In gray zone conflict, state actors use a combination of strategic and operational-level techniques . This form of warfare is exceptionally resistant to resolution . State actors use strategic and Operational-level tactics, making this form of conflict exceptionally resistant.
 Onset and termination are ambiguous because many of the techniques used in gray zone conflicts are largely contingent upon a highly globalized and interconnected international economic and political world order and the substantial permeability of international borders .
 There are several reasons why gray zone conflict is difficult to resolve . There are many reasons why it is difficult.
 First, conventional conflicts are generally characterized by overtness at the tactical level, with hybrid techniques as support . First, traditional conflicts are characterized by Overtness at a tactical level .
 In gray zone conflict, states rely primarily on covert operations which never pass the threshold of war . The U.S. has been involved in several wars in the past .
 There is an overarching ambiguity regarding long-term victory by participants and stakeholders . Second, there is an overall ambiguity regarding the outcome of participants and participants .
There is a desire by one or more parties to gradually, but fundamentally, revise the regional or global system of alliances and norms of international conduct . The Cold War era was not even seen during the Cold War .
 A goal of this magnitude adds complexity by drawing in many parties and stakeholders into the conflict . The individual interests of which must be considered during resolution attempts .
 hybrid warfare techniques are utilized within the broader gray zone conflict category . Hybrid warfare techniques have been used in the past .
 The game is played in the gray zone of the game . It is an element unique to gray zone conflicts . The tactics and tactics are used gradually in the achievement of a victory point .
 Political warfare by states can be defined as the dissemination of misleading information in the form of propaganda and a strong appeal to diaspora and ethnic ties .
 Adversaries may invest in media campaigns through television, online social media, non-governmental organizations, and activist groups to discredit the opponent .
 It is impossible to quantify the success or failure of these tools as no deaths or infrastructural damage directly result from their use .
 Information warfare is only one segment of the “soft power’s arsenal available to states in gray zone conflicts .
Economic pressure is often used by states against their opponents in gray zone conflicts . Even though its effectiveness remains uncertain, economic pressure is frequently utilized by states .
 The inducement of economic pressure, through methods such as sanctions, is intended to erode the opponents’ economies, says John Sutter .
 It is a method of leverage which cannot be categorized as an overt declaration of war, but also escapes the absolute state of peace . It is not a way to declare war but it is a way of leverage that can be used to gain leverage .
 states may utilize tools more proximate to other elements of “hard power’s” conflict . States may still maintain the conflict in a state short of war .
 Cyber warfare has become especially elaborate as software and hardware has become increasingly sophisticated . For example, cyber warfare is increasingly sophisticated as software has become more sophisticated .
 Cyber-attacks remain below the threshold of overt warfare because they can rarely inflict immediate damage or cause casualties . Cyber-attackers can rarely cause immediate damage and cause casualties, say experts .
Most cyber operations can only be probabilistically attributed to specific state actors and sponsors . Most cyber operations are not attributed to state actors or sponsors .
Within gray zone conflicts, states themselves might not utilize all the tactics and operations to sub-state actors and proxies .
 States may provide material support to organized crime, militant elements, separatist factions, and local elites . States may also provide direct material support for organized crime and militant elements .
 states backing actors want to insulate themselves from responsibility and potential political backlash domestically and internationally . This is important as states backing these actors desire to insulates themselves from political backlash .
 This method increases the number of actors and stakeholders in the conflict but creates problems with attribution of actions to specific entities when attempting to reach conflict resolution . This method not only increases the overall number of actor and stakeholders.
 All of the aforementioned tools utilized by states, and sub-state actors, will not achieve any rapid results but a prolongation of the conflict . The conflict will continue to be prolonged .
 As the global financial, alliance, and military order is highly rigid, states understand that structural revisions may not be expedient .
 NATO representatives claim Russia wants to invade the entirety of Ukraine . From NATO’s side, in the early stages of the conflict, representatives claimed that Russia wanted to invade Ukraine .
 Leaders from Russia claimed they wanted to counter NATO's expansion closer to Russia’s borders . They said they were trying to counter the expansion of NATO's borders .
 US 'hardliners' from the US claimed Russia would invade the Baltics and continue into Europe .
 A country would be signing on to a costly prolonged conflict, the U.S. says . The incentives to engage in such a form of confrontation must be clear .
 Based on the experience of the US, conventional military operations have become increasingly expensive to the point of being cost-prohibitive .
 conventional tools of warfare have become increasingly sophisticated and deadly over the past 30 years . The potential human costs of warfare are less likely due to the potential human cost .
 It is unlikely that nuclear-armed parties would be willing to engage in a direct military confrontation . The potential destruction experienced by any of the parties is unacceptable .
 When considering incentives for engagement in gray zone conflict, it is also important to note regime type .
 Russia and significant in cases of West; breakdown of asymmetric economic Russian–Ukrainian interdependence . Energy sector ties. State-level economic Erosion of the opponent's Sanctions regimes pressure sanctions and blackmail .
 The U.S. wants to insulate Russia’s material support to support for rebels and local themselves from support for the rebels . The United States wants Russia to provide supplies of responsibility domestically of Luhansk and elsewhere .
 Gradualism States utilize hybrid warfare by techniques in a gradual victory in the conflict by Russia . Only shortall parties ambiguous for erode the integrity of term tactical objectives .
 Russia and EU states have special bilateral relations between Russia and the EU . Ukraine, Ukraine and other countries have special relations between them .
 Russia’s government possesses fewer internal checks and balances, it is less costly to support criminal organizations, separatists, and local elites than for the EU and the United States to back similar sub-state actors .
 The Ukraine crisis is the focus of this week's CNN special . We look at the rapidity of events coupled with a complexity of actors and the rise of new gray zone techniques to illustrate gray zone elements .
 In November 2013, Ukraine was poised to sign the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement . The Ukraine-European Union Agreement was signed in November 2013 .
 Russia formally requested a delay in signing in order to better assess the impact of the agreement on Russian–Ukrainian–EU relations . Russia requested the delay to better assessment of the impact on the agreement .
 President Yanukovych responded favorably to Russia’s requests in late November 2013, thus stalling the association agreement . President Yanukovych also responded favorably.
 On November 29, 2013, the largest organized demonstration since the Orange Revolution of 2004 began in central Kyiv . Protesters rallied against the government’s decision.
 A foreign policy crisis for Ukraine began on February 22, 2014, when Yanukovych fled to Russia following violent clashes between protesters and government forces .
 The overthrow of Yanukovych's government created substantial uncertainty over the future of Ukraine’s integrity . Ukraine's future is uncertain.
 The leaders of a number of regions including Donbas, L’viv, Odesa, and Crimea all expressed concerns about their willingness to remain part of Ukraine .
 Popular protests and the occupation and seizure of municipal buildings and state administrations became major protest techniques . Both pro-Euromaidan protestors and those who opposed them used the techniques .
Mass activism in Ukraine is diffused across the country, moving quickly into Eastern Ukraine . Starting in Western Ukraine, mass activism has been diffused.
 By February 26, protestors controlled the RSA in Kharkiv, Poltava, and Dnipropetrovsk . By February 25, protestors had control of two cities .
Following Yanukovych’s removal from power, the mayors of some of the largest cities resigned .
 Both central and local powers simultaneously struggled to restore public safety . Both powers struggled to restored public safety. Both powers failed to restore safety .
 In Crimea, the local leaders of the autonomous republic were caught between opposing interests .
 From one side, Sergey Konstantinov remained a strong supporter of President Yanukovych . The Speaker of the regional parliament remains a strong supporters of Yanukovych .
 Konstantinov initiated a letter of parliamentary loyalty to Yanukovych on February 22 . The letter is an expression of political support .
 Crimea's pro-Russian parties and Crimea’s intelligentsia are in negotiations . From the other side there are ongoing negotiations between representatives of Crimea‘s pro-Russia parties and the intelligentsian .
 Konstantinov established an alliance with little known pro-Russian Crimean MP Sergey Aksyonov . He soon presented himself as the new leader of Crimea .
 Massive pro-Russian rallies in Simferopol and Sevastopol soon followed, accompanied by patrols by Cossacks, local militia and unidentified soldiers .
 Street clashes between pro-Russian protestors and pro-Ukrainian activists left three people dead . Crimean Tatar Mejlis was also killed .
 Armed militia began surrounding and seizing strategic buildings in the early hours of the morning . Soon after, armed militia started surrounding and seized strategic buildings .
 For Russia, the security and integrity of its large Black Sea Fleet in the Crimean Peninsula was paramount . Russia's security was paramount for Russia .
 Crimea’s parliament was seized by unidentified soldiers on February 27 .
New premier, Sergey Aksyonov, will be appointed by the end of the day . Parliament remained functional and the new premier was appointed .
 At the same time, in Kyiv, an emergency meeting of the Council for National Safety and Defense was held .
 Minutes from that meeting show only acting president Oleksandr Turchinov voted to impose martial law on Crimea . The remainder abstaining or preferring diplomatic negotiations with Russia .
 Ukraine’s leaders were taken by surprise at the speed of events, says CNN . We now know that Ukraine's leaders were surprised by the pace of events .
 The government in Kyiv seemed unable or unwilling to engage in negotiations with Russia, even as a way of thwarting the latter in the pursuit of strategic goals .
 Few politicians in Kyiv or the West were prepared to entertain alternative scenarios for resolving the crisis . Few, if any, of the politicians in Ukraine or West, were prepared for alternative scenarios .
 When proposals for greater autonomy finally made it onto the table, it was too late . It was too early for proposals to make it on the table .
 On March 16, 2014, about 96 percent of voters supported the idea of joining Russian Federation .
 Three days later the lower chamber of Russia’s State Duma voted in support of the Crimean referendum . The Crimean referendum was held in Crimea in March .
 The East, South, and Center regions of Ukraine witnessed amplified pro-Russian protests and massive rallies . The main stage of the conflict shifted to Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia maintained the narrative that the Russian-speaking people living in Eastern Ukraine were de facto oppressed by the Kyiv government . Russia maintained that the Russians living in eastern Ukraine were oppressed .
 Russia effectively promoted the local uprisings. By adopting this position, Russia effectively promotes the localUprisings .
 Crimean separatists mobilized in the Donbas region starting in April 2014 . Less than two months after crisis onset, Crimean separatists including Russian Cossack brigades mobilized .
 Municipal and regional authorities with strong pro-Russian positions declared their own status referendum for early May .
 Ukraine's acting president Oleksandr Turchinov announced the beginning of an anti-terrorist operation in Donbas to restore order . Anticipating that separatist sentiment would grow in advance of the referendum .
 Kyiv’s military response was ineffective and inconsequential. The military response to civilian protest movements in the Eastern regions was ineffective .
Between April and June 2014, municipalities, businesses, and state factories and warehouses holding ammunition and military equipment fell under the control of pro-separatist factions . Between April andJune 2014, towns and factories holding ammunition, military equipment were under control .
 The organization had been advocating for moderate levels of self-determination for regional Tatars as well as respect for indigenous special status within Ukraine .
 Once the annexation of Crimea took place, Tatars were outlawed by the Russian authorities . The organization was outlawed by Russian authorities thus undermining the status of Tatars in regional politics .
 The first question regarding membership in the Russian Federation was important . It was important to answer the first question.
 The Russian Federation is recognized in international law as the successor state of the Soviet Union . Russia is recognized as a successor state in the Russian Federation .
 The question asked Crimeans to decide if they should return to the status quo ante before the break-up of the Soviet Union .
 Crimea regained its status as an Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in January 1991 . In January 1991, through a referendum, the peninsula was granted extended rights to the peninsula . The peninsula was re-elected to the Autonomous Russian Socialist Republic .
 With separatist control over the border, the situation changed dramatically, starting with mass shelling from the Russian side .
 By September 19, separatists controlled the entire stretch of territory along the Russian border in Eastern Ukraine to the coast of the Azov Sea .
 The bloody battle of Illovaysk, in August 2014, pushed the Ukrainian army back even further, giving the separatists almost complete control over the region .
 Over the fall of 2014, and into the winter of 2015, the separatists further improved their positions and re-captured a few major cities in the region .
 In Debaltseve, Ukrainian army and volunteer battalions surrounded by separatists were yet again forced into retreat .
Kyiv sought and obtained immediate peace talks. Fearful of a separatist offensive into Central Ukraine, Kyiv sought immediate peace Talks .
 The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe facilitated a meeting of the leaders of Russia, Ukraine, Germany, France, France and LNR . The parties agreed to a ceasefire that would commence on February 15, 2015 .
 The OSCE would be responsible for the facilitation of the withdrawal of heavy military equipment and fighters on all sides . Under the agreement (known as Minsk II) the OSCE will be responsible to the withdrawal.
 By this time, the separatist leadership had become firmly established in Eastern Ukraine . Other actors were instrumental in influencing the uncertainty of the situation .
 Pro-separatist rallies threatened Akhmetov’s business empire in the Donbas . But pro- separation rallies threatened the business empire .
 Akhmetov adopted a relatively neutral position calling for peaceful resolution through negotiation . As a result, Akh met with the Russian government, it has called for a peaceful resolution .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi's PrivatBank conducted business in Central Ukraine while relying on its strong ties with European financial institutions . This contrasted the position taken by another oligarch, IHor Kolomoysskyi .
 Russian-language television solidified existing social networks 12 Leadership in Donbas region . The region went through a few stages of sporadic leadership in the first months .
 Those political leaders who led the uprising in the early stages were eventually moved aside and replaced by military commanders .
 Plotnitsky resigned and was replaced by Leonid Pasechnik in November 2017 . In November 2017, Plotnitky resigned.
 A big portion of the Russianspeaking population of Eastern Ukraine became markedly sympathetic to Russia’s point of view . The ethnic Ukrainian population in the rest of the country largely accepted the narrative presented by the opposition to Yanukovych .
 The loyalty of many in Eastern Ukraine remained on the side of Russia. These points illustrate that many in eastern Ukraine remain with Russia .
 Information warfare tools are not the only element of ‘soft power’ states utilize in gray zone conflicts . The use of information warfare tools is part of the "soft power" strategy in some states .
 Economic pressure is a substantial element of gray zone conflicts as it erodes opponents’ economy in hope of changing their policy direction .
 NATO used economic tools against Russia, such as sanctions, to pressure Russia against Ukraine . Russia has been more finely tuned by NATO .
 Russia utilized its energy sector to choke the Ukrainian economy during the ongoing conflict in Eastern Ukraine . Russia used its energy industry to choke Ukraine during the conflict .
 Russia and Ukraine engaged in substantial cooperation in the energy sector in 2014 . Prior to the events in 2014, the two countries engaged in significant cooperation in energy sector .
 Ukraine had been purchasing Russian natural gas at discounted prices . pipelines between Russia and the EU had been constructed through Ukraine, which gained revenues from transit fees .
 Russia was the single largest supplier of Ukrainian oil and gas for domestic consumption . Most importantly, Russia had been the single biggest supplier of Ukraine's oil .
 Russia ceased the export of its gas to Ukraine in 2015 . Russia claimed it would be demanding upfront payments for natural gas .
 The timing and magnitude of this energy-related crisis seems convenient for Russia, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: This scenario appears as an energy dispute, but it seems convenient to Russia .
 Russia held Ukrainian energy debt for decades without entering substantial disputes over it . Russia held Ukraine's energy debt without entering major disputes over the debt .
 The successful exploitation of economic and political pressure points against the opponent is difficult to achieve without the incorporation of cyber space . The success of economic, political pressure point against the opponents is difficult, but it is difficult.
 Russia was accused of attacking Ukraine’s power grid through cyber space in December 2015 .
 The event, even though attributed to Russia, can only be probabilistically attributed to the Kyiv government and some NATO officials . This event is not the first time the event has been blamed on Russia .
 In Eastern Ukraine social networks are primarily based on ties with Russia and/or Russian-language events, religious practices, and television programs .
 67 percent of Ukrainians believed that trust is “not necessary’ for Ukrainian politics, a survey says .
 Most citizens did not even consider themselves close to their neighbors within their own country . But they did feel closeness to people in neighboring states, a survey found .
 In Western Ukraine, people felt closer to Hungary and Poland, but not neighboring regions within Ukraine . People felt close to Poland, Hungary, and Hungary but not within Ukraine.
The same tendency existed in the East, where people felt closer to Russia and Belarus . The same tendency exists in the east, with people feeling closer to each other .
 Another important element of a gray zone conflict is the direct support for sub-state criminal and militant elements that fight on behalf of conflicting parties .
 A T-72 main battle tank with particular specifications was identified in the possession of separatists in Eastern Ukraine .
 Despite indirect evidence, it remains unclear how much control Russia has over actions taken by the LNR and DNR separatists .
 There is some evidence to suggest sustainable strong influence by Russia . There is also some evidence that Russia has a strong influence on Russia .
 We now turn to an evaluation of mediation strategies in the two regions .
 In the international domain, a combination of techniques involving coercive manipulation and non-coercive incentives are applied . In the International domain, coercive manipulation is used to manipulate people .
 Bercovitch and Houston have noted a mediator’s choice of strategy is most strongly influenced by the conditions of the mediation environment and the identities of the parties in conflict . The mediator's choice of strategies is most heavily influenced by conditions of mediation environment
 Research based on ICB data finds that mixed strategies involving some elements of manipulation are more likely to generate formal outcomes .
 The conflict in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine has become more intense, complex, and bloody . In comparing the two cases, we see evidence of a scaling up of mediation efforts as the conflict shifts from the first arena to the second .
 In the former case, mediators remained relatively aloof and facilitative . In the latter case, we see clear evidence of mixed and far more manipulative strategies .
 identity-based differences acted as a clear driver in both cases. identity has influenced the intensity and endurance of the Ukraine crisis . At the same time, identity- based differences acted.
 Gleditsch and Beardsley show that transnational ethnic actors alter levels of cooperation among domestic adversaries, making resolution more difficult . Carment, James, and Taydas show that the presence of transnational actors, such as diasporas, alters levels of
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov spent six hours discussing the situation around Crimea with no results . On March 14, just a few days before the referendum, the United States.
 Kerry argues that the whole of Ukraine should have been given the opportunity to vote on the issues involved . Kerry argued that the entire country should be given the chance to vote .
 Kerry's response was inadequate, given the lack of mechanisms for enforcing corresponding solutions on all the parties concerned . Kerry’s response to the crisis was inadequate. Kerry has not been able to find a solution to the problem .
 Petro Poroshenko, a Ukrainian MP, visited Crimea on February 28, 2014 but was escorted out of Crimea the same day .
 OSCE delegation visited Crimea the following day . OSCE envoy Tim Guldimann and OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities Astrid Thors visited Crimea .
By the time of their arrival, Simferopol airport was already controlled by pro-Russian activists and unidentified military personnel .
 German chancellor Angela Merkel was actively involved in negotiations with Russia at the end of February and the beginning of March . All her efforts had very little effect on Russian president Vladimir Putin .
 Kyiv declared the 2014 referendum illegal on the grounds that the Ukrainian constitution made no provision for it . Kyiv declares the 2014 vote illegal on grounds the Ukraine constitution makes no provision.
 The Russian framing of the conflict consisted of questioning the legitimacy of the Kyiv government’s claim to Crimea, based on precedent, experience, and Crimean sentiment .
 The results of surveys show strong Crimean support for remaining in Russia .17.17. 17.17 .17 . 17 . 17. 17 . The lack of mediation was an unwillingness to address Russia's geopolitical security concerns .
 Crimea resumed its 1992 constitution and remained an autonomous part of Ukraine . A compromise might have been possible, for example, whereby Sevastopol was annexed .
 Sevastopol was a “city with special status,’s area in which it was included was a distinct municipality, separate from Crimea .
 Russia's Black Sea Fleet is home to Russia’s Black Sea fleet . The naval facilities had previously been leased to Russia by Ukraine .
 independent Sevastopol city council held a referendum of its own on accession to Russia .
 Most members of these minorities live in four sub-regions in the north of Crimea . Most of these minority members live in Crimea's north .
 Historically, they have sought the union of Kherson oblast with adjoining oblasts in Ukraine proper .
 Western mediators could have spelled out costs of Crimea’s absorption into Russia .
 There were bailouts and aid packages for Kyiv, but the economic and political benefits that would accrue to the Crimeans by staying in a unified Ukraine were never properly explained to them .
 The parties in conflict were acting under immense pressure to avoid a full-blown war . None of the solutions mentioned were easy choices, and it may be that none was obvious .
 Crimea managed to come away from the crisis without significant violence. Even in the absence of meaningful diplomacy, Crimea came away with no significant violence .
 Crimea could easily now be a bloody battleground. There is little doubt that Crimea would have sought independence from Ukraine anyway .
 Mediation in Eastern Ukraine captures key elements of gray zone conflict . Russia and the United States are involved in supporting opposing sides .
 This obviously raises the stakes, but it also influences mediator techniques, the likelihood of success, and the level of commitment from the opposing parties, necessary to ensure a lasting peace .
 The earliest and most concerted mediation attempt to facilitate a peaceful resolution to the war in Donbas was the meeting of the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine .
 The OSCE was developed by the OSCE as an attempt to facilitate a dialogue between Russia and Ukraine through the mediation of an impartial actor . In Minsk I and then Minsk II agreements, this dialogue resumed in Minsk .
 Leaders of Germany, France, Russia, and Ukraine met for a memorial D-Day service in France . They also discussed the possibilities for a settlement of the Donbas crisis .
 The active role of German and French parties initially produced a few rounds of negotiation . The Minsk agreements became formally recognized as the Minsk agreement .
 The Normandy Format did not directly involve the EU and consisted for the most part of phone conversations among the four counterparts . This process was called the Normandy Format .
 There have been several efforts at negotiation by the U.S. Special Representatives for Ukraine, first Victoria Nuland .
 American side ostensibly negotiating on behalf of Ukraine, U.S. side says . These conversations are based on private talks .
 In 2017 there were five meetings between Volker and Surkov, showing an increasing pace compared to previous rounds . In 2017 itself there were 5 meetings between the two sides .
 The agreement on military prisoner exchange was a result of these talks . The prisoner exchange agreement was the result of the talks .
 mediation has been supported through the good offices of the OSCE . It gives an opportunity for separatist leaders and representatives of Kyiv to consider options put forward by Contact Group .
 The SMM is an unarmed, civilian mission, present on the ground 24/7 in all regions of Ukraine . It is a civilian mission. It is an armed and unarmed mission .
 OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia, Ukraine, Minsk protocol signed on September 4, 2014 . The protocol was signed by Russia and Ukraine .
 Minsk has agreed a temporary ceasefire with separatists Luhansk and Donetsk separatists . It has granted separatists more autonomy in Minsk .
 Heavy weaponry moved back by all 2014  Group and  separatists from belligerents from belligerents .
 Minsk separatists Luhansk and Donetsk January 31, 2015, OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia, Ukraine, and Ukraine collapsed . Minsk separatist Luhinsk and Donetsk have been involved in the conflict .
 OSCE highlighted that casualties in Perceived conflict stabilization .
 OSCE confirmation that the water Signaled the stabilization of conflict . Vienna Group supplies agreement remains in perceived decline in severity of force .
 OSCE Trilateral Contact Russia and Ukraine Reaffirmation of commitment to Decline in fighting . February 1, 2017, OSCE trilateral Contact Russian and Ukraine reaffirmation. February 2, 2017.
 Minsk Group  Minsk II provisions Signaled the stabilization of conflict . Minsk group  minsk Group signaled stabilization of conflict .
 OSCE-mediated meetings and informal dialogue are public knowledge . Not all OSCE meetings are public know, but not all are in public knowledge.
 Russian president Vladimir Putin interpreted Minsk I as requesting that both sides implement a ceasefire, but that only Ukrainians would withdraw, thus effectively enabling separatists to maintain de facto control over Donbas .
 All heavy weapons were to be moved back by all belligerents to 15 km from the front lines, which formed the territory claimed and controlled by separatists .
 The parties failed to uphold that agreement by again violating the terms of the ceasefire . A subsequent meeting on February 11 and 12, 2015 that included the OSCE, the leaders of the Normandy Format, and representatives of LNR and DNR produced a 13-point peace plan .
 Minsk II also specified support for the restoration of the Ukrainian–Russian border .
Military portions of the Minsk II protocol were finalized within three months of signing . The political and security portions remain unaddressed .
 The Trilateral Contact Group meets regularly to obtain commitments from all parties to maintain the ceasefire, withdraw all weapons regulated by Minsk II . The group also commits to restoration of basic utilities and critical infrastructure for the population directly affected by the conflict .
Multiple mediation efforts have not proven successful. There are a number of reasons why these attempts have not been successful .
 Russia has worked hard to exploit the situation to ensure a diffusion of efforts and focus from the West . A key element in the conflict is the mixed motives and interests of third parties .
 Some members of the EU, such as Germany, France, and Britain, have been involved in the conflict . Other European states remain aloof or more supportive of the Russian position .
 The situation has remained static since the Minsk agreements, and solidarity within the West has deteriorated since about 2016 . Some EU policymakers have called for an easing of Russian sanctions .
 Russia has shown some success in developing strong bilateral relations with individual EU states, such as Hungary and Italy . Russia has also developed strong bilateral ties with Hungary, Italy and Hungary .
 Italy’s then prime minister Matteo Ranzi was eventually persuaded to oppose the majority of EU policymakers . He proposed implementing even stricter sanctions regime against Russia .
 A second problem facing mediators in Donbas is the lack of a hurting stalemate in which the institutionalized process offers a better option than continued fighting .
 Third parties can, in theory, induce settlements through the creation of hurting stalemates, as well as speed up the movement towards a settlement through the imposition of deadlines and other crisis-related strategies .
 Balch-Lindsay and Enterline show that long civil wars typically correspond to the equitable distribution of third-party interventions .
 In essence, external involvement has the effect of prolongation, with its power tipping in favor of Ukraine .
 When third parties raise the stakes by engaging in the use of force and favoring one side, the duration of civil conflicts is significantly reduced . Conversely, when third parties use force, the length of the conflict is significantly lower .
 Third parties are already actively supporting the belligerents with the West . The West is focusing its efforts on buttressing Kyiv and Russia supporting the armed separatist groups .
 There are risks beyond the higher probability of war and long conflict endurance. Simply put, there are risks Beyond the higher probabilities of war .
 The conflict includes informally organized paramilitary forces, funded by private interests over which Kyiv does not exercise full control . Such support increases the number of parties who can veto a settlement .
 gray zone cases pose a challenge to mediation because of the difficulty in assigning culpability to specific acts, discerning belligerent intentions, and enforcing agreements .
 Pruitt argues that heavy-handed mediation strategies occur more often when faced with intransigent belligerents . This point is consistent with Pruitt’s argument that heavy handed mediation strategies are more often .
 Such efforts increase the number of parties who can veto a settlement and the amount of time required to reach a settlement . However, such efforts increase both the number and the time required for a settlement.
 One way to boost the prospects of resolution is to reduce the number of veto actors by excluding them from a final settlement .
 Russia and the US have been in direct talks between Russia and US, essentially circumventing Ukraine and separatists . We have seen this exemplified by direct talks.
 A shift to bilateral dialogue is consistent with what we know about mediating complex and protracted conflict . A shift is similar to what we have seen in the past .
 As time progresses, the chains that produce results become shorter as intermediaries are dropped from the negotiation . The chains that produced results are shorter as time progresses .
 With this information in hand, we envision three possible scenarios for Ukraine . We envision three potential scenarios.
 Both sides tilted towards European integration initiatives and both ended up in similar situations as de facto uncontrolled territories . Both tilted towards EU integration initiatives. Both ended up with similar situations. Both ends up in same situations.
 Both the West and Russia must be supportive of providing credible assurances to the people of Eastern Ukraine . In return, they must obtain assurances that fighting on both sides will stop .
 A third option would see the deployment of peacekeepers beyond the unarmed OSCE observers scattered throughout the country already . A return to Ukraine with Peacekeeping and Autonomy would be a third option .
 A combatant uses a peace process to simply stall is applicable to gray zone crises in general and Donbas in particular . Such a mission would be large, expensive, and fraught with political roadblocks, notwithstanding the obvious veto .
 The major impediment to peacekeepers is the disagreement between Russia and the U.S. over the deployment location of the peacekeeping force . The United States and Russia disagree over the location of their peacekeepers .
 The United States wants peacekeepers throughout the separatist territories . The U.S. has the ability to intercept war materiel which Russia has purportedly been supplying the separatists .
 Russia argues that peacekeepers should only be deployed on the border between Ukraine and the Donbas region where the fighting takes place .
 The scattering of peacekeepers throughout the Donbas would likely make them more targets rather than intermediaries . The scattering would make the peacekeepers more targets for peacekeepers .
 The U.S. and Russia discussed a possible multi-phased approach to peacekeeping deployment in Dubai in January 2018 . The United States, Russia and the United States discussed the possibility of a multi- phased approach .
 An armed peacekeeping capability would help ensure a level of third-party credibility and commitment to a peace process currently absent .
 Russia and the U.S. have discovered that peace process needs to be sequenced out with a clear and mutually supported political objective foremost in the minds of its implementers .
 The crucial next step is to look beyond the cessation of violence towards political compromise by placing the burden of implementation on the conflicting parties themselves . The next step will be to put the burden on both sides of the conflict .
 A UN supported peace process must consider Eastern Ukraine’s long-term political prospects as an autonomous entity free to choose its own political path through free and fair elections .