 Russia’s strategic interests in the Black Sea region, especially in terms of energy and military presence, collide with those of Ukraine, Turkey, the European Union and the United States, among others . The gap left by the existing conventions and institutions in dealing with the region.
 It is argued that Russia’s move to annex Crimea was a strategic decision made irrespective of the destructive effect on the post-Cold War order . It is also argued that the move was not a strategic move made in the wake of the conflict .
There is no hope of revising the existing conventions and institutions pertaining to the basin . Until a new normal has been accepted by the main players, there is no chance of changing the basin's conventions .
 The debate over the crisis in Crimea has been dominated by a clash of conceptions and interpretations of the scope and limitations of the notions of sovereignty, self-determination, secession and the use of armed force .
 debate about state and human security-centred principles has descended into a dialogue of the deaf . While it is important to discuss these state and security-Centred principles, the debate about them has descended to a dialogue.
 The inﬁltration, occupation and annexation of Crimea by Russia by Russia was an ordinary post-imperial land grab by a ruler .
 Putin and his revisionist ideologues and propaganda machine have used concepts like ‘Novorossiya’ and the protection of Russians and Russian speakers abroad to convince the Russian population of the just nature of the Kremlin’s actions .
 Russia's pursuit of energy interests and military domination of the Black Sea is an additional explanation for Russia’s wrongful actions . Other reasons of a more strategic and geoeconomic nature offer a additional explanation .
 Russia’s strategic interests in the Black Sea region collide with those of Ukraine, Turkey, the European Union and the U.S.
 This leaves the question whether the gap can be plugged and, if so, when and how . This is the first time the gap has been plugged .
 The peninsula could serve as a military outpost for extending power projection towards Ukraine, Moldova, Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, the South Caucasus and even the eastern Mediterranean . The peninsula would serve as an outpost for power projection.
 For Ukraine, the loss of Crimea represents a signiﬁcant decline in its military potential . For Ukraine's military potential, Crimea's loss is a sign of a decline .
 It translates into the near-complete elimination of the Ukrainian ﬂeet . The Ukrainian government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 The Russian navy and air force have been testing the battle readiness of neighbouring states and NATO allies .
 The ‘highly disturbing’ violations of national airspace had caused several incidents where military confrontation or loss of life was narrowly avoided .
 One of the results of the crisis over Crimea has been an increased United States presence in the region .
 Washington has extended support to NATO allies in the Black Sea basin . Washington has also extended support for its NATO allies .
 The US continues to build a missile defence base in Romania . The base is set to become operational by the end of 2015 .
 The missile defence shield has been a thorn in Moscow's side since 2002 . The idea was launched after NATO’s Prague Summit that year .
 The U.S. role of the United States in Ukraine has been famously exposed in the form of the leaked recording of a telephone conversation between Victoria Nuland and Geoffrey Pyatt . The recording of the conversation was leaked by U. S. ambassador to Kiev Geoffrey Pyat .
 The more important message contained in the conversation concerned the role of Washington in liaising with Ukrainian opposition parties . The conversation concerned Washington in liaison with Ukraine's opposition parties.
 Romania and Bulgaria acceded to the EU, but it cannot be considered a Black Sea power . The EU has bordered the Black Sea ever since the two countries acceded .
 The basin represents a pressure point for the EU’s security and has become a direct geopolitical concern with the crisis in Crimea . The basin nevertheless represents a Pressure point for EU's security .
 The failure of this EU-centric approach was most painfully exposed by the two crises in Ukraine . The failures of this European approach were exposed by Ukraine's two crises .
 The EU is now scrambling to up its game by reviewing the entire European Neighbourhood Policy .
 The EU is in an urgent need of a more comprehensive and proactive regional ‘strategy’ towards the Black Sea region . Based on its previous experiences in region-building practices in the Baltic and Mediterranean Seas .
 The EU should address the energy dependence of the EU on Russia through the diversiﬁcation of energy resources and transit corridors for Caspian oil . This strategic reassessment ought to address theenergy dependence of Russia on Russia .
 The EU is notoriously dependent on oil and gas imports, with its 28 member states obtaining over 50% of their aggregate demand from outside the Union . Some Eastern European member states are almost entirely dependent on Russian energy supplies .
 Russia is equally dependent on its European buyers, as a supplier of energy resources . Russia is also dependent on European buyers .
 Russia too has to diversify, hence the mega gas deal with China in 2014 . Russia too have to diversified, hence its mega gas deals with China .
 The South Stream project will be scrapped and the intention to work on 'Turkish Stream' should be seen as a twin-track attempt at punishing the EU . The Turks are keen to become Europe’s fourth energy supply ‘artery’ by building their own pipelines to get
 Russia’s assertive foreign policy and expanded military presence in the Black Sea has pushed Turkey in a more defensive position . Turkey has been in a defensive position for years .
 Turkey’s proﬁle as the sole local actor capable of challenging Russian aggression in the region . By the same token, the new situation has raised Turkey's pro-pro-Turkish pro-Turkish status .
 Moscow’s proposal to Ankara to build Turkish Stream can be seen as an effort by Russia to woo Turkey . Russia has already acquired its newly acquired position in the basin .
 The Black Sea region's governing conventions and institutions have either been violated with impunity or have proven useless to address the Crimean crisis . The dynamics of the region have changed dramatically .
 These and other admissions, combined with the misguided justiﬁcations for Russia’s military intervention in Crimea, seem emblematic for the ‘couldn’t care less’ attitude of Putin.
 Turkey controls access to the Black Sea through the Dardanelles and the Bosporus Straits . Pursuant to the provisions of this convention.
 In April 1982, the Convention was amended to allow Turkey to close the Straits at its discretion in peacetime and in wartime .
 Turkey authorized a U.S. Navy destroyer to pass through the Bosphorus . But the Convention did not permit a United States aircraft carrier to make the same passage .
 The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea entered into force in November 1994 . Calls for the Montreux Convention to be amended to make it compatible with the UNCLOS regime .
 Turkey’s long-standing refusal to sign UNCLOS has meant that the Montreux Convention remains in force without further amendments .
 U.S. concerns about Montreux ring hollow in the face of its refusal to sign up to UNCLOS . The strains between the region's archaic regional security arrangement and the demands for a multilateral regime ofUNCLOS are becoming increasingly apparent .
 Crimea annexation has altered the balance of power in the region into a more duopolistic geopolitical arrangement between Russia and Turkey . The annexation of Crimea has signiﬁcantly altered the balances of power.
 Many states have challenged Russia’s seizing of Crimea and thus the legality of its Black Sea claims . It is likely that the other coastal countries will tacitly recognize the new normal in order to avoid open conﬂict .
 Romania and Russia now de facto neighbours and the former getting increased military support from the US . New maritime border could become a potential source of conﬂict.
 The consequences of Russia’s annexation of Crimea extend beyond concerns of land sovereignty and far into waters of the Black Sea basin .
 Russia has more than halved Ukraine's coastal line and totally controls the country’s access to the open Black Sea .
 The UNCLOS provisions are used by Russia to establish its dominion over vast oil and gas reserves just off the Crimean shore . Russia is dealing a crippling blow to Ukraine’s hopes for energy independence .
 Article 4 of the Treaty of Annexation between the newly declared Republic of Crimea and the Russian Federation contains a single sentence which states that international law will govern the drawing of boundaries through the adjacent Black and Azov Seas .
 The 2003 Agreement between the Russian Federation and the Ukraine on cooperation in the use of the sea of Azov and the strait of Kerch’s deﬁned the Azov Sea as a closed sea .
 The demarcation of the maritime border was left to a special commission, which met only once in 2012 . Putin may still want to inspire and support the separatists of the so-called Luhansk and Donetsk Peoples Republics .
 In doing so, the entire coastline of the Azov Sea would come under de facto Russian control .
 With regard to the Black Sea, the coastal countries have long seen its ﬂoor as a potential energy source .
 Russia has taken over the Crimean branch of Naftogaz, Ukraine’s national gas company . The annexation of the Peninsula has seen Russia take over the Crimea branch of the company .
Economic sanctions could slow Russia’s exploitation of its Black and Azov Sea annexations by reducing access to Western technology and technology . However, mounting economic sanctions may slow Russia's exploitation of the sea annexations .
 The Council Regulation also prohibits the export of certain goods and technology to Crimean companies or for use in the transport, telecommunications and energy sectors .
 The EU ban affects the prospection, exploration and production of oil, gas and mineral resources . The ban affects prospection and exploration of oil and gas resources .
 Technical assistance, brokering, construction or engineering services related to infrastructure in the energy, transport and telecommunications sectors are forbidden . Also, technical assistance, Brokering and construction services are forbidden.
 The downgrade means that foreign investors, such as pension funds, are legally obliged to divest billions of their Russian holdings . The downgrade is a downgrade for foreign investors .
 The blatant disregard for international rules by Putin's Russia in Crimea has not gone unpunished . In sum, while the international conventions remain toothless in and of their own.
 It is highly doubtful whether the stated aim of the EU sanctions will be achieved,e.e. The EU's stated aim is to create behavioural change among those targeted Russians .
International cooperation in the Black Sea basin has been the object of various institutionalization attempts . International organizations for years have been trying to institutionalize the region .
 Regional powers like Russia and Turkey have become vehicles for regional powers to pursue their hegemonic interests under institutional cover, reducing regional cooperation to merely rhetorical level .
 BSEC has proved to be the most efﬁcient con-building forum to discuss common interests . BSEC is one of the most popular con-buildings forums in the world .
 Lest to say that none of these organizations have proved suitable platforms for the resolution of disputes at the high political level at which they have and continue to be played out .
 The organization could not prevent the annexation of Ukraine and its monitors have been kept off the peninsula by Russia .
 In the face of a Russian veto in the UN Security Council, only the UN General Assembly deﬁned the opinion juris of the global community .
 Afﬁrms its commitment to the sovereignty, political independence, unity and territorial integrity of Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders .
 Calls upon all States to desist and refrain from actions aimed at the partial or total disruption of Ukraine’s national unity and territorial integrity .
 The United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other international and regional organizations are assisting Ukraine in protecting the rights of all persons in Ukraine, including those belonging to minorities .
 The referendum held in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol on 16 March 2014, has no validity . The referendum cannot form the basis for any alteration of the status of the Aut autonomous republic of Crimea or of the city.
 Calls upon all States, international organizations and specialized agencies not to recognize any alteration of the status of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and city of Sevastopol .
 UN Security Council member trespasses on every basic rule structuring the international and regional order . This renders the institutional governance system not ﬁt for purpose when dealing with a nuclear weapon-wielding member of the Security Council .
 This begs the question whether the governance gap over the Black Sea can be plugged . The Black Sea is the largest area in the world of the world .
 The annexation of Crimea by Russia in March 2014 has had an immediate impact on the strategic situation across the Black Sea region . Concluding remarks the annexation has had a immediate impact.
 Russia has emerged as a clear beneﬁciary mostly at the expense of Ukraine . Russia is seen as a strong ally of Ukraine, but it has been criticised for its actions .
 Russian militarism was motivated by the idea of restoring Russian pride and standing by appealing to historical rights and wrongs . Competition to dominate the Eurasian energy corridors is as much behind Russia’s aggressive foreign policy .
 EU jockeying and U.S. interference in the Black Sea region is also driven by the desire to control critical energy pockets and pipeline routes .
 Russia's move to annex Crimea was a strategic decision made irrespective of the destructive effect on the post-Cold War order, and Russia’s own place therein . But what distinguishes Russia as a player in this great game is that its move to annexed Crimea was not a
 Putin’s regime is more concerned with the short-term consolidation of its own power and popular support at home than with long-term economic well-being of its citizens and international stability .
 The Kremlin has even gone so far as to issue provocative pinpricks to the air and naval defences of individual NATO allies and G7 countries like Australia .
 Putin’s Russia seems to be on course towards greater international isolation .
 The Black Sea region has emerged as a key issue for recasting a new balance of power between Russia and the West . Russia and West have emerged as key issues for recast a new power balance between them .
 The geopolitical ‘chessboard’ is being reordered, with Russia and the Euro-Atlantic community seeking to reconﬁgure their positions in the aftermath of the Crimean crisis .
There is no hope of revising the existing conventions and institutions pertaining to the basin . Until a new normal has been accepted by those main players, there is no chance of reviving the existing convention and institutions .
 The governance gap in the Black Sea region is set to continue for the foreseeable future . The gap is expected to continue in the future, however .
 Russian authorities have misconstrued the sequence of events in several other instances . Russian authorities and media outlets have misinterpreted events, according to the Russian media .
 Russia ranks 148th in the 2014 World Press Freedom Index . It is below Cambodia, Myanmar and Bangladesh . Russia is ranked 148th.
 Crimea and the maritime zone around it offers Russia a strong line of defence far ahead of the southwestern mainland . Russia has increased its offensive capabilities in Crimea and maritime zone .
 The deployment of troops would be further facilitated by the delivery by France of Mistral amphibious assault ships . One was to be allocated to the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 Turkish Navy splits its forces between the Black Sea and the Aegean and Mediterranean theatres . Its potential was only exceeded by the Turkish Navy which split its forces from Black Sea .
 The Black Sea Fleet will add six new frigates, six new submarines and several smaller vessels . The potential of the Black Sea fleet will be further increased after completion of an ambitious modernisation programme .
 The ‘Energy Union’ which was unveiled on 25 February 2015 is a ﬁrst attempt of the European Commission to address this issue by way of formulating a ‘framework strategy’ based on the 2014 Energy Security Strategy .
 The EU's leaders have not jumped on the smoking gun delivered by Putin . It is frustrating that the EU’s leaders, notably High Representative Federica Mogherini, has not jumped.
 The EU has called on UN members to consider similar non-recognition measures in line with UN General Assembly Resolution 68/262 Territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 For almost 20 years, he has worked for the EU institutions and member states’ governments on numerous research and technical assistance projects in the geographical neighbourhood of the EU and in Asia .
 He served as project leader and leading author of the FES-sponsored Task Force on European Security and Defence . He is currently project leader of a SIDA-sponsored study on the implementation of the EU Association Agreements with Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia .
 Ukraine’s energy policy and U.S. strategic interests in Eurasia. Ukraine's energy policy, United States strategic interests are in the region .
 Putin's ‘couldn’t care less’ attitude towards Russia’s international commitments, says Putin . Putin's 'couldn't care less' about Russia's international commitments.
 Council Regulation No 692/2014 of 23 June 2014 concerning restrictions on the import into the Union of goods originating in Crimea or Sevastopol . The restrictions are in response to the illegal annexation of Crimea and SevASTopol .
 Geostrategic and economic priorities in the Black Sea regionreconconconﬁguring a fuzzy eastern borderline .
 List of close military encounters between Russia and the West, March 2014- March 2015 .
 Belarus, Moldova, and Ukraine between Russia and the European Union, ed. Russia and Ukraine.
 Crimea’s annexation by Russia – Contradictions of the new Russian doctrine of international law . Crimea's annexation is part of a new doctrine ofInternational law .
 Russia's military muscle as tensions rise in Ukraine’s Crimea, CNN.com reports .