 France and Germany have called elections by Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine 'illegal and illegitimate' They join a chorus of international criticism over the vote .
 Moscow argues elections to choose separatists heads in Donetsk and Luhansk would not violate Minsk agreements . But Moscow argues that the elections would not break the Minsk agreement aimed at putting an end to violence .
 Denis Pushilin was leading with 61 percent of the ballots, Russian news agencies reported . With almost all votes counted, the acting head of the separatists in the Donetsk region was leading .
 The acting head of the separatists in the neighboring Luhansk region, Leonid Pasechnik, was said to have taken 68 percent of the vote .
 Germany, France, and Ukraine are part of the so-called 'Normandy format' countries seeking a resolution to the conflict . Germany, French, Germany and Ukraine have been involved in the conflict for years .
 Russia is the fourth country in the format, which has not held talks in two years . Russia has not been in talks with other countries in the past two years.
 Pushilin, 37, has worked a series of jobs including casino croupier and pushing financial products for MMM . MMM was a successor to the infamous Russian Ponzi scheme that swindled tens of thousands of people after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Pasechnik, 48, is a former regional chief of the Ukrainian Security Service . He is the former regional head of the Ukraine Security Service.
 Pushilin and Pasechnik have promised to seek tighter ties with Moscow . Both have promised tighter ties. Both have said they want to seek closer ties with Russia .
 Voting was held amid tightened security, with gun-toting, camouflage-clad soldiers deployed to ensure order .
 Posters around the separatist stronghold of Donetsk call on people to vote with Russia in your heart .
 The last separatist elections were held in 2014 despite protests from Kyiv and the West, which didn’t recognize their results .
 Ukraine, the U.S. and the European Union had already condemned the latest vote as a sham manipulated by Russia . The vote was signed in the Belarusian capital, Minsk, in September 2014 and February 2015 .
 NATO says elections 'undermine efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the conflict' NATO calls on Russia to 'withdraw its forces and cease all support to militant groups'
 Ukrainian authorities had urged residents of separatist-held territories to boycott the elections . They had warned that their participation would violate Ukrainian legislation .
 The separatists and Moscow rejected appeals to cancel the elections . Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said in October that the vote was needed to fill the vacuum in power .
 Separatists seized territory in Donetsk and Luhansk regions after a popular uprising . Russia annexed Ukraine’s Crimea Peninsula a month later .
 The United States and other Western countries have imposed sanctions on Russia over its annexation of Crimea and its backing of the separatists . The U.S. has imposed sanctions over the annexation of the Crimea and the backing of separatists .
 Moscow has repeatedly denied financing and equipping separatist forces despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary . Moscow insists that the fighting was a civil, internal conflict .
 Four Ukrainian soldiers were reported killed in or near separatist-held areas, the military said . The military said on November 10.