 This article explores the origins of the Ukrainian crisis in several historical developments that came together in 2014 . This article also explores the history of the Ukraine crisis .
 The situation has unfolded inside Ukraine itself since 1991 with the establishment of a new nation state simultaneously with the return of capitalism . The first development, and the condition necessary for activating all the others, is the condition needed for activating the others .
 The second is the isolation of Ukraine from the regional economic and security blocs of the Euro-Atlantic core states to the west and of Russia to the east .
 The third is the revival of Russian imperialism. The fourth is the ensuing rivalry between Russian and European imperialisms to incorporate Ukraine into their respective transnational strategies .
 The fifth development is a confrontation between a declining U.S. power and a reviving Russian power in Europe . The fifth is the overarching confrontation between the two countries .
 Russia is observed as the proactive power that militarised and internationalised the Ukrainian crisis in 2014 by seizing Crimea and arming the separatist insurgency in the east . Russia has been observed as a proactive power.
 USA has the potential to open up cracks in the Euro-Atlantic core between the USA and the most powerful European states on the other .
 The Maidan arose in 2013, as it did in 2004, because the new Ukrainian ruling class failed to share state power democratically or to invest in the development of its own society .
 Lacking democratic legitimacy or an adequate social consensus made the state weak and less capable of dealing with the challenges and opportunities it faced from neighbouring powers . Lacking a social consensus or a lack of democratic legitimacy made it weak, it was less able to deal with challenges it faced
 This past quarter century we have seen the simultaneous construction of a new nation state and its still incomplete transition to a capitalist economy . This year we have also seen the construction of the new nation states .
 State building and privatisation of nationalised assets have been not only simultaneous, but also symbiotic processes . State building, privatisation and state-owned assets have also been simultaneous .
 The state was built as the instrument for the wholesale transfer of these assets into the hands of a very narrow class that we call the oligarchs . The oligarchs are very narrow.
 The social class then turned the state to enabling new rounds of wealth accumulation from the living labour . The private sector has become a growing part of the private sector .
 The old Stalinist bureaucracy was not driven out of the collapsing nationalised economy . The old Soviet-Stalinist bureaucracy is not driving out the collapsing economy .
 The political sphere became the absolutely dominant subject of the multi-party system . So too did it ensure its own resurrection in the political sphere .
 The state rested on a fragile social consensus of a population holding onto an ever fading promise that prosperity would come from leaving the Soviet Union and joining the West .
 The Ukrainian masses rose up in frustration and anger over this broken promise in 1994, 2001 and 2004 1, but their increasingly massive protests failed each time to fundamentally change things .
Ukrainian people are poorer today as they were in the last year of the USSR . They are riven by far more inequalities than they were then .
 Their influence over public policy and public institutions remains weak, even if they have managed repeatedly to recover their basic rights to free expression, assembly and self organisation .
 The Maidan in the winter of 2013-14 was the latest revolt against this manifest failure, a mass movement that briefly undermined the new ruling class, drove its most powerful faction out of the country, but ultimately failed to dislodge it from the political and economic institutions .
 The Maidan was threatening to compel the Russian state to intervene and seize Crimea . It was to arm a revanchist insurgency in the Donbas .
 The second historical development that contributed to the outbreak of the current crisis was the failure of the Ukrainian state to integrate successfully into either the Euro-Atlantic alliance or the Russia-led alliance .
 Ukraine's isolation from the integration projects on either side made Ukraine vulnerable to shifts in the relations between the big powers in the region . Ukraine's integration projects made Ukraine particularly vulnerable.
There was a rapid rate of economic recovery on the back of growing exports . There was a fast rate of growth on the backs of growing export growth .
 The mounting social and regional economic inequalities and an increasingly repressive regime were the triggers for the 2004 Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution was the result of the Orange Revolution in 2004 .
 Russian capitalists succeeded in placing substantial investments in the Ukrainian economy . Kuchma's second term in office and Putin's first in Russia was his second in Russia .
 Kuchma’s successor in 2004, Viktor Yushchenko, tried to offset the Russian advance by inviting in European investment capital .
 By 2008 the Ukrainian economy was well penetrated by both Western and Russian investors, neither of whom contributed much to diversifying or upgrading it .
 Each side was trying to incorporate Ukraine’s natural resources, cheap labour and its markets onto a low technological echelon of its own regional chains.
 The 2008 financial crisis prevented either side from making a bid for a dominant position . Yet the 2008 crisis prevented both sides from making an attempt to win a dominant role .
 The Ukrainian oligarchs still held onto their hope of remaining an independent capitalist class in the global political economy .
 The European Union, on the other hand, did not want them in as members . Yushchenko is the most pro-Western of all Ukraine's leaders .
 Ukraine ended up in the grey zone between US-led Europe and Russia, and the likely recipient of friction between them . Russia revived and United States influence in Europe waned as Russia revived.
 The third historical development contributing to the current crisis has been the revival of Russian imperialist ambitions . The third historic development contributed to the crisis is a revival of the Russian imperialism .
 Throughout the 1990s the Western powers set the agenda, incorporating Central European and Baltic states into the EU and NATO . All the time holding Russia, Ukraine and Belarus at arm’s length outside their integration project .
 Russian expansion has relied on its competitive advantages in global markets of fuel, energy and mineral resources . American capitalism expanded globally with a far more diversified production base and with already saturated domestic demand .
 The Russian economy is weakly driven by domestic demand, and it does not satisfy it . Russia's economy is weaker than any other country, but it is not as strong as other countries are .
 It is not diversified nor is its bourgeoisie willing to invest significantly in its diversification . It's not diversification or is its bourgeois willing to investment significantly .
 Property ownership in Russia is too insecure, access to domestic resources and markets is in the gift of state authorities . Better security and better investment opportunities exist for Russian capital investment abroad .
 Russian capital has become diversified both sectorally and geographically along transnational chains of production, trade and investment . The Russian national economy is not diversified, but it has become more diversified .
 Ukraine's gas and oil transit pipelines through Ukraine have remained steadfastly in state hands . Russia is the most valuable transit facility of them all, according to the U.S. government .
 The period of Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency saw further popular alienation from the political order . The economy falter under the blows of the 2008 financial crisis . The state face a zero-sum choice to accept either Russia’'s or the West’’
 The mixture of these three factors finally exploded in Kyiv in the winter of 2013-14 . The combination of the three factors exploded in 2014-14.
 Yushchenko had fallen out bitterly with Tymoshenko as Prime Minister over policy towards Russia . His predecessor Yushchenchenko was Prime Minister of Ukraine .
 Ukraine-Russia relations were dominated by disputes about the cost of Russian gas and for its transit to Europe . Ukraine- Russia relations were also dominated by disagreements about the price of gas .
 The state corporation Naftogaz Ukrainy became more and more indebted to Gazprom . The Russian government used the debt to pressure Ukraine on a variety of issues .
 Yushchenko had tried to balance growing Russian economic penetration by opening up the country to Western investment .
 The financial meltdown in 2008 that battered people’s livelihoods and convinced enough voters to give Yanukovych a chance to turn things around . That influx ended spectacularly with the financial meltdown.
 The arrival of Armani-dressed oligarchs in window darkened limos to Yanukovych’s inauguration in January 2010 gave everyone a taste of things to come .
 As soon as he took office Yanukovych moved to strengthen presidential authority over the legislature, judiciary, public procuracy and the Kyiv city government .
 The law by which the Rada was elected entirely on the basis of proportional representation of parties was replaced in August 2012 . In August 2012 the law was replaced by a new law by a single party .
 Half the seats would be chosen on the basis of proportional representation of those parties that gained more than 5 percent of all votes . The other half would be decided by single mandate constituency elections .
 It also provided the means to subvert the democratic oversight of local electoral committees and deliver fraudulent vote counts to the Central Election Commissions . It also provides the means of subverting the democracy of local elections .
 Yulia Tymoshenko and Yuriy Lutsenko were jailed for 7 years . They were barred from public office for seven years . Their imprisonment served to intimidate the parliamentary and extra-parliamentary opposition .
State security organs went after opposition candidates, independent analysts, university rectors and investigative journalists . State security organs also went after independent analysts and independent analysts .
 A attempt was made – in the end unsuccessful – to muzzle the media by making slander of public officials a criminal offense . The attempt was unsuccessful, but was made to make slander a criminal offence .
 Putin had some of the hallmarks of the drive to ‘sovereign democracy’ made by Putin years before in neighbouring Russia .
 Commodity prices recovered at the end of 2009, but in the longer term international demand did not .
 Ukraine’s recorded annual GDP grew again in 2011 by just over 5% . But then fell back and registered no growth at all in 2012 and 2013 .
 The value of its trade with the EU single market and with Russia has fluctuated over the years . Russia has been trading with the European single market for years .
 The general pattern was the steady displacement of Russia as Ukraine’s dominant trade partner by other countries .
 EU and Russia each accounted for around one third of Ukraine’s total trade . The EU, Russia and the EU each account for around a third of the Ukraine's trade .
 Ukraine has covered its trade deficits with Russia and the EU by generating surpluses from trade with the East Asian, Middle Eastern and African countries . Ukraine has also generated surpluse from trade.
 In 2013 Russia began a trade war with Ukraine in response to the first easing of trade barriers between the EU and Ukraine . In 2013 the two countries began a war over the anticipated free trade area agreement between them .
 Russia claimed EU exporters would use Ukraine to dump their products into the Russian market . Russia claimed that EU exporter would use Ukrainian products to dump into the market .
Ukrainian dairy products, fruit, vegetables, meat, sunflower oil and alcohol banned . It banned imports of Ukrainian dairy products.
 Ukraine’s indebtedness provided a handy lever to influence its government . For both the West and Russia, Ukraine's debt provides a handy leverage to influence their government .
 The IMF was the arbiter of its creditworthiness and so its gatekeeper to international capital markets . It tried to impose conditions on the government to decrease state ownership of public utilities .
 Russian government used Ukraine’s indebtedness and its dependence on Russian export markets to lever the Kharkiv Accords in April 2010 .
 The Accords extended the lease of Sevastopol and other Crimean ports to the Russian navy until 2042 . In exchange for cheaper gas, the Accords agreed to extend the lease .
 In June of that year the Verkhovna Rada excluded the goal of NATO membership from the country’s national security strategy . The country has a non-aligned status .
 Yanukovych also agreed to start talks with Russia about merging the state utility Naftogaz Ukrayiny with Gazprom . The talks could deepen co-operation between the countries’ defence, aerospace and aeronautical industries .
Without remittances, the condition of the working class would be considerably worse than it is today . Without remittance, it would be significantly worse than today .
The overall impact of labour outmigration has been negative as far as the reproductive capacity of Ukrainian society is concerned . The overall impact on labour is negative, however, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Labour migration, trade, the repatriation of profits from FDI, debt repayments and capital flight are all tributaries for the extraction of wealth from the Ukrainian economy .
 The European Union and the Eurasian Economic Union are both regional integration projects . The projects are designed to comprehensively regulate and channel such tributaries into their respective metropolitan cores .
 In 2013 the Ukrainian state found itself forced to choose between the EU and Customs Union on the one hand and the other . The Ukrainian state was forced to pick between EU and the Customs Union .
 The Customs Union, formed in 2010, was made up of Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan . It was the precursor to the Eurasian Economic Union .
 The latter was launched in January 2015, together with Armenia as its fourth member . The latter is now the fourth member of Armenia .
 There was no way for Ukraine to belong to both regional integration projects. This was a zero-sum choice because there was noway for Ukraine for both projects .
 The fact that its economy was closely tied to both the Russian and EU markets, asymmetrically but in equally strong measures, was simply ignored by Russia and EU leaders .
 Ukraine was not offered membership in the EU nor even even the prospect of membership . It would remain excluded from the decision making process that shapes the EU single market .
 Kyiv baulked at pooling its sovereignty with Russia’s in the Customs Union or the Eurasian Economic Union . It was therefore hardly surprising Kyivbaulked.
 The Ukrainian government's inability to service its foreign debt brought matters to a head at the beginning of winter in 2013 .
 Several hundred people gathered on the Maidan to protest and demand Yanukovych sign the agreements . The news reached Kyiv.
 He proposed as a way out of the situation that Moscow be involved in three way negotiations with the EU and Ukraine . He proposed the situation as an alternative to Moscow's involvement in three-way negotiations .
 Yanukovych was being pressed to choose between Russia and the West . He wanted co-operation with both sides to deal with the country’s mounting problems .
 The protesters simply saw in Yanukovych’s refusal to sign the Agreements a rejection of the EU as a result of pressure from Moscow .
 The treatment caused outrage in the capital and the numbers on the Maidan the following day, 1 December, swelled to hundreds thousand .
 The events which then unfolded in December, January and February became known around the world as “the Maidan’s” The events then became known as ‘ the Maidan.’ The Maidan constituted a mass struggle to overthrow the political regime of Viktor Yanukovych .
 The class of oligarchs whose power and interests his regime served was not removed . Although he was removed from power, he was not taken from power .
 Yanukovych’s faction among the class of oligarchs driven to the eastern border . It mounted its revanche in the form of a separatist movement against those oligarchs who retained control .
 The Maidan failed in several respects to utilise the revolutionary potential of this historical moment. Crucially, the Maidan didn't utilise this historic moment .
 It failed to drive the oligarchs from the institutions of the state to challenge their control over the economy, or offer an alternative programme of social and economic development .
 The outcome of the struggle between the Yanukovych regime and the Maidan was not resolved solely on the basis of domestic forces alone . However, the outcome was not entirely resolved on the ground of domestic force .
 Both Russia and the U.S. strived to influence the course of events to their own great power advantage . If not at the beginning of the mass mobilisations then certainly by the end of the regime both Russia and U. S. of America strived for
 Russia decisively turned the struggle for power inside Ukraine into an international crisis . However, it was Russia that decisively turned it into a crisis .
As Yanukovych's position in Kyiv grew more tenuous the Russian leadership deployed military forces to its border with Ukraine . The Russian leadership reinforced its positions in the leased Crimean naval bases .
 Yanukovych fled Kyiv Russian forces began taking control of the Crimean government . The peninsula’s communications and the urban centres are under siege by Russian forces .
 Moscow based newspaper Novaya gazeta says eight oblasts were targeted for separation from Ukraine .
 Russia has a land bridge from its western border through to Crimea and across to Transdnistria . If successful, this would have given Russia a landbridge from its west to Crimea . This would have cut Ukraine off completely from the Black Sea .
 In the end, Russian and Russia-backed Ukrainian forces took only parts of two oblasts, Donetsk and Luhansk . The Ukrainian forces have taken only part of two Oblasts.
 Initially they made up about 4% of the territory of Ukraine in 2014, and 5% after the separatist offensive in January 2015 . But they accounted for a considerably larger portion of its GDP and export earnings .
 The oligarchs' industrial assets and power were concentrated in the Maidan . But their real aim was to prevent the spread of Maidan into the east where they were concentrated .
 The ousted fragment of the oligarchic regime clung to this separatist platform in the east and started to rock it so as to upend the Kyiv government . The ousted part of the regime started to fight back against the Kyv government .
 Kyiv government stepped up its military campaign against these militias and their declared republics Russia increased the calibre and supply of personnel and weaponry to them .
 Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics did establish a certain social base and a professional cadre drawn from the region itself . The so-called Donetsk andLuhansk people's Republics.
Military, diplomatic and financial capacities were almost entirely dependent on the Kremlin . But their military, diplomatic, financial and financial capacity were almost completely dependent on Kremlin .
 Russia’s principal motive in seizing Crimea was not to gain territory, but above all to suppress the Maidan . Yanukovych had previously guaranteed the government in Kyiv that Yanukovych had already guaranteed .
 Russia aimed to prevent Ukraine's further incorporation into the Atlantic alliance through an association agreement or a free trade regime with the EU or a path to NATO membership .
 It sought guarantees for Russian capitalists’ access to Ukraine’s markets and protection from competition by EU investors and producers .
 Kyiv wanted a government in Kyiv that would align its economic and security policies with Russian regional and global strategies . It wanted to join the Eurasian Economic Union and a Russia-led security alliance .
 Former President Kuchma was forced to negotiate the Minsk Accords with the leaders of the separatist republics in September . The leaders were recognised as parties to an interstate agreement .
 He calculated correctly that NATO would not respond in kind to Russia’s attack on Ukraine if that attack was decisive and rapidly attained its objectives .
 Russia-Georgia shooting war lasted for only four days in August 2008 . However, the ongoing crisis did not play out like the 2008 shooting war .
 Putin miscalculated on the readiness of Ukrainian government forces to resist the separatist insurgency in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts and to suppress his efforts to widen it to the other Oblasts . Putin's attempt to suppress the separatists' attempts to widen the insurgency to
 Pro-Russia separatist forces were contained in the eastern reaches of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . He failed to achieve that depth of position and the pro-Russia separatists were contained .
 The Russians’ advantages in speed and geographic proximity diminished as the conflict dragged on, leaving them with superiority in fire power .
 The longer it dragged on the more it encouraged NATO member states in the region to seek reinforcements of their own borders with Russia from their Western allies .
 The Ukraine crisis is changing the balance of power between Russia, the USA and Germany as the leading EU state . Russia is now the leading state in the EU .
 Russia’s economic and military expansion places it on a collision course with U.S. hegemony over Western and Central Europe . Russia's economic andMilitary expansion places the country on a collided course with the United States .
 This collision is all the more destabilising the weaker becomes the USA’s capacity to project its own power into Eastern Europe . This collision could destabilise the weaker become the USA.
 Russian capital is investing and diversifying its portfolios in Western and Central Europe . The government has long sought and secured bilateral co-operation with separate EU member states .
 It has done so deliberately to avoid negotiating with the EU as their collective representative . It has also done so to avoid negotiations with the European Union as their representative .
 Germany has admitted significant Russian inward investment in return . It has the biggest investment in Russia of any country in the world .
 The Ukrainian crisis broke open when the Ukraine crisis broke out in Ukraine . The EU was a political axis of EU -Kyiv-Moscow in the making .
 The imposition of Western sanctions against Russia has created huge uncertainty as to its future . The imposition a Western sanctions on Russia is creating huge uncertainty .
 The Employers Federation is headed by Firtash himself . Its members’ businesses accounted for 70% of the country’s GDP in 2014 .
 The faction of Firtash, Lyovochkin and the Opposition Bloc has been preparing to challenge the current government . The faction is preparing to challenges the government .
 The second political axis passing through the Ukrainian ruling class is a Washington-Kyiv-Moscow axis . The Poroshenko-Yatseniuk faction in Kyiv passes through the Poroshenko faction . The third political axis passes through Kyiv's ruling class .
 All three oligarchs have powerful interests in maintaining ties with both Russia and the EU states . But all three have strong ties with the EU and Russia .
 The U.S. does not have a vital economic relationship with either Russia or Ukraine . The EU has not had as powerful an economic chain at its foundation as the EU has .
 Europe's main underlying motive is to demarcate and discipline the European region over which the USA exercises hegemony . The U.S. exercises hegemony.
 The war between Russia and Ukraine has become the issue through which Washington tries to contain German ambitions and marshals all its European allies .
 The USA's approach is fundamentally different from Germany's, which is to get Russia to uphold a common rules-based regional order that is also economically productive for both of them .
 Ukraine crisis has caused an exodus of a million, now internally and externally displaced people, a deepening economic and social crisis throughout the country . Western sanctions against Russia, rising nationalisms in Russia and Ukraine, military exercises and mobilisations by Russia and NATO across Eastern Europe .
In this article I have tried to show it is not enough to examine the actions of the big powers in order to understand how this crisis began . In this article, I try to show that the powers are not enough.
 Its tap root grows out of the historical experience of Ukrainian society and their state . The tap root has been used in Ukraine for more than 30 years .
 It is the first and necessary condition for the activation of all the other roots . It is first and needed condition for activation of the all other roots.
 It will have to confront the failure of the contemporary ruling class to fulfil the popular expectations arising from the attainment of independence in 1991 for prosperity and social justice .
 Ukraine's ruling class is incapable of defending its country's national independence, says CNN's John Sutter . The first three expectations were denied by the Ukrainian ruling class, he says .
 The current situation powerfully echoes the two previous attempts in history – in 1648 and 1917 – when a new social class tried but failed to build an independent state centred on Kyiv and the Dnipro River basin .
 Russia, USA and West European states all bear responsibility for their parts in this crisis . Russia, the USA and the West European countries all bearresponsibility for their part in the crisis .
 The political economy of Ukraine is stretched across a reknitted transnational capitalist economy . Russia on the one hand and the Western powers on the other are vying to draw Ukraine's ruling class, national market and productive assets into their respective integration projects .
 The Ukrainian state has been unable to gain membership in the Western, Euroatlantic project . Despite trying for a quarter century, the state has not been able to gain political and military-security membership .
 Russia has been refusing to join equivalent institutions of the Russia-led project . Over the same period it has been refused to join the project .
Russian imperialism has been revived since 2000, says author . He says the U.S. has diminished the capacity of the USA to project its own power into Russia .
 The balance of power in Eastern Europe between these competing regional integration projects has been altered by these three factors . These three factors steadily altered the balance ofpower in Eastern European countries .
 The collapse of the Yanukovych regime gave Russia's leaders the opportunity to exploit the changing balance . Russia’s leaders tried to draw Ukraine back into its own sphere .
 It provoked the Western powers to respond with economic sanctions and strengthening NATO’s capacity of its member states bordering Russia and Ukraine .
 Both the Western powers and Russia have pressed the Ukrainian leadership to engage with the separatist movement and seek a negotiated solution with them .
 The harder it is pressed the less becomes the room for its manoeuvre between them . The harder you are pressed the more room for your manoeuvre .
 Whether it is Russia or Western powers who claim Ukraine as part of their own sphere this can only be an imperialist claim .
 One or another faction of the Ukrainian ruling class may submit to such a claim, or even to a joint Russia-West tutelage .
 Ukrainian people will not be accepted by the Ukrainian people, nor should it be by those who want to support them around the world . But it is not expected to be accepted.