 This did not have to be a tragedy with Ukraine, and can still be handled amicably with Belarus . This didn't have to have been a tragedy, and could still be dealt with amicably .
 An independent Ukrainian state and a Ukrainian political nation ease Russia’s transition from its post-imperial condition and facilitate the formation of a Russian political nation .
 The Ukraine crisis is usually seen as an act of final liberation of the second largest former Soviet republic from imperial Russia .
 The significance of the reverse effect, of Russia finally drawing the border between itself and Ukraine, is often overlooked . Russia's border between the two countries is often ignored .
 It closed the books on the post-imperial period in Russia’s recent history . It still held out hopes for some sort of meaningful reintegration of the former Soviet republics around the Russian Federation .
 The Russian Federation asserts itself as a self-standing multiethnic nation-state in the middle of the mega-continent of Greater Eurasia . The separation from Ukraine and the breakdown in relations with the West have ushered in a wholly new era in the Russian Federation .
 Ukraine, not just Ukraine, are simply geographical neighbors, rather than “little brothers’s in an extended family run from Moscow .
 For Russia to succeed in its relations with Ukraine, it needs to learn the lessons of Ukraine . Russia must learn lessons from Ukraine, Russia says .
 Russia did not take its largest post-Soviet neighbor very seriously . For more than two decades prior to it, Russia did Not take its post- Soviet neighbor very serious .
 It preferred to deal with a range of pressing issues rather than the country behind them . It was more focused on pressing issues than any other country .
 Ukraine was first reduced to the issue of the transfer of the Soviet nuclear weapons to Russia . Then to the division of the Black Sea Fleet, and finally to the gas transit to Europe .
 Ukraine itself, with its complexities and problems, fell through the cracks . Ukraine itself has its complexities, but it also has its problems .
 Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian nations spent a quarter millennium under the ‘Mongol yoke’ and then rising to build an empire of its own . The two others were absorbed into eastern European states before being incorporated into the Russian empire .
 The common Russian view portrays Ukraine’s independence as something unnatural and pernicious, and striving for it as a betrayal not only of Russia's and Ukraine's own interests .
 The emphasis in the Russian narrative has always been placed on what is shared, on what brings the Eastern Slavic peoples together, such as common faith and common history .
Ukrainian nationalism was summarily defined as an enemy rather than a product of historical development . Thus, Ukrainian nationalism was not an enemy but an enemy .
 Many Ukrainians do not want to look and sound like Russians, says Leonid Kuchma . He says Ukraine is not Russia, in the words of the supposedly most “pro-Russian’s second president of Ukraine .
 Many in Moscow viewed Ukraine's 2004-2005 “Orange Revolution’s 2004–2005 ‘Orange revolution’ primarily in terms of a new political technology of “color revolutions’ launched by Americans .
 It was interpreted as a dress rehearsal of a potential regime change in Moscow . It was also interpreted as an attempt to stage a possible regime change .
 The failure of the “Orange leaders to deliver on their promises only produced schadenfreude and complacency in Moscow, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Kremlin continued to play with corrupt Ukrainian politicians, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the Kremlin is trying to build a strong constituency for an independent Ukraine .
 Many in Moscow interpreted the 2010 election of Viktor Yanukovych, the loser of the 2004 race, as Ukraine’s president, as a revenge for the past setback . The 2010 election was a down payment on the future integration of Ukraine into a unified economic, political, and strategic space shared
 That Yanukovych only cared for his own family interest and was cynically exploiting Moscow’s dreams, as well as Europe's hopes, was conveniently ignored . That Yanukovych's family interest was ignored.
 Vladimir Putin made Ukraine's integration with Russia a centerpiece of his foreign policy program . Putin prepared to return to the Russian presidency in 2012 .
 Putin's entire Eurasian integration project depended on Kiev aligning itself, economically as well as politically, with Moscow . It even would be fair to say that the success of Putin’s entire Eurasia integration project depends on Kiev .
 The Kremlin worked hard, but exclusively with Yanukovych and his government . To achieve that, the Kremlin workedhard, but only with Yanukovych .
 Russia’s policy toward Ukraine just before the 2013–2014 crisis is generally seen as a signal failure . Russia's policy toward the Ukraine crisis has been seen by some as a signals failure .
 Russia was unable to prevent the overthrow of Viktor Yanukovych by the Kiev Maidan . Russia was able to provide a political counterweight to the new “Maidan’s authorities in the form of a cross-regional alignment of the predominantly Russian-speaking southeastern Ukraine .
 Moscow did almost nothing to empower those elements in Ukraine that were friendly to Russia . Crimea was the important exception of Crimea . Moscow did not empower those parts in Ukraine.
 The cost of the failure of Russia’s Ukraine policy has turned out to be lower than the entirely unaffordable cost that would have been incurred had it been a success .
 Russia would have received a restive country with a population of 45 million that it would have to materially support to a significant degree and for an indefinite period of time . Yanukovych in 2013 unambiguously took Russia's side and agreed to Ukraine’s full participation in the
 Yanukovych at the beginning of 2014 would still have been the outbreak of a civil war in Ukraine . Had Yanukovych done what many in Moscow expected from him, it would have been a civil War in Ukraine.
 The new Ukrainian “people’s republic’ would have appeared, complete with guerillas . Instead of in the east, it would have broken out in the west of the country .
 Yanukovych would have been forced to begin his own ‘anti-terrorist operation’ in order to suppress them . Yanukovych would be forced to start his own 'anti- terrorist operation'
 Poland and NATO wouldn't have openly interfered, of course, but they would have aided the insurgents, just morally . Poland, NATO wouldn’t have publicly interfered, but would have helped them.
 Ukraine would have been subjected to Western sanctions, and Russia would have had to compensate for the losses . Ukraine, in the meantime, would have suffered from Western sanctions .
 In this scenario, Russia itself would also have been placed under sanctions . It is likely that they would be harsher than they are at present .
 The "support of a repressive puppet regime in Kiev" would have come at a high price. The support of a puppet regime would have been high, says the author .
 Russia would have to extend security assistance to Ukraine, including dispatch of special forces units and personnel . To reinforce the position of this shaky regime, Russia would need to extend the assistance .
 Such interference, in turn, would have provoked a great deal of discontent and mass resistance, not just in Western Ukraine . Such interference would have sparked a great number of discontent, and not just just in West Ukraine .
 Moscow would have found itself caught in a trap from which it wouldn’t be able to get out without destabilizing the Russian Federation itself .
 Despite all its dangers and complications, the actual situation today is far more favorable for Russia than what the presumed “successes’ of its policies would have offered. Despite all the dangers and complication, the real situation is more favorable than what Russia has offered .
 Ukraine is closely linked economically, socially, and culturally to Russia . Right up to 2014 there was simply no chance of such a project being implemented within the framework of a Ukraine closely linked to Russia.
 These are rooted in rural, peasant culture, and are alien to Russia-led urbanization, industrialization, and unification . The Russian peasant culture is rooted in Russia's rural culture .
 The Ukrainian political project, in principle, can only succeed under conditions where Ukraine is isolated off from Russia to the maximum possible extent . It can only become possible under conditions of the conflict that started in 2014 .
 Russia’s use of military force to seize control over Crimea and to intervene in Donbass was accompanied by talk of uniting a ‘Russian world’ as a distinct civilizational community .
 This approach, however, was completely inappropriate for economics or politics . This approach might have been with regard to many shared elements of culture, but justified it may have been . The approach was not entirely inappropriate for politics or economics .
 The concept of the "Russian world" has gone up in flames of Donbass . As a result, the idea of the “Russian world’s” has gone down in flames .
 The idea was wholly compromised, not just in Ukraine but also in Belarus . The idea is not only in Ukraine, but in Belarus.
It would be hard, and certainly ill-advised, to try to resuscitate it anywhere . It would behard, and definitely ill-Advised, for anyone to try.
 Since the start of the conflict in Donbass, the formation of the Ukrainian political nation has proceeded on a clear anti-Russian platform . Since the beginning of the war, the country has been on an anti-Russia platform .
 Russia's foreign policy did not have to be more enlightened, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia’s foreign policy was more enlightened.
 The emergence of independent Ukraine, as well as Belarus, is a natural process . Russia would be better off understanding and accepting as a fact, says Peter Bergen .
 Ukraine, overtly, and Belarus, less so, are tilting toward the European Union, for the same reasons as Rumanians and Bulgarians . As independent nations, Ukraine and Belarus have been tilting towards the EU .
 A clever Russian policy should have seen that and offered them a concept of how to “go west’s” without breaking with Russia .
 Russia is parting ways with both Ukraine and Belarus . As many centuries ago, Russia was parting way with both countries .
 It has found a position for itself in the north of the great continent of Eurasia . It is the first time the country has been in the region of the continent .
 Crimea was annexed by Ukraine in 2014, but not so much due to the annexation of Crimea . This process sped up after 2014, and not so far due to Crimea's separation from Ukraine .
 The official version of Russian history already regards the “main site of the baptism of Rus, the Russia of old, as being Chersonese in Crimea, and the cradle of Russian statehood as being Novgorod .
 Practical Ideas on European Security’s project, supported by the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office . The project is part of a joint effort to improve security in Europe .