 The Ukrainian diaspora has been a cheerleader for democratisation, reforms and integration of Ukraine into Europe . Some of its members have been willing recipients of Ukrainian oligarchs’ financial assistance .
 Ukrainian oligarchs are often pro-Russian or at the very least they are only interested in personal enrichment . They are never supportive of the establishment of a rule of law based state in Ukraine .
Financial donations from Ukrainian oligarchs have been paid to a far larger group of people than only U.S. political consultants .
 Firtash, a western Ukrainian, has supported projects inside Ukraine and abroad that the Ukrainian diaspora have applauded . Firtosh, a west Ukrainian, is a former member of the Ukrainian government .
 At the same time, he is Vladimir Putin’s man in Ukraine who has received discounted gas through various intermediaries . He is also Putin's man in the Ukraine, according to an extensive in-depth investigation .
 He has purportedly used the profits of this to buy chunks of the Ukrainian economy on behalf of Russia . He has allegedly used the money to buy parts of Ukraine's economy .
 During Viktor Yanukovych’s presidency, Firtash increased their wealth through insider sweetheart deals .
Firtash’s business assets remain untouched by the Russian occupation authorities in Crimea . Firtash's business assets are still untouched by Russian occupation.
 oligarch Ihor Kolomoyskyi adopted a pro-Ukrainian stance and funded volunteer battalions to fight separatists in Donbas . Russian occupation authorities have nationalised the business assets of the oligarch .
 The U.S. government has sought to extradite Firtash from Austria on charges of corruption . The Austrian is accused of corruption in Austria .
 An Austrian court turned down the US’ request and the case is now pending an appeal from the United States government .
 Firtash's donations totaled over $230 million during the last three years of Yanukovych's presidency . Putin and the kleptocratic Ukrainian president helped make him even wealthier .
 Firtash funded Ukrainian theatre and cultural events within Ukraine and in Western Europe . A new Ukrainian cultural festival in London is being held .
 The donation sparked much controversy in Ukrainian diaspora circles which had raised funds for UKU and the prestigious Kyiv Mohyla Academy . UKU had raised money for the prestigious Academy .
 Borys Gudziak is now the eparch of the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Eparchy in Paris . He gave his wholehearted support to Firtash’s donation .
 Firtash and his wife, Lada, have been admitted to the Guild of Cambridge Benefactors . The couple are married and have been married for more than a decade .
 Knowledge about Firtash’s corruption and intimate ties with Ukrainian and Russian politicians did not suddenly emerge in 2014 .
 Firtash told the U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine William Taylor that he needed Mogilevich’s approval to get into business in the first place . He acknowledged ties to Russian organised crime figure.
 Mogilevich has been on the FBI’s wanted list since the 1990s for multi-million-dollar fraud schemes .
 Ukrainian Congress Committee of America senior member and United States Holodomor Committee chairman Michael Sawkiw Jr. commented on Firtash’s donation . ‘We are truly grateful for Mr FirtASH's generosity’
 Mr Firtash has worked on this issue for many years . The project would not have been successful without his awareness and dedication .
 Yanukovych's willingness to accept funds from Ukrainian oligarchs was most glaring during Yanukovych's kleptocracy . Yanukovych was under intense western criticism for selective use of justice in imprisoning Yulia Tymoshenko .
 The US-Ukraine Foundation received donations and funding from the Akhmetov and Kluyev foundations for its ‘Ukraine in Washington’ Gala in December 2013, ironically during the Revolution of Dignity .
 Rinat Akhmetov and Serhiy and Andriy Kluyev have been close to Yanukovych for decades . The pair are close to each other for decades.
 Andriy Kluyev was a regular speaker at the annual ‘Ukraine in Washington’ Gala throughout Yanukoych’s presidency .
 Some of the Ukrainian-American diaspora's leaders provided Yanukovych's cronies with a platform to lobby the U.S. government on their attitudes towards his keptocratic and politically repressive regime .
 Yanukovych and Andriy Kluyev fled to Russia in February 2014 when the EuroMaidan revolutionaries came to power . The pair fled the country in February 2013 .
 Serhiy Kluyev fled to Russia in summer of 2015 . President Petro Poroshenko was allowed to escape an attempt at detaining him .
 Ukrainian diaspora's support for democratisation, fight against corruption and Ukraine’s integration into Europe is a contradiction .