 The country’s economy declined by an estimated 4. per cent during 2015 and 2016, while increasing numbers of its population are living in poverty .
 Russia has been accused of interference in eastern Ukraine, annexation of Crimea and the Syrian civil war . Russia has turned Russia into a pariah state after intervention in Syria .
 Kremlin watchers debate whether economic shocks or isolation abroad will lead to domestic unrest and further acts of international aggression .
 Dr Tomila Lankina, Associate Professor of International Relations at LSE, finds this approach overlooks Russia's deft and sophisticated media management .
 Dr Lankina's study focused on several pivotal moments of public dissent in Russia’s recent history . The study was published in the journal of Russia's history .
 In December 2011 and early 2012, thousands of citizens protested against allegations of electoral fraud . Putin would again stand for the Russian presidency .
 Russia's state-controlled media covered the Euromaidan protests and the Revolution of Dignity, a wave of demonstrations and civil unrest in Ukraine that began in late 2013 . Similar media analysis was then applied to explore how Russia’s state- controlled media covered those protests .
 Russia’s state-controlled media presented the protests as the work of ‘fascists’ and ultra-nationalists, according to analysis . Ukrainian and Russian media outlets outside of the Kremlin's control were also present .
Russian-supported Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych fled the country in February 2014 . This trend reached its apex around February 2014, when Yanukovych fled .
Following annexation of Crimea in 2014, domestic sentiment and public opinion among ethnic Russians in Ukraine's eastern territories did not show high levels of support for separation of Ukraine’s territories in the Donbas . Russian media responded quickly.
 The media toned down the aggressively negative narratives about the Euromaidan protests . The media said a pro-EU orientation Ukraine would threaten ethnic Russians .
 The Russian regime's pursuit of subtle techniques of media manipulation, according to the Russian media .
 Russian media have altered coverage of public discontent at home and abroad in ways meant to undermine dissent or to cater to public sentiment . By deftly using these different frames, Russian media has altered the coverage ofpublic discontent .
 Dr Lankina identifies a number of enduring parallels between the current Russian government and the old Soviet regime . However, he says there are many parallels between current government and former regime .
 Russian media's flexible coverage of protest as a regime survival strategy by Dr Tomila Lankina was published in PONARS Eurasia, Washington, DC, USA .