As the conflict between Russia and Ukraine continues, critical factors have emerged that severely mitigate Russia’s ambitions .
 Ukraine has a blossoming relationship with its newest partner – China . Ukraine has shifting military capacities, and shifting reliance on Russian gas .
Attack left most of Eastern Ukraine in the hands of ‘separatists’ and Russian soldiers .
 The conflict ostensibly created independent separatist states in the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts . The conflict appears to have been created by the conflict .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin celebrated the annexation of Crimea . Further threats were advanced towards Ukraine through a sponsored military conflict in Eastern Ukraine .
 Each day the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission reports of battles between Ukrainian and Russian-sponsored troops in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 More than 10,000 people have been killed and thousands displaced in eastern Ukraine since 2014 . Between 2014 and 2018, this military conflict continued in east Ukraine .
 On November 25, 2018, Russian ships attacked and boarded three Ukrainian vessels in the Crimean port of Azov near Black Sea .
 A freighter was placed to block the port, under the claim that Ukraine had violated Russian waters . The freighter has been placed in the port's area .
As these conflicts continue, the underlying treaties and protocols which had been agreed upon to regulate relations between Russia and Ukraine have been violated by Russia .
 Despite threats, critical factors have emerged that mitigate Russia’s aims . Russia and Ukraine are at risk of a potentially greater conflict between them .
 Ukraine's increased ability to defend itself against Russia militarily, Russia's decreased military capacity, a diminishing reliance on Russian gas, and most of all, Ukraine's blossoming relationship with its newest partner – China .
 These formerly allied states were granted or asserted their autonomy and became independent states . The former allied states are now independent states.
 The former Warsaw Pact nations were no longer in the thrall of Moscow and went their own way . The former Polish Pact nations went their way in Moscow .
 Mikhail Gorbachev had prepared a treaty recognising the breakup of the USSR into autonomous republics . But he was prevented from signing the treaty by the attempted coup against him in August of 1991 .
 Leonid Makarovych Kravchuk, head of the Ukrainian parliament, passed a motion declaring independence of Ukraine with him as its first leader . The coup had failed in August 1991 .
 A referendum in December 1991 voted Kravchuk in as the first President of an independent Ukraine . In December 1991, he was elected as the President of Ukraine .
 The United States became deeply involved in Ukrainian politics . It was at that point that the U.S. became involved in Ukraine politics .
 The U.S.'s primary concern was strategic; the control of Ukraine’s nuclear weapons . The main concern was control of the nuclear weapons in Ukraine .
 Ukraine was the third largest nuclear power in the world. At that time, Ukraine was third largest power in world .
 Ukraine's denuclearization was established with three international treaties . Ukraine’s denuclearisation was established in 2003 .
 The accord was buttressed with paragraphs of American-Russian security guarantees. The accord is buttressed by paragraphs of U.S. security guarantees .
 In a private letter to President Clinton, Kravchuk promised that Ukraine would be nuclear free by June 1996 .
 Consult with one another should questions arise regarding these commitments . Consult with another should arise about these commitments.
 The next area of concern was the division of the Soviet Black Sea Fleet . The next areas of concern were the Russian Black Sea fleet .
 Russian State has always been a key military concern of the Russian State to have access to a warm-water port for its navy .
 The independence of the Ukrainian state left its key warm-water ports entirely under Ukrainian control .
 The Russians were keen on maintaining their Black Sea Fleet in the Black Sea and operating the large Soviet naval fleet there .
 The Ukrainians entered into discussions with the Russians on the division of the fleet of warships in the Black Sea ports and the leasing of Ukrainian ports to the Russian Navy . The Ukrainians are also discussing leasing of Ukraine ports to Russia .
 The change in the status of the Soviet Navy was conducted within the framework of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe which was being negotiated between NATO and the Warsaw Pact organisations .
 NATO played an important role in advising the Ukrainians on its Black Sea Fleet issues . NATO, essentially a euphemism for the Pentagon, played a important role.
 It also generated the creation of the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe . Now, it plays an important role in the relationship between NATO, the Ukraine and Russia .
 In June 1993, then Ukrainian President Leonid Kravchuk and Russian President Boris Yeltsin signed an agreement essentially splitting the fleet in half . The agreement was signed in June 1993 .
Ukrainian and Russian military leaders objected to their losses of either ships or ports . Ukraine and Russia have lost both ships and ports .
 In September 1993, and again in April 1994, the Black Sea Fleet agreement was renegotiated . The Black Sea fleet agreement was re-negotiated again in September 1993 .
 Prime Ministers Chernomyrdin and Lazarenko signed three intergovernmental agreements in 1997 . The dispute was finally settled on 28 May 1997 .
 The fleet would divide the fleet’s assets while leasing port facilities in Sevastopol to the Russian Navy .
 Both nations split the fleet’s ships evenly, while Russia agreed to buy back some of the more modern ships with cash . Both countries split the ships evenly.
 Russia ultimately received four-fifths of the Black Sea Fleet’s warships, while Ukraine received about half of the facilities .
 Several Russian Black Sea Fleet warships dropped anchor off the Georgian coast during and after the August 2008 Russian armed conflict with Georgia over Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Ukraine, which sided with Georgia and NATO during the conflict, repeatedly said that Russian Black Sea combat ships regularly transported undeclared cargo to the Georgian enclaves .
 The United States intervened diplomatically for the Ukrainians to support them in their pressure on the Russians in the Crimea not to use their ships to intervene in the Georgian war .
 Ukrainian president Viktor Yushchenko announced that Ukraine would not extend the lease of Sevastopol base beyond 2017 . He urged the Russian fleet to start preparations for a withdrawal .
 The war in Georgia, supported by NATO and the European Union, provoked Russia to retaliate against both Ukraine and European Union .
 Russia threatened to cut off supplies of natural gas to Ukraine and Western Europe . Russia has threatened to shut off supplies to Ukraine, Western Europe.
 The dispute was framed as a commercial dispute over prices and payments . But there were far more strategic concerns involved – the Black Sea Fleet .
 Europeans pressed for a compromise which would let the gas flow to their countries . The U.S. supported the Ukrainians in their defiance of the Russian threats .
 Europe was desperate for Ukraine to do whatever it took to assuage the Russian gas threat . The United States and its NATO allies pressed the Ukrainians to follow through on ending the Russian leases which allowed them a presence in the Black Sea .
 A compromise would have to be reached with Russia. Despite the arguments brought forward in favour of each of these policies, a realistic assessment of the situation was made .
 Ukrainian and Russian parliaments ratified a deal to extend the lease on Russian naval bases in Ukraine for 25 years . The current current lease expired in 2017 .
 The government of Ukraine under its wing and control could prevent further confrontations on the transport of gas . This began an accelerated process in Europe to bring the government under its wings and control . This is the first step in the process to bring Ukraine under control of the government.
 Ukraine was not very interested at that time in joining NATO . It was interested in establishing a relationship within the aegis of the European Union .
 Yulia Tymoshenko had met with representatives of the European Union under the terms of the EU Neighbourhood Policy .
 The 'neocons' who dominated U.S. foreign policy towards Ukraine were loath to lose the opportunity of denying Russia the use of naval bases in the Black Sea, especially after the Georgian War .
 Russia's main enemy was seen as Russia, and any diminution of Russian power and influence was a main concern . While vaguely sympathetic to the Europeans, their main enemy is Russia .
 President Viktor Yuschenko and Prime Minister Tymoshenko had just lost control of Ukraine in the national election of a new President . Yanukovych had taken office on the 25th of February 2010 .
 Yanukovych was President from the Donbas region which the Yuschenko and Tymoshenko governments had largely ignored or opposed during their presidencies . Yanukovych was the President of the Don Bas region .
 Former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko called on citizens to rise against the current leadership .
 The Rada ratified the treaty on 27th of April 2010 . Despite protests, the treaty was ratified by the Rada .
 The European Union continued to encourage Ukraine to move closer to EU accession . The EU continued to support Ukraine's move to the EU .
 The EU wanted to control Ukrainian energy policy so it could protect European-wide price of gas . The first thing the EU wanted was to control Ukraine energy policy .
 In May 2010, President Yanukovych promised to adopt legislation necessary for creating a free trade zone between Ukraine and Europe .
 Further discussions in the next year led to proposals for even closer bonds between the EU and Ukraine .
 Former PM Tymoshenko was arrested and jailed for corruption under politically motivated circumstances by the Yanukovych government . They were broken off, however, when ex-PM was arrested .
 The EU would put the accession of Ukraine on hold until Yanukovych freed Tymoshenko .
 The Rada decided that before ratification there must be a three-way trade agreement which included Russia, to prevent a gas crisis . ratification of the agreement with the EU was suspended .
 Yanukovych had refused to sign the EU agreement because his supporters, primarily in the Eastern heartland, were bitterly opposed to its terms . Yanukovych's supporters came with a long list of economic austerity programs .
 Ukraine's refusal of the government to sign the agreement resulted in a repeat of the Maidan Square occupation . This resulted in considerable backlash within Ukraine .
 Ukraine is in a far better place to defend itself against Russia militarily than Russia . Russia is in the far better position to defend its territory than Ukraine, it says .
 The agreement ‘About settlement of political crisis in Ukraine’ was signed on February 21, after negotiations between President Yanukovych and representatives of the opposition, aided with mediation by the European Union and Russia .
 The agreement provided a return to the constitution of 2004 . It is to a parliamentary presidential government, carrying out early elections of the president until end of 2014 .
 The U.S. government insisted on further concessions and the resignation of the President . However, the protestors and representatives of the United States government refused to accept the resignation .
 Ukraine turned first to its erstwhile partners in the EU, requesting 20 billion Euros in loans and aid . Ukraine is the first country to request the aid of the EU in the past .
 Russia offered US$ 15 billion in loans and cheaper gas prices without an austerity program . On the other hand, Russia offered $15 billion in Loans and $15billion in loans . Russia offered the same amount without the onerous demands.
 Russia began supporting the rebelling regions of Donetsk and Luhansk which had supported Yanukovych . With the ouster of Yanukovych, Russia began support for the rebels .
 Arms, equipment and ‘irregular’ soldiers were sent to fight against the Ukrainian army .
 In mid-March, NATO revealed satellite photos showing Russia's covert invasion of Ukraine’s eastern border . The photos were taken in mid- March .
 An EU emergency meeting added further sanctions on Russia’s oil and banking sectors .
 In April 2014, Russia supported local rebels which took over city halls and police stations throughout eastern Ukraine . Russia supported the rebels in April 2014 .
 By July, Russia continued to strengthen its military force on the border with Russia . Russia continues to strengthen the military force.
19,000 to 21,000 troops massed, 14 advanced surface-to-air missile units, and 30 artillery batteries . There were 19,000-21,000 soldiers massed and 14 advanced missile units .
 It was clear that Russia could launch an attack into eastern Ukraine at a moment’s notice . Russia could attack Ukraine at the moment.
 Russia has already launched rockets across the border in support of Ukrainian rebels . Russia had already launched rocket rockets across border in Ukraine .
 OSCE has created security zones in the border regions of Ukraine and the Russian Federation . To ensure the permanent monitoring of the Ukrainian-Russian border and verification by the OSCE .
 A law preventing prosecution and punishment of persons in connection with the events that have taken place in some areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts .
 To withdraw illegal armed groups and military equipment as well as fighters and mercenaries from the territory of Ukraine .
 To adopt a programme of economic recovery and reconstruction for the Donbass region. To adopt an economic recovery.
 Russia sent troops and equipment to carry on a war against Ukraine using its own troops and surrogates in the Donetsk and Luhansk .
 There are several factors mitigating Russia’s success, including threats and the condonation of Russia's behaviour by Europeans desperate for Russian gas . Despite these apparent threats, there are many factors mitigating Russian success .
 The U.S. has had growing support from a more openly “neocon’s foreign policy direction by the United States. It has had grown support from an openly ‘neocon' policy direction .
 There has been a decline in Russia’s ability to afford or achieve the modernisation of its military equipment . There has also been a lack of competent manpower .
 There has also been a diminishing reliance by Europe for Russian gas . There has been a decreasing reliance on Europe for Russia gas .
 Ukraine has a growing relationship with its newest partner, China . Most of all, Ukraine has been with China for more than a decade .
 The most developed facilities for military production were located in Ukraine . Russia's military stance towards Ukraine has been a major problem for Russia .
 The Russian Army had been starved of new equipment for over 20 years, and much of what it had available was built in Ukraine .
 There are about 85 scientific organizations specialized in the development of armaments and military equipment . There are also research, design and development institutes to design and build modern ships and armaments .
 This includes ability to design and build heavy cruisers, missile cruisers and anti-submarine warfare cruisers . This includes the ability to build and design heavy cruiser, missilecruisers and other cruisers.
 Ukraine’s military industrial complex has capacity to develop and produce small arms, communications and automated control systems, intelligence and radio-electronic warfare equipment, and engineer equipment and materiel .
 It has been the sole producer of engines for the MI-8 and MI-24 helicopters . It has also produced engines for MI-9, MI-12 and MI 24 helicopters .
 It produced these engines for the Russian helicopter industry and a wide range of other military components . It produced the engines for Russian helicopter industries and other military parts .
 The air firm Antonov is based in Ukraine and is one of the major suppliers of aircraft for the Russian Air Force and for Russian arms exports . The air company is also a major supplier of aircraft and arms for Russian air force .
 The Russian industry needs Ukrainian parts and subassemblies for its exports and consumption . The ability of the Russian industry to fill its own needs is compounded by the fact that it needs Ukraine parts and Subassemblies .
 Losing control of the Eastern Ukraine has jeopardised Moscow’s ability to fulfill multibillion-dollar international contracts without Ukrainian inputs .
 Antonov also supplies the engines for the jointly-produced AN-148 planes . Antonov has also supplied engines for jointly- produced AN- 148 planes .
 Other exporters to Russia include Mykolayiv-based Zorya-Mashproekt, which sells several types of turbines to Russia . The turbines are installed on military ships .
 Another is Kharkiv-based Haroun, which supplies control systems for Russian missiles . Another is the control system for Russian missile control systems .
 The Yasumasa plant in Dnipropetrovsk is the only service provider for Satan missiles that Russia uses .
 The Ukrainians are also the main supplier of spare parts which its armed forces desperately need . The Ukrainians also provide spare parts for the Ukrainian army .
 Russia is scrambling to supply domestic factories with the technology needed to produce these components inside Russia . Russia is also scrambling to produce technology needed for these components in Russia .
 Much of the higher inputs of technology, especially in the electromechanical area, are sourced in France, Germany, Britain and the U.S. However, much of the technology is sourced in Germany, France and Germany .
 Many of the existing plants were attacked and damaged by the rebels of Donetsk and Lugansk . Despite efforts by Russian troops in the Eastern Ukraine, many of the plants were damaged .
 The skill set of the Russian factories has been degraded by the demographic crisis of Russia and an ageing population .
 Russia did not have the capacity to replicate the Ukrainian military-industrial complex inside the Russian borders overnight, despite its bluff and bluster to the contrary .
 Ukrainian government decreed that it was banning all military sales to Russia . It was a challenge to President Vladimir Putin and Russia's generals .
 The Russian government tallied up the costs of modernizing its military forces equipment . It concluded that it would total about $800 billion .
 Vladimir Putin had campaigned for the presidency by calling for a rejuvenated Russian military . Putin had called for rejuvenation of the military .
 Rosicky Gazeta published an article in Rosy Gazeta outlining the massive spending he was intending to pursue in building up the armed forces .
 Russia didn’t have the money, and arms manufacturers were in no position to use the funds even if they got them . Russia's state of dereliction and the disappearance of skilled workers in the machine-tool industry.
 Not only was supply a problem, there were serious problems with quality . There were serious issues with quality, according to experts .
 Uralvagonzavod, the country’s only tank manufacturer, is a good case .
 Putin himself bowed to army pressure to place an order for 2,300 tanks to be built over the next 10 years . General Staff head Nikolai Makarov said the military would not be purchasing any tanks in the next five years due to their substandard quality .
 In an article in RIA Novosti on 15 March 2012, Ground Forces Chief Col. Col. Gen. John Sutter wrote about the U.S. Army's ground forces .
 Military modernisation was Russia’s key priority, but it was made infinitely more challenging by the loss of Ukrainian facilities, technology and skilled workers .
 President Putin has consistently promised more funds for this endeavour, but has been hampered by several key problems, some of which he can't control .
 For years, Russia has been in the midst of a demographic crisis – and it might be getting worse . Russia has had a population crisis for years, and it may be getting better .
Low birth rate and low immigration made 2018 the first year there was a population decline in absolute terms . Up until last year, the population has been holding somewhat steady .
 Global tables of male life expectancy put Russia in about the 160th place, below Bangladesh . Russia is ranked about 160th.
 The Russian population is ageing, and Russia remains in the throes of a catastrophic demographic collapse . The population of Russia is ageing and Russia is in the midst of a demographic collapse.
 Russia is suffering from a mass emigration of its populace, especially among the educated . Russia has been suffering from the mass em migration of its population .
 The cost of the continuing war in Ukraine and the massive bleed of Russian military resources in Syria are also taking a heavy toll on the Russian budget . The Russian budget has also taken a huge toll on Russia's budget .
 The cost of rebuilding Syria will make a heavy dent in Russia’s economic well-being . Russia's economy will be hit hard by the cost of the rebuilding .
 It has committed itself to a wide range of improvements in its military capabilities . However, it has committed herself to a variety of improvements .
 Russia's lack of adequate shipyards, missile factories, available conscript manpower, essential electronic and guidance systems and subsystems blocked by sanctions . This despite Russia’s lack ofadequate shipyards and missile factories .
 The burden of maintaining aged and decrepit equipment and an ever-expanding effort to extend its political reach into the Middle East, Africa and Latin America has increased .
 Russia is engaged in some expansion of its intermediate range missile systems . Russian policy of bluff and bluster is a traditional Russian policy.
 Russia is stepping up its threat level as Ukraine prepares for elections . Some of these efforts towards greater capability appear to be directed against Ukraine .
 The United States passed a $47 million military-aid package for 2018 . Ukraine has continued its daily confrontations with the forces of the Donetsk and Luhansk Regions and Russian forces .
 Russia and rebels have already had a marked effect on the deployment of tanks by Russia and the rebels . The tanks had already had an effect on Russia's deployment of them .
 Russia moved military convoys north on the Simferopol-Armyansk highway toward the border between Kherson Oblast’s in Ukraine and Crimea .
 Russian submarines conducted drills in the Black Sea to practice covert movements while submerged . Later that month, Russian submarines of the Black sea Fleet conducted drills .
 Russia shifted 14 Su-27 and Su-30 fighter jets to Belbek Airbase near Sevastopol . Russia also shifted fourteen Su- 27 and Su 30 fighter jets.
 Ukrainians blocked the Dnepr River canal which provided fresh water to the Crimea . This was to begin an assault on the canal before the Ukrainians blocked it .
 The bridge is not expected to last too long because of the seismic conditions in the Strait . It is low enough to block many of the commercial vessels shipping goods to and from the Ukrainian ports of Mariupol and Berdiansk .
 The U.S. and EU have been pushing back against Russia's attempt to strangle Ukraine economically . Russia has sent vessels and missile cruisers to the area .
 There is a new dimension to the power equation with the arrival of a large Chinese presence . But there is also a newdimension to thePower equation .
 China has increased its involvement in Ukraine, using development assistance through its Belt and Road Initiative as a rationale for its efforts . China has been involved in Ukraine for years .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and Chinese leader Xi Jinping discussed increasing cooperation during World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland .
 Ukraine’s foreign minister, Pawlo Klimkin, paid a visit to China in September 2017, and then last December, Ma Kai, China's vice premier, visited Kyiv .
 China aggressively competes with Ukraine’s Western partners for a strong foothold in this important frontier economy . China has much less restrictions than Ukraine, often with less restrictions .
 Ukraine remains a highly attractive partner to China and Chinese companies . Combined with free trade agreements with the EU and Canada, along with steady United States trade.
 Chinese companies are now major competitors with Europe for big infrastructure projects . Beijing has pledged at least $7 billion for major Ukrainian infrastructure projects.
 China clearly sees Ukraine as a special area of interest, both for its location and for its agricultural productivity . China also sees Ukraine for its place and agricultural productivity.
 At the moment there is no open conflict between China and Russia over Ukraine . There are no open conflicts between the two countries .
 China does oppose any expanded military initiatives between Russia and Ukraine, especially those which may close down its ports and rail lines . However, it is clear that China does not oppose any expanding military initiatives .
 China has essentially economic interests in Ukraine . interests will disappear if hostilities break out between the two .
 China has grown to be a much more formidable military power than Russia . China has become a much stronger military power.
 Its military history is one which demonstrates the growth in Chinese power . It is one of the most important military history in China .
 The most important conflict between the Russian military and President Putin may have arisen from Putin’s policy towards China .
 Putin's administration has been making every effort to engage with China . Russia is a consumer of its energy exports, as well as a builder of pipelines, ports and railroads .
 President Putin is in direct conflict with the Russian military, which views China as a strategic enemy . These efforts have put President Putin in direct battle with Russia .
 For decades there has been an intense competition between the two nations in their border regions . At times, it has resulted in conflict and disputes over land .
 A treaty was completed in November 1997 establishing the border between the two countries, and a 2004 Complementary Agreement returning some territory to China . relations have been strained since then as there is an increasing imbalance between the countries .
 There are too few Russians in the regions of Khabarovsk and Primorsky Krai to match the Chinese .
 Russia is being depopulated at a prodigious rate with many of those who lived in Siberia and the Russian East moving West to the cities across the Urals .
 There are not enough Russians to conduct the business that will need to be done on a project as vast as the extraction of oil, the building of a pipeline and the establishment of roads, ports and infrastructure in that region .
 Russians admit that this work will be performed by Chinese labourers . Even Russians admit they will be performing the work .
 Russian companies do not have the manpower, the working capital, or the inclination to perform this infrastructural work . Russian companies have no manpower or inclination to do this work .
 dependence on Chinese manpower has had an important effect on Russia’s purported tilt towards China . The dependence on China has been seen as a factor in Russia's purported tilt to China .
 Russian politicians may think it makes sense to shift focus to co-operation with China . But Russian military has no such compulsions, says Russian military .
 Russia’s military has voiced concerns over its naval bases in Sovetskaya Gavan and Bolshoi Kamen . Russia's military has expressed concerns over their naval bases .
 President Putin appears more concerned about NATO than about China, officials say . China shares a border a quarter of a mile away from the Amur and the Ussuri Rivers .
 There are concerns that Russia would not be able to prevent a Chinese decision to take back some of its lost lands in the Russian Far East .
 China's military exports to the world of products derived from Russian designs, but improved upon by the Chinese . This issue has been compounded by the current Chinese military and economic expansion.
 We are no longer bound by any limitations either on the range of our missiles, nor on their power . We are not only bound by the range, but let the enemy know about it, too .
 We are not going to repeat the mistakes of the Budapest memorandum. We need high-precision missiles and we are notGoing to repeat our mistakes, he says .
 Ukrainian response to the advances by China is in its military-industrial complex negotiations with the Chinese . The most important aspect of Ukraine's response to China's advances is in the military- industrial complex negotiations .
 China is trying to buy or control the vast military capability of Ukraine, which was denied to Russia after its invasion of Ukraine . China is also trying to control Ukraine's military capability .
Motor Sich is a world leader in building helicopter engines and other components, as well as turbine engines for warships . Ukraine has the firm, Motor Sich, that is the world leaders in helicopter manufacturing .
 Ukraine and its Western partners are not willing to allow what many consider a national treasure to become Chinese owned . Ukraine and the West have not agreed to allow it to become a national Treasure .
 China has been buying components from Motor Sich since the 1990s . China would greatly benefit from its trade secrets and key personnel .
 As long as Russia occupies Crimea and Donbas that business relationship remains blocked . Russia occupies the Crimea and donbas .
 Ukraine's defence industries are growing. Russia's ability to project hard power against the Ukrainians is limited . The rise of a working relationship between Ukraine and China is due to the rise of defence industries .
 Russia's cyber efforts, or the use of trolls, hackers and subterfuge to alter the political destiny of Ukraine or its ability to choose its leaders without undue interference. Regardless, in no way does this diminish or impede Russia’s cyber efforts .