 Kyiv officials argue Russia's leader is accumulating pretexts to justify a major assault on Ukraine . The Black Sea peninsula Moscow annexed weeks after the 2014 ouster of Putin’s ally Viktor Yanukovych .
Pro-Moscow militants and Russian forces have been locked in a so-called ‘frozen conflict’ with the Ukrainian military . They see the escalation of fighting in the country's mainly Russian-speaking eastern region of Donbas .
 The massing of Russian troops and hardware, including S-400 Triumph missiles, in Crimea and last week’s claims by Moscow that Ukraine infiltrated saboteurs into the peninsula, are viewed in Kyiv as ominous signs .
 Ukraine’s military intelligence officials say they expect more sabotage claims by the Kremlin . They say ‘the enemy is planning large-scale provocative actions’ in a bid to discredit Ukraine in the eyes of the West .
 Moscow is planning an offensive to start just before parliamentary polls scheduled for September 18 . The offensive is thought to be planned just before the parliamentary elections .
 Russian officials say provocation is coming from Ukraine, not the other way round . Russian officials deny this .
 If there is a major offensive, “the Russians will want to take Mariupol,’ he suspects, part of a ground campaign to secure a land corridor for Crimea .
 Russia is building a bridge spanning the Kerch Strait as well as energy pipelines linking the peninsula to the Russian mainland . That would avoid the need for Russia to spend billions building the bridge .
 Kyiv army strategists fear Russian forces would push out from Crimea into Ukraine’s Kherson and Zaporizhya oblasts . Arestovych, who is familiar with the thinking of top Ukrainian military planners, said one scenario would see Russian forces driving as far north
 Some members of the monitoring mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe's based in Mariupol already have “grab bags’ of their possessions ready for hasty evacuation .
 Russian drone activity has increased dramatically, a security spokesman for Ukraine’s presidential administration said . Some surveillance incursions went deep into Ukrainian territory, he said .
 Ukrainian military strategists say heights just south of Kramatorsk and north of Horlivka in the Donbas would likely be another major Russian military objective .
 Seizing the heights would give Russian-backed forces a strategic vantage point for shelling Ukrainian forces besieging Donetsk .
 Ukraine’s military is in much better shape than it was last year, he says . He says Western military advisers from the US, Canada and some other NATO countries have trained the country .
 The Russian military and pro-Moscow separatists “would start first in the east to try to divert us,’ says Arestovych . Arest Yanukovych says the separatists would try to ‘ divert us’
 Ukraine military officials estimate there are 45,000 Russian-backed forces on Ukrainian territory in the east . Another 45,00 regular troops are stationed just across the international border in the Russian Federation .
 Ukraine has four brigades — about 10,000 men — stationed in the Kherson and Zaporizhya oblasts . They could be reinforced by another two brigades held in reserve .
 Since annexing Crimea in 2014, Russia has been building up its forces and military hardware, say Western and Ukrainian officials . There could be as many as 45,000 regulars there now, they say .
 Anton Lavrov is an independent military analyst and author of a book on the 2008 Russian-Georgian war . He argues the Kremlin is not on the brink of launching a major offensive .
 No field camps have been established by Russian forces along the border with the Donbas, he says . He would expect to see if a campaign is being planned .
 Security spokesman says it is difficult to predict what Moscow might be planning . Oleksandr Motuzyanyk says it's difficult to guess what Moscow may be planning.
 Motuzyanyk suspects Russia is testing and probing, trying to fathom what Western political reaction would be in the event of an offensive and what Ukraine’s military response would be .
Ukrainian forces in the Donbas are reporting new portable electronic jamming systems being used by Russian-backed forces . They have observed an influx of man-portable, short-range guided anti-tank missiles known as Bumbars .
 Kyiv officials think the aim might instead be to pressure the West to lift some of the economic sanctions imposed on Russia after the annexation of the Crimea .
 Russia's economy shrank last year by four percent thanks in part to the plunge in the price of oil . World Bank says it will diminish by at least another two percent this year .
 In this scenario either Russia trades the easing of sanctions for staying its hand militarily . In this case, Russia would be able to stay its hand.
 The Kremlin alleges Ukrainian intelligence was mounted by Ukrainian intelligence last week . Or it succeeds in discrediting Ukraine in the eyes of the West with claims of sabotage missions .