 Ukraine will build a military base on the Azov Sea and send more forces to the area to counter a worsening Russian threat . The area is a flashpoint of tensions with Moscow .
 Ukraine will conduct a naval exercise in the Sea of Azov . Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council Oleksandr Turchynov announced the exercise .
 The NSDC approved a set of measures aimed at protecting national interests in the country’s southern regions . The measures were approved on September 6 .
 Ukrainian servicemen plan to conduct large-scale exercises in the Azov Sea . National Security and Defense Council Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov has said that servicemen will conduct large scale exercises .
 NATO is concerned that Russia is preventing Ukrainian vessels from accessing the Azov Sea . The Secretary-General of NATO Jens Stoltenberg stated the Secretary- General of NATO.
 NATO is concerned with the presence of Russia in the Crimea and their activities near the Crimean bridge . NATO is also concerned with Russia's activity near the Crimea .
 The Ukrainian State Emergency Service and the State Border Service were forced to increase their presence in the Azov Sea because of the detention of ships by Russia . The Ukrainian state emergency service and the state Border Service are now increasing their presence .
 The European Parliament plans to consider the situation in the Sea of Azov at its plenary meeting in October .
 Ukraine is boosting its military presence in the Sea of Azov . Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council Oleksandr Turchynov says Ukraine will respond adequately to any aggression .
 Ukrainian Navy under Ukraine's Armed Forces General Staff’s command has conducted a risky and successful naval operation . At the end of September, the Ukrainian Navy has conducted the operation .
 Two Ukrainian vessels, the Donbas search and rescue ship and the Korets sea tug departed from Odesa at the Black Sea . They went around the occupied Crimea, passed the Kerch Strait under the newly-built bridge .
 Russians currently illegally occupy Crimea after annexing it in 2014 from Ukraine . Their move has come out of the blue for Russians, who currently control waters around it .
 Russian commandment’s unpreparedness has been visible with panic reactions that accompanied Ukrainian naval vessels move .
 The Donbas and the Korets have been followed by at least 13 Russian vessels, Russian aircraft flew dangerously low over them .
 The commander of the operation is the deputy head of the staff of the maritime commandment of the Ukrainian Navy, Captain 1st rank Dmytro Kovalenko .
 The transition to the Kerch Strait and through it was in a difficult situation, says Andriy Tarasov . The transition was accompanied by ships and aviation of the Russian Federation .
 The video appeared on the Facebook page of the Ukrainian Navy on Tuesday .
 One of the stages included defense of the coastline of the Sea of Azov . Another was defense of a coastal area of the Azov coast .
 Russia’s activity in the Azov Sea has increased significantly over the past three months .
 The Russians do not allow commercial vessels going to and leaving Ukrainian ports to pass through Kerch Strait without hindrance .
 President Petro Poroshenko instructed the Minister of Defense, the Chief of the General Staff and the Ukrainian Navy to take measures to stop Russian provocations .
 The Ministry of Infrastructure of Ukraine has developed a set of measures in response to Russia’s actions .
 At the same time, it was reported that the package of measures includes restrictions on passenger traffic with Russia .
 The main weapon of the boat is 8 PKR ‘Neptun’ of Ukrainian production . ARB “Crossbow-K’s’ AK-176 in the bow and two artillery AK-630 in the stern .
 Also included in the arms are 16 MANPADs ‘Eagle’ and two machine guns 12. mm. Also included are 16 ManPads “Eagle,’s ’Eagle and two Machine guns .
 The Russian Black Sea Fleet’s most advanced frigate Admiral Makarov has arrived in Sevastopol for the first time . It is the first ship to enter service with the Fleet .
 The Admiral Makarov is the third Project 11356 blue-water frigate named after Imperial Russian Navy Commander, Oceanographer and Vice-Admiral Stepan Makarov . It is the second project named after the Russian Navy commander and vice-admiral Makarov. The
 The latest frigate was delivered to the Navy and the naval flag was hoisted on the warship on December 27, 2017 .
 The Project 11356 frigates have a displacement of 4,000 tons, a length of 124. meters, a speed of 30 knots and a sea endurance of 30 days . The frigates are designed to be able to withstand 30 days in the sea .
 They are armed with Kalibr-NK cruise missiles, Shtil-1 surface-to-air missile complexes, A-190 100mm artillery guns, air defense artillery, rocket launchers and torpedoes . Can also carry a deck-based Kamov Ka-27 helicopter .
 A section of the railway portion of the Crimean bridge fell into the sea during assembly .
 The incident was presumably due to technical issues with the jack system . The jack system was apparently affected by a problem with the system .
 The span structure ended up in the water . It will be pulled out with cranes after the necessary preparation .
 At present, the builders are assessing the consequences of the accident .
 The motorway part of the Crimean Bridge was opened to trucks on October 1 this year . The Crimean Bridge is the most important road in the region .
 The Ukrainian Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories notes that all the military and civil aircraft over the waters of the Black and Azov Seas are within the radius of destruction of these systems .
 The maximum target speed that the system can intercept is 4. km per second . The maximum speed that can intercept was 4.km per second.
 The Russian Guards Sevastopol-Feodosia anti-aircraft missile regiment was reinforced with the first division of S-400 anti- aircraft missile systems Triumph in 2016 . The first division was reinforced in 2016.
 Third division of anti-aircraft systems S-400 took up combat duty near Yevpatoria in September 2018 . The third division of the anti- aircraft systems took up duty near the city in September.
 Special Representative of the United States Department of State for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker explained why Ukraine needed to retain the special status of Donbas . Volker told about the progress in negotiations with Russia on the deployment of a UN peacekeeping mission .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker said it would be too costly for Russia to try to move forward in Donbas . Volker has said it is too costly to move to Donbas.
 Volker stressed the Ukrainian military due to Ukraine’s own efforts is much better today than it was in 2014 . Volker said Ukraine's own efforts are much better now than in 2014.
 Russia would introduce additional costs to Russia, he said . Russia would not be able to deny its responsibility if it were to launch new aggression this time .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker has called on the Russian Federation to cancel sham, illegal elections in Donbas in connection with the extension by the Verkhovna Rada of the law on the special order of local self-government in certain areas
 Ukraine has repeatedly done its part to implement Minsk . Now Russia must fulfill its commitments, Volker says .
 UN peacekeeping mission should create environment of overall security for local elections in occupied Donbas . UN peacekeepers should hold elections for the legitimate local entities in occupiedDonbas .
Russia will have to pay according to Stockholm Arbitration court decision . Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko stated that ‘Russia will pay’
 Ukraine won a gas transit contract dispute against Russia in Stockholm Arbitration Court . Ukraine had recently won a contract dispute with Russia .
 Ukraine should not expect that this amount will never be paid to Ukraine in full. They should not be paid in full, says one expert .
 Russia will receive even more, as every day that Russia doesn't pay, the amount owing grows by half a million dollars . Russia will get even more as each day Russia doesn’t pay, according to the government .
 Interfax-Ukraine Poroshenko: "I have no doubt that the amount will be received soon,’ he said. And I haveno doubt that he will get the amount soon," he said .
 Kyiv won’t return Russia the funds transferred to former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in December 2013 .
 Ukrainian President Petro says the U.N. General Assembly will adopt a resolution calling Russia an occupying state . The resolution calls Russia an occupied state .
 Ukraine’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs is preparing a new draft resolution on Crimea for consideration at the UN General Assembly late this year .
 Ukraine, the United States, Germany and France are practically ready to submit a joint resolution to the UN Security Council for consideration of the peacekeeping mission in Donbas . Ukraine, U.S., Germany, France and Ukraine are almost ready for a joint vote .
 If Russia takes advantage of the right of veto, it will be its challenge to the entire world community . Russia will be the challenge not only to Ukraine, but to the world community.
 There has been a 30% increase in the number of restrictions OSCE monitors have faced in Ukraine . The vast majority of the monitors are in areas controlled by Russia's proxies .
 OSCE's Chief Monitor in Ukraine, Ambassador Ertugrul Apakan, and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office’s Special Representative in Ukraine . Ambassador Martin Sajdik As delivered by Chargé d’Affaires,i.
 Harry Kamian to the Permanent Council, Vienna September 27, 2018 Thank you, Mr Chair .
 Ambassador Apakan, we are pleased to welcome you back to the Permanent Council . We regret that Ambassador Sajdik is not able to be with us today .
We wish him a speedy recovery. Please pass on our appreciation for his work and his report, and that we wish him speedy recovery .
 Ambassador Apakan: "We remain supportive of your collective efforts to seek a lasting peace in eastern Ukraine" The ambassador says he remains supportive of his collective efforts.
 The people of Ukraine deserve peace, a peace that is achieved through the respect for international law and commitments, says the Ukrainian government . "You and your monitors can continue to count on our full support"
 Most members of the U.N. Security Council support the Ukrainian initiative for deployment of a peacekeeping mission in Donbas . Most of the United Nations Security Council supports the initiative .
 We have an intensive dialogue with China, which will not oppose certainly. We have a long-term relationship, but it will be difficult to see if it will change .
 Most of the UN Security Council members also support us as evidenced by the talks I held yesterday and the day before . Most of them also support the UN.
 The Russian Federation is the only one country which is against the Russian Federation . President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko said .
 Solution to the issue of deployment of UN peacekeeping mission has reached ‘Moscow’s deadlock’, Poroshenko stressed .
 Ukraine, the United States, Germany and France were ready to submit a joint resolution to the UN Security Council for consideration . The President reminded that Ukraine, U.S. and Germany had a common vision for such a mission .
 Russia would defy the international community and further strengthen its isolation. At the same time, Poroshenko noted that Russia would use its veto power .
 UN peacekeeping mission in Donbas will significantly reduce the risk of military conflict escalation in eastern Ukraine . Ukraine insists it will prevent Russia and mercenaries from delivering weapons .
 Ukraine spends 6% of its GDP on the defense sector, more than NATO’s member countries spend to maintain their minimum obligations to the Alliance . Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko handed over two American Island-class patrol boats that took place at the United States Coast Guard shipyard in Baltimore
 This figure is now higher than minimal obligations for NATO members, NATO chief says .
 President Donald Trump has signed the bill on the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2019 . The bill provides for $250 million in security assistance to Ukraine .
 The sum is 50 million higher than the allocations of the 2018 budget for relevant financial aid programs for Ukraine . The total is more than 50 million more than the allocation for relevant aid programs .
 Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov and British Minister of State for Security and Economic Crime Ben Wallace have discussed joint response to threats of a hybrid war being waged by Russia .
 Ukraine&rsquo;s Internal Minister Arsen Avakov and Great Britain's Minister&nbsp;of State for&nbs; security Ben Wallace discussed plans for comprehensive cooperation and exchange of experience .
 Ukraine's Internal Minister Arsen Avakov and Great Britain's Minister of State for Security Ben Wallace discussed plans for comprehensive cooperation and exchange of experience .
 Russia is deploying new military units on the border with Ukraine, which can be used for active hostilities . Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council Oleksandr Turchynov says Russia will deploy new units .
 Ukraine is a serious threat for Ukraine, an official says . The official says this constitutes a serious threats for Ukraine .
 Russia is deploying additional troops near the Ukrainian border, stated Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine .
 Turchynov stated that Russia would never dominate in the Azov Sea . Several days ago, he said Russia would not dominate the sea .
 National Security and Defense Council Secretary Oleksandr Turchynov predicted that Ukraine and the United States will continue military-technical cooperation, including on the supply of lethal weapons .
 The first step has already been taken, and I think this relevant issue will also be discussed at the end of this year . But the first step is already taken, says the author .
 Turchynov: "We will talk about more serious interaction systems and projects, in particular air defense. When planning the budget for next year, we will talk to journalists,’ he said .
When we talk about weapons, these are weapons that can be used to systematically defeat an enemy . When we talk of weapons, this is a time to think about how to use them .
 Turchynov also stressed that he would like Ukraine to maintain military-technical cooperation with its strategic partners without any restrictions .
 This is the logic of the reforms we are conducting in the Armed Forces, in other bodies, says the author . The author says the reforms are being carried out in the armed forces .
 A large batch of small arms and ammunition has been delivered to the occupied city of Luhansk, eastern Ukraine, from Russia .
 The arsenal is stored on the military base in Luhansk . It is arranged on the site of the former knitting factory in the city .
 According to intelligence reports, three enemy troops were killed and another three were wounded . Three enemy troops killed and three wounded .
 Volunteers of the Povernys Zhyvym project have posted the video on social networks . Video shows the strike hitting the militants’ truck with ammo .
 A militant company commander was among those killed in the hit, according to Ukrainian intelligence .
 The command of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation is secretly boosting the training of the occupation forces in Donbas to conduct offensive operations, the speaker of the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine says .
 The Russian Federation plans to conduct military exercises in the occupied territories of Ukraine . The military exercises will take place in occupied territories .
 Officers of the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine have reported yet another case of Russian occupation forces using banned laser weapons .
 The serviceman was hit by a laser beam lost 80% of sight in a right eye .
 At least four people, including a candidate for the head of the Donetsk People's Republic, have been injured in an explosion in Donetsk . The explosion occurred in the city of Donetsk .
 Three boys have been reported killed and another injured by a land mine in a separatist-controlled town .
 The Ukrainian military has expanded the security zone in Donbas by more than 10 square kilometers since the beginning of August . Head of the Joint Forces Operation’s press center Viacheslav Petrovskiy says the military have expanded the area by 10 square km .
 Mykola Rudkovsky had been wanted for allegedly taking part in the ‘attack’ on the Russian embassy in Kyiv in 2014 .
 Rudkovsky allegedly hurled a stone at the building of the Russian embassy in Kyiv in June 2014 .
 Ukrainian Deputy Minister for temporarily occupied territories and internally displaced persons George Tuka says residents of the occupied territories in Donbas have no illusions about the possible accession of the war-struck areas to Russia .
 Russia doesn't need the devastated and destroyed Donbas, the deputy minister believes . Russia doesn’t need the devastation and destruction, he says .
 There is still no popular slogan ‘We want to Ukraine’ in the temporarily occupied areas in eastern Ukraine . According to the official, there is still not a popular slogan .
 According to the official, 85 railcars were bought by Ukraine under the EBRD loan .
 Bohdan Senyk heads the public office of the General Staff of Ukraine’s Armed Forces . He told the Kyiv-based Interfax-Ukraine news agency on October 3 .
 On August 30, about 3,500 small arms, more than 3,100 mines, about two million ammunition rounds, 34,000 detonation devices, 52,000 missiles and 5.38 million blank cartridges were imported into Ukraine via the Krakivets border crossing .
 Oleksandr Turchynov and Head of the National Security Bureau of the Republic of Poland Pawel Soloch are on a two-day visit in Ukraine . They discussed the trending areas of… View news.
 The new facility is supposed to broadcast the Ukrainian TV programs to the temporarily occupied territories of Donetsk region . The facility is meant to broadcast Ukrainian TV shows to temporarily occupied territory .
 This tower is recognized the highest ever in the history of modern Ukraine . It is the highest in the country's history .
 National Council of Television and Radio Broadcasting of Ukraine issued new permissions for temporary broadcasting under a simplified procedure in temporarily uncontrolled territories in Donetsk region and in Crimea .
Deputies propose to put into law the concept of ‘Russian World’ and determine what statements can be considered propaganda . In connection with this, the deputies propose to make the concept into law .
 Deputies of the Rada propose to punish such actions by imprisonment for up to five years with or without confiscation of property . The Rada proposes to punish those actions by imprisoning them for five years .
 Representatives of the authorities will receive stricter punishment . They will receive five to ten years in prison .
 The same punishment is planned to be established for persons who promote the idea of “Russian World’s” in social media and internet publications .
 The bill proposes not to allow registration of presidential or deputy candidates if they promote the pro-Russian ideology or have ties to the political forces promoting such ideology . In addition, the bill would not allow presidential or Deputy candidates to register .
 The former Defense Minister of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic, Igor ‘Strelkov’ Girkin stated on his VKontakte post that the audio recording was authentic .
 The recording captured an assistant to Denis Pushilin discussing the assasination of then DPR head Alexander Zakharchenko with unknown people . The recording was recorded by an assistant. The recording shows the assistant discussing the Assasination. of the DPR head of the
 Pushilin was chosen to succeed Zakharchenko a week after the latter was assassinated on August 31 . He was chosen as the successor to the former president of Ukraine .
 The character has been recognized and the people who know him have no doubt regarding the identification of his voice and manner of speaking .
 It was also confirmed that this person surely worked in Pushilin’s team and was one of his close associates .
 The recorded conversation took place in June between the assistant of Pushilin, who was the head of Parliament at the time, and two unknown people . The SBU stated that the recorded conversation happened in June .
 In this recording, the people were discussing the preparations for a coup d’état by Pushilin and the assasination of Zakharchenko .
 Ukraine cut off all communications with Ukraine and they take information from our communication channels anyway . We cut off communication with Ukraine. We also cut off communications with Russia and Ukraine .
 Mr Lavrentiev even went to Turkey in June to discuss plans and took no precautions against leaks .
 Four people, including a candidate for the head of the so-called “Donetsk People's Republic’s Republic, have been injured in an explosion in Donetsk, eastern Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian Air Force has a thing for crazy, dangerous low-altitude passes, but you probably can't fly much lower than this .
This is about the possibility of quick fire strikes on the enemy’s intended goals and leaving their own position even before the enemy strikes a response . This is about a possible quick fire strike on the enemies' intended goals .
 All the key components of Bogdan’s art pieces, including the barrel of the newest gun, have been developed and manufactured . By the way, it is precisely at the kramatorskoy enterprise, in addition to the trunks to the artsists .
 The SAU was created on the basis of the all-wheel drive military truck “KrAZ-6322” with the wheel formula 6х6. The SA U was created by the same company as the military truck .
 The chassis has a twin armored four-door cabin with two rows of seats . The cabin is designed for a crew of 5 people .
 The Ukrainian Army has received the new batch of upgraded T-80 and T-64BV tanks and new BTR-4 armoured vehicle personnel carriers .
 Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov visited the flagships of the armored industry of Ukraine . He visited the State enterprise “Malyshev Plant’s” where as instructed by President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko, a
 Ukrainian servicemen have received 16 tanks and five armored personnel carriers manufactured by the Ukroboronprom State Concern, President Petro Poroshenko has said .
Ukroboronprom Concern has received 16 tanks and five armored personnel carriers . Ukrainian Armed Forces have received five armored carriers and 16 tanks .
 The military of Ukraine’s Joint Forces Operation has received a brand-new armored personnel carrier . Butsefal was developed by the Kharkiv-based Morozov Machine Building Design Bureau, a state-owned enterprise .
 The BTR is equipped with a powerful 30mm gun and a combat module that includes Stugna anti-tank guided missiles . The combat module also includes a combat unit that includes a StugNA anti- tank guided missile .
 Ukraine plans to strengthen the Armed Forces’ armored potential . Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov says Ukraine will strengthen the armed forces' potential .
 The military have received 16 T-64 and T-80 tanks, as well as five BTR-4 armored personnel carriers . The military has also received five B TR4 armored carriers .
 The day of the machine-builder at AvtoKrAZ was marked with awards, awards, a concert and an autoshow . KrAZs arrived on the obstacles at the test-demonstration ground .
 Petro Poroshenko signed a law on the ratification of the General Agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers and the Polish Government on the cooperation in the defence field .
 The implementation of the document creates the prerequisites for the development of the Ukrainian-Polish cooperation in the defence sector .
 The Agreement provides for the cooperation of both states concerning information sharing, demonstration of the armaments and military equipment, joint drills, bilateral and multilateral military exercises, military cultural events, and competitions .
 President Petro Poroshenko signed the law on ratification of the agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of Romania on cooperation in the field of military transportation .
 15 helicopter bases and service centre for the French Airbus Helicopters in the amount of 55 items will start working in Ukraine soon .
 Interior Minister Arsen Avakov claimed this during a working visit to France . The Interior Minister of Ukraine was visiting France .
15 bases for our helicopter units will start working all over the country, Avakov said . Preliminary, we plan that 15 bases for the helicopters will work in the United States .
 Russia is ready to exchange the Ukrainian director and political prisoner Oleg Sentsov for the Russians convicted in the U.S. Viktor Bout and Konstantin Yaroshenko . Maria Butina, who is under arrest, is also under arrest .
 This is reported by Novaya Gazeta referring to a source close to the negotiations on the exchange of prisoners between Ukraine and the Russian Federation . This is said to be referring to the talks on the release of prisoners .
 The Kremlin is ready to discuss the exchange of Oleg Sentsov directly with Washington, a source says .
 The official representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation Maria Zakharova informed the publication that she “does not know’ on such an initiative .
 Viktor Bout was convicted in 2012 in the U.S. for intending to illegally trade in arms and support terrorism . Bout was sentenced to 25 years in prison in the United States for 25 years .
 Konstantin Yaroshenko was arrested on May 28, 2010 in Liberia . He was charged with preparing for transportation of a large batch of cocaine .
 Maria Butina was detained in Washington on July 15, 2018 . She was detained on suspicion of trying to influence United States policy on the orders of a high-ranking official from the Kremlin .
 She was officially charged on two counts – in collusion with the purpose of working as a foreign agent . She was also charged in acting as aforeign agent without proper registration .
 The United States does not consider the option of exchange of Ukrainian movie director Oleg Sentsov for three Russians kept in custody in America .
 Ukraine's Verkhovna Rada urges the country’s National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine to introduce sanctions against several Ukrainian TV channels .
 Ivan Vynnyk, the Secretary of the Defence Committee of the Verkhovna Rada, presented a draft law . The draft law was presented by the Defence Minister .
 The committee offers this very wording and proposes to forward it to the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine regarding the introduction of the personal restrictive sanctions, Vynnyk said .
 The event's lineup also features humanoid robot Sophia that uses artificial intelligence .
 Poland and Ukraine are able to supply raw materials to Western markets . In conditions of the growing influence of China in world trade, Polish and Ukraine can provide raw materials .
 The Representative of Polish MFA also noted that internal reforms in Ukraine should not be delayed by armed conflict with Moscow or “the conflict of identity with Poland’s Poland.
 Officers of the Security Service of Ukraine jointly blocked the export of smuggled amber with the weight of more than one ton to European countries in Zakarpattia region .
 The stuff was placed in trunk compartment and was packed into travel bags . The stuff had to be placed in the trunk compartment .
 Operational services established that one of the customs officers facilitated the smuggling of the amber across the state border of Ukraine .
 Ukrainian anticorruption investigators launch probe into alleged illegal enrichment by top intelligence official . Family reportedly owns three villas worth millions of dollars, it is claimed .
 The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry has launched an online campaign #CorrectUA . It will ask foreign media outlets to spell the Ukrainian capital correctly .
 The Foreign Ministry invited all Ukrainian citizens and their friends to join the campaign . The campaign was launched by the Foreign Ministry .
 Ukrainian Foreign Ministry demands access to Ukrainian film director Oleh Sentsov . Sentsov has been on hunger strike in a Russian prison for more than four months .
 A monument to Anne of Kyiv has been unveiled in the French city of Toulouse . Anne is the daughter of Grand Prince of Kyv Yaroslav the Wise, wife of King Henry I of France .
 Five members of one family in Ukraine’s southern region of Odesa have been hospitalized with symptoms of anthrax . The Health Ministry says the family slaughtered cattle in Ukraine's southern region .
 The Holodomor of 1932-1933 was designated as genocide against the Ukrainian people . The U.S. Senate has unanimously passed a bipartisan resolution .
 The resolution was the result of fruitful interaction between the Embassy of Ukraine in the U.S. and the Ukrainian community of America and friends of Ukraine .
 Ukraine has declared a Hungarian consul persona non grata and demanded he leave the country within 72 hours . Ukraine has asked him to leave within the next 72 hours.
 The tension in relations between Ukraine and Hungary should not affect the development of cooperation between the two countries, says the head of the National Security Bureau of the Republic of Poland .
 The official commented on Budapest blocking Kyiv’s participation in NATO events . The official said that Kyiv's participation was blocked by Budapest .
 The Consul of Hungary in the town of Berehove, Ukraine’s Zakarpattia region has been declared persona non grata .
 consul must leave the territory of Ukraine within the next 72 hours . The consul has to leave the country within a day .
 The Security Service of Ukraine assures that the legislative branch of Ukraine needs to decide on the possibility of the implementation of the criminal liability for the dual citizenship .
 Viktor Kononenko, the Deputy Head of the SBU, claimed this as Interfax-Ukraine reported .
 Hungary will immediately retaliate if Ukraine expels the Hungarian consul from the town of Berehove, Ukraine’s Zakarpattia region, over the issue of Hungarian passports to Ukrainian citizens . Hungary will also retaliate.
 Ukraine's Foreign Ministry plans to send Hungary a note informing that the Hungarian consul in Berehove must leave Ukraine . Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry on October 4 plans to sent the note .
 The United States continues to call on Hungary not to oppose a NATO-Ukraine Commission . The U.S. Permanent Representative to NATO Kay Bailey Hutchison says that the United States is still calling on Hungary to oppose the Commission .
 Hungary started to block any Ukraine-NATO Commission activity over a new education law adopted by Ukraine to introduce Ukrainian as the language of tuition .
 Ukraine is going to expel the Hungarian consul from Berehove this week if Budapest does not recall its consul . Ukraine’s Minister of Foreign Affairs Pavlo Klimkin says that following a reported case of issuing Hungarian passports to Ukrainian citizens, he will be expelled .
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin said Russia will use the situation with the issuance of Hungarian passports to Ukrainians in Zakarpattia to destabilize the region in particular .
 The Kremlin’s actions are neither in the interests of Hungarians in Zakarpattia nor in Hungary. The Kremlin's actions are not in the interest of the Hungarians .
 Foreign Minister of Ukraine Pavlo Klimkin gave a week to the Foreign Ministry of Hungary to withdraw its consul from Ukraine as he reported .
 If it is not done this week, we will send a note to the Hungarian side on his expulsion, Klimkin emphasized .
 Hungary violated the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, the minister says . Also, he says, Hungary violated a Convention on consular Relations .
 "Nobody should hide the fact of acquisition of rights and commitments," he said . "By definition, by definition, nobody should hide" the fact, he said.
 Criminal proceeding for the issuance of Hungarian passports to the residents of Zakarpattia region was investigated under the article of the Criminal Code on high treason . Criminal proceeding was held for the issuing of Hungarian passport to residents of the region .
 The press office of the regional Prosecutor’s office claimed, Interfax-Ukraine reports . The regional Prosecutor's office's office claimed .
 This is a preliminary legal qualification,’ the press office of the regional Prosecutor’s office claimed .
 The issue of Hungarian passports to Ukrainian citizens in the town of Berehove is high treason . The prosecutor's office in Ukraine’s Zakarpattia region is investigating the issue .
High treason is punishable by imprisonment for a term of 12 to 15 years . In keeping with Ukraine’s Criminal Code, high treason can be sentenced to 12 to15 years .
 It is not an offense for Ukrainian nationals not to report the fact that they are also in possession of a passport issued by another country, the Hungarian foreign ministry says .
 Hungary will not be recalling its Consul General or Consul from Berehove in view of these affairs, according to Menczer .
 The event was organized by the Embassy of Ukraine in cooperation with the diplomatic missions of Canada, the U.S. and the UK . The event is held in Hungary .
 The event was organized with the Embassies of Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States in Hungary .
 68% of the conscripts did not show up at military enlistment offices in Uzhgorod, western Ukraine .
 ‘1,377 conscripts are due to show up at the military enlistment office, and about a hundred of them should be enlisted for compulsory military service. The local city council reported this on Thursday .
 68% of young men did not show up at the enlistment office, according to the message .
 The evasion from military duty envisages administrative and criminal responsibility . The first act of evasion results in a fine in the amount from five to seven personal exemptions . The second one – in the amounts from 10 to 15 personal exemptions – is the second one .
 The toughest legal measure of punishment in this case is three years-long imprisonment . The toughest punishment is a three-year sentence .
 The autumn military draft began on October 1 and will be running through December 31 . The military draft will run through the end of December 31.
 General Staff of the Armed Forces admitted the term was extended until December . The National Guard and the State Border Guard need to man the active duty units .