 Kyiv fights to defend hard-won liberty as sanctions make no dent on Moscow . Kyiv fight to defend free speech as sanctions continue to hit Moscow .
 The Javelin anti-tank missiles rolled down Khreshchatyk, Kyiv's main thoroughfare, in a ceremony that involved military aircraft and 4,500 troops .
 The parade on August 24 underscored the Ukrainian government's determination to send a message to its citizens and to the world . Kyiv will not give up in what its leaders see as a grim, life-and-death struggle to defend national freedom .
 Ukraine has been a boon to Ukraine's domestic companies and foreign investors in sectors from IT to manufacturing . Closing the door on Russia, and opening it to the EU via a trade deal, is a boon for Ukraine .
 conflict with Russia and Moscow-backed separatists in the south-eastern Donbas region remains a major threat to the economic recovery . The conflict is now in its fifth year, and is in its sixth year .
 The missiles are a source of reassurance to the government in Kyiv, fearful that support in Washington and other western capitals may diminish over time as the conflict drags on .
 In July, Kyiv feared that President Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin might use their Helsinki summit to reach an understanding about the Donbas conflict . The Russian annexation of the Crimean peninsula that preceded it.
 Some policymakers in Kyiv were aghast to hear Mr Trump speak warmly of Mr Putin and make no public criticism of Russian policies towards Ukraine .
 Kurt Volker, U.S. special representative for Ukraine negotiations, says worries were overblown . But Volker says the worries are overblown, he says .
 The United States will keep sanctions on Russia until it changes its behavior . The U.S. does not support the Kremlin's proposal for a referendum to settle the status of Donbas .
 The Donbas war is similar to so-called "frozen conflicts" in the former Soviet republics of Azerbaijan, Georgia and Moldova, where fighting has ended but without a political solution .
 A similar outcome in Donbas would not only leave Ukraine – already a truncated state after Russia's action in Crimea – without certainty of regaining control of a strategically important region .
 It would leave a question mark over the concept of Ukrainian statehood . It would also give the Kremlin powerful leverage over Ukrainian politics .
 Russia denies direct involvement in the confrontation, despite widespread evidence to the contrary . Russia has denied direct involvement.
 Ukrainian government ministers and defense officials say the conflict is very much a "hot" one . For their part, Ukrainian government officials say it is far from being "frozen"
Every week brings numerous violations of a ceasefire agreed in 2015 but rarely heeded since . Every week brings several violations of the ceasefire agreement .
 Casualties are reported on an almost daily basis, adding to the toll of more than 10,000 dead since fighting started in April 2014 .
 For the moment, the United States and the EU are united in maintaining sanctions on Russia . The U.S. and EU are still maintaining sanctions.
 Ukrainian government and opposition politicians are concerned that cracks are appearing in the west's common front . The rise in influence of Russophile political parties in countries such as Austria, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Italy .
 Alexei Kudrin, a liberal ex-finance minister of Russia, estimates that the United States and EU sanctions have reduced Russian gross domestic product by half a percentage point a year since 2014 .
 ICU head of research Alexander Valchyshen doubts sanctions will change Russian behavior .
 Mr Valchyshen: "I'm saying that they are not counteracting Russian intentions"
 Western capitals would like the government in Kyiv to make a more serious effort to win the hearts and minds of the roughly 4m civilians caught up in the conflict .
 Some politicians in Kyiv seem lukewarm about reintegrating Donbas civilians into Ukraine's democratic life . In the pre-2014 era, for presidential candidates and parties less than enthusiastic about national independence and pro-western policies .
 Russia's intervention in Donbas has been the single most important factor of the past quarter of a century in accelerating the process of Ukrainian nation-building, politicians say .