 The Ukrainian state must take all possible measures to improve the situation . The Russian Federation has been accused of persecution of people by other authoritarian regimes .
 The issue of the security of Ukrainian and foreign citizens who became victims of the persecution by the Russian Federation and its satellites has extremely exacerbated . In the context of armed aggression of the Russian federation against Ukraine, occupation of the AR of Crimea and Sevastopol.
 In recent years, the authoritarian regime of Vladimir Putin in the Russian Federation has become even more centralized and rigid .
 The war against Ukraine and occupation of the Crimean Peninsula are accompanied with the suppression of civil and political freedoms in Russia itself . The war in Ukraine and the occupation of Crimea are also accompanied by the suppression.
 New repressive laws were adopted, and already existing ones are also selectively applied for persecution, defamation, prosecution, imprisonment, detention, fines, and pressure on individuals and organizations criticizing authorities .
 The changes to anti-terrorism laws known as ‘Yarovaya’s package’ gave the authorities sweeping powers .
 The persecution targeted Ukrainian citizens, as well as Russian citizens and organizations supporting the Ukrainian government or criticizing the Ukraine government .
 In Russia, the historical revisionism of Soviet totalitarianism is underway, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The historical revisionistism of Russia is underway"
Stalin-style kidnappings, detentions, arrests, searches and torture of detainees charged with fictitious crimes . They practice Stalin-style kidnapping and detention of detainees .
 Forty-six persons are recognized political prisoners, 97 people are victims of persecution for religious beliefs . 39 are victims with non-custodial sentences, and another 46 people are likely victims .
 Many Russians, victims of persecution by the Russian authorities, are seeking refuge in Ukraine . Ukrainians who are persecuted by the RF set their hopes on Ukraine to be protected .
 The UNHCR does not consider the designation of Ukraine as a “safe country of origin’ to be appropriate . Ukraine is not considered a safe country oforigin .
 The states should remove Ukraine from the “safe country of origin’s lists. Ukraine should be removed from the list, according to the U.S.
 Ukraine does not meet the criteria of the EU as a safe country of origin, according to the EU .
 Ukrainian legislation generally complies with international standards in this area . However, enforcement practice remains far from such standards .
 The annual report of the human rights organizations Human Rights in Ukraine-2016 contains data on murders, enforced disappearances, indiscriminate violence during a conflict with the RF, torture and ill-treatment .
On June 1, 2017, an attempt was commissioned on the life of Adam Osmayev and Amina Okuyev . The two men had been married for three years .
 The man was legalized in Ukraine in February 2016 under the name of Olexandr Dakar . According to Herashchenko, the man was born in Ukraine.
 Amina Okuyeva was killed during a second assassination attempt . Adam Osmayev was wounded during the second attempt .
Unknown persons delivered fire from bushes aiming at the car of Okuyeva and Osmayev . She died near the Village of Hlevakha, Kyiv Oblast .
 Denis Voronenkov, an ex-deputy of the Russia State Duma, was shot dead in the downtown Kyiv on March 23, 2017 . He received Ukrainian citizenship .
 He was the native of Pavlohrad Pavlo Parshov, who previously served in the National Guard . He was sacked for non-fulfillment of terms of the contract .
Antin Herashchenko called Pavlo Parshov "Russian subversive" before attacking Voronenkov . He called him ‘Russian subversive’ as according to Ukrainian law enforcers, according to Ukraine law.
 The car of Timur Makhauri was blown up in Kyiv, near the Bessarabian market, in September 2017 . His acquaintance was with her child, in which he was with a child .
 Makhauri died, the woman suffered heavy bodily injuries, and the child received slight injuries . The child received minor injuries .
 The man was a volunteer of the Chechen International Peacekeeping Battalion named after Dzhokhar Dudayev . He was a citizen of Georgia .
 Belarusian journalist Pavlo Sheremet was blown up in a car a mine mine in downtown Kyiv on July 20, 2016 . The journalist had been working in Ukraine for several years .
 Video from surveillance cameras was uploaded to the Internet . It showed several people mining the journalist's car on the night before the explosion .
 In May, the journalists of the "Investigation.Info" argued that Igor Ustymenko, a former SBU security officer, allegedly stayed near the Sheremet's house on the night before the assassination .
 The investigation has still not found the killers of Pavlo Sheremet or instigators of the crime . SBU employees confiscated the server with video from surveillance cameras in one of the stores near the house . The server was returned empty .
 The subordinates of Shapoval carried out operations in the zone of ATO and in uncontrolled areas of the Donbas . The subordinates carried out Operations in the area.
 The main versions include Russian trace and revenge for successful operations in the uncontrolled territory of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts . The main version of the main version includes Russian trace.
 The Haraberiush's car was blown up on March 31, 2017 in the residential quarter of Mariupol .
 Ivan Mamchur was shot dead on September 16, 2016 in the corridor of the house where he lived in Rivne . He had served in the special units of the Armed Forces of Ukraine in the Donbas .
 One of the murder suspects was detained while attempting to enter Russia . The suspect was arrested while trying to enter the country .
 Attorney General Yuriy Lutsenko said the detainee said he had murdered Ivan Mamchur at the request of the bodies of the FSB .
Two malefactors intended to attach explosive device to Anton Heraschenko's car and activate it with the help of a mobile phone . SBU says only positive example of the work of the SBU murder prevention is the detention of two malefacts .
 The SBU completed the pre-trial investigation into an attempt on the life of People’s Deputy Anton Herashchenko in connection with his public and state activities .
 An attempt was organized by one of the active members of the terrorist organization “LPR’s’. The order was ordered by the General Directorate of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation .
 The suspect is hiding from the investigation in the RF and in the temporarily occupied territories . The suspect has not been identified as the suspect .
 Abduction of the oppositionists by special services of the RF from the territory of Ukraine was practiced also before the EuroMaidan . Abducting of oppositionists from Ukraine was also practiced before the EU .
 Leonid Razvazzhaev was abducted near the UNHCR office on October 20, 2012 .
 The Head Office of the MIA of Ukraine in Kyiv said that no applications concerning the disappearance of this person were received . No applications were received for this person .
 There is a reasonable suspicion that the Ukrainian secret services have helped to abduct him . However, there is areasonable suspicion that he was abducted .
 After EuroMaidan and with the onset of RF aggression against Ukraine, violent disappearances, abductions and luring of people from the territory of Ukraine became an element of the hybrid war .
 Oleksandr Kostenko, a former militia officer, took part in the EuroMaidan . He is a resident of the Crimea .
 EuroMaydan was kidnapped by unknowns and taken to the city of Bryansk, Russia . He was taken to Bryansk without any documentation .
 On February 5, 2015, he was kidnapped from his own house in Simferopol by unknown persons . He was taken out in a minibus without identifying marks .
 Kostenko was “found in the FSB in a grave condition, with a broken arm and dislocation of the forearm’s forearm . On February 6, after torture, he was ‘found’ in agrave condition, FSB says .
 Kostenko was tortured by former Crimean SBU and now FSB officers Tyschenin and Shambazov . Former SBU officers were tortured by ex-SBU officers .
 It was originally reported that Fedir Kostenko managed to enter the territory of Crimea . Later this information was not confirmed .
 Crimean investigating authorities refused to institute criminal proceedings . The Crimean investigating Authorities refused to impose criminal proceedings.
 The State Border Guard Service of Ukraine stated that he had not crossed the administrative border . The border service said that he did not cross the border .
 Eskander Ibraimov, inhabitant of Simferopol, moved to the mainland of Ukraine after Crimea's annexation . He moved to Ukraine shortly after the annexation of Crimea by Russia .
 According to his wife, he left Vinnytsia for Moscow to meet his future business partner, Rustam Mann . Mann is a Russian from Kabardino-Balkaria, Russia .
 Ibraimov phoned his wife on the night of June 20, 2014 . For the last time he phoned her on the day of the day .
 The appeals to state institutions of Ukraine and Russia did not provide information sufficient for Ibraimov’s searches . The appeals were made by the Ukrainian government .
 Rustam Mann was questioned as a witness, and subsequently as a suspect two months before the scheduled meeting with Ibrahimov . Mann is a fugitive from Russia .
Ibraimov and Mann stopped answering phone calls on June 20, 2014 . Mann was controlled by the FSB and was used to lure Ibraimov out of Ukraine, according to reports .
 Ibraimov's disappearance is violent and involves Russian special services. Apparently, the disappearance of Ibraov is violent .
 Stanislav Klykh and Mykola Karpiuk were lured out into the territory of Russia . They were accused of the so-called “Chechen case’s” in the creation of a gang and murders of Russian servicemen during Chechen events
 Stanislav Klykh lured out to Russia through his girlfriend Victoria, his mother says . He was lured out by his girlfriend under the pretext of her pregnancy, she says .
Klykh and Karpiuk underwent terrible tortures, which made Klykh mentally ill . Both were mentally ill. Both were taken to hospital .
 From the persons under investigation, they wrested evidence against A Yatsenyuk, D Yarosh, and Tiahnybok brothers . The men were under investigation .
 There are grounds to consider this case organized in order to discredit the new leadership of Ukraine . Ukraine's new leadership has been accused of trying to discredit new leadership .
 Klykh and Karpiuk were sentenced to 20 and 22 years of a strict regime colony . In May 2016, the Supreme Court of the Chechen Republic sentenced them to 20-22 years .
 Pavlo Hryb, 19, was abducted by Russian special services on the territory of Belarus on August 24, 2017 .
 He was transferred to the RF under compulsion, where he was charged with incitement to blow up a school . He allegedly revealed in his communication with an online girlfriend that he had been in contact with a girlfriend .
 FSB officers forced her to play the role of a lure in a transborder special operation aimed at persuading Hryb to arrive in Belarus with subsequent abduction .
 Pavlo's life is endangered as he lives with a disability associated with a malfunction of the cardiovascular system . Pavlo’s life is at risk as he suffers from a heart condition .
 Ukrainian doctors are denied access to Pavlo. They do not give Pavlo necessary medications and Ukrainian doctors do not have access to him .
 In June 2015, Ukraine joined the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance . Ukraine must abide by all its norms .
 Under international law, enforced disappearance is a crime, and under certain circumstances, even a crime against humanity . The enforced disappearance of a person is an international crime, under international law .
 The SSU has been conducting enforced disappearing for a long time now, we are compelled to note . Instead, we're forced to note that the SSU is being enforced disappearing .
Three cases of abduction by SBU officers and the illegal extradition to RF of persons who wished to apply or apply for refugee status in Ukraine .
 Aminat Babayeva was detained on September 9, 2016, by border guards at the border crossing point at the Kharkiv Airport . There were no legitimate grounds for detention, according to the authorities .
 Her former husband was suspected of participating in military operations in Syria on the IDIL side . She was deported from Turkey due to the fact that her ex-husband was suspected in Syria .
 Babayeva maintained that she had not seen her ex-husband for two years . She said she had been seeing him for two months .
 Kharkiv Human Rights Group lawyer was not allowed to see Babaeva . Her friends turned to the KHPG with a request for legal assistance .
 SBU officers urged Babayeva to agree to return to Russia, then to Belarus . SBU officials arrived at the airport at the time and urged her to return .
After intervention of MIA leaders Babayeva was admitted to the country . After intervention of the MIA leaders, the MIA leader was admitted.
 She applied to the Kharkiv Regional Department of the Migration Service for asylum . The unknowns abducted her, forced her to get in the car and drove her away . She put up at a hotel and on Monday, September 12, she applied for asylum.
 One of the abductors was identified by Aminat as a security officer named Arthur who talked with her at the airport . The abductors are believed to have been in the custody of the woman .
 Babayeva was brought to the Goptivka border crossing with Russia and handed over to border guards . Babayev was brought over to Russian border guards.
 In April 2017, representatives of the Ukrainian competent authorities illegally transferred to Russia Ahmed Isakov resident of Buynaksk, Dagestan .
Unconfirmed information: He lived on a false passport of a citizen of Ukraine . Subsequently, he went to Turkey, where he lived on the false passport .
 Isakov was detained upon arrival at the Kharkiv airport, the fake Ukrainian passport was found .
 He was denied to write an application for asylum and without proper legal procedures . He was forcibly sent to Russia without the possibility of appealing against this decision .
 In Russia, he was taken into custody, and a case was registered against him for illegal storage of weapons . He was arrested in Russia, where he was held in custody .
 In 2016, a criminal case was initiated against Vladimir Yegorov, member of the Yabloko party for calls for extremist activity for his post in the social network ‘Vkontakte’ He strongly spoke about President of Russia Vladimir Putin .
 Egorov crossed the border with Ukraine on June 13, 2017, on the internal passport of the RF . He wrote an application for asylum at the checkpoint Senkivka .
 The SMS in Chernihiv issued documents and certificate of a person seeking asylum in Ukraine .
 SSU officers abducted him from the place of temporary work in July 2017 . They brought him home for his belongings and took him to a neutral strip near the Senkivka checkpoint .
 The SSU officially answered that it did not take a decision on forced return or refoulement and entry ban . After this, following the request of the Public TV.
 Egorov entered Belarus, where he disappeared on July 27 . He was subsequently found in a temporary isolator in his native town of Toropets of the Tver Oblast .
 Memorial Human Rights Center recognized Egorov as a political prisoner . The Memorial Human rights Center recognized him as apolitical prisoner .
 Egorov was released from custody on November 16, 2017 . The case was sent to trial after a pre-trial investigation .
 The Ukrainian state must take all possible measures to improve the situation, says the U.S. State . Russian Federation must ensure human rights and guarantees of security.
 This material is based upon the written request by Escander Ibraimov’s wife Mariana Kudinova to the Kharkiv Human Rights Group . This material was based on a written request from the wife of the Russian dictator .
 Anvar Derkach monitors violations of human rights of Muslims in Ukraine . He is a journalist from Ukraine .