 Council wants information concerning certain persons and entities in Annex I to Regulation No 269/2014 to be amended . The information concerning four deceased persons should be deleted .
 Annex I to Regulation No 269/2014 should be amended in order to keep the measures against them in place . The changes in the ownership structure of three entities should be changed .
 Annex I to Regulation Regulation No 269/2014 shall be amended as set out in the Annex to this Regulation . Annex I-to Regulation Regulation no 269/ 2014 shall be amend as set up in the annex .
 Crimean ‘authorities’ and the ‘Crimean Sea Ports’ have benefited from the illegal transfer of their ownership . Those enterprises were effectively confiscated by the Crimean 'authorities' and the 'CrimeanSea Ports' have benefited .
 Oleksandr Turchynov's ‘election’ was decreed unconstitutional by the acting Ukrainian President on 1 March 2014 . His ‘ election’ is deemed unconstitutional by acting President Oleksander Turchyov .
 He actively lobbied for the ‘referendum’ of 16 March 2014 . He was one of the co-signatories of the 'treaty on Crimea's accession to the Russian Federation' of 18 March 2014.
 President Putin appointed acting ‘Head’ of the so-called ‘Republic of Crimea’ on 9 April 2014 .
 Aksyonov decreed that the offices of ‘Head’ and ‘Prime Minister’ be combined . The offices of Head and Prime Minister will be combined.
 Russian State order ‘For Merit to the Fatherland’ — first degree. For his involvement in the annexation process he has been awarded with Russian State Order ‘ for Merit To Fatherland'
 Temirgaliev played a relevant role in the decisions taken by the ‘Supreme Council’ of 16 March 2014 . The former Deputy Prime Minister of Crimea was former Deputy PM of Crimea . He was a member of the Supreme Council of Ukraine .
 He was acting 'governor' of Sevastopol from 1 to 14 April 2014 . He is a former ‘elected’ Chairman of the ‘Legislative Assembly’ of the City of Sevstopol .
 He is responsible for part of the Russian military presence in Crimea which is undermining the sovereignty of Ukraine . He assisted the Crimean authorities in preventing public demonstrations against moves towards a referendum and incorporation into Russia .
 Currently employed by the Central apparatus of the Russian Ministry of Defence . Currently employed.
 Active participant and organiser of separatist actions, coordinator of actions of ‘Russian tourists’ in Donetsk .
 Former head of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ Central Electoral Commission .
 Former permanent member of the Security Council of the Russian Federation . Former Director of the Foreign Intelligence Service of the Russia Federation . Ex-Director of the foreign intelligence Service of Russian Federation.
 Director of the Russian Institute for Strategic Studies. As of 4 January 2017, Director of Russian Institute of Strategic Studies is in charge .
 Former vice-prime minister of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’ responsible for security and law enforcement .
 Mr Malofeev is closely linked to Ukrainian separatists in Eastern Ukraine and Crimea . He is also linked to Ukraine's pro-Ukrainian separatists .
 Mr Borodai met with Mr Aksyonov, so-called ‘Prime Minister’ of the ‘Republic of Crimea’ during the period of the Crimean annexation process . He is a former employer of the former 'Prime Minister' of the '
 Former Deputy Minister of Defence was involved in supporting the deployment of Russian troops in Ukraine .
 Russian Ministry of Defence structure. In that capacity he participated in shaping and implementing the Russian Government .
 This is in breach of Ukrainian constitutional law, and, as a consequence, of international law, according to Ukrainian law . Ukraine's territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine are at risk, says the author .
 The ownership of the entity was transferred contrary to the Ukrainian law . The ownership was transferred Contrary to the Ukraine law .
 Crimea is the biggest commercial seaport in Crimea . In terms of volume of trade, it is the largest commercial seabort in the region .
 It had no presence in Crimea before the annexation . It has become the dominant player in the market .
 RNCB supported materially and financially the actions of the Russian government to integrate Crimea into the Russian Federation, thus undermining Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 In participating formally in the illegal ‘elections’ it has actively supported actions which undermine the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine, and to further destabilise Ukraine .
 Public ‘organisation’ presented candidates in the so-called ‘elections’ of the ‘Donetsk People's Republic’2 November 2014 .
 It aims to provide all-round, effective assistance to ‘Novorossiya’ It also supports policies undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 Associated with a person listed for undermining the territorial integrity of Ukraine .