 March 18 marks the sixth anniversary of Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea . The annexation was illegal in Crimea .
 Moscow's seizure of Crimea has arguably done as much or more damage to Europe’s post-Cold War security order .
 Ukraine lacks the leverage to restore sovereignty over Crimea, at least for the foreseeable future . Steven Pifer Nonresident Senior Fellow Foreign Policy, Center for Security, Strategy, and Technology .
 The Kremlin believes that taking the territory of other countries is an action that it can get away with . Doing so might only encourage the Kremlin to believe that taking other countries' territory is an act that it is able to do so with .
 Ukraine's Maidan Revolution ended in late February 2014, when President Victor Yanukovych fled Kyiv . The Rada appointed an acting president and acting prime minister to take charge .
 Ukraine made clear their intention to draw Ukraine closer to Europe by signing an association agreement with the European Union . They made clear they want Ukraine to draw closer to the EU by signing the agreement .
 Armed men began occupying key facilities and checkpoints on the Crimean peninsula . Almost immediately thereafter, armed men began occupy key facilities .
 Russian soldiers wore Russian combat fatigues but with no identifying insignia . Clearly professional soldiers by the way they handled themselves and their weapons .
 President Vladimir Putin at first flatly denied these were Russian soldiers, only to later admit that they were and award commendations to their commanders .
 If shooting began, Kyiv wanted the world to see the Russians fire first . If shooting started, Kyv wanted the Russians to fire first, he said .
 Many enlisted personnel in the Ukrainian ranks came from Crimea . Ukrainian commanders probably had less than full confidence in their troops' reliability .
 Crimean Supreme Council voted to accede to Russia on March 6 . On March 6, the Crimean Supreme Court voted to ask for accede.
 The conduct of the referendum proved chaotic and took place absent any credible international observers . The referendum was held in a referendum held in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 Local authorities reported a turnout of 83 percent, with 96 percent voting to join Russia . Local authorities said the turnout was 83 percent .
 The numbers seemed implausible, given that ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars accounted for almost 40 percent of the peninsula’s population .
 On March 18, Crimean and Russian officials signed the Treaty of Accession of the Republic of Crimea to Russia . The treaty was signed on March 18 .
 The Russians colonized Crimea during the reign of Catherine the Great . They founded Sevastopol — the peninsula’s main port and largest city — to be the homeport for the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 Crimea was a part of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic until 1954 . It was transferred administratively to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic .
 Crimea in 2014 had an ethnic Russian majority of about 60 percent — the only part of Ukraine where ethnic Russians constituted the majority . It is also true that Crimea has an ethnic Russians majority of 60 percent .
 When the Soviet Union collapsed in December 1991, the resulting independent states recognized one another in their then-existing borders . But it is equally true that, when the Soviets collapsed, they recognized each other in their now-existing border .
 The Russian government justified the referendum and annexation as an act of self-determination . But it appears that less than half of the Crimean population actually voted to join Russia .
 Moscow responded to the desire of Chechens for independence from Russia after the Soviet collapse with two bloody conflicts . In any case, the Kremlin applies the principle of self-determination selectively .
 It appears that domestic politics provided one motive behind Putin's decision to seize Crimea . The Crimea region was seized by Russia in March 2014 .
Russian President Vladimir Putin based much of his reelection appeal on Russian nationalism . Instead of being able to cite economic growth and rising living standards, he based his appeal on Russia's nationalism .
 Seizing Crimea in a quick and relatively bloodless operation proved very popular with the Russian public . Seize Crimea was a quick operation that proved very successful with the public .
 Crimea has undergone significant changes over the past six years . Crimea has seen significant changes in the last six years.
 A large number of ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars have left the peninsula since 2014 . Some put the total at 140,000, with some putting the total in 2014 .
 Crimean Tatars complain of intimidation and oppression as one reason for moving . Crimea's Tatars say they have been harassed and intimidated by the government .
 The inflow has included troops and sailors, as the Kremlin has bolstered the Russian military presence on the peninsula . The Kremlin has deployed new submarines, surface combatants and combat aircraft .
 Moscow has poured in more than $10 billion in direct subsidies as well as funding major construction and infrastructure projects . The Kerch Strait now links Crimea directly to Russia .
Small business has suffered, particularly with the decline in tourism, which once accounted for about one quarter of Crimea’s economy .
 Crimea is subject to a variety of Western economic and other sanctions . Crimea also remains subject to Western economic, other sanctions.
 The reality of the economic situation today falls short of what many in Crimea expected, or hoped for, with Russia’s annexation .
 The ongoing Russian-Ukrainian conflict in Donbas has pushed Crimea to the back pages . Kyiv understandably focusing on trying to end that fighting, which claims the lives of Ukrainian soldiers on almost a weekly basis .
 Crimea’s seizure arguably has done as much, if not more, damage to the European security order . Still, while Donbas has meant far more dead than Crimea, the seizure has meant more than Crimea .
 A key premise of the 1975 Helsinki Final Act was that state borders should be inviolable and not changed by force . Russia’s actions in 2014 shredded that principle .
 Analytically, it is difficult to see how Kyiv can muster the political, diplomatic, economic, economic and military leverage needed to do so .
 Crimeans calculated that their living standards would be better off as part of Ukraine . Ukraine's economy is relative to the Russian economy, both in absolute terms and relative to Russia .
 Moscow would likely resist that — just ask the Chechens — and in any case, Ukraine's economy has a long way to go . Moscow would probably fiercely resist that, just Ask the Chechen .
 The U.S. and Europe should continue to support Kyiv's position, maintain Crimea-related sanctions on Russia, and hold to the policy of non-recognition of Crimea’s annexation .
 Moscow should pay some price for its use of military force to seize the peninsula, says the Russian president . Russia should pay a price for the use of its military force, he says .
 Ukraine is the right thing to do for Ukraine, for the European security order, and for dissuading the Kremlin from trying land grabs elsewhere. That’s the right things to do, for Ukraine.
 For five decades, the United States and other European countries refused to recognize their incorporation into the Soviet Union .
 For most of that time, Baltics regaining independence seemed implausible . Until it happened, the Baltics never seemed to get independence .