 The last time I visited Kiev in April 2014, when the city still felt an incredible energy . The city still feels incredible energy, says author .
 For many months, Independence square was occupied by protesters and the police .
 When I was in Kyiv, the Euromaidan was still filled with a variety of Ukrainians, they demanded a more transparent government, a more democratic society and closer integration with Europe and the West .
 Former President Viktor Yanukovych has fled to Russia, and Ukraine held the first days of the new government .
 U.S. support for Ukraine is now more important than ever before, says former Kyiv member . "I understand that United States support forUkraine is now much more important"
 After the revolution, it became clear that the Yanukovych regime was not acting alone when violently attacked its citizens . The revolution became known as the Revolution of Dignity . The Yanukovych regime became known for its violent attacks on citizens .
 The Russian government also provided support to spread disinformation, sow confusion and suppress the protests . The government also gave support to financial and other.
 In the following months and years, the ambition of the leader of the Kremlin of Vladimir Putin in Ukraine became more sinister .
 The policy of President Barack Obama regarding the Ukraine and Russia helped to keep the imperfect and the fragile ceasefire .
Fighting in the town, an industrial city near the Russian border, has been intensified to levels that were not for a long time .
 To date, the administration trump could not provide a coherent concept of foreign policy of Ukraine or Russia .
 News from Washington come at a furious pace, from Michael Flynn's resignation to reports of contacts between helpers campaign trump and Russian intelligence . All this at a time when a growing body of evidence of Russian interference in presidential elections .
 A President trump for reasons unknown still wants to resist Russian aggression, or in their own country or abroad . It is amazing that a President trump is still trying to resist Russia .
 The Ukraine, Baltic States and throughout Eastern Europe. Of course, this was not a surprise for our friends in the Ukraine, the Baltic States .
 Russia uses tactics of the Soviet type for many decades in an attempt to maintain its sphere of influence and power in the region .
 The spread of “false news, the propaganda, the introduction of spies and supporters of a foreign government, blackmail, extortion, and interference in elections are all part of the same script, says the author .
 Trump would have to prove the leading role of the U.S. in the world in the face of these problems .
 Russian troops literally moved the boundary fences encroaching on the sovereignty of the country .
 NATO remains the most effective deterrent, which prevents further advance of Russia . Despite the claims by trump, NATO is the most successful deterrent in the world .
Georgia and Ukraine were hoping to join the transatlantic Alliance . Georgia and Ukraine wanted to be part of the Alliance .
 The United States should withdraw from these countries and leave them under the influence of Moscow . Today, it sounds impossible, but this does not mean that the U.S. should withdraw .
 The new administration does not preclude the cancellation of the Russian sanctions . The sanctions were imposed in response to the invasion of Crimea and intervention in the United States electoral process .
 No matter what known to the administration trump about hacking the election, it's completely unreasonable to abandon the only leverage . Russia is becoming more bold, especially when Russia is more bold .
 The maintenance of a multilateral sanctions together with the EU is crucial for the survival of Ukraine as a democracy friendly to the West . The U.S. and the EU are crucial for Ukraine's survival, according to the EU .
 The President trump still wants to maintain a hard line against Russia . Congress must take responsibility and confront Putin .
 President Petro Poroshenko reiterated his commitment to the position . The position has bipartisan support in the House of Representatives and the Senate . The sanctions should be maintained until Russia will not restore the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine, he said .
Today, when I go on Khreshchatyk, everything is calmer, Ukrainians rushing for shopping and to work . Today, when you go on the show, everyone is rushing to work and shopping . The show is based in the Ukraine and is based on the
 Government buildings that for several months crumbled and were covered with ash are now cleaned and restored . The government buildings were covered in ash for months .
 patriotism that erupted as a result of the revolution of Dignity remains, but there is a feeling of fatigue . But the mood is different, and the mood of patriotism is different .
 Reveals political differences, and fading confidence in the Verkhovna Rada, the Ukrainian Parliament .
 President Poroshenko continues the hard work of building democracy, trying to stabilize the economy, eliminate corruption and eliminate corruption .
 After meeting him, it became very clear how important U.S. aid in promoting the implementation of reforms .
 The Ukrainians have to stay on the path that leads to democracy, despite challenges . But despite these challenges, the Ukrainians are still in charge of democracy .