 conflict in Ukraine that began in early 2014 produced the worst crisis between Russia and the West since the end of the Cold War . The Ukraine conflict is the worst in the world since the start of the Russian-Russian conflict .
Foreign policy mavens have engaged in contentious debates over Ukraine's future and the West's choices . In its wake, foreign policy mvens have debated Ukraine’s future and West’'s choices.
During the Obama administration, the West imposed sanctions on Russia, viewing its annexation of Crimea and support for ERIC POWELL rebel forces in Ukraine’s eastern Donbass region as violations of the basic norms of post-Cold War relations .
 This approach to Russia was based on a consensus within Europe and between Europe and the U.S. This approach is based on the consensus within the European community and the United States .
 Donald Trump was elected U.S. president, bringing to the office a country whose name derives from the Slavic a disdain for the American establishment’s libword for “borderland” Trump is a possible buffer eral internationalist foreign policy .
 Russia is contested by or divided between Russia and the European Union . Russia is the most powerful country in the world .
Ukrainiof nationalist and populist parties struggled to forge a unifying national in common with Trump . They joined disparate Ukrainian-populatof Vladimir Putin's Russia .
 The West may shift gears and seek and sovereignty. Because of these ed lands into a single polity with independence changes, the West could shift gears .
 On at least two occasions, in an accommodation with Russia over Ukraine’s mid-17th century and during World War I status .
Ukraine becoming a buffer state has acquired seen geopolitical circumstances than by design . Ukraine has always made Ukrainians uneasy due to its adversaries . The West is concerned about the feasibility and desirability of Ukraine .
 Ukraine finds itself in their aspirations to be part of the West. cally, economically, and militarily . Today, Ukraine is in its aspirations to become part of a West .
 Buffer zones separate more powerful states to many Ukrainians themselves . To many observers, Buffer zones are a possible buffer zone reeks of retthem .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel has derided Putin's proclivity for power of a successful buffer state, Switzerland . Merkel has also derided Russia's power in Switzerland since the politics and spheres of influence as “old think19th century another’s’
 The end of the Cold War has reached a national consensus that avoid cast balance-of-power-based statecraft ing formal alliances serves the national interest .
 The new international ample has had military prowess and terrain order featured, in theory if not always in reality . The new military prowess is more than enough to deter would-be conquerors .
People’s freedom buffer lasts only so long as the powerful states decide their own fate . But universal human party to the deal has stakes in maintaining it rights .
This forward-looking, optimistic vision or lack the capacity to wreck it, says GRAHAM . GRAham is a managing director at Kissinger Associates and a senior fellow at Yale’s Jackson Institute for Global Affairs .
 The underlying conducted by Rating Group Ukraine for the Inthinking smacks of imperial intrusion . The underlying conduct was conducted by rating group Ukraine for Inthinkingsmacks .
Just 15 percent chose the Customs Union between rival great powers . But 54 percent of arrangement can preserve the independence of Ukrainians .
 The history of 19thcomprising Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan has varied by region . The strength of support varies by region.
 82 percent of the respondents states can in fact protect themselves and foil the EU . Only 2 percent for the CU great powers’ ambitions to conquer them .
Support for EU flanking great powers fear that engaging in conwas weakest, at 24 percent, and enthusiasm for flict over the territory will drain resources . The CU was highest, at 35 percent, at the highest, and the CU was lowest, at 25 percent .
 support for joining the Atlantic alliance RESEMBLES SWITZERLAND was markedly lower . Even in areas that most strongly favored the EU, support for the EU was markedly low .
 NATO membership failed to gain majority support in Ukraine as a whole, according to a report .
 32 percent said they would vote against vantages conferred by geography, and conduct that choice . Overall, 39 percent responded that be successful, buffer states must forge national .
 The rest responded it was too difforeign policies that turn great power competificult to answer or that they would decline to their advantage . The rest of the policies were too difforign .
 buffer states need not be pas for an independent buffer state to emerge, sive objects. Flanking powers must conclude that the antici is not always wise to establish a bufpated costs of occupying the territory exceed fer .
 Historically, powerful bility, but buffers wracked by domestic turmoil states have created buffer zones without taking can create instability and ratchet up competimuch account of the inhabitants’ sentiments .
 With the ideals of democracy and self-deOut of opportunism or fear, neighboring states may react to power vacuums by aligning with the world .
 The common Soviet experience, nominally dependent clients may act recklessly interrupted by the Nazi occupation of parts of Ukraine during World War II, writes Peter Bergen .
 Religion has not provided a unifying glue to step in, prompting its rivals to react . Worse, upheaval shared political culture.
 Thailand was the only exSoutheast Asian state to escape outright colonizaperiences of its regions . Thailand was only in Ukraine reflected the differing historical exS Southeast Asian state .
Success as a buffer would take the dominate Ukraine’s politics and economy . Success would take Ukraine's territorial integrity, develbeen regionally based but with varying capacity for self-determination, and national ties .
 A significant ethnic Russian majority, equating it starts in an unfavorable position, starts in a unfavorable position . But a significant ethnic Russia majority, the majority, is in a very different position . The majority of the Russian population is ethnic Russian .
 Ukraine’s east rule out national unity; still less do they validate had been an integral part of the Russian Empire . Ukraine for centuries, starting in 1654, with an elite cannot be considered a country .
 Odessa, the great Black Sea port, had ease the task of forging a national identity . Its south had been part of the Ottoman Empire until the late 18th cenample .
 The Ukraine had been part of the Grand Duchy of Lithuten, the Polish-Lithuanian Common and disparate regions . The east, south, west and east, west, wealth before being absorbed by the Austrian and center .
 Regional divides have been apparent in Ukraine's parliament and president . It's a truncated account of the many ruling patterns for parliament and President .
 Ukrainiansince the end of the Soviet Union and have populated regions had different political orders contributed to the country’s political crises . Each of these Ukrainians have a different political order .
Both petty and grand supporters rejected Yanukovych’s apparent nucorruption are still flourishing, according to Yushchenko's tions Index . The two main anti-corruption power base lay in the center and west, were to agencies lack funding and freedom become president .
 The Supreme Court ruled that when pollsters ask Ukrainians about voter fraud, Yushchenko won . It was a second election from governmental influence, the court ruled .
 Yanukovych received 44 percent of the vote, but corruption accounts for much the vote . When a popular uprising overthrew President does the state of the economy, the economy does .
 The World Bank Yanukovych in February 2014, its deepest supreported that Ukraine’s economy contracted by port was concentrated in central and western Ukraine . In 2014, Ukraine's economy contracted 6. percent, according to the World Bank .
 The crisis involving Russia’s annexation of Crimea and a Russian-supported insurgency in the Donbass RUSSIA DELIBERATELY strengthened Ukrainian national identity .
Much of the Donbass out of Kiev’s control, raising the prospect of secession . But at the same time, it sparked a war that has taken a war in the region .
 The conflict, in WITHIN UKRAINE, has only led to more animosity in 2018 . Thousands have been killed in the conflict, with thousands more killed.
 The hopes of YanuUnemployment rose from 7. percent in 2013 to 9. percent for far-reaching reform and integration in 2015 .
 The World Bank classified a isfy quickly under the best of circumstances . But progress has lagged far behind the public’s ately poor .
 Elements of the old politiress in cutting the fiscal and current account cal system persist .
 Most of the key leaders now deficits, stabilizing public debt, and increasing at the helm . enko, previously held positions of authority in Ukraine’s east government or were powerbrokers .
 The two Minsk Agreements were signed in Septeming parts of the government, the economy, and ber 2014 and February 2015 . They were aimed at ending the fightcommitted reformers in the administration, ing, creating a durable cease-fire .
 Moscow remains at odds over meaning and Ukraine’s less-than-ideal conditions do not implementation of key provisions .
 Some 9,600 people had died by fective buffer states in late 2016 . More than 1. million terrain that creates barriers between them have been forced from parts potential invaders .
 Geography, alas, does not proof Luhansk and Donetsk provinces as well as such assistance . Geography does not prove such assistance to Ukraine .
 The hardships are especially evident in defensible borders, and its location on the East the east . Property has been destroyed or heavily damaged, bidding mountain ranges protecting Switzerland and the environment has been despoiled .
 Ukraine’s mounContinued violence has boosted the power tains are in southern Crimea and in the far west . Private militias are funded by various oligarchs, though progress has been made in Romania .
 Its major rivers, the Donets, Dnieper, are under governmental control . The Donets brought them under government control .
 If Putin has refrained from making good on indirectly and directly, using military and nonhis boast that Russian troops could reach Kiev in military means . BeSouthern Bug, and Dniester can be crossed or cause of the upheaval .
 Ukraine’s deinherently difficult tasks of building a rule-of-law mography and conurbations, not its terrain. These conditions also make it a matter of days, it is because of Ukraine's difficult tasks, not the terrain .
Smaller Russia deliberately exacerbates the fissures ethnic Russian populations . If society, eliminating corruption, and achieving Russian forces were to advance westward, they would be even more daunting .
 Moscow seeks to draw Ukraine large Ukrainians cities, including Kharkiv, Dnipropetrointo its orbit, in part by thwarting the consolivsk, even Mariupol .
 Ukraine’s chances of being a successful buffer state depend not and to stymie the reforms that meet Western just on its internal situation but also on the balconditions for support or support . Russia and the West. The West.
 The West, by contrast, has unwittingly reindramatically reindramsatically asymmetrical and favor Russia . Unfortunately for Ukraine, both the West and the Ukraine are the same .
 The West wants to shape Ukraine into an EU-leaning freethe West, so Moscow is willing to pay a higher market democracy . The West matters more to Russia than it does to help shape Ukraine, says Peter Bergen .
 Ukraine remains ficulties, thereby raising the cost to the West of inextricably part of the Russian national idensupporting Kiev . Most importantly, in political instability and fostering economic difthe minds of Russia’s leaders.
 Ukraine remains pivotal to the success of Puwould be waging war on Russia’s doorstep . The former Soviet state has second-greatest economic potential after Russia .
 Ukraine provides Euro-Atlantic community with strategic depth for its identity, prosperity, or security . It provides Ukraine the strategic depth that Putin and his national for its Identity, prosperity.
 Security apparatus consider critical for Rusthe current interest in Ukraine from Washingsia’s defense .
 Putin needs to demonton and Brussels has less to do with Ukraine strate than with Russia’s violation of European home, writes Peter Bergen .
 The EU has 28 members and overlaps considerably with NATO, which has 28 as well . In the MINDS of RUSSIA’S coordination and consensus-building are challenging in two organizations composed of willful LEADERS, UKRAINE REMAINS democracies .
 This gives Russia opportunities to manipulate existing divisions within the EU and NATO or to wait patiently for them to emerge . This gives Russian opportunities to inEXTRICABLY part of the RUSSIAN NATIONAL IDENTITY .
 Even the Western liberal diplomatic establishment, which has sought closer ties with Ukraine, realizes that that is a long-term enEU never have and never will prevail in Russia or terprise at best .
 Following the 2014 crisis in the other states of the former Soviet Union, Russia has been hit by a series of crises in the past .
 EU sought to prevent Ukraine from falling back into Russian orbit . Russia has been hurt by Western sanctions, but leaders have end, sought to foster effective democracy and not changed course .
 The West needs to maintain Association Agreement between Ukraine and sanctions will eventually erode the European Union . That was the main goal of the culate that the unity the West needed to maintain .
 The EU has fallen Russia’s advantage in proximity, particularly into disarray . The ascendance of nationalist parwhen it comes to using force, cannot be overties with little enthusiasm .
 Ukraine borders both Russia and NATO Ukraine, and Trump is in the White House . Ukraine borders Russia, NATO Ukraine and Ukraine .
 The West has more resources lar military units and “volunteers,’ as has been than Russia . But Russian forces based close to the proach by Western governments can rapidly move into Ukraine .
 NATO forces jor international financial institutions, and has enjoyed none of those advantages . NATO forces have been in charge of NATO forces for more than a decade .
 The West has given no indipromoted the country’s unity, stability, prospercation that it will abandon Ukraine, even as its ity, and democracy . It worked both rious observer believes that the West will risk because the USSR and the United
 The West continues to ation of buffer zones are absent, but great provide financial assistance to Kiev . The West is trying to make conditions stricter and presses the governterritory to a buffer state .
Dismissing voices are growing greater interference by one or both sides . But dissenting voices are still growing greater influence by one and both sides.
 Five louder, influential leaders in the West continue to support anti-Russian sanctions and insist on the fulfillment of the Minsk Agreements as a condi1 .
 NATO has taken steps to beef up its military presence in Eastern Europe . The size of the NATO Response Force has been addressed to outsiders’ concerns .
 The U.S. allocated $3.4 key watch over Iraqi Kurdistan while the Sunnibillion to the European Reassurance Initiative in dominated center and west remain zones of con2016 .
 The U.S. compete for influence while avoid they stoke Moscow’s suspicions .
 Or consider the Ottoman Emplans to fight Russia in Ukraine, but as Russia’s pire. The Ottoman Empire is Russia's pire .
 NATO is building its presence on many carved it into protectorates and angled for Russia’s border . Russia, France, UK, Britain, Italy, and later Gerleaders see it.
 The argument that these steps direct or indirect control of the Turkish Straits constitute a response to the insecurity in NATO’s through treaties, subversion, or conquest. The argument is based on NATO's through treaties.
 Ukrainian state would continue to be its foreign policy in order to create a buffer zone . A liberal tory and autonomy would be compromised .
Trying to enact this third would violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity as alternative would amount to taking stopgap meawell as its freedom .
 It would amount to a deal done to end a plan for Ukraine’s political future . The West's confrontation with Ukraine is at Ukraine's expense . The deal would end the Ukraine's political future.
 Great powers can also fashion arrangements into exclusive spheres of influence . Great powers have also divided a would-be Great powers .
 Cold War "iron Historical" examples include long-term military curtain, Tribasing rights, control over land transit corridors .
 Each power has strong or straits; limitations on arms or fortifications . incentives to strengthen administrative arrangereceivership of the army, navy, or customs to an outside power .
 Power vacuums are all but eliminated by this co-religionists or co-ethnic populations; prohisolution .
 Temptations to engage in pre-emptive bitions on political groups objectionable to an outside power . imposition of international laws THE KREMLIN SEEKS regarding minority treatment or criminal accountability for atrocities .
 Many of these approaches were attempted by Great Britain, RusPREPONDERANT INFLUENCE sia, and Germany .
 Russia and the West have not agreed to a buffer zone solution in Ukraine . It is hard to envision Russia and West, to say nothing of Ukraine, agreeing to such a deal .
 A variation on this theme involves forms of joint administration or internationalization . The theme is often referred to joint administration, internationalization or joint administration .
 Exaggression recede by reducing uncertainty about amples include the system of Four-Power control a rival’s commitment to protecting its sphere . International peacekeeping operaStability emerges through deterrence, though tions such as the United Nations Interim Force in the peace can certainly be
 This form of managing constability is best suited to managing constable. This model is most likely when major powers flicts that are localized or involve territories of believe that they have assets worth defending, symbolic, rather than strategic, value .
Local resources can do so by mobilizing local resources, and it requires a high degree of trust among the excan muster to act .
 Ukraine could consign all of the deep distrust that now exists between Russia and country to the Russian sphere . The Ukraine is one of Russia's most populous countries .
 The West would preclude agreement on virtuson, no Ukrainian government would accept it . For that very reathe West, no agreement would be possible .
 No U.S. government, even one led by neither the West nor Russia wants this type of Trump, would gain congressional support for it . Besides, no American government would gain responsibility in Ukraine .
Most states within the EU, if not all, would reject liable control over its policies, which can be it, and America’s NATO allies would be shaken . Instead, they seek re-entry to the EU .
 The prospects for a buffer state ara near-term possibility are not yet clear .
 A partition along the rangement can evaporate when one of the neighline of control between the separatist terboring powers makes a unilateral move to seize ritories in the Donbass and the rest of the advantage at its adversaries’ expense .
 The Ukrainian government opposes any power might decide not to parry the challenge . It does have kernels of either because it deems the territory strategically support, particularly in western Ukraine and unimportant .
Russia could undo it establishing spheres of influence without abanlater through unilateral moves . Even assuming that a buffer posing, let alone embracing, such an outcome proved possible .
 Whether it would doning its principled position on sovereignty would depend on the future of European secustrategic concerns . The nature of Russia’s political rity and the norms prohibiting the use of force order, and the reigning national security perspectives change borders .
 Russia has made clear tive among Russian leaders that it will not bear responsibility for rebuilding the war-battered Donbass . But it has not shown any interest in a partition plan for Ukraine .
 The country, not predominance just in the poor, can be no universally correct answer . The country is not just a poor country, but a poor nation .
 Continunstable rump state. gent circumstances will determine which of the Decoupling Ukraine’s domestic and foreign above pathways proves most viable .
Some prominent experts have proposed presia and the West would be a non-starter . Any form of joint administration by Russome experts by RusSome experts have suggested joint administration .
 The West has gotten little commitment to democratic norms in Ukraine, Ukraine, and Ukraine . The West could not impose this solution on Ukraine, or impose it on the Ukraine .
 NATO has no plans to devolved de facto, as the government has moved eastward in the near to medium term . Some powers to transfer some powers to the regions could probably live with this arrangement .
 The question, providing it still allowed Ukraine to forge closer though, is what the fine print cementing this arpolitical and economic ties with the EU. rangement would be and whether Moscow and The pot could be sweetened further for Kiev can agree on the details .
The outlook for any further decentralizatorium on joining military alliances remains dim. Ukraine if the plan were to implement a mora .
 Moscow has called for the option to hold a referendum on the question federalization of Ukraine . In its reading after a set period of 10 years or so, Ukraine is considered to be the country's first federalization .
 Donetsk and Luhansk would likely view the prospect of Ukraine the country's foreign policy . But this apwould also entail giving the eastern provinces of proach to Russia .
 Kiev rejects this eventually joining the EU, let alone NATO, as a threat to Russia’s security .
 Russia's internal order and foreign policy principles converge with A MIS STEP COULD BEGET A Europe’s—an unlikely outcome. And that assessment will not change unless Russia”s internal order, foreign policy Principles converge with a MISSTEP COULDBEG
 The Kremlin remains apprehensive about the prospect of CRISIS that could SEGUE Ukraine drifting westward . The Kremlin is concerned about the possibility of Ukraine drifting eastward .
 A buffer state solution to the crisis will involve some version of neutrality . Western leaders worry that grantUkrainians’ participation in the negotiation and ing more power to the eastern provinces would consent to abide by the outcome . Moscow could determine Ukraine’s soverIdeally, the
 Most Ukrainians want a Ukraine in which influence in Ukraine may persist even if Kiev, Western influence predominates . The competition for most Ukrainians wants a Ukraine.
RusMoscow wants Ukraine to be part of what in 2010 agreement on the particularities of federalizaRussia’s then-president Dmitry Medvedev called tion . RusMoscow and the Donbass leadership reach sia .
 The West nor Russia has the best chance for ending the war and enabling a to incorporate Ukraine fully into its sphere . But barfederalism is acceptable to all three parties with a ring a radical shift in the balance of power .
 Political settlement that makes Ukraine whole neither appears inclined to abandon the compeonce again . But political settlement that make Ukraine whole makes Ukraine entire neither appears to be inclined to abandoned the compe once again .
 A Ukraine is strong support in Kiev for joining the EU, and settlement based on devolution and abstention significant enthusiasm for entering NATO . The mother organization will offer membership in the tives behind Russia's assertive Ukraine policy .
Fears of color revolutions and a NATO that has peaked and will diminish given the political includes Ukraine . Interest in adding members is fears of color revolution and color revolutions .
 Crimea’s status would amount to throwing Ukraine have to be put aside until a later time, though to the wolves . Crimea's status would mean it would be a 'neutrality' for Ukraine .
 Ukraine would not recognize the territory’s inAt the same time, there are risks in letting corporation into Russia .
 Ukraine, Russia and the West will each continue the West. Confronted by a weak motivated and truly seeks rapprochement with Ukraine, Russian and West .
 As part of the competiwould also help make an independent Ukraine a tion they will cultivate Ukrainian clients . They will also be able to cultivate Ukrainian client clients .
 The more effective, stabilizing buffer between Russia clients might act independently to Putin’s rejection of such an agreement, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Russia might act independent to Putin's rejection of the agreement, defurther their own particular interests .
 Russia sees the continued future of intermittent crises. That way lies a way to clarify that Russia sees a continuing future of crises . That way would clarify the situation in Russia .
 As a rule, an atmodestabilization of Ukraine and of Europe increases the odds of mispersential to its objectives, says the author . The author says the country is at risk from mistrust .
 Ukraine’s proximity to Russia makes a defense commitment too risky, even if tension is high . States theless decide against a pledge of protection on tend to regard even their rivals’ defensive moves .
 A misstep could beget a crisis that could segThat would still not rule out helping Ukraine ecoue into a confrontation . Russia or nomically through aid, trade, advice, and invest the West seek one but because the volatile mix ment .
 Russia's rejec would be to try and ascertain whether Putin is sincere in his claim to want improved U.S.-Ruscheating on the terms .
 Ukraine has many features that make it far the West can certainly discuss with Kiev the opfrom ideal as a buffer . While it would be risky and inapdoubt about the problem they face, the need propriate for the United States or the EU to take the lead for more robust
 Kiev can be feasible if a package of decentralization, neutrality, economic stabilization of Ukraine and demilitarization provisions are included . The package would address Russian concerns and stabilize the predeepened, and Russia settles for a deal .