 The Kremlin forced on Kyiv in the context of devastating Ukrainian military defeats by Russian forces in September 2014 and February 2015 were not a solution but part of the problem .
 These agreements were partially in manifest violation of international law as they undermined such principles as the political sovereignty of states, non-use of force and national self-determination .
 Western states helped to make more permanent transgressions that undermined the post-1945 international system . Their welcome and legitimization by various Western states effectively helped to made more permanent violations .
 The Minsk Agreements also implicitly undermined basic democratic standards . The agreements also implicitly undermine basic democratic rights .
 Kremlin instruments to harvest the fruits of Russia’s initially covert military aggression against Ukraine. They constituted Kremlin instruments, they say .
 Western states condoning the conclusion of the Minsk Agreements and pressuring Ukraine to implement their more dubious provisions . Not holding Moscow accountable for violations of the agreements and subversion of the negotiations in the Trilateral Contact Group and elsewhere .
 Russia’s eight-year aggression against Ukraine is still informed by the unsuccessful implementation of the 2014–2015 so-called Minsk Agreements between Kyiv and Moscow .
 The issue was not a potential instrument of resolution, but part and parcel of the issues that led to the 2022 escalation . It was the first time the issue had been resolved .
 Russia’s covert armed attack on Ukraine began with the military occupation of Crimea in late February 2014 . The History of the Minsk Agreements.
 Russia instigated unrest in the eastern Ukrainian Donets Basin and attempted to do so elsewhere in the country . In parallel with a successful operation to annex the South Ukrainian peninsula, Russia instigating unrest in Ukraine .
 Moscow employed some of the tools it had previously used to prop up non-government-controlled areas that had emerged in Moldova and Georgia in the 1990s .
 The Ukrainian armed forces launched an initially successful counter-offensive in the summer of 2014 . After some territorial gains by the Moscow-led paramilitary units, the Ukrainian armed Forces launched an initial counter- offensive .
 Kyiv reconquered a significant amount of lost territory, including the strategically crucial port city of Mariupol .
 Before this, only smaller groups of regular Russian troops had entered eastern Ukraine .
 Russia sent a large detachment of unmarked ground forces to fight on behalf of its Donbas proxy militias . In late August 2014, Russia intervened for the first time in this area .
 Kyiv agreed to negotiations with Moscow in Minsk, Belarus, after devastating defeat of the Ukrainian army at Ilovaisk .
 Two envoys of the so-called People’s Republics, Oleksandr Zakharchenko and Ihor Plotnytskyy also put their signatures to the protocol without their self-declared functions being mentioned .
 Ukraine is not considered the “people’s republics’ to be parties to the conflict . Ostensibly, this format was a compromise since Russia and Ukraine were not considered ‘people's republics.’
 The pattern of August-September 2014 was repeated in January-February 2015 . In January–February 2015, the pattern was repeated . The pattern was similar to the previous year .
 Ukraine suffered another devastating defeat by newly invading Russian regular troops at Debaltseve .
 Kyiv signed a so-called Package of Measures for the Implementation of the Minsk Agreements . In view of looming deeper Russian incursions into Ukraine, Kyiv signs the Package of measures .
 The Minsk II package was endorsed by the United Nations Security Council in 2014-2022 2 . It legitimized an agreement containing manifest violations of international law .
 Minsk I and II comprise provisions on security measures, such as a ceasefire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons from the contact line and disarmament of all illegal groups . Other measures include local elections in the non-government-controlled territories under Ukrainian law .
 They also foresee the restoration of Ukrainian control over the border with Russia . They say they also foresee restoration of Ukraine's control of the border.
 Normandy Format is made up of Russia, Germany, France and Ukraine . Implementation of the agreements was to be further discussed in the TCG .
 The two agreements usually mentioned in press and other reporting were a fragile ceasefire . A partial withdrawal from the contact line, some mitigation of humanitarian suffering and the theoretical prospect of future conflict resolution .
 Many observers have in mind when speaking about the Minsk Agreements, their negotiation and their attempted implementation . This story is what many observers say is what they want to know .
 There are at least three fundamental problems with the emergence, content and implications of the Minsk Agreements as a basis for conflict resolution .
 These problematic aspects need to be avoided in future agreements in Ukraine and elsewhere in the post-Soviet area .
 The principal defect of the Minsk Agreements is their disregard of Ukraine’s sovereignty . Russia's violations of international law. Legitimizing International Legal Nihilism is the principal defect .
 The agreements (if it is possible to use the term) were concluded by Ukraine under enormous duress . The agreements were concluded under enormousDuress .
 Moscow deliberately increased armed pressure on Kyiv before their conclusion . It allowed the Kremlin to frame the conflict’s definition and presumed resolution in documents .
 The Minsk Agreements’ domestic secessionist premise was fiercely promoted by Russia . It was demonstrated by the presence of separatists in the TCG working groups .
 Most outside actors acknowledged Moscow’s role in the war, many continued to treat it as an internal rather than international conflict . But this conceptual framework was in manifest contradiction with the genesis, determinants and course of the Donbas War .
 Russia was considered a party to the conflict, there was an underlying assumption that it would implement the agreements in good faith . Russia was also considered a part of the conflict.
 The Donbas schism was prepared, triggered and directed by the Kremlin . Even more than the partly similar situations in Transnistria, Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region.
 From April 2014, if not earlier, it involved both regular and irregular military units under Moscow’s thinly disguised command .
 The February–March 2014 “secession of Crimea’s Crimea was even more obviously Moscowinitiated. The February February 2014 ‘secession’ of Crimea was more clearly Moscow initiated by the Russian government .
 Russia's Dictated Non-Peace for Ukraine in 2014-2022 3 among them the speaker of the Crimean parliament, Volodymyr Konstantinov .
 The start of the Donbas ‘rebellion’ never attracted any widely notable figures from the region’s political, economic, cultural, cultural or scientific elites .
 Not even the outspokenly pro-Russian politicians in the Donbas played any noteworthy role in the alleged Russophile local uprising by their hometowns .
 Tsariov, however, is a native of the city of Dnipro, and not of the Donbas .
 In the first months of the ‘uprising’ in eastern Ukraine, several of the crucial commanders and political leaders were plainly Russian citizens . Many of them were without any noteworthy biographical or family links to Donets Basin .
Russian state agents crossed the border to Ukraine as Russian state agents, Moscow’s paid mercenaries or irregular fighters . They had crossed the Ukraine border to Russia as state agents .
 Only several months later were most of the pseudo-states’ senor positions filled with previously marginal and largely unknown local individuals .
 These and other aspects of the ‘Donbas rebellion’ constituted manifest violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty, integrity, and borders, and thus also of the European Security Order in particular, and international law mor .
 These breaches were only punished in the West by relatively minor sectoral and select individual or corporate sanctions .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and pseudo-civil war in eastern Ukraine were not commensurate with the geopolitical salience of Russia’s annexation of Ukraine .
 A conundrum related to the interpretation of the conflict and the reintegration of the de facto Russia-controlled territories into the Ukrainian state was the question of who Kyiv’s negotiation partner would be .
 Minsk I commitments were made in September 2014, despite their denigrating provisions . There was a readiness to swiftly fulfil the Moscow-dictated September 2014 Minsk commitments .
 The democratically elected Verkhovna Rada decided to play its part in implementing the agreements . The agreement was signed by the democratically elected Rada .
 The Rada adopted a special status law for the occupied territories of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . The law was adopted by the Rada for occupied territories .
 Kyiv scheduled local elections in the occupied territories according to Ukrainian law for December 2014 . Ukrainian law says elections will take place in occupied territories in 2014 .
 The results of these elections would have provided an opportunity to replace Russia as a negotiation partner with more or less legitimate representatives of the region . The results would have been in accordance with Ukrainian law and international principles .
 This procedure would certainly have constituted a disruption of regular Ukrainian domestic politics by an outside power . This procedure could have also been a disruption to regular domestic politics, says the author .
 The two Moscow-controlled de facto regimes illegally conducted their own public votes . One month before the scheduled elections, in early November 2014, the two regimes illegally held their own votes .
 The heavily staged polls were not agreed with Kyiv and most likely orchestrated by Moscow, which “respected the votes’s votes.’
 They also took place without the participation of any all-Ukrainian parties – even the pro-Russian ones . They also did not take place without any of any of the all- Ukrainian parties .
 There was no proper Russia's Dictated Non-Peace for Ukraine in 2014-2022 4 international observation . Illegal armed groups were omnipresent throughout the elections .
 The act provided the leaders of Russia’s puppet statelets in Ukraine with some fake legitimacy .
 Moscow would, from now on, increasingly refer to these and other manipulated votes when portraying DNR and LNR leaders as representatives of the population of the Donbas and of the parties in conflict with Kyiv .
 The unrecognized elections had already precluded in November 2014 any genuine political process that could be agreed with Kyiv . Kyiv has already been precluded by November 2014 .
 Ukrainian political parties would have been a crucial step in the reintegration process . Real elections according to Ukrainian law and with Ukrainian political Parties would be crucial step to reintegment process .
 The political consolidation of the People's Republics, and their heavy support through, among other things, undermined Ukrainian sovereignty, became the principal stumbling block to feasible reintegration .
 The sectoral sanctions that had been adopted before the signing of the Minsk Agreements were left in place . Only some minor sanctions were added before February 2022 .
 Moscow’s gradual “passportization’ of the population of the occupied territories, in a policy designed to transform Donbas inhabitants from Ukrainian into Russian citizens .
 Despite passportization being an additional violation of international law, it did not lead the international community to impose any additional costs on Russia . Despite passporting being an egregious additional violation, it didn't lead to any extra costs .
 The 2014 and later “elections in the occupied territories’s occupied territories did not just complicate the task of determining a legitimate negotiation partner for Kyiv .
 They also raised the issue of how to disempower the republican pseudo-authorities should a situation ever emerge . freely elected local legislators and executives could take over .
 Moscow’s permission, organization and semi-official recognition of the pseudo-elections had already subverted the Minsk negotiation process before Minsk II was signed . Moscow's permission and organization and Semi- official recognition had alreadySubverted the process .
 The passportization, moreover, was a creeping informal Russian annexation of the occupied territories . It was also a creeping unofficial Russian annexation.
 Both Minsk I and II were negotiated – if the term applies at all – against the background of two sizable invasions by Russian regular ground forces into eastern Ukraine in 2014 and 2015 .
 The agreements were concluded after devastating Ukrainian defeats left hundreds dead . Hundreds were wounded or captured at Ilovaisk and Debaltseve .
 Kyiv signed the Minsk deals in view of the prospect of even deeper Russian military incursions into Ukrainian territory . Kyiv signs the deals in a bid to prevent further Russian incursion into Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s second President Leonid Kuchma and the serving 2014–2019 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko saw no way out other than to sign the denigrating texts proposed by Putin .
 2014 and 2015 agreements contained provisions obviously designed to subvert the sovereignty, integrity and polity of Ukraine . They did so despite the fact that the 2014 and2015 agreements had provisions that subvert Ukraine's sovereignty and integrity .
 Russia’s Dictated Non-Peace for Ukraine in 2014-2022 5. This was bad enough by itself by itself. Russia's Dictation Non- peace for Ukraine was badenough by itself .
 Moscow would be allowed to use the Minsk provisions to exert pressure on Kyiv . It frequently did with reference to UN Security Council Resolution 2202 of 17 February 2015 .
 The explicit mention of the Minsk II agreement in this official document enhanced the legal weight of the controversial deal signed five days before .
 Western representatives repeatedly tried to talk Kyiv into concessions that undermined Ukrainian sovereignty . Rather than oppose these and similar Russian tactics, Western representatives tried to talks Kyiv in concessions .
 Ukraine provide non-government-controlled areas with a constitutionally fixed special status and conduct local elections before Russia’s irregular proxy troops had been either withdrawn or disarmed .
 Russia refuses to allow permanent observation of Ukrainian-Russian border by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission . Western politicians and diplomats also failed to sufficiently oppose Russia’s refusal to allow observation of the Ukrainian–Russian state border .
Western supply of even defensive weapons to Ukraine was ruled out . The possibility of additional sanctions on Russia was hardly, if ever, mentioned .
 The EU also linked the lifting of sanctions to implementation of the Minsk Agreements signed after imposition of major sanctions .
 Russia also included in its conditions for sanctions relief steps to be taken by the victim of aggression . Instead of simply tying the abolition of sanctions to an end of Russia’s transgressions, it also included.
 Russia in the first high-intensity phase of its covert aggression against Ukraine in 2014–2015 became the new baselines for the Kremlin . Russia's geographical, political and legal gains made by Russia in 2014-2015 became a new baseline, and not only for Kremlin .
 Western politicians and diplomats were largely accepted as novel objective starting points or “facts on the ground’s’ for negotiations . The two countries have agreed a framework for a rapprochement between them .
 The Russian aggressor was in fact often assisted by international mediators, according to reports . Russian aggressors were often not reminded that these conditions were unacceptable .
 Moscow was continuously allowed to harvest the fruits of its military aggression in international negotiations and in political confrontations with its Ukrainian victim . Moscow was thus continuously allowed. to harvest its fruits of the military aggression.
 This sequencing anticipated re-established Ukrainian control of the Ukrainian-Russian border in the occupied territories not before but after a political solution . This peculiar sequencing anticipated the re-establishing of Ukrainian control.
 Ukrainian government would have conducted elections on territory under informal Russian control . This would have meant the Ukrainian government conducting elections on the territory that remained under informal Russia control .
 Moscow wanted, through its agents and proxies in the occupied territories, to influence and manipulate the political process that was supposed to resolve the conflict .
 The principal problem with this idea was not so much that Russia managed to smuggle them into the two agreements through ruthless pressure on Ukraine . The main problem is that the provisions in Minsk I and II were similar to other similar problematic provisions .
 Kyiv’s coerced consent was the acceptance by and even support of Western governments and organizations for various points in the two Minsk deals .
 In 2015, French diplomat Pierre Morel and then German foreign minister Frank-Walter Russia’s Dictated Non-Peace for Ukraine in 2014-2022 6 Steinmeier each proposed conflict resolution plans that implicitly acknowledged, and were explicitly based on, the Kremlin's military achievements
 Moscow and Berlin proposed Kyiv conduct democratic elections on a territory de facto controlled by a rapacious neighbouring state . Russia had officially annexed part of Ukraine only a year before .
 In the following years, German politicians and diplomats continued to suggest that the Ukrainian government use the Steinmeier Formula, which the Kremlin understandably approved of .
 The Formula focused on concessions by Ukraine concerning local elections and a “special status’ for the occupied territories . The F1 focused on Russia’s fundamental violations of international law and the European Security Order .
 Berlin kept up pressure on Kyiv to implement the dubious plan despite ever clearer indications that Moscow was not interested in a genuine settlement .
 The Kremlin sought to transform the conflict from an international territorial into an intra-national political dispute . The Kremlin, however, sought to turn the conflict into an internal political dispute.
 Kremlin had already been implementing for more than two decades in Moldova and Georgia . It wanted to use the pseudo-republics as instruments to undermine the domestic stability, international relations and foreign policy of Ukraine .
 Moscow’s price for partially giving up the eastern Ukrainian fruits of its hybrid aggression was to get a foot back into the entire Ukrainian polity .
 Once the Kremlin concluded that this was unobtainable, it began preparing a Plan B to subjugate Ukraine, and amassing troops for a traditional military invasion . The Kremlin, at some point in late 2020 or early 2021, concluded this was unftainable .
 The “dictated non-peace’ of the Minsk Agreements should never have been accepted by the West or supported through such initiatives as the Normandy Format or the Steinmeier Formula. Conclusions and Policy Recommendations .
 Minsk Agreements did not sooth but fanned the Russian-Ukrainian conflict . The conflict could not prevent its stark escalation in February 2022 .
 The engagement by France and especially Germany in the many negotiations was intense and mainly driven by humanitarian concerns . The engagement was intense.
 Ukraine has been punished by the European Union for its role in the Ukraine crisis . Russia has not been punished for its involvement in the crisis . The European Union has not supported Ukraine and Russia .
 Insisting on respect for and observation of half-baked deals like the Minsk Agreements is not just normatively and morally questionable. Insists on respect.
 As the catastrophic finale to the negotiations of the agreements has demonstrated, it is also strategically unwise . The catastrophic finale is also unwise, says the author .
 Fine-sounding concepts used in attempts to implement such agreements such as “peaceful settlement’s” and “confidencebuilding’ may have been believed by many Western politicians and negotiators .
 Minsk Agreements serve both the mediators and the aggressor as cover for substantive inaction, if not worse . Dubious documents such as the MinskAgreements serve the mediator and aggressor.
 Russia's Dictated Non-Peace for Ukraine in 2014-2022 7 conserve and sharpen conflicts, and do not contribute to their solution . They merely postpone or even even even Russia’s Non- peace for Ukraine .
 The Agreements and their negotiation allowed Russia to draw the conclusion that it could harvest the fruits of its aggression; and sent the wrong signals to all parties involved . The Ag agreements and their negotiations allowed Russia.
 In 2014–2022, the Kremlin created the impression that establishing more new facts on the ground would further move everybody’s baseline for negotiations in the direction desired by Moscow .
 The West has been criticized for allowing such an anomalous situation in the U.S. It's unclear why such a situation occurred .
 Staff at SCEEUS made valuable comments on an earlier draft of this report . Staff at the U.S. agency made valuable remarks on the report .
 Russia's Dictated Non-Peace for Ukraine in 2014-2022 8 Recommended Literature on the Genesis of the Two “People’s Republics:” Hauter, Jakob . 2021a. 2021a . 2021 a. Russia's
 The Stockholm Centre for Eastern European Studies at the Swedish Institute of International Affairs is an independent Centre, funded by the Swedish Government, established in 2021 .
 The Centre conducts policy relevant analysis on Russia and Eastern Europe . The Centre serves as a platform and meeting place for national and international discussions and exchanges .