 The presidential campaign is receiving wall-to-wall coverage from Russia’s federal channels .
The Kremlin has a lot of explaining to do, says the Russian president . With no chance of achieving a favorable result, Russia is simply getting its excuses in early .
 Russia must watch from the sidelines as Ukraine's three leading presidential candidates denounce Putin's war . Russia still has its own preferences in Ukraine’s race . Russia must also burnish their credentials as opponents of Kremlin aggression .
 Yulia Tymoshenko is seen as a potential improvement due to her past readiness to cut murky gas deals with the Kremlin . She has spent much of the campaign promising the return of occupied eastern Ukraine and Crimea, while lambasting Poroshenko over alleged defense sector corruption .
It is not difficult to understand why Russia has become so toxic to Ukrainian voters. Even if either of Poroshenko’s chief rivals were personally inclined to seek a negotiated compromise with Russia, they would find their room for maneuver severely restricted .
Moscow's miscalculation has its roots in the lingering imperial hubris that prevents many in Russia from thinking of Ukraine as a separate country . The Kremlin’s fateful decision to attack Ukraine has proven a geopolitical blunder.
Nor is there any reason to believe Moscow can eventually regain the ground it has lost since 2014 . This means that a quarter of Yanukovych's voters cannot vote on Sunday .
Ukraine's nation-building odyssey is still a work in progress and it may take decades before the divorce from Russia is complete . None of this would have been possible without the catalyst of Russian aggression .
 Three hundred years of Russian dominance over Ukraine are drawing to a close . The Kremlin has nobody to blame but itself .
 When copying materials for Internet publications, a direct open hyperlink for search engines must be given . When copying material for Internet publication, adirect open hyper link for search engine search engines is given .
 The link should be placed regardless of full or partial use of our siteпїЅs materials . The link is not required to be used in any way .
 Hyperlink must be placed in the subtitle or in the first paragraph of the material . The subtitle must also be placed on the first page of the book .