 Washington has appointed former ambassador to NATO Kurt Volker as a special representative to Ukraine . Volker has been appointed as special representative for Ukraine .
 The move comes less than three months after the U.S. expressed doubt that the Ukrainian conflict was a point of interest for American taxpayers .
Volker “will take responsibility for advancing United States efforts to achieve the objectives set out in the Minsk agreements’
 Ukrainian leader Petro Poroshenko greeted Volker's appointment on his Twitter feed . Volker has been in charge of Ukraine since 2007 .
 The rhetoric is remarkably different from three months ago, when Tillerson questioned why U.S. taxpayers should be interested in Ukraine . The rhetoric has been remarkably different since the G7 meeting in Italy .
 The Ukrainian crisis has become a thorny issue in Russian-US relations since 2014 . The Kiev government was overthrown in 2014 .
 Kiev and its Western backers accuse Russia of supporting rebel forces in eastern Ukraine . The rebels do not recognize the post-coup government . Kiev and the Western backers say Russia is supporting the rebels .
 Moscow has repeatedly said the Ukraine crisis is an internal conflict and that Kiev is not fulfilling its part of the Minsk agreements . Kiev is refusing to negotiate with its own people in Donbass .
 The United States imposed sanctions against Russia after Russia's reunification with Crimea following a 2014 referendum . The U.S. imposed the latest expansion in late June, after Russia’s reunification.
 Washington calls it an ‘annexation’ and says sanctions will not be lifted until the peninsula becomes part of Ukraine again . Washington calls the sanctions an “annexations’s’
 The situation in Ukraine and its resolution were expected to be on the agenda during the first face-to-face meeting between Putin and Trump in Hamburg on Friday .
 The Kremlin stressed that the meeting was “a great opportunity to repeat the Russian position’ and emphasize the necessity to implement the Minsk agreements .
 The Russian president would not have an opportunity to fully express his understanding of the Ukrainian conflict, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov noted .