 The term Russkii mir has long historical roots . It has been debated and refined in Russian political and cultural circles during the Ukraine and Crimea .
 The concept of the Russian world remains controversial, and outside Russia it is often associated with Russia's foreign policy actions .
 Examination of official texts from Vladimir Putin and articles from three Russian newspapers indicate complicated and multifaceted views of the Russkii mir concept .
 Surveys in December 2014 in five sites on the fringes of Russia – in southeastern Ukraine, Crimea, and three Russian-supported de facto states – show significant differences between the Ukrainian sample points and other locations .
 In Ukraine, nationality is aligned with the answers, while overall, attitudes toward Russian foreign policy are positive . Overall, level of trust in the Russian president, trust of Vladimir Putin, and liking Russians are positively related to beliefs about living in Russia .
 The origins of the crisis go back more than a decade, it escalated dramatically in early 2014 . The flight of the democratically elected president of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, was in face of violent protests against his rule .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin authorized a stealthy Russian invasion of Crimea . This turn of events precipitated a decision by Russian President Putin to authorize a stealthly Russian invasion .
Pro-Russian activists across southeastern Ukraine sought to exploit the vacuum of power and legitimacy crisis created by Yanukovych’s departure . They sought to advance their own autonomy and separatist aspirations .
 By May 2014 the Ukrainian military and pro-Kyiv militias were at war with Russian-backed separatists .
 An imperfect ceasefire arrangement largely stabilized the frontlines in the Donbas in the second Minsk Agreement in February 2015 . The ceasefire arrangement was largely stabilized in the first Minsk agreement in 2015 .
 In December 2014, we organized simultaneous social scientific surveys in five locations in Russia’s near abroad . In six oblasts of southeastern Ukraine (not including the Donbas war zone), in Crimea (the territory annexed to Russia in March 2014), and in the three “de
 We sought to examine how the violent and tumultuous events that year affected the political attitudes of the various nationalities living in these areas .
 President Truman framed world affairs as a struggle between two ways of life . In a speech before Congress on 12 March 1947, Truman framed the Cold War in a speech .
 The other way of life is based “upon the will of a minority forcibly imposed upon the majority’s majority .
 The Truman Doctrine defined the cold war as a clash of opposing worlds . The Truman doctrine defined the Cold War as a war between two worlds .
 Their use helps create and constitute the very categorical scheme they proclaim. What this means is that their use is that they proclaim, they proclaim .
 States become part of the ‘free world’ or “the West’ by being described as such . Even if these states have characteristics that call such a designation into question, it is called into question .
 For many geopolitical frames, their substance is fluid and ambivalent . For many, for many, it is fluid, ambivalent and fluid .
 It is the power of the act of categorizing and framing that matters, not whether it is accurate . The power of categorization and framing is to determine whether it's accurate or not .
 Mass media play a central role in the reproduction of historical myths and narratives in the public field . Mass media also play a key role in reproduction of history and narratives .
 The term ‘Russian world’ is one of many used historically to describe the Russian state and empire as a distinctive civilizational space .
 Medieval sources, for example, described the civilization of ancient Rus as a world .
 The modern framing has a long genesis beginning with its initial promulgation in St. St. Louis .
 Russian playwright Alexander Ostrovskii understood it in spiritual terms . Orthodox Christians living in the unity of belief, rites, and traditions .
 Russkii mir emerged anew as a gathering node for self-definition and meaning after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
This renewed articulation has been conditioned by the geopolitical context of its emergence and by multiple overlapping understandings of the term . This renewed articulations has beenconditioned by the political context of the emergence of its emerging.
Up to 25 million ethnic Russians found themselves beyond the borders of the Russian Federation . Up to 25million ethnic Russians are in Russia.
 The new states became a crucial advantage in competition for prestigious jobs, housing, and land .
 Different factions across the Russian political spectrum worked out varied approaches to this geopolitical dilemma . Some were revisionist and imperialist in ambition, some decidedly revisionist in ambition .
 Dmitri Rogozin (currently Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation) initiated the creation of a Congress of Russian Communities to organize reuniting Russian communities and NGOs .
 In 1995 a liberal faction around the well-connected Russian political technologist Gleb Pavlovskii established a consulting agency, Foundation for Efficient Politics . His first project was planning the KRO’s unsuccessful electoral campaign .
 The Soviet liberal philosopher Georgii Shchedrovitskii specialized in the field of semiotics . He viewed the common language as a tool to bridge different communities spread across the world .
 Russian speakers who had left the Soviet Union/Russia at different time periods. They also wanted to maintain interaction between divergent post-Soviet states .
 The term Russian/Russkii and not Rossian/rossiiskii enjoyed greater emphasis . The term "Russian/ Russkii" was more popular than the term "Rossian/Rossiiski"
 Rossian/rossiiskiiskii has been seen as a liberal multiculturalism . This reflected a conscious effort to rehabilitate pride in matters explicitly Russian .
 Large numbers of scholars and politicians were involved in debate about how to understand Rossian/rossiiskii political identity .
 The tension within the Russian world concept between a broad attempt to encompass all Russian speakers and a narrower ethnic Russian understanding of the term has never been resolved .
 Russian serves as the language of communication and social promotion for most ethnic groups . It is difficult to clearly separate Russian ethnic culture from the Rossian political definition .
 Russkii mir is polysemous, a catchphrase that is sufficiently fluid, vague, and empty in substance . It is a sound bite with the useful quality of being ambiguous in substance but clear in its broad boundary .
 The first meaning as a cultural and linguistic definition ostensibly has little to do with politics . The first word is the first meaning of a cultural, linguistic definition .
 The Russian world is the cultural sphere of the Russian language and its productions . The Russian language is a cultural sphere .
There is a Francophone world well beyond France’s borders, so also is there a Russian world . There is a shared spoken language and culture .
 The first congress of compatriots was held exactly on the same days of the coup against Mikhail Gorbachev in August 1991 . Recognizing that Russian culture was also being developed abroad.
All states, to different extents and degrees, use biopolitical techniques to manage and monitor their diasporas . All states, including the U.S. and the United States, use the same techniques as other states . The United States is one of several
 Croatia, Hungary, and Poland use biopolitical criteria for maintaining relations with their compatriots . For example, Croatia,Hungary, Poland, and Croatia, useBiopolitical rules to maintain relations .
 This support is inevitably geopolitical since these populations reside in the territory beyond ‘their homeland’ within its present boundaries . This support has always been geopolitical since those populations reside within the territory .
 The notion of ‘compatriot’ was legally defined in Russia in the federal law “On the State Policy toward Compatriots Abroad’s’ adopted on 24 May 1999 and completed in 2002–2003 .
 The Putin administration facilitated a Congress of Compatriots in October 2001 to address what Putin saw as a neglect of this diaspora . Putin saw this as a failure to address the problem.
 Putin gave voice to what would be a consistent theme during his rule – the injustice of the sudden collapse of Soviet Union .
 Putin regularly acknowledged a firm intention to support ‘compatriots’ in their struggle for civil rights and against discrimination .
 Russia needs the help of its diaspora, he says . Russia is recovering its power, he adds .
 Putin explained that a compatriot is defined not by a legal category or status . Putin said that a citizen is not defined by legal or status.
Ruskii mir is framed in a language of spirituality, of community that transcends the materiality of actual political borders . From the beginning, this second biopolitical understanding of Ruskiimir isframed in alanguage of spirituality .
Common cultural and information space is a key instrument of the interaction between the state and fellow countrymen abroad . A common cultural and Information space is an important part of the relationship .
 Compatriots were the biopolitical substance – a substance defined in terms of its spirit – of the idea of the Russian world .
 Russian leaders stress the need for consolidation and solidarity . Russian leaders observe enormous diversity across the world .
 Its institutional mission was to promote the Russian language within Russia and abroad . It was to encourage interest in Russian history and culture .
 The establishment of the Foundation was inspired by the experience of organizations like Alliance Française or the British Council . The Foundation is based in Moscow and is based on the experiences of the Russian community .
 The Russian World Foundation established programs in 80 countries across the world . The foundation is based in Russia and operates in Russia .
 It has held international congresses in Russia annually for the last decade . It has been held every year for 10 years .
Russian World Foundation supports compatriots through the Russian World Foundation . At each Congress, the government regularly confirmed the commitment to support compatriots .
 There are also federal programs of compatriots’ voluntary resettlement to Russia . There is also a quota for them in Russian higher educational institutions .
 Russian Orthodox Church is the only faith to have representatives on the Foundation’s governing board . The notion is sometimes considered equivalent to the community of believers of Russian Orthodoxy .
 Russia is a distinctive world power with its own civilizational space . The term was a “global signifier” constituting Russia as a ‘global signifiers’
 The official Foreign Policy Concept adopted by Putin soon after he came to power in 2000 proclaimed the need to oppose the establishment of the unipolar global structure .
 The notion of the Russian world became a justification of Russia’s specific place and influence in the world, an organic and natural element of its soft power . Even if it is not directly used in the Foreign Policy Concept, it is a confirmation of the world.
 All of these competing understandings of the term have been over-determined in recent years by Russia’s actions in Ukraine .
 Vladimir Putin returned to the collapse of the Soviet Union as a trauma of sudden fragmentation for the Russian nation and those who identified with it . In justifying soft and hard power actions in a set-piece speech on 18 March 2014, Vladimir Putin returns to a hard-power speech .
 The Russian nation became one of the biggest, if not the biggest ethnic group in the world to be divided by borders . Millions of people went to bed in one country and awoke in different ones .
 Putin was given an environmental, biological, and super-cultural meaning a month later in his annual marathon Direct Line television event .
 Our country, like a magnet, has attracted representatives of different ethnic groups, nations and nationalities . Our people, like our people, have been drawn to different groups.
 genes have been exchanged during all these centuries and even millennia as a result of mixed marriages . This has become the backbone for our common cultural code and a very powerful genetic code .
 The genetic code of ours is probably, and in fact, one of our main competitive advantages in today’s world .
 It seems to me that the Russian person or, on a broader scale, a person of the Russian world thinks about his or her highest moral designation, some highest moral truths .
 Western values are different and are focused on one's inner self . This is why the Russian person, or a person of the Russian world, does not concentrate on his or her own precious personality .
Personal success is the yardstick of success in life and this is acknowledged by society . Personal success is a yard stick of success.
 They explain mass heroism during armed conflicts and wars and even sacrifice in peacetime . They also explain how they were able to save their lives during wars and conflicts .
 Maybe this is a reflection of the grandeur of our country and its boundless expanses, says John Sutter .
 His understanding of patriotism (willingness to die for the homeland) is also recognizably Western . He is known for his patriotism, but also for his Western views .
To speak of the Russian world in this way is to potentially mobilize a variety of possible meanings in combination and interconnected . To speak of Russian world is to talk of the world, to speak of its potential meanings in a different way .
 The survey research question we analyze does not presume or test whether respondents know the different contextual meanings of the term .
 respondents are asked to accept or refuse an act of identification with Russkii mir . It is a prompt that asks respondents to accept and refuse a form of identification .
 Many interpret this as a question asking them if they identify with the Russian state under Vladimir Putin as opposed to a Russo-phonic cultural sphere that does not involve endorsing one state or one ruler .
Russkii mir and three Russian newspapers. We have elaborated above the development and the use of the Russkiimir concept at the highest levels of the Russian government . We also have suspicions about its advocacy in a foreign policy sense .
Public reception of the term and its salience in Russian media is quite uncertain .
We examine three Russian newspapers that span the political spectrum for the years 2014–2016 . We examine three of the most popular newspapers in Russia .
 Nezavissimaya Gazeta (Independent Newspaper) is compared to two further from the mainstream . Zavtra is a national-patriotic outlet, and Sovetskaya Rossiya .
 War is declared on Russia, and if it was not unleashed in the Donbas, it would begin in Crimea or somewhere else .
 This is a stage of a big war between the West and the Russian world. This is the stage of the West aspiring to global dominance and Russian world, says CNN.com .
 Stories in Sovetskaya Rossiya targeted at elderly Communist party voters nostalgic for the Soviet Union .
 In May 2014, Sovetskaya Rossiya published a long article where it was noted that the ideologists of Russian nationalism were now regularly invited to talk shows on the main television stations .
 Kirillov opted for the recreation of an empire as a means to avoid the risk of outbursts of Russian nationalisms .
 Sovetskaya Rossiya has never delimited the boundaries of a hypothetical empire, or the Russian world . Like other newspapers, it has never defined boundaries of the hypothetical empire .
 Sovetskaya Rossiya accepts the official concept of the Russian world as a community of all those who speak Russian and identify with Russian culture .
 The Russian world is a network of large and small communities, defending Russian civilization and its spiritual culture without the single coordinating center . They also define the Russian world as anetwork of large, small communities .
 The Russkii Mir Foundation's official concept cannot be applied in practice . The newspaper reacted to the creation of the foundation by declaring that it cannot be used in practice.
 The paper includes in the Russian world former parts of the Soviet Union, neighboring republics, and territories with an important share of Russian speakers in population .
 In the paper’s opinion, the organizers of the coup in Kyiv wanted not only control over Ukraine but to involve Russia into the conflict . The paper's opinion is that the organizers wanted to control over the Ukraine .
 The overriding preoccupation of Zavtra is that Russians should strengthen the state and maintain its sovereignty . The overridingpreoccupation is that Russia should strengthen its sovereignty and maintain the state .
 Russia is to be the core of an empire interpreted as a voluntary association of Russians and “small’s” neighboring peoples under the umbrella of a powerful common great power state .
 The Eurasian Economic Union is the latest form of the post-Soviet Economic Union . It was formed in the 1980s. It was founded by the Communist Party in the Soviet Union .
 Orthodoxy opening the way to endless azure from where divine paradise senses, the light of justice and love . Orthodoxy opens the way for divine paradise to be found .
 A favorite xenophobic theme of Zavtra, as well as Sovetskaya Rossiya, is the decrease in the number of ethnic Russians and the inflow of “Turkic-Muslim’s’ migrants to Russian cities .
 Nezavissimaya Gazeta is a more high-brow newspaper with strong readership in Moscow and St. Petersburg .
 A screening of the term “Russkii mir” shows its almost-complete absence until 2007–2008 . The Russkii Mir Foundation was established in 2007-2008 .
Russkii mir’s frequency in the newspaper reflects the events in Ukraine . With 11 occurrences in 2013, 48, 48 in 2014, 52 in 2015, and 27 in 2016, Russkiimir's frequency is increasing .
 mir term and how it might be translated into concrete political actions. O'LOUGHLIN ET AL.
 Authors are agreed about the political use of the term by the Putin government . Much speculation is evident about its geopolitical implications .
 Nezavissimaya Gazeta’s editorial at the end of 2016 recognized the growing importance of the Russkii mir term, from an abstract historical term to “a support mechanism of the Russian diaspora”
 Christian values already means Christian values, and sports achievements, and musical, technical, or scientific accomplishments . And it already meansChristian values and sports accomplishments .
 New approach requires involvement of the Foreign Ministry in the ideological struggle, but also the wider public . This new approach requires the involvement not only of the foreign ministry, but of the public .
 Vladimir Putin has radically changed the ideological nature of the Russian state . The first post-Soviet territorial increment of Russian territory from the territory of another state .
 Russia appealed to values of development, modernization, respect for international law, broad international cooperation, and human rights . Earlier, Russia appealed for the values of developing, modernization and modernization, and respect for human rights.
 The term "Russkii mir" is not one that was particularly central to Russian geopolitical culture until 2014 . It was known but not widely debated.
 Putin administration has been used to frame Russia’s foreign policy vision and interests, particularly from early 2014 onward . That it has become a matter of controversy and debate is a function of how it has been use by the Putin administration .
 The term “Russkii mir’ at the highest levels of the Russian state is reflected in a variety of media outlets . The relative silences about and the uncertainty around the term are reflected in media outlets in Russia .
Russkii mir’s meaning remains highly controversial . Ranging from a vague cultural-language promotion project like the Alliance Française to a conspiratorial view from outside Russia .
 Russia and the West in the Black Sea-Caucasus region are heavily involved with Russia . The term is used in a variety of settings outside Russia but which is heavily involved in Russia .
 The overall project was set in the context of the changing geopolitical relations between Russia and the West . The 2014 Ukrainian crisis featured the 2014 Ukraine crisis as its fulcrum .
 The "Russian world" is at the center of our interest in mapping and analyzing the new realities of the near abroad. What the “Russian world” means in this hostile political environment and where its margins are lie at the centre of our Interest in mapping.
Russkii mir term in a variety of settings outside Russia but which are heavily involved with Russia . We can probe the relevance of the concept in the context of the renewed confrontation between Russia and the West in the Black Sea-Caucasus region .
 The later project examined three of these regions (Nagorny-Karabakh was excluded since Armenia is the patron state and Russia is a more remote supporter) The broader swath of contested territory in the south and east of Ukraine is also examined .
 SE6 rather than “southeastern Ukraine’s southeastern Ukraine” throughout the text to indicate this substantial but not complete coverage .
 Five research sites offer an exploratory and useful tour d’horizon of the concept of Russkii mir on the borders of Russia itself . The five research sites are located in Russia and Russia .
 The sites include two regions with large ethnic Russian minorities . Two regions with small or negligible Russian populations . The sites are in a region with a large Russian majority .
 All sites were formerly in the Soviet Union and all have experienced disputes over the eventual disposition of the respective territories . All sites have had disputes over their respective territories.
 In the case of Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Transnistria, and parts of southeastern Ukraine, the territorial dispute was violent . In Crimea, the annexation of March 2014 was peaceful, while in the case, Crimea was peaceful .
 collapse of Soviet Union involved these five regions . collapse of the Soviet Union has involved these regions .
 The timing of interviews in the five settings should be exactly the same. Critical to the project was that the timing of the interviews should be the exact same .
In an environment where the geopolitical atmosphere was changing rapidly, the results would have been jeopardized if the interviews were staggered over time as contextual circumstances changed . In the Donbas region, where the conflict in the region was not stable, the interviews would have had to be staggered.
 All interviews were conducted in the last two weeks of December 2014 in the same manner of faceto-face doorstep interviews .
 The question about Russkii mir was the same in all settings and the predictor variables analyzing the responses are also directly comparable across the samples . The question was theSame in all sets and the predictors of the question were the same .
 The demographic section of 29 questions and the generic section of 80 questions about contemporary geopolitical developments were exactly the same in all settings . The demographic sections of 29 Questions and 80 questions were the same.
 The third section of each survey was specifically oriented to the local conditions and consisted of about 18 questions . The second section was specifically aimed at local conditions .
 The sampling procedure design was a four-step process with random selection at each stage . The sampling process was designed to be random and random .
 The sample was divided by each of the main regions in each location proportionate to the most recent census population over 18 . The sample is based on each region's population of 18.
 For each district, all settlements were stratified by size and type . The probability of each settlement being included is proportional to its size .
 respondents were selected by the method of the modified route sample . Starting with the initial address, respondents were chosen by the way of the route .
After getting the initial address, the interviewer made a list of potential respondents . The interviewer questioned every third or fifth respondent from the list .
 Follow-up checks by supervisors were completed for 10% of the completed questionnaires . Follow-ups were completed by supervisors for 10 per cent .
 response rate varied from 41% in SE6 Ukraine to over 75% in Crimea . Response rate varies from 41%, in SE 6 Ukraine to 75%, in Crimea.
Russkii mir can take on different hues from a vague and unthreatening promotion of Russian culture, language, and literature to a scripted and aggressive geopolitical vision .
 The Crimean annexation was seen as the first of several such appropriations planned in the Kremlin . In this latter interpretation, the Crimean annexation is seen as a first of many such appropriations .
 In the survey question, we did not specify a particular notion nor exclude others . Each individual respondent answered based on his/her own understanding of what the term meant .
 Vladimir Putin’s multiple uses of the term during 2014 and the highly divergent opinions of his actions during the year likely colored some if not most responses .
 Respondents could give an answer that ranged from ‘strongly agree’ to “strongly disagree’ or could reply with a “don’t know’s” answer . Responders could give a ‘Don’
 The ratio of refusals was low in all locations, but the rate of ‘don’t know’ at 20% in the SE6 oblasts differs dramatically from the very low rate in other locations .
There is no evidence that respondents considered the Russkii mir subject as highly sensitive . Unlike other parts in the survey, high rates of ‘don’t know’ indicate a high level of sensitivity .
 The one-in-five response of ‘don’t know’ is more likely a reflection of a sense of uncertainty about the meaning of the term . The mismatch between the political boundary and the cultural one with Russia is seen in Ukraine .
Living in SE6 Ukraine where Russian is commonly spoken, where Russian television was available on cable . Russian history and culture have been prominent and widely studied .
 A rejection of this background can be made for political reasons and nationalistic motivations . Ukraine wants to erect a cultural barrier to strong Russian influence in the region .
 A clear majority of respondents in the SE6 did not believe that their oblasts were part of the Russian world .
 The relatively low ratio of respondents in Ukraine who believe they are in an area that could properly be labeled as Russkii mir could be due to a number of factors, including resentment at Putin’s capture of the term .
 More than half of the respondents used Russian as the home language . A rejection of the Russkii mir appellation is probably a response to the contentious geopolitical circumstances of SE6 in late 2014 .
 Kharkiv, located close to the border with Russia, registered the highest ratio of respondents who feel that their oblast belongs to the Russian world . Kharksiv is located near the Russian border with the Russian Republic .
 The 1989 Soviet census indicated that 53% of the city population (more than half of the oblast's population) were ethnic Russians .
 The city’s population remains largely Russian-speaking, and its economy was based on large plants directed by all-union ministries . The city is one of the largest city and industrial centers in the former USSR .
 In Odesa the situation is to some extent similar, with most inhabitants living in the Russian-speaking capital city . Most inhabitants in the city live in the capital city of OdesA .
 Dnipro 2 oblast contains a predominantly Russian-speaking city of about one million inhabitants . Kharkiv and Odesa oblasts contain fewer respondents that think that their region is part of the Russian world .
 As a polycentric region, its urban population was recruited from the surrounding densely populated countryside and more broadly, from central Ukraine .
 Kyiv has been dominated by the tycoon Igor’ Kolomoisky, appointed as mayor by the new Kyiv authorities . Since March 2014 the city has been ruled by the city's new mayor .
 Kyiv government's side in the conflict, funding his own paramilitary units to protect the region and fight Russian-backed separatists in the Donbas .
 " rapid forceful moves in the oblast, close to the Donbas front line, determined the resulting political environment in the city," says the author . "These rapid forceful Moves in the Oblast" determined the result of the city's political environment.
 Russian is widely spoken, and a possible explanation of the apparent lack of correlation with the sense of belonging to the Russian world is the origin of population .
 In the last decades of the USSR, it was growing due to migration from the Ukrainian-populated rural hinterland .
 A high percentage of “don’t know’s answers and refusals is noticeable in Zaporizhzhia oblast (38%, compared to only 12% in Dnipro), indicating a hesitation or an uncertainty .
 The choice by a respondent on the question about whether the end of the Soviet Union was a right or a wrong step is a powerful predictor of a wider set of beliefs about Russia and Russians . The question is about President Vladimir Putin’s motivations and actions .
 Ratio of respondents in southeastern Ukraine agree that their oblast is part of “Russkii mir,’ by national and language groups, age, education, and attitudes to the end of the Soviet Union .
 Crimea is part of “Russkii mir,’ by national groups, age, education, and attitudes to the end of the Soviet Union . Crimea is one of Crimea's most populous regions .
 Authors' data have seen a positive uptick or, at least, not a dramatic fall in living standards over the past quarter-century . Authors’ data.
 The most visible features of the graphs in this region are the large differences between Ukrainianspeakers and Russians .
 The differences between the language groups within the Ukrainian population on this Russkii mir question are notable since our analyses of other political controversial questions – such as support for political leaders – shows no significant differences in the Ukrainian nationality .
Abkhazia is part of "Russkii mir,’ by national groups, age, education, and attitudes to the end of the Soviet Union . The majority of respondents agreed that their republic was part of “Russki i mir’s
 South Ossetia agrees that their republic is part of “Russkii mir,’ by Ossetian population, age, education, and attitudes to the end of the Soviet Union .
 Authors' data suggest that there is a sizable number of respondents who interpreted the question in a cultural-linguistic sense . Authors’ data. Both languages.
 The ratio does not vary by linguistic or national group, it is thus unlikely to be politically motivated. Because the “don’t know’s” ratio doesn't vary by language or group.
 As expected, just over 10% of those who believe that the end of the Soviet Union was a correct move agree that their oblast is part of Russkii mir .
 These respondents are most determined to put the Soviet past behind them and move away from the Russian orbit .
 There are no sizable differences between age or educational groups. On the other hand, it is rather surprising that there are no differences between ages or schools .
Transnistria is part of “Russkii mir,’ by national groups, age, education, and attitudes to the end of the Soviet Union . Transnistrian respondents agree that their republic is part.
 The strongest support was the highest among the set of five survey respondents . Authors’ data is based on survey results from a group of authors .
 The survey took place about nine months after the March 2014 annexation to Russia . Only the Tatar minority disagrees with the interpretation that the peninsula was part of the Russian world .
 The support for annexation in the survey showed huge support for the Russian majority population and the Ukrainian minority . Tatars showed a high ratio of “don’t know,’s” indicating the sensitivity of the opinions about the annexation and the marginal position of
 The responses on the question about Russkii mir align well with the responses on annexation . The responses to the question align with the answers on the annexation of Russia .
 Two-thirds of people in Crimea believe that the end of the Soviet Union was a mistake . The minority who think it was a right step show about 20% less agreement that the peninsula belongs to Russkii mir.
 Abkhazia has the most diverse nationality mix of the five study sites . The most complex politics is based on the different group interests and a significant split within the Abkhazi establishment .
 The ratio of Georgians saying that they were unable to give an opinion is higher than the other groups . In 2010 and 2014, Abkhazia had the highest ratio of people saying they couldn't give their opinion .
 At 12% in this instance, the “don’t know’s’ ratio was much lower than other questions about the direction of the republic or relations with Russia .
 No differences by age or educational level or by those who believe that the end of the Soviet Union was a correct move are evident in the graphs .
 South Ossetia is now populated almost completely by Ossetians after the displacements of ethnic Georgians in the wake of the 2008 five-day war with Georgia .
 There is a small Georgian minority in Akhalgori rayon . There are concerns about the reliability of responses and interviewer accessibility .
 75% of respondents in all demographic and other categories agreed that South Ossetia is part of Russkii mir . But like Abkhazia, this high level of agreement hides differences about the scale of integration .
 After the 2008 war, Russia recognized both Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states . A strong minority in both republics prefers annexation to Russia .
Both republics are heavily dependent on Russian economic and security guarantees . Both republics rely heavily on Russia's economic and Security guarantees .
 A referendum in 2006 confirmed that orientation with 98% support for annexation . A referendum was held in 2006 in 2006 .
 The Transnistrian government tried to position the republic as a region of the Russian Federation . After the Maidan revolt in Kyiv and the ratcheting of tensions between Russia and the Western alliance, the government wanted the republic to become a Russian Federation.
 That is the line that is heavily pushed by local media and by all segments of the political establishment . The line is being pushed by the local media, by the politicalestablishment .
 Differences among groups are insignificant in the face of a widespread consensus that the republic’s best option for economic development is full integration into Russia .
 In the 1990s, a sizable literature emerged on the social and regional cleavages that underlie the post-Communist party formations and the bases of their support .
 Countries such as Poland stand in contrast with countries such as Ukraine, Georgia, and Russia . Few questions about the survivability of the state or extent of its borders emerged in post-Communist period .
Center-periphery differences related to both distance from the metropolis and regional ethnic and cultural dissimilarities from the majority populations need to be considered . In these countries, center-per periphery differences must be considered in addition to political factors .
 Kitschelt extended and modified the approach for the new electoral politics in the post-Communist states .
 The region in which the respondent lives is part of Russkii mir. We follow his model to understand the answers to our question .
 All predictors are included in the model, whether significant or not . To allow proper comparison across the five research sites, all predictions are included .
 The first axis, named the “citizenship axis by Zarycki following Kitschelt, defines the elements of belonging to the state with full inclusive rights . The second axis, called the ‘citizenship’ axis, is named the first axis .
 It arranges inclusiveness from a sense of universal citizenship regardless of demographic characteristics to one that is based on ethnic identification where minorities are marginalized .
 In mixed ethnic societies like Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia, and Russia, the majority-minorities question motivated fundamental political questions about the direction of the state .
 To animate the “citizenship axis, we need to consider the nature of ethnic differences within the study sites, says the author .
 South Ossetia is essentially homogenously Ossetian . Due to population displacements at the end of the respective post-Soviet conflicts, the country is homogenous .
 Ethnic Russian status is a predictor that helps to account for beliefs of belonging to the Russian world . We include ethnic Russian status as a predictor.
 Two predictors that measure the strength of attachment to and support of the state are potentially useful in the models . But, where Russians are a minority, two predictors are not useful .
 A measure of ethnic pride (respondents who reported that they were “very proud of their ethnic group) and a willingness to defend the state are effective measures of attachment to the state .
Those who answered questions in the negative are likely to be alienated from the state . Those who answered these questions in a negative will likely be alienated.
 Russian ethnicity to be positively related to the Russkii mir question . Ethnic pride and propensity to fight are expected to be negatively related, except in Crimea . Russians are a majority and the region is heavily Russified .
 We include a fourth predictor on this dimension – the level of ethnic distancing from Russians . We also include a third predictor on the level.
 Since all sites except South Ossetia have sizable numbers of Russians, since Russia is a powerful and omnipresent geopolitical power in the region . Since Russian media is readily accessible, personal attitudes to Russians are expected to be important in influencing opinions about residence .
 For Kitschelt and Zarycki, values relate to the political dimension of authoritarianism versus liberalism . They say they are also connected to the conservative religious beliefs opposed to Western ideals of individual liberties .
 The concept of Russkii mir stressed its communal appeal that is contrary to Western individualism . The concept was discussed earlier in the book .
 For post-Communist societies, one can substitute the continued appeal of communist ideologies and authoritarian principles that guarantee a modicum of material well-being against the liberal and political model .
Both domestically and about relations with the other post-Soviet states, especially Russia . Both domestically and on the other side of the world .
 In the face of perceived Russian actions in its neighborhood – the near abroad – opinions about the supposed aims of President Putin are paramount . The near abroad are paramount.
 trust in Putin and a left of center ideology to be positively related . The other two measures to be negatively related to the sense of being included in part of the Russian world . The two measures are expected to be negative to Putin and left of centre ideology .
 The third axis is generated by the uneven distribution of resources after the collapse of Communism . The “interests’ one’s one – the third axis – the ‘interests one.’ – is the “Interests one .
 The social fabric of Communist times was severely damaged by a capitalist model that provided little support to those whose livelihoods became tenuous with the end of the centrally planned model .
 The “interests’ axis ranges from those who support the post-1991 economic model to those who oppose it because of its deleterious effects on material status .
 In our models, we expect those who grew up and were socialized in the Soviet times . We expect those with a low level of education and those with low incomes to have higher levels of agreement that they reside in the Russkii mir .
 Many theorists point to the centrality of emotions in conflictual environments . Many theorists say emotions can be found in conflict situations .
 In addition to the three sets of variables based on the axes/cleavages visible in the post-Communist years, we also include four controls in the models .
 These variables are not of intrinsic predictive value in themselves since we have no theoretical justification for their inclusion . We have no idea why they are included in the list of variables .
 We include a gender control and one based on the respondent’s self-reported interest in politics . We also include aGender control and a political control .
 Television as the main source of news and watching more than 20 h of television a week are expected to influence a respondent’s view of Russia and the Russian world .
 The lengths of the bars correspond to odds ratios from logit models where the outcome variable is agreement (combined strongly agree and agree) with the statement that the respondent lives in a region that belongs to Russkii mir.
 The odds ratios give the chances that a particular respondent of a certain group will agree with the statement . The odds ratio is based on the odds ratios of a group of people .
 A value of 1.75 indicates a 75% increased likelihood for this group . In this case non-Russians are holding other factors constant .
 Values less than 1.0, such as 0.75, indicate a 25% decreased likelihood of agreement .
 Of the 17 predictors, only three of them show significant relationships in three of the sites . Of the seventeen predictors , only three show significant relationship in three sites .
 The distinction between SE6 (where ethnic Russians and pro-Russia attitudes are in a minority) and the other sites is seen in this indicator that is negatively related to the outcome variable but is positively related in Crimea and Abkhazia .
 These relationships are expected and provide further evidence of the different political and nationality contexts of the survey .
 In general, most respondents in SE6 are suspicious of Russian government intentions . respondents want closer relations with Russia and deeper incorporation into the Russian world .
 The significant negative relationship for optimists in SE6 matches the same relationship for two predictors that measure attitudes toward the end of the Soviet Union .
 Authors’ data. to move away from the Russian world and for a stronger level of interaction with the West, including NATO and the European Union .
 The divide in SE6 is strongly along nationality lines, with Russians showing a significant positive value there . The divide is strong in SE7 and SE6.
 Similar groups line up in the same way about whether their region belongs to Russkii mir . Now they live in different countries after the March 2014 annexation .
 Those who perceive that they have lost out since the end of the Soviet Union are expected to want to be part of the Russian world . For them it offers a nostalgic memory of social protection and a possible integration into Russia’s security orbit .
 The significant negative value for poorly educated individuals in Abkhazia is related to the ethnic division of labor and in-out group status in the political arena, with Georgians forming the “out group’s” in the republic .
 The Russian government says they do not live in a region of the Russian world . The statement is a statement about their geopolitical orientation toward Georgia and the Western alliance .
 Most Crimeans remained in favor of the unification with Russia as reported elsewhere in our survey . The high level of political mobilization and pro-Russian sentiment is evident in other questions .
 Those who affirmed that they were willing to fight to defend their territory are a small minority – less than 25% in all sites . In the Crimean case, their views confirm their advocacy of their new status as a subject of the Russian Federation and their opposition to a return to Ukraine .
 TV viewing is significant and positively related to a sense of belonging to the Russian world . Russian television stations dominate the viewership of Russian television .
 Of the five sites, both SE6 and Crimea show seven significant predictors, Abkhazia and Transnistria have four each . South Ossetia only has two significant variables .
 Ukraine and Crimea have been compared to Russia's Crimea and Ukraine's Ukraine . The two countries have different views about Russian geopolitical motivations and actions . These comparisons reflect the divided societies.
South Ossetia is now quite homogenous and therefore few divides mark its society . South Ossetian is now more homogenous than ever before, and few divides are visible .
 Abkhazia and Transnistria have heterogeneous ethnic mixes . Both republics are closely aligned to Russia and depend on the Putin government for financial subventions that keep state services running .
 In regard to expected relationships, all of the significant variables aligned as the hypotheses anticipated .
 The cleavages that have emerged in post-Communist societies about domestic political choices are still evident a quarter-century after the events of 1989–1991, says John Sutter .
 In our case, the question about belonging to the Russian world is both a domestic and a foreign policy one, we say . In the case, it is both domestic and foreign policy.
 Its wording suggests a geopolitical orientation as well as a possible cultural direction . It also suggests a potential cultural direction.
Only SE6 is part of an internationally recognized entity . The responses to the question about belonging to the Russian world are consistent across the sites .
 Geopolitical framing practices are part of the everyday operation and practice of geopolitics. Conclusions Geopolitics is part of a daily operation and Practice of geop Politics .
 In 2014 the storyline developed by the Putin administration to justify its annexation of Crimea and interventionism in southeastern Ukraine framed the conflict in Ukraine as a “fascist coup” backed by the U.S. and NATO in order to wrest Ukraine from Russia .
 In history and demographics, Ukraine was part of the Russian world, a Russophonic and cultural sphere at the least . Ukraine was a separate civilizational space in its grandest articulations .
 Large segments of the Ukrainian population were Russian speakers and ethnic Russians . Large segments were Ukrainian speakers and Russian speakers .
 This paper sought to measure the degree to which this storyline of cross-border common community resonates in contested regions of Russia’s near abroad .
 Reviewing differing understandings of the term “Russkii mir’s” it underscores that the term has no fixed and essential meaning . The term has been used in the past for years .
Russia is a geopolitical speech act that either works or does not for individuals, both inside Russia and outside its borders . It is not a political speech act, but it is a speech act.
 A simultaneous survey in five contested territorial locations beyond Russia’s border. We presented evidence that select populations do indeed identify with the notion of a Russian world .
Strong correlations reflect divides along political, nationality, and ideological preferences in Russia . The answers about whether the respondent lives in the Russian world were not as predictable .
 A deep divide along ethnic lines among residents of six oblasts in southeastern Ukraine about the direction of the country, about responsibility for the war, and about the country's orientation to the EU/US/West or to the Eurasian Customs Union is not replicated in the Russian world question
 For a geographically wider set of locations on the borders of Russia, the de facto states, and the annexed territory of Crimea, less doubt is visible . Russia dominates these territories economically and in security terms .
 The vast majority of Russian residents live in the Russian capital . The majority of the Russian city's residents are in their own country .
 The term and concept “Russkii mir’ has achieved a growing presence in political discourse at the highest levels in Moscow . The implications for the support of compatriots abroad have alarmed many in the countries adjoining Russia .
 Survey shows varying acceptance of belief among respondents that they live in the Russian world, despite their location in Russia .
 The region's reluctance to accept the moniker for their region indicates a high level of suspicion of the geopolitical implications in the term . This reluctance to accepted the moniker is seen as a highlevel of suspicion.
 We are thankful for the cooperation of the 4783 respondents in the five locations who filled out the respective questionnaires .
 A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the Association for Slavic, East European and Eurasian Studies annual meeting in Philadelphia in November 2015 . The paper is published in the Journal of Slavic and East European Studies .
 Lucan Way and other panelists for their comments on that version of the original version .
 Close readings of the paper by Ralph Clem and Nancy Place improved the text . The text was improved by close reading of the book .
 Biopolitics, Eurasianism and the Construction of Community in Modern Russia are the three main themes of Russian culture .
 Cross-National Perspectives, edited by Seymour Martin Lipset and Stein Rokkan, 1–64 .
 Nezavissimaya Gazeta www.ng.ru/ng_politics/2015-03-03/10_nostalgy.html .
 Institute of World Economy and International Relations of Russian Academy of Sciences . Institute of world economy and international relations of Russian academy of sciences .