 Russia’s annexation of Crimea and attempts to further dismember the Ukrainian state pose a challenge for Russian neighbours . The wider European security order of a greater magnitude than anything since the end of the Cold War has been seen .
 Russian legal claims seek to deflect attention from Moscow’s use of force and seizure of territory . To reinforce the principles which underpin European security, it is essential to assess and refute unjustified Russian claims .
 Russia may be ready to stake out a wider legal/normative challenge to western states beyond the clashes in spring and summer 2014 . Otherwise Russia could be ready for a wider challenge to Western states beyond this year's clashes .
 It is also essential to achieve a much better understanding of the determinants of Russian policies in the Ukraine crisis .
 The current spiral of antagonisms between western and Russian leaders could intensify and have long-term profound consequences. Practitioners as well as scholars need to draw on an explanatory framework .
 Comparing the underlying explanations of Russian conduct in the crisis also helps us judge whether the emphasis on de-escalation of the conflict in Ukraine could deliver a temporary peace but maintain a track to further dangerous crises ahead .
 This article offers a multifaceted analysis of Russian intervention in Ukraine . It focuses on the persuasiveness of Russian legal claims and on alternative, but overlapping, explanations.
 Russian intervention in Crimea and eastern Ukraine between February and September 2014 is a frontal challenge to the post-Cold War European regional order . Russian intervention is using coercion and force to take control of and destabilize the territories of a neighbour state .
 Attention has mostly focused on the military and security dimensions of this challenge . The challenge has been largely focused on military, security dimensions .
 The Russian government has been accused of a series of crimes against Russian citizens in the past . Russian authorities have accused the Russian government of using Russian citizens to commit crimes . Russian President Vladimir Putin is accused of the crimes, which have been committed by Russian authorities .
 Russia is a major power, with a permanent seat on the UN Security Council . It aspires to shape and constrain interpretations of law and international norms in the wider community of states .
This legal contest has potentially serious implications for the wider international system . This legal contest could have serious implications, therefore, for the whole international system.
 The question even arises whether President Putin has taken Russian policy across a watershed which threatens a new era of dangerous confrontation involving western states . The question also arises whether Russia has taken its policy across the watershed .
 The major part of this article evaluates explanations for the Russian actions in Ukraine . The main part of the article is based on different conceptual approaches to state behaviour and Russian foreign policy .
 Russian actions in Ukraine have a wider competitive background to Russia's actions in the Ukraine .
 For years there have been entrenched beliefs within the Russian security and foreign policy elite . In a highly competitive and increasingly conflictual world, western political ideals and regional structures mask strategic goals .
 Moscow has viewed its wider international standing as linked to its efforts to front a Eurasian set of states with ever more consolidated positions . In response, Moscow has seen its wider global standing as part of its efforts.
 By 2014 Russia felt it could register some success with such integration in bringing together like-minded CIS state leaders . By 2014 Russian state leaders felt they could make some success .
 Russian diplomacy castigated EU programmes and reform processes in the EU’s eastern security neighbourhood for hindering ‘natural’ processes of Russia-led Eurasian integration .
 Putin's hopes grew that Ukraine's potential participation in at least a customs union could be the key to his plans for a substantive Russia-led Eurasian regional order .
 Ukraine had previously positioned itself on the sidelines of or outside Moscow’s various Eurasian integration projects .
 Putin stepped up efforts to stake out not just an economic, political or strategic division but a normative division . Ukraine's domestic political crisis mounted in late 2013, Putin steps up efforts .
 This was rather akin to western politicians viewing the EU as a normative power with a transformation agenda in the EU’s eastern neighbourhood . This was not the same as western politicians. This was more like Western politicians viewing EU as normative power .
 Putin derided the EU as a cover for self-serving and strategic objectives . On the other side of this divide are found the liberal, universalist values and ideas of the EU and western states .
 Putin evidently was deeply shocked in late February 2014 by the sudden overthrow of President Yanukovych . Ukrainian populist leaders intent on an explicit European political orientation .
 Yanukovych had blocked Ukrainian movement towards NATO accession . In autumn 2013 he had come out in support of Ukrainian entry into the Russia-led customs union .
 The reverse in February 2014 rankled all the more with Putin for coming just as the Russian President was anticipating international accolades and a rise in status for hosting the Sochi Winter Olympics .
 Putin and other senior figures in the Russian security elite convinced themselves that this critical political transformation in the strategically core state of Russia’s CIS neighbourhood must have been fomented by western leaders .
 The purpose, they suspected, was to empower a hostile government on Russia’s western borders . The purpose was to block Russian integration plans and open the way for a renewed effort by western states and NATO to achieve a security alignment with Ukraine .
 This would permanently constrain Russian potential as a European regional power . It could be used to challenge the legitimacy of the Russian political system .
 Russian decision to flout Ukrainian sovereignty would open out fundamentally new opportunities for it in Crimea and potentially eastern Ukraine. This reasoning may underlie the Russian decision.
 Putin presented the ‘unconstitutional coup’ in Kiev as creating a new playing field, as changing the rules of the game . Putin presented it as a 'un constitutional coup'
For him this appeared to vindicate actions which overrode traditional legal constraints on the use of force, though to other states it did not constitute any persuasive justification . For him this appears to vindicates actions whichOverrodetraditional legal constraints .
 Putin explicitly denied that Russian soldiers had been involved in the Crimean occupation . For more than six weeks after the occupation Putin explicitly denies Russian soldiers were involved .
 Moscow continued to deny that regular forces were involved . The scale of the Russian military intervention in August and September was such that Russian denials convinced few states .
 To characterize it would obscure the distinct and multifaceted nature of the Russian interventions . To characterize the Russian intervention would obscure it, it would be difficult to describe it .
 Russian emphasis in eastern Ukraine was on use of military intelligence, arms deliveries and transfer of small groups of armed men from Russia until at least August . A low level of force was employed in Crimea, and the Russian emphasis was on military intelligence .
 Moscow also proved to be remarkably effective in the use of non-military instruments of influence and diplomacy . Moscow also demonstrated a more or less plausible deniability in an effort to disable international responses and bolster domestic Russian support .
 The Russian interventions in spring and summer 2014 relied heavily on diplomatic, legal and media campaigns . Military means ultimately were critical, the Russian interventions were critical . The Ukrainian state is trying to restructuring the Ukrainian state .
 civilians and ostensible ‘self-defence forces’ in Ukraine have been a major resource in Russian efforts to neutralize and counter the reaction of the Ukrainian central authorities .
 Russia judged it could take advantage of a moment of opportunity when the military and internal security forces of the Ukrainian state were fragmented, demoralized and uncertain where their loyalties lay . The Yanukovych regime had so suddenly collapsed.
International politics and power play a role in consolidation of legal arguments and the development of customary international law . It is aware that interpretations of international law are often fiercely contested among states .
 This is a discursive process, one of persuasion and deliberation, most prominently conducted in the U.N. Security Council . The United Nations Security Council is one of the world's most influential bodies .
 The polarized perspectives among states over Crimea and events in Ukraine have not changed this function of legal rhetoric . The polarized views among states in Ukraine are not changing this function.
International law has framed the political will of other states to respond to Russia over the crisis surrounding these territories . In this sense international law hasframed the politicalWill of other countries to respond.
Since Russia remains an influential state, this outcome will reverberate through the international system . Since Russia remains a powerful state, the outcome will be reverberated through the system .
 It is very important to assess how Russia ‘broke the rules’ for the language and claims involved go far beyond mere diplomatic jousting. It is thus very important.
 An assessment of Moscow’s legal rhetoric, with a focus on Crimea, also improves our understanding of Russian policy . The assessment also improves the understanding of Russia's legal rhetoric .
 Russian claims are enmeshed with the political and military aspects of Moscow’s strategy over Ukraine . Russian claims remain an integral part of the continuing dialogue between Russia and Ukraine .
 The arguments used have sought, albeit fairly unsuccessfully, to divide the international community . They represent a challenge to sovereignty in the increasingly diverse regional order formed by the post-Soviet states .
 No doubt Russia also hopes its claims may deflect or mitigate China's concerns about Russia’s empowerment of separatism in Ukraine and its territorial revisionism .
Russian legal claims have been constructed to mobilize and consolidate Russian domestic opinion around Putin’s leadership . Beyond this, Russian legal claims are being constructed to consolidate Putin's leadership .
 Justifications for the Russian use of force and the annexation of Crimea are cast in terms which appeal to deeper sentiments and grievances in Russian society and among Russian elites . They include justifications for Russia's use of Force and the annexed of Crimea .
 As the crisis escalated, Russia drew on legal rhetoric to assist the process of ‘deniable’ intervention .
 Russia offered for its actions exploited grey areas and flux in legal and normative development as well as playing back to western states their own liberal discourse . The justifications Russia offered were justifications for its action .
 This was contrasted to the ‘unconstitutional’ and hence illegitimate ouster of President Yanukovych . This was compared to the 'unconstitutional' ouster. This was contrasts to the  ‘Unconstitutional” and hence illegitimity of Yanukovych .
 Crimean parliament building seized in February to hold referendum on Crimea's autonomy . The vote began with the vote on 27 February by unverifiable number of deputies in the seized parliament building .
 Crimean parliament adopted a ‘declaration of independence’ on 11 March,7 and a referendum (offering the option of secession to residents) was conducted on 16 March .
 Putin described this as an expression of the popular will of the Crimeans to secede from Ukraine . Putin described it as a expression of a popular will to secere from Ukraine.
 This rode roughshod over Ukraine’s own constitutional procedures for the secession of any of its regions . Quite apart from other serious problems with the nature of this putative secession.
 Putin signed the accession treaty with Crimean and Sevastopol leaders on 18 March . Russian constitutional court ruled the next day that this complied with the Russian constitution .
 Russia presented an assortment of legal and normative arguments to justify its coercive acts in Crimea . In this legal battleground Russia presented a range of legal, normative arguments .
 Some resembled claims made at the onset of the war with Georgia in 2008, but others stretched legal credibility even further .
 Moscow claims its military forces had not been and were not engaged in aggressive actions or indeed military action against a sovereign state . These claims were obscured by Moscow’s contention that its military force was not involved .
 Russian diplomacy had emphasized this narrow, traditional interpretation in previous years in lambasting western-led interventions . Russian diplomacy has emphasized that this narrow interpretation in recent years .
 Moscow benefited initially from the fairly high threshold that the factual evidence of Russian military action had to cross before western states were ready to accuse Russia of the grave act of military aggression .
 Kiev claimed it was subject to Russian aggression in Crimea as early as 2 March . The Ukrainian authorities said it had been subject to Russia aggression .
 The Kiev leadership was also urged by western states to avoid any situation where Moscow could exploit this legal tripwire for the larger goal of destabilizing the Kiev leadership .
 The UN Charter prohibits states from engaging in use of force but any threats of such use against other states . Russian conduct in Crimea fell into this category of coercive activity .
 I present Russia’s formal positions as set out in the UN Security Council emergency meetings on 1 and 3 March 2014 . Below I present the formal positions of Russia's formal positions.
 Moscow claims that the interim government in Kiev which assumed authority when President Yanukovych fled the country had no legitimacy since it violently usurped power .
 Yanukovych, Putin claimed, remained Ukraine’s legitimate president in legal terms . Yanukovych himself insisted that his supposed impeachment had not been properly conducted . Putin claimed that the United States and other states had violated the sovereignty of Ukraine .
 Russia made much of the collapse of the agreement between Yanukovych and the Ukrainian opposition . The agreement provided for a national unity government, and included a pledge by the opposition and its leaders not to use force .
 Yanukovych fled Kiev and left the seat of the presidency vacant for two days with Ukraine in crisis . Yanukovych himself had failed to abide by the 21 February agreement, since he fled Kiev .
 Yanukovych's departure does not provide any basis for Russian military actions in Crimea, according to the new Ukrainian authorities . However, the controversy over whether the events leading to Yanukovych’s departure constituted a revolution.
 Putin’s claim that all Russian treaties with Ukraine were void as these had been signed with previous legitimate Ukrainian state authorities was an effort to sweep clear the treaty regulation .
 Moscow claimed that the human rights of the large Russian minority resident in Crimea and Ukraine at large were threatened by an extreme nationalist programme advanced by the interim government. Second, Moscow claimed the human Rights of the Russian minority in Crimea were threatened .
 The United States insisted there was no evidence to support Russian allegations of actions against and threats to minority groups in Ukraine .
 The new Ukrainian government, it was argued, had placed a priority on internal reconciliation and political inclusivity . It was argued that the new government had placed an emphasis on reconciliation .
 Moscow made no real efforts to show that its military actions complied with the requirements of necessity and proportionality, which are essential preconditions to protect nationals .
 The Verkhovna Rada sought to repeal the 2012 language law allowing Ukrainian regions to make Russian a second official language . But this measure was not approved by Ukraine’s acting president Oleksandr Turchynov .
 Russia tried to belittle and dismiss the conclusions of a series of reports on the situation by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights . Russia also tried to prevent discussion at the UN Security Council .
 The reports did not support Russian charges of significant human rights abuses by revolutionary ‘ultra-radicals’ in Crimea .
20 Third, Putin argued that Russian forces based in Crimea and the Black Sea Fleet faced a direct threat to their security . He warned that enforcement of Russian law ‘will have a significant impact on human rights’
 Putin referred to the threat to the personnel of its military contingent deployed in Crimea . He appealed to the Russian Federation Council to allow the use of Russian armed forces in Ukraine .
 Russian Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu warned of ‘the danger of seizure of Russian military infrastructure by extremist organisations’ in Crimea . He argued that security had required tightened security at Russian military facilities in Crimea.
 This was an attempt to create a self-defence claim, presumably on the basis of article 51 of the UN Charter, although without explicit reference to the imminence or immediacy of the threat . This was a attempt to make the claim.
 Russia offered no credible evidence that its forces were under threat, let alone subject to an extraterritorial armed attack .
 Kremlin claims 675,000 Russian-speakers fled into Russia in January and February 2014 . This effort to play back western justificatory language for interventions in Kosovo and Libya .
 Russian obligations under international law would trump any reference to the constitutional obligations of the Russian state . This claim was largely directed at bolstering the legitimacy of Russian actions for domestic audiences .
 Putin gained approval from the Russian Federation Council on 1 March for the potential use of Russian armed forces ‘in the territory of Ukraine pending normalisation of the public and political situation in that country’ President Yanukovych, as the legitimate president of Ukraine, along with the
 Churkin dramatically held up in the Security Council a letter from Yanukovych calling for the use of Russian armed forces to establish legitimate peace, law and order and stability . Two days later, Yanukovych held up a letter calling for use of Russia's armed forces .
 This represented an appeal to the important although unwritten exception to the general legal prohibition on the use of force. This represents an appeal. It represented an Appeal to the key issue of force-intervention upon invitation .
 Washington also noted that under the Ukrainian constitution ‘only the 25 Cited in ‘Exodus begins for the families fearing future under Russian yoke’ The Times, 17 March 2014, 31 March 2014.
 Whether Yanukovych's departure was legal under Ukrainian constitutional law can be debated in different ways . Whether Yanukovych’s departure is legal under Ukraine's constitutional law is a question .
 Given competing claims for legitimacy and political turmoil in Kiev, effective control was essential in determining who was entitled to extend such a valid invitation to these Russian forces, says the author .
 Putin renounces all previous Russian bilateral agreements with Ukraine . Putin also mounted a fundamental challenge to Ukrainian statehood and territorial integrity .
 The challenge to the legitimacy of the Ukrainian government was superseded by the election of President Petro Poroshenko . Russia lacked military bases in Ukraine beyond Crimea to help manufacture a self-defence argument .
Claim that Russian-speakers, ethnic Russians and Russian ‘compatriots’ were being threatened and repressed in south-east and eastern Ukraine, and 30 Remarks by Samantha Power .
 Putin evoked the ‘lost’ territories of ‘Novorossiya’ which were given to the Ukrainian SSR by the Soviet government in the 1920s .
 In this context he accused external forces of involvement in an attempt ‘to divide us into parts’ as was done with Yugoslavia .
 Putin described the use of the army against people inside Ukraine as ‘a very serious crime against their own people’ Also justified the support that Russia had provided to people living in Crimea .
 The discursive groundwork was laid for a possible future ‘humanitarian intervention’ Russia had long rejected this notion and presented it as a cloak for the strategic intentions of western powers .
 There remain the highly contentious Russian claims about the legitimacy of the process leading to the annexation of Crimea . Russia took in recognizing South Ossetia and Abkhazia in 2008 .
 The Russian case is also demolished in major works under preparation by western international lawyers .
 It is sufficient for the argument here to make a few core observations. It is necessary for the arguments to be made, says author .
 Putin was correct in pointing out that international law is generally neutral on the questions of territorial secession and external self-determination . The ICJ has clearly established that this does not apply in cases when declarations of independence are accompanied by an unlawful use of force, as occurred in Crimea
 The core issue is that Russia created an illegal territorial situation by using the threat of force .
 This is quite apart from the issue of the illegality of the referendum under the Ukrainian constitution . This is not the same issue as the legality of the vote under the constitution .
 The annexation of Crimea represents such an affront to core principles of contemporary interstate conduct that it raises the question whether Putin is 34 Direct Line interview with Putin .
 In this sense the Ukraine crisis has exposed Putin's deeper grievances. The Ukraine crisis is exposing Putin’s deeper grievances, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin claimed that if a revolution had occurred in Kiev in February 2014 then this wiped the slate clean in Russia's bilateral relations with Ukraine .
 Putin’s spokesman Dmitriy Peskov even claimed that Ukraine had placed itself ‘beyond international law’ with its ‘armed coup’ So that the principle of self-determination in Crimea, ‘when threatened with chaos and economic turbulence’
 Putin implied that this kind of Russian interpretation and the actions that followed were simply a case of Russia finally asserting itself effectively as a legitimate actor and influence in defining international rules . This is hardly persuasive, yet Putin implied, yet he implied that the actions were just a matter of
 Putin intoned that ‘we proceed from the conviction that we always act legitimately’ He launched an acerbic attack on the legitimacy of U.S. actions in Afghanistan, Iraq and Libya .
 Russia is no longer satisfied with discussing the previous rules of the game . The core issue here is not how Russia interprets international rules and law, says Lukyanov .
 Putin is seeking to project a different vision of international order from western liberal states . It is whether Putin is now seeking toproject a set of principles that represent a different view of the world .
 Russia could mount a challenge to the ‘western’ legal order, projecting some Russian alternative as a means of asserting Russian global influence .
 In July 2014, the deputy secretary of the Russian National Security Council suggested a global conference be convened to rewrite international law . ‘There are no agreed rules and the world may become an increasingly unruly place’
 Russia may well seek support for this set of principles, which resemble tsarist Russian policy . Russia may also seek support from states such as China and India .
 UN General Assembly draft resolution affirming Ukraine’s territorial integrity on 27 March 2014 was troubling for Moscow . Moscow offered it some hope that it could preserve its image in the confrontation over Ukraine .
 Russia will be unable to shift the broad support for the prohibition on using force or the threat of force to change state boundaries . But it will continue to challenge the right of the United States and other western powers to act as the privileged custodians of international order .
 Russia is likely to pursue and diplomatic positions it may adopt in international forums . Analysis of Russian legal rhetoric reveals discursive strategies Russia may adopt . Russia may pursue and adopt diplomatic positions in the future .
 It exposes central Russian grievances and with careful interpretation, indicates certain Russian priorities in the Ukraine crisis . It also exposes central Russia grievances and, with careful interpretations, indicates some Russian priorities .
 Much of this language probably conceals or diverts attention from underlying Russian motivations, says Peter Bergen . It does not bring us closer to explaining Russia’s belligerent conduct in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 To attempt this requires an analysis structured around different explanatory approaches . To try this requires a different approach to the analysis .
 Three broad explanations are now considered, rooted in different conceptual understandings of Russian conduct .
 The first focuses on geopolitics and Russian strategic goals, particularly in asserting primacy in the CIS region . The second focuses on Russia's role in the region's future .
 The second focuses on Russian identity as an influence on policy, which could draw on the insights of social constructivism . The third focuses on social constructivist .
 The third focuses on domestic politics and regime consolidation as a determinant of policy . This line of thought could be developed further through the various paradigms of foreign policy analysis .
 Russia has described variously as the near abroad, the post-Soviet space or a zone of Russian privileged interest . This is expressed in offensive action, but in terms of neo-realist theories, it does not need to be motivated by an offensive Russian strategy .
 The key issue is that since 1991 Ukraine has been the pivotal state for Russian efforts to restore at least partial control over the security policy orientation of the CIS region . Since 1991 Ukraine is the key state for Russia's efforts to regain control over security policy in the region .
 Independent Ukraine has never been willing to enter Russia-led international security structures with supranational elements . That is, substantive security policy integration with Russia .
 The European Union has gradually become securitized in this Russian mindset, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: The effort to assert Russian primacy in the CIS regional order was already a feature of Russian policy under President Yeltsin .
 Georgia’s interest in entering NATO was anathema to Russia . In contrast, Georgia's interest in joining NATO is anathemma to the Russian nation .
 A fuller account would assess the military legacy of earlier Russian-Ukrainian relations . In 2011 President Medvedev finally admitted effectively that the primary Russian motivation in sending its 44-page account was Russia's military legacy .
 Some 48. per cent of Ukrainians believed in August that year that a conflict similar to that in Georgia could break out in Ukraine .
 Russian comments from Moscow at that time did not concern Kiev’s EU aspirations . It only partly reflected Yushchenko's political support for Georgia in the crisis .
 Kiev protested that the distribution of passports to Ukrainian citizens by the Russian consulate in Simferopol was a threat to Ukrainian security . The chairman of the Crimean Tatar Majlis in turn charged Russia with continually promoting conflict in Crimea .
 In fact there is little evidence of active Russian political destabilization of the peninsula in 2008. In fact, there was little evidence.
 Russian–Ukrainian tensions remained high the following year over various issues . But Russian-Ukrainians tensions remain high in 2014 .
 It is possible that a plan for the political and military seizure of Crimea was developed by the Russian general staff and other agencies as early as autumn 2008 . Kiev were to move close to accession in NATO in the near future .
 Viktor Yanukovych, a more Russia-oriented leader, was elected Ukrainian president in February 2010 . It was unnecessary to consider this further once Yanukovych was elected president .
 He rejected NATO membership as a Ukrainian strategic goal in favour of a ‘non-bloc’ status . In April 2010 he agreed to extend the lease for the Sevastopol naval base to Russia for 25 years .
 This Russian characterization of EU goals in the region grew over the following years . This Russian perspective of EU Goals in the Region grew over years .
 Russian leadership continued after occupying Crimea to accuse EU policy towards Ukraine of having been based on a ‘with us or against us’ logic .
 Yanukovych signed the outstanding chapters of a historic association agreement with the EU in June 2014 . The Ukrainian and EU parliaments proceeded to ratify the agreement in September . Russia warned that this action would have 'grave consequences'
 The full implementation of its critical trade chapter was postponed to 2016, allowing Russia time to plan counter-measures . But the full implementation was delayed to 2016 . Russia is now planning counter- Measures to inhibit Kiev's ambitions .
 Russia could only hope to draw towards its Eurasian integration project by autumn 2014 . Crimea was permanently denied to the EU zone .
 Russian military intervention in Ukraine was determined less by this broader competition around integration schemes than by the more specific objective of strategic denial of Ukraine to NATO to NATO . The goal is more realizable than by this specific objective.
 Russian actions limited to the Crimean operation threatened the result of ‘winning Crimea but losing Ukraine’ by fuelling deep anti-Russian sentiments in Ukraine .
 Russia felt tempted to escalate in March and pursue ambitions also in eastern Ukraine .
 The trigger was the collapse of the 21 February agreement between Yanukovych and opposition leaders . Putin chose or was persuaded to interpret as instigated by western states in order to install a compliant government that would be ready to lobby for NATO membership .
On 5 March the Verkhovna Rada secretariat registered draft legislation that would reinstate the goal of joining NATO as a centrepiece of Ukraine’s national strategy . This could be interpreted as reactive since it was only after Crimea occupation had commenced .
 Moscow quickly condemned this, as well as a statement by Acting President Turchynov that Ukraine was considering changing its non-bloc status . Russia quickly condemned the move, and Ukraine is considering a change .
 Moscow could expect a Ukraine subject to territorial conflicts to have any bid for NATO membership blocked by certain European NATO states . Third, with eastern Ukraine placed in long-term dispute, Moscow may expect a long- term dispute .
 Moscow can turn on and off the heat over disputes over Ukraine’s buffer zone status . Moscow continues to insist on recognition of Ukraine's status .
 Putin claims peace in Ukraine could be restored only through negotiations on the 'statehood' of south-eastern Ukraine . Ukraine declared its firm intent of proceeding towards joining NATO and ending its non-bloc status at the end of August 2014 .
 Lavrov: Ukraine's non-aligned status was 'a basic issue' for Moscow . Lavrov: It was in everyone's interest for Ukraine to avoid alignment with NATO .
 Putin’s own account of the initial Russian operation in Crimea, the NATO factor certainly looms large .
 Next month he warned fellow Russians that with NATO troops in Crimea, ‘Russia would be practically ousted from the Black Sea area’
 Putin’s images of NATO forces in ‘historically Russian’ Crimea appealed to Russian public opinion .
 Russia is seeking to avert change that would threaten Russia . But they also strove to present Russian decision-making as defensive, seeking to avoid change .
 For neo-realists, this could fall under the category of defensive rather than offensive logic .
 Russia should retain discretion to interpret such a geopolitical concordat and crucially, as eastern Ukraine descended into conflict . Russia should decide whether to approve a new federal state structure for Ukraine .
 Agreement over some kind of buffer status for Ukraine may appeal to practitioners of realpolitik . European politicians seeking a rapid alleviation of East–West tensions over Ukraine .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski argued in favour of a Finnish model of ‘wide-ranging economic relations with both Russia and the EU’ But applied in a territorially undivided Ukraine .
 Henry Kissinger claimed Ukraine should not join NATO but pursue an international posture comparable to Finland which ‘cooperates with the West in most fields but carefully avoids institutional institutionalism’ Henry Kissinger said Ukraine shouldn't join NATO .
 Mearsheimer has elaborated the concept of ‘offensive realism’ but chooses in this case not to view Russia as a power-maximizing revisionist state .
 The assumption was that Russia would recognize Ukraine’s sovereignty over Crimea, a hope that now seems lost .
 Ukrainian people and leadership are key issues in the country's political landscape . Ukraine's government has been accused of trying to stifle the opposition to Ukraine .
 As Russia seized Crimea, one seasoned Russian specialist predicted that Russia would seek the ‘eastern and southern regions of Ukraine forming a separate entity integrated with Russia economically and politically’ We cannot yet say whether his forecast was right .
 Russian military support committed to separatist fighters in eastern Ukraine by summer 2014 made it appear likely that Moscow was aiming at more than just confirmation of Ukraine’s non-bloc status .
 The goal was also a decentralization of the Ukrainian state such that the eastern if not also the southern regions would exercise selfgovernment . The aim was to become still more firmly integrated with the Russian economy .
 eastern and potentially parts of Ukraine are increasingly viewed in Moscow as territorial assets for Russia in their own right . But whether or not this effort succeeds, eastern and possibly parts of southern Ukraine are viewed in Russia as territorial Assets for Russia .
 The Russian intervention is not explicable simply in terms of defensive concerns about NATO access to the territory of Ukraine . This attempt to deconstruct the Ukrainian state suggests that the Russian intervention isn't explicable. It is not just about defensive concerns.
 The chances that some international bargain or concordat over the role of NATO in Ukraine could restore Kiev's full authority over its eastern regions, let alone Crimea, seem slight .
 Russia–NATO Founding Act on mutual relations, cooperation and security founders on the rock of Ukraine crisis . The challenge for NATO states becomes how to find new ways to constrain rising Russian ambitions in the Black Sea and perhaps the Baltic region .
 Russian hopes of averting the return of a NATO accession option for Ukraine, or even the ambition of restoring Ukraine’s track to participation in Russia-led integration schemes . As part of a new and wider determination to use coercive and even military means to confirm Russian primacy among
 The current administration in Kiev is now wholly alienated from the Russia-led customs union and the Eurasian Economic Union .
 The organization’s members had previously been reluctant to orchestrate foreign policy positions in this forum .
 In April a 72 Henry A Kissinger, ‘How the Ukraine crisis ends’, a 72-year-old Kissinger, wrote a book about the crisis .
 Topics were agreed for joint statements of CSTO member states in the UN, OSCE and other forums . Topics were also agreed for Joint statements of the UN and OSCE member states .
 CSTO states bandwagoning with Russia, whether more or less reluctantly, helps explain the scarcity of public discussion on the consequences of the Ukrainian conflict . Central Asia remains a seat of serious potential future conflicts .
 Moscow's readiness to use force to pursue its interests has been confirmed . For Russia's neighbour states outside the CSTO, Moscow’s readiness for use of force is confirmed . Moscow's willingness to pursue interests has increased their sense of vulnerability .
 Georgia has signed an association agreement with the EU, its continued wish to join NATO . Georgia has been alarmed by the assumption that Russia has the same reasons, or pretexts.
 Fears have risen that Russia could initiate a process towards the outright annexation of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Georgian experts have speculated that ‘Russia needs Georgia as a transit corridor, in order to establish the Moscow–Yerevan–Tehran–Damascus geostrategic axis’ and to enhance its influence.
 Mike Rogers revived Georgian concerns about a possible Russian intention to establish a land corridor from the occupied Tskhinvali region through Armenia to Iran .
 Georgian officials have believed that Russian general staff have an operational plan to force a corridor from South Ossetia to the 102nd Russian base at Gyumri in Armenia . If Georgia were to turn down Russian demands for such transit in some wider crisis, it could use this for wider actions
 Transnistria hosts a Russian base and a significant ethnic Russian population . Moldova has heightened concerns in Moldova with its western-leaning leadership .
 Russia already has strong political, economic and military leverage over unrecognized separatist enclave . However, Russia has strong power over the unrecognized enclave .
 Separatist leaders in eastern Ukraine may wish they had the same privileged relations with Moscow . It is not clear what geopolitical advantage Russia would gain by formally recognizing Transnistria as a state or by seeking to incorporate it into Russian Federation .
Transnistrian politicians have declared that they would like the region to join Russia in Crimea's footsteps . However, some Transnistrians have said they want Russia to join the region in Crimea .
 Russia made of Crimean units without insignia, the use of ‘volunteer’ Transnistrian units in Odessa or along the Ukrainian Black Sea coast cannot be excluded .
 Russian leadership now harbour hopes of engineering a return of Russian influence in the Danube region .
 This would provide greater access to Transnistria, perhaps including a military supply route and access to Moldova proper and Romania . This would also include access to the Moldova Proper and Romania proper and the Moldovian capital .
 Odessa province may be viewed as the strategic focus of a longer-term effort to develop Russia’s ‘Novorossiya’ project, by inciting local protests .
 Russian strategists are surely aware that if a hostile Ukraine were in one way or another to lose effective access to its Black Sea littoral with its coastal ports, it would be significantly diminished .
 These considerations make any Russian military focus on south Ukraine especially disturbing . These considerations are particularly disturbing .
 Russian thinking on the strategic possibilities in southern Ukraine is likely to be evolving rather than predetermined . However, Russian thinking will likely be evolving, according to Russian officials .
 Russian calls for federalization offered by ethnic Russians in Odessa province in spring 2014 . One influence has to be the poorer than expected support for anti-Kiev protests .
 Russian focus on Crimea as a strategic dividend suggests that military perspectives on Ukraine will continue to feature in the inner decision-making circles in Moscow .
 Russian general staff welcomed the Russian absorption of Crimea as a strategic windfall . It is undoubtedly the case that the Russian General Staff have welcomed the move .
 The question remains how far the military/strategic desirability of this territory and military institutional interests and leverage in decision-making help explain Russian actions in February and March 2014, says Peter Bergen .
 The gains are 80 Interfax-AVN military news agency, Moscow, 18 March 2014, BBC Mon FS1 FsuPol iu, accessed 22 March 2014 . BBC MonFS1 fsuPoli accessed 30 March 2014.
 Russian annexation of Crimea and acquisition of its assets resolved the anomalous position of the naval city of Sevastopol . The uncertainty of Russian basing rights there was also resolved .
 The Russian fleet was confirmed over the Turkish fleet as the most powerful on the Black Sea . Second, by taking control of the Ukrainian Navy and ejecting that part it did not wish to retain, the Russian fleet is confirmed over Turkish fleet .
 Russia could invigorate ambitious plans for military development on and strategic reach from the Crimean peninsula . Third, Russia couldinvigorate plans for strategic reach.
 Ukrainian and Russian parliaments had ratified an extension of the Russian Navy’s lease of Sevastopol as a base for 25 years from 2017 after the expiry of the current lease .
 President Yanukovych’s approval of this extension was virulently opposed by opposition politicians . But efforts may well be made to revise it in the future .
 Moscow had not really been content with the renewal, since the 1997 lease failed to remove restrictions on the Black Sea Fleet . Russia only had to replace old naval craft with similar ones .
 Russia took possession of Sevastopol, but also of the former Ukrainian naval bases of Novoozerne and Myrnyi . Saky, Balaklava and a marine infantry base at Feodosiya .
 Russia captured most of the Ukrainian Navy’s 25 warships and numerous service ships . Russia captured many of the Ukraine's 25 warships .
 Seven shipyards also acquired in Crimea, which will assist Russia’s plans to upgrade its Black Sea naval forces .
 Ukraine left without suitable base locations or facilities outside Crimea for its remaining naval vessels . For its part, Ukraine was left without adequate facilities or facilities for its naval vessels.
 Crimea for Russia was not spelt out publicly by the Russian leadership as the political crisis in Ukraine unfolded . Some days before Yanukovych fled from Kiev former chief of the Russian general staff Yuri Baluyevsky insisted that Russia ‘should urgently reinforce western strategic areas and the Black Sea Fleet�
 Russia's military ambitions for the Crimean peninsula began to emerge after Yanukovych's departure . It was only once Russia had forcibly transformed its local presence after Yanukovych’s departure .
 Deputy Russian Defence Minister Yuri Borisov asserted that the military infrastructure of Crimea would be developed so as to be ‘protected against all possible attacks’
 The United Nations, Department of Field Support, Cartographic Section. Ukraine, March 2014, shows major cities and internal boundaries .
 A number of city names in the text, following more common usage, differ from the transliterated names used on the map . Donetsk, Kharkov and Kharkiv are among the most common city names used .
 Moscow has revealed plans to locate once again a Tu-22M3 long-range bomber regiment at the Gvardeyskiy airbase and use three other airports for warplanes . The move will revive the Soviet era image of Crimea as ‘an unsinkable aircraft carrier
 Plans are also under way for new coastal defence and artillery units in Crimea . More resources for air defence and reconnaissance and more resources to be used .
 Consideration is even being given to reactivate and upgrade an early warning radar station in Sevastopol . The station would cover the Black Sea and Middle East .
 A Russian general has suggested that Russian ground forces in Crimea by 2020 may amount to 7-10 combat brigades . A plan of activities to 2020 is being drawn up to ensure Russian security ‘in the territory of the Crimean Federal District’
 The geographical configuration of the peninsula, jutting out into the Black Sea, made it valuable for these purposes in the Soviet era .
 The Russian air force's strategic aviation has already started to explore new patrol routes above the Black Sea . The expansion of ‘Russian’ territorial waters has been assisted by the expansion of Russian territorial waters .
 Su-24 aircraft of the Black Sea Fleet have been practising strikes against imaginary enemy detachments of warships . Su- 24 aircraft have been practicing strikes on imaginary enemy warships .
 The existing demarcation lines of the Black Sea continental shelf and exclusive economic zones are now brought into question . The Sea of Azov is now a Russian lake .
 Russia will lay claim to parts of Ukraine’s continental shelf and exclusive economic zone . Other Black Sea countries will not recognize the legality of this Russian effort to extend its maritime jurisdiction .
 This article provides a very full account of declared and potential Russian military development in Crimea . This article is the first time this article has been published in the past .
 The value of Crimea for Russian power projection will be ingrained in those senior Russian military officers who lamented the end of the unified military structure of the Soviet period .
 The strategic availability of Crimea offers new possibilities in the region and further afield . Crimea is located in Crimea, Crimea is the region of Crimea .
 Locally, in the current situation Russian forces in Crimea could be integrated into potential offensive operations in the south of Ukraine . The current situation in Crimea is currently a threat to Ukraine .
 Russia and Transnistria would play an important role in any future plan to gain greater influence over the Odessa region .
 Ukrainian military experts have argued that the structure, size and armaments of the Russian forces in the Crimean peninsula indicate Russian long-term planning . If Putin and his advisers had doubted the Russian ability, with local support, to gain control over Ukrainian settlements from Donetsk to Odessa
 The acquisition of Crimea was influenced by broader hopes, to which Putin is sympathetic, on the part of the Russian military to enhance its military presence and prowess abroad .
Full technical rearmament of airborne troops by 2025 will 'allow us to perform tasks far beyond Russia' Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu has talked similarly of Russian plans to ‘expand’ its military presence ‘in a number of key regions of the world’
 It is difficult to think of a strategic territory on the Russian periphery that could more easily be seized . It would better dovetail with this vision of broader military power projection, than Crimea . It's difficult to imagine a strategic region on the periphery, and would better dive
 Russian military intervention into eastern Ukraine could be at cross purposes with Shoigu’s ‘far abroad’ plans . This risks drawing Russia into protracted low-intensity military actions on Russian borders .
 Crimea annexation fits well into the forward strategic planning of the Russian general staff . The annexation of Crimea could be undermined by the distraction of combat in eastern Ukraine .
 The author assesses options for possible Russian military operations in Crimea . The author offers details of the strengthening Russian forces in Crimea.
 Vladimir Shamanov, Interfax-AVN military news agency, Moscow, 1.14.14, BBC Mon Alert FS1 FsuPol iz, accessed 5.14 .
 The Kremlin has formed central planks of the Kremlin’s justificatory rhetoric about its actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . The Kremlin is persuading Russian domestic audiences of the legitimacy of these actions .
 Claims by the Russian leadership about ethnic Russians, Russian citizens, Russian compatriots, Russian-speakers or historic Russian justice have been aimed at sustaining a broad domestic support base among political and security elites .
 Russian actions within Crimea and eastern Ukraine among local populations . They have been articulated to generate support for Russian actions in Crimea and east Ukraine .
 Russian leadership's beliefs about rights of Russians were a decisive influence on its policies in Ukraine . This leaves the question of how far the Russian leadership’s beliefs about the rights of Russian Russians are defined .
 The broad discourse over Russian identity expressed in official comments on Ukraine explains specific policies taken by the Kremlin or their timing from February 2014 . Scholars have confirmed that identity considerations have had a significant broader formative influence on Russian– Ukrainian relations since 1991 .
 Moscow's sudden upsurge of support by Moscow for Russian or Russian-speaking communities in Ukraine demands explanation .
 When Russian troops intervened in Georgia and Moldova/ Transnistria in the early 1990s, domestic political debates had included appeals to protect Russian minority populations and Russian citizens .
 Such protection did not determine the decisions to intervene, nor was it used formally to justify those early interventions . But such protection didn't determine whether to intervene .
 In later years, Russia refrained from promoting secessionism among the substantial Russian communities in Ukraine or Kazakhstan .
 Moscow hoped the Russian diaspora would reach out to Russia . In return, Moscow hoped that Russia would send a message to the world .
 The language had an ominous ring to the leaders of CIS states with significant Russian communities . He promised ‘the consistent protection of the interests of the Russian diaspora in Ukraine and in other states'
 Putin's influence in Crimea appears to have been a Russia-leaning political influence in Ukraine and Kazakhstan . However, for Putin, the political value of such large diaspora communities appears to be less than that of Russia .
Russian community lost capacity to act as an 'internal lobby' in Ukraine after annexation of peninsula .
 Russian leaders must surely be aware of an emphasis 96 Address by Putin, 18 March 2014 .
 The Russian leadership had refrained from interference in Crimea’s early efforts to assert its autonomy during 1991–5 . The Russian leader had refrain from interference.
For the remainder of the 1990s there was no obvious attempt by Russia thereafter to incite such conflict in Crimea or elsewhere in Ukraine . But for the rest of the 90s there were no obvious attempts by Russia to incite a conflict in the Ukraine .
 More extreme Russian nationalism could develop a political momentum of its own, which would escape Moscow’s control .
 references to the right of ethnic Russians in Crimea to secede from Ukraine and join their ethnic kin in the Russian Federation offered ethnically non-Russian regions in the North Caucasus a justification in principle for seeking secession from the Russian federation .
 Moscow’s identification with Russian citizens or nationals in Ukraine, ultimately a legal category, did not appear to exert a strong influence on Russian crisis decision-making .
 Moscow has shown itself ready to view citizenship not just as a mark of identity but as a coercive resource .
 Tension had arisen between Moscow and Kiev earlier in autumn 2008 when the Russian consulate in Simferopol increased the distribution of Russian passports to Ukrainian citizens in Crimea .
 Russia's military intervention in Georgia had been the protection of Russian citizens, many of whom had recently been offered this citizenship by Russia .
 Russia has claimed to protect ethnic Russians and compatriots during the crisis . Such claims would not have generated the same extent of domestic support in Russia as claims to protect Russians .
 There has been some effort to draw the categories of Russian citizen and compatriot closer together .
 Russia drafted legislation to fast-track Russian citizenship for eligible Russian-speaking applicants . In March 2014, after the occupation of Crimea, Russia draft legislation to amend its citizenship law .
 The citizenship law was tinkering around the edges compared to the creation of over 2 million new Russian citizens . The annexation of Crimea was almost at a stroke.
 Ukrainians who predominantly consider Russian their native language’s .105 The outcome de facto certainly augments the aggregate size of the ethnic Russian population of the Russian Federation .
 Putin's decision to absorb Crimea could be viewed primarily as a matter of extending the power and capacities of the Russian state . Crimea provided strategic assets for Russia .
 The same impulse, based on strategy rather than identity, would lie behind claims that Russian passports are being issued forcibly in population centres in eastern Ukraine .
 Crimea in some sense is rightfully, territorially Russian, regardless of basic principles of sovereignty . This is consistent with Putin’s belief prior to the annexation that Crimea is rightfully Russian, according to Putin .
For Putin, irredentist goals which were previously unrealistic became unexpectedly realizable . For Putin,irredentists had previously unrealistic goals that were previously unrealized .
 Russia may have believed that the collapse of the Yanukovych regime presented Russia with a historic opportunity . He may even have thought that the grave weakening of central state authority in Ukraine was ahistoric opportunity .
 Redressing historic injustice then was an appeal to a higher form of legitimation, superseding the mundane commitment to Ukrainian territorial integrity . Redressing historical injustice now is an appeal for a greater form of legitimacy .
 Putin presents emotional case for reunion to bolster other claims advanced for annexation of peninsula . References to past shared glories between imperial Russia and USSR on the one hand and Crimea/Sevastopol on the other hand .
 Putin criticized the Bolsheviks after the revolution for adding ‘large sections of the historical South of Russia to the Republic of Ukraine’ sections which, he said, today ‘form the south-east of Ukraine'
 The region had 'intertwined its roots with those of the Russian state' and Russia would 'fight for' these people to be able 'to defend their rights and determine their fate on their own'
 ‘Novorossiya’ was increasingly a part of Kremlin discourse and the term was floated . By August 2014, even if the southern regions of Ukraine had not followed the rebellions of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 All this might appear to be driven by an underlying sense of identity, an amalgam of ethnicity, language, culture, culture and historical rights . Ukraine is dismissive of the notion that a distinct Ukrainian nation exists .
 Moscow seems to be aiming at domestic consumption, according to the Russian media .
 identity tags used by Russia seem to be attached to an exercise of structural power by Russia to enforce territorial adjustments rather than to reflect a reality .
 The Russian narrative about ethnic polarization and the subjugation of the Russian language in Ukraine jars with the fact that in the years before the 2014 crisis separatist agitation was minimal . There was no serious tension between ethnic Russians or Russian-speakers in Crimea and the population or authorities in the rest of
 The same broadly stable coexistence between Russians and Ukrainians was present in eastern Ukraine before 2014 . It was present before 2014, but it was not until 2014 .
 The Novorossiya concept also includes several southern regions, including Rostov oblast and Stavropol and Krasnodor krais .
 Putin and his entourage miscalculated, says Putin . Putin's entourage may have been miscalculated, but it's not clear what they were .
In providing support for separatist groups in eastern Ukraine early in the crisis, they may have expected that an unrealistic level of popular resistance to the post-Maidan Kiev government would follow .
 This could reflect wishful thinking by Putin and those he consults, once they had been drawn towards an agenda of Soviet or even imperial revisionism, previously confined to a fringe of Russian nationalist politics .
 Putin's decisions to cross political thresholds and sovereign borders in unprecedented way for post-Cold War Russia . The ideational influences of Russian nationalists marked by pronounced hostility to western powers .
 Dmitri Trenin claims that with the flight of Yanukovych from Kiev, Putin ‘saw a threat of Galicia, or western Ukraine, taking over the entire country and turning it into an anti-Russian force’ This kind of civilizational polarization and threat imagery is the stuff
 Some have even presented Dugin as the philosophical inspiration behind Putin’s occupation of Crimea .
 Putin intervened on a larger scale the following month, before brokering a deal over the rebel-held areas in eastern Ukraine . Dugin is not believed to have been close to Putin in the years prior to the intervention .
 Other uncompromising Russian nationalists, such as Aleksandr Prokhanov, may have felt that Russia had lost the chance to implement a bolder revisionist programme .
 Putin has to be wary that his freedom of manoeuvre is not curtailed by revisionist political momentum he has unleashed .
 Zhirinovsky’s provocative suggestion, aired just before the Russian occupation of Crimea, was given even shorter shrift publicly by the Russian leadership .
 Putin may view extreme notions as useful, since they position Putin’s own irredentist, even neo-imperial, in domestic debates . It might serve to signal to other CIS state leaders that it is important to engage with Putin's own ideas .
 Putin must realize the dangers of trying to ride the crest of a new Russian irredentist wave, he says .
Russian President Vladimir Putin's readiness to take risks may be explained in large measure by his overriding concern with domestic political consolidation in Russia . He is concerned about shock over the revolutionary upheaval in neighbouring Ukraine .
 The third possible explanation of the Russian interventions in Ukraine is rooted in the domestic political structure over which Putin presides . The overthrow of the Yanukovych regime in Ukraine and its replacement by a radical nationalist and western-oriented leadership in Kiev are seen as the reasons for Russian intervention .
 Ukraine's political break in Ukraine did not just set in motion worst-case planning in Moscow . Ukraine's new lurch towards NATO by Ukraine was not just a political break, says the analyst .
 Nor was the primary concern a degeneration in the political or humanitarian environment for ethnic Russians or Russian-speakers .
 Putin's own crisis decision-making was a determination to reverse or at least limit the political entrenchment and territorial control of what he termed ‘an anti-constitutional coup’ in Kiev and thereby to shield Russia itself .
 Putin’s response reflected his deep aversion to ‘colour revolutions’ A term which the Kremlin applied to street demonstrations leading to changes of regime or government .
 The Russian leadership's hostility to ‘colour revolutions’ was originally focused on the Orange Revolution in Kiev in November–December 2004 .
 The confirmation of Viktor Yushchenko as Ukrainian president in place of Viktor Yanukovych through large-scale yet peaceful street protests was wholly unexpected in Moscow . The confirmation fuelled a belief that western states were using competition around election processes to shift local and foreign policy alignments in their favour
 The political degeneration of the Arab Spring revolts was grist to the mill for this Russian analysis . Putin portrayed as ‘a whole series of controlled ‘colour revolutions’
 Putin was shaken by Russia's own experience of street demonstrations between December 2011 and spring 2012 . Tens of thousands protested against vote-rigging in parliamentary elections .
 These were the largest anti-Kremlin protests since the 1990s . The protests created a sense of vulnerability within the Russian ruling elite .
 In spring 2011 a Public Opinion Foundation survey had found that 49 per cent of Russians were prepared to take part in protest demonstrations . Already in spring 2011, a survey found that49 per cent were prepared for demonstrations .
 General Vladimir Zarudnitsky describes process whereby opposition forces receive military aid from outside countries . He says coalition of countries may intervene to rout government troops .
 The takeover in Kiev left Yanukovych as ‘the only undoubtedly legitimate president’ but Putin admitted ‘he has no political future’ For Russia, this controversy was cast as a competition about legitimate rule between Moscow and Kiev .
 This framing lies at the core of contrasting Russian and western understandings of earlier ‘colour revolutions’ as well as the new Maidan revolution in Ukraine .
 Putin's challenge to the outcome of the Maidan revolution went further as he called into question the legitimacy of the ‘new state’ formed by this ‘coup’ and the validity of all previous bilateral treaties Ukraine had signed with Russia .
 This would enable the continued reproduction of that system in the post-Soviet space . This would be the first time such a system has been recreated in the Soviet space .
 Navalny viewed the call for a referendum to determine Crimean sovereignty as risky . The reality of Russia is a federation of numerous regions, ethnic groups and languages .
 For Putin, annexation ‘is a strategic choice to bolster his regime’s survival’ for Putin, since it would raise ‘nationalist fervour to a fever pitch’ and under the banner of fighting external enemies would serve to distract mass opinion from real problems in
 This has been greatly assisted by the wholly controlled narrative over Ukraine in the Russian mass media . This has also been greatly aided by the completely controlled narrative. This is the most significant change in the history of Ukraine .
 The pro-Kremlin polling body VTsIOM gave Putin a Soviet-era style 96 per cent approval rating by the Russian public in March 2014 for annexing Crimea .
 In spring 2014 Putin was riding on the crest of renewed populist support, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: A Putin personality cult has been forming .
 Russia's president has been in charge of Russia's power structure for years . This has allowed him to reinforce further central control in Russia over dissent and criticism of the existing power structure .
 There are efforts to control critical views on the internet of the Russian official narrative . There are also attempts to control the internet's views of Russian officials .
 Anti-war protesters have selectively been detained or warned . In May 2014 new legislation in effect made calling Crimea ‘occupied’ or Ukrainian a criminal offence was criminalized .
6 Strelkov has no official status in Russia . To thwart this plan and preserve Russia, ‘the defence of Novorossiya’ is presented as critically important .
 The West has invoked external enemies in Ukraine to justify actions in Ukraine and control mechanisms at home . But his views share with the new official populism an important central element .
 This threat hung over Kiev for much of the middle of 2014, from March to September . This threat hangs over Kiev from March-September .
 Russian troops on Kharkov would have required similar threats from western powers . Strelkov hoped for after capturing Sloviansk .
 For Shevtsova, consolidation of Russia on wartime footing around Ukraine crisis may have only a short-lived effect . Public discontent with the regime will eventually be followed by public discontent .
 Putin will need to plunge Russia into further wars or search for new ways to direct attention to external enemies . This then will require Putin to seek out a new way to direct his attention to the external enemies.
 Putin declared Russia to be under a growing multitude of outside threats emanating from the U.S. and its allies . Russia's armament procurement programme for 2016–25, he said .
 The West ‘organised and provoked’ the Ukraine crisis, he claimed . He claimed it was a pretext to reinvigorate NATO and deploy western forces close to Russia's borders .
 A former Russian air force commander-in-chief suggested Russia should 'counter' NATO by setting up air force bases near the United States . This drumbeat of the ‘enemy at the gate’ may have served to consolidate support among Russian domestic elites and the public .
 Putin and his entourage perceive in the example of revolution in Ukraine and the empowerment of nationalist prowestern politicians committed to non-authoritarian governance . But it fails to address the underlying threat to ‘regime security’ in Russia .
 Moscow's demands to reconstitute the Ukrainian state politically and the Russian structural disruption of Ukrainian statehood through military intervention beyond Crimea alone. Arguably this is a key element in explaining Moscow’s demands.
 Russia’s support for the constitutional reform of Ukraine referred to in the 21 February agreement between Yanukovych and opposition politicians has been a baseline position for Moscow . Russia's support for Ukraine's constitutional reform is seen as a ' baseline position'
 Russia's occupation of Crimea was followed by its insistence on a new federal arrangement in Ukraine . It would restrict the scope of Kiev's political authority over the rest of the country .
 Moscow could play on centrifugal currents across its borders in Ukraine . New friendly political forces in this region, empowered in a new constitution, could frustrate the workings and pro-western initiatives .
 Sergei Lavrov called for the regions to be granted sweeping powers in a new federal structure . In the case of eastern Ukraine, with Russia, he said in March .
 The agreement reached the following month, enshrined in Ukrainian laws, provided self-governance to certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces for three years .
 Russian hopes of Russian separatist groups fall short of Russian hopes earlier this spring . But it also falls short of ambitions of local separatist groups .
Anti-Kiev agitation failed to materialize in the past . These hopes depended on a much wider geographic scope of anti- Kiev agitation .
 The central government never lost control of the major cities of Odessa, Nikolayev, Kherson, Kharkov, and Dnipropetrovsk .
 The self-governance agreement retains ample scope for future clashes of interpretation over the territories involved . The distribution of competences between Kiev and the regions, and control of the border.
 Putin may believe that, with the creation of small Russian quasiprotectorates in eastern Ukraine, he is ready to use force and Russian leverage through trade and energy relations . He retains substantial options over time to influence and constrain the political orientation and governance of Poroshenko's administration
 Putin may underestimate the degree to which his use of force has acted to consolidate Ukrainian society since February 2014 . But Putin may also underestimate the extent of the Russian domination in Ukraine .
 Putin 'would like to see central Ukraine, with Kiev, join with the eastern and southern regions of the country' But this now seems a remote possibility .
 The demonstrative effect of post-Maidan political arrangements in Ukraine can't be predicted . Ukraine is still mired in clientelism and non-transparent flows of power, says the author .
 Russian economy in 2014–16 if not beyond, aggravated by western sanctions . More important is the probability of stagnation, even recession, in the Russian economy during 2014-16 .
 Putin's hopes that seizing Crimea has yielded a golden political dividend for him within Russia . separatism in eastern Ukraine is likely to exacerbate legitimate domestic economic and political grievances at home .
 This policy also risks further spillover of instability from the region into Russia, delaying the return of refugees . This policy is also a significant and open-ended Russian economic liability for the separatist territories .
 The Russian interventions in Ukraine have shaken the international community . The Russian intervention in Ukraine has shaken the world's community .
 Russia engaged in coercive efforts to manipulate local politics and undermine sovereign decision-making in Kiev, Russia says . Russia's actions escalated militarily after the election of President Poroshenko .
 The channelling of this activity to enable a territorial extension of the Russian state in Crimea. More disturbing still is the creation of potential protectorates in eastern Ukraine .
 The strategic and political consequences of a Russian readiness to rewrite borders in this way are most serious . The strategic consequences of Russia's readiness to re-write borders are the most serious.
 Moscow seeks to better explain Russian actions towards Ukraine . This demands a concentrated effort to understand the extent to which Moscow wants to challenge the current European international order .
 The first part of this article has argued that in a rule-based system legal rhetoric matters, and that the contestation of legal interpretations frames international diplomacy .
 It is important to engage with and refute international legal claims and justifications that fall outside core principles, especially over the use of force, as happened during the Ukraine crisis .
 Western states do not have an unblemished record in post-Cold War years . In the matter of military interventions in the past, western states have a good record .
 Russian actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine are not justified, says Russian official . But this in no manner serves to justify Russian actions, he says .
 The Russian effort has been ‘to find justifications in precedent or law to excuse its actions in Ukraine and to muddy the waters of international opinion’ In response, the deconstruction of Russian legal claims, as briefly conducted in this article, is one necessary step to restore some semblance
 The choice between a more western-oriented or a Russia-oriented political trajectory for Ukraine seemed to crystallize with the collapse of the Yanukovych regime . But this wider framing has been an important influence on the perceptions of politicians, says the author .
 In reality, the polarization of Ukrainian leaders was never practical for Ukrainian leaders .
 Ukrainian economy and trading patterns are likely to remain strongly interlinked with Russia . The option of Ukrainian accession to NATO would be unlikely to find approval among major European NATO states in the medium term .
 Russian perception of the new Ukrainian leadership as especially hostile to Russia seems to trigger strategic worst-case thinking . Ukraine's new leadership has implemented a plan for the occupation and eventual annexation of Crimea .
 Putin oblivious to the moment of opportunity, given the obvious weakness of the Ukrainian state and its security apparatus .
 Ukraine to NATO was a strong impulse underlying this action, it was reinforced by the substantial gain of the territory of Crimea as a strategic asset . If strategic denial of Ukraine to the NATO was strong impulse, this action was reinforced.
Russian actions in eastern Ukraine followed to ensure continued leverage on Kiev’s choices . Russian actions in east Ukraine followed.
 A more far-reaching goal, if a broader pro-Russia support base could be achieved in southern Ukraine, was effectively the fracturing of the Ukrainian state . The creation of a new Russia-oriented federation, perhaps as the first stage towards greater control of the central state and its foreign policy
Russian actions based on identity are less convincing, according to Russian authorities . By comparison, explanations of Russian actions on identity were less convincing .
 Moscow’s choice to identify with ethnic Russians, Russian-speakers and Russian ‘compatriots’ in the crisis was useful in generating domestic support for coercive action in Ukraine .
 Russia's state-controlled media is under no real threat, despite the strident narrative channelled through Russia’s state media . This identification does not offer significant explanatory value for such extreme Russian behaviour at the specific time it occurred .
 The ‘Novorossiya’ concept and calls for the righting of historical wrongs similarly appear as the instrumental use of images, symbols and language for other ends .
 Crimea's large ethnic Russian population boosted Putin's domestic approval ratings . But it had more to do with a search for domestic political consolidation rather than the simple gravitational pull of Moscow towards Russian ethnic kin or compatriots .
 Domestic political consolidation emerges as an important influence on Russian action in Ukraine, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The opposition to Putin’s centralized rule expressed in large protest demonstrations in Russian cities as recently as late 2011 and early 2012 .
 For Putin, the presumed association between earlier ‘colour revolutions’ and now the new Maidan revolution in Kiev was difficult to swallow .
 Even with Poroshenko's election as president, an 'alternative' Ukraine could be fostered in the east . The popularity of embroilment in eastern Ukraine could not be assured among the Russian public .
 Putin felt the ouster of Yanukovych had been felt very personally by Putin . The ouster was a political and normative challenge to Putin’s vision of Russia-led Eurasian integration .
 Russian conduct in Ukraine since February 2014 has been a challenge to states on its periphery . Core legal principles are contested, and alternative rules and understandings are far from agreed .
 Putin evoked the scenario of a world where states ‘live without any rules at all’ and where there are heightened risks from internal instability in states .
 In the Soviet era tacit codes of conduct developed between the USSR and western states . In an effort to regulate dangerous competition between their interests in the Third World .
 Nothing similar has been attempted for the CIS region, where Russian and western interests are fluid and intersect . Even the Baltic states now appear less secure, while even the Russian and Western states are less secure .
 The practical risks are reflected in a discussion held in April 2014 between the Russian Chief of the General Staff and the Chairman of the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff about measures to prevent dangerous military activity .
 Russian specialist warns of danger of Russia being drawn into direct military conflict with Ukraine . This would form the first post-Cold War proxy conflict between Russia and western states .
 The stakes would be raised if some NATO states were to offer Kiev direct military supplies, as well as training, to offset some Russian support for separatist forces .
 The September 2014 ceasefire and subsequent agreement curtailed the extensive military operations of late summer . The September2014 ceasefire was the result of an agreement between the two sides .
 Russia's support of self-governing enclaves in the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces leaves a lasting settlement . This leaves a wider political stabilization of Ukraine still critically dependent on how Russia chooses to support the ill-defined and precarious enclaves .
 Russian Army General Valeriy Gerasimov complained of the increase in NATO's military activity near Russia’s borders . He said the increase was in response to NATO's increase in military activity.