 Volodymyr Zelenskiy has stepped onto centre stage in the real-life drama of the country's presidential elections . The popular Russian-speaking comedian has been playing an accidental Ukrainian president .
Despite his lack of experience, he has established himself as frontrunner. With a few giant leaps following a late entry into the race, he is frontrunner .
Only a sharp turnaround will prevent him from winning this weekend’s first round of voting with a clear majority .
 Zelenskiy will then comfortably defeat either the sitting president, Petro Poroshenko, or Yulia Tymoshenko, in the 21 April run-off .
 Anatoliy Hrytsenko is a pro-Western former defence minister . He is the only other candidate with a shadow of a chance of getting through the first round .
 Zelenskiy is a one-off, his political success is the product of his television success . Zelenskyy is one of the most successful television personalities in history .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi has also given some backing to Tymoshenko, herself a wealthy businesswoman . He enjoys support — including heavy television exposure — from the prominent oligarch .
 Prime minister Poroshenko is an oligarch in his own right, and an enemy of Kolomoyskyi, an enemy.
 Zelenskiy has initiated a lawsuit against Kolomoyskyi . He claims that the president's program is being used to spread lies damaging to the honour and dignity of the president .
 This manoeuvre might yet get him over the line, despite his recent reverses . The manoeuvre may still get him back on the line .
 The new president will need to find a way of exercising some control over parliament’s deliberations . With parliamentary elections due in October, the new president needs to find some control .
 Poroshenko will be represented by his own party, the Poroshenko Bloc . Poroshenko's party is largely an extension of his political persona .
 Tymoshenko's Batkivshchyna is a well-developed party by Ukrainian standards . It tends to lapse into its characteristic populist excesses, though, for which it then suffers in the opinion polls .
 Zelenskiy would come to the job without any existing parliamentary vehicle . He has formed a party of his own that could gain at least some seats in October .
 Zelenskiy may still find a way to win, but it looks likely, with all the uncertainty that such an outcome would bring . Poroshenko may still be able to win.
 Putin has said he would like to meet as soon as possible with the Russian president to discuss bringing the war in the eastern Donbas region of Ukraine to an end . He has said, and recently repeated, that he would want to meet with Vladimir Putin .
 Zelenskiy is a Russophone from the east of Ukraine . He presents as a pro-Western democrat, and has recruited some able pro- Western and reformist advisers .
 Putin would no doubt relish the opportunity to bring his dirty tricks department to bear on such a naive novice . Putin would be happy to bring the opportunity.
 Russian president's preferred Ukrainian politicians have been pushed towards the perimeter of public life since Russia seized Crimea and launched its proxy war in the eastern Donbas region of Ukraine in 2014 . Any overtly pro-Russian candidate would have no hope of victory in present circumstances .
 Much of southeastern Ukraine is under Russian occupation, and its residents are unable to vote . Much of the region is under Russia occupation, while its residents can't vote .
 Poroshenko has proven to be a formidable military, diplomatic and political opponent . Poroshenko is a strong political and military opponent .
 Both Tymoshenko and Zelenskiy have Russian connections that Putin would hope to exploit . Both have Kremlin-preferred alternatives, especially Tyloshenko .
 Left without a serious horse in the race, he will do whatever he can to eject Poroshenko while taking advantage of any opportunities for further low-risk aggression the election might engender .
Sudden game-changing developments are still possible, particularly affecting the sitting president . Only days remain before the first round of voting .
 Poroshenko has been damaged recently by a corruption scandal involving a close ally and senior defence official . His son allegedly acquired Russian weapons and sold them to the Ukrainian army at grossly inflated prices .
 The details of this affair are complex and perhaps less scandalous than they appear . The alleged actions would be judged a particularly heinous offence in a country where the army had to be largely crowdfunded by the public, at considerable sacrifice .
 Ukraine’s armed forces were suffering from gross neglect and rampant corruption, a post-Soviet legacy accentuated by the dismal performance of the pro-Russian regime of previous president Viktor Yanukovych .
 corruption in the armed forces remains a serious problem in Ukraine . Corruption has been overcome, but corruption remains a problem in other spheres of Ukrainian life .
 Two dubious court decisions by Ukraine’s notoriously unreconstructed judiciary have also acutely embarrassed the president .
 Ulana Suprun was dismissed as a corrupt health minister . The health minister had successfully nobbled the health minister's role .
 Ukraine's Constitutional Court struck down a law that required public officials who had mysteriously become wealthy to explain their newfound wealth or risk a custodial sentence . The second, by Ukraine’s Constitutional Court, struck down the law .
 Both seemingly corrupt decisions were severely criticised by domestic reformers, as well as by foreign diplomats and representatives of organisations that provide financial support to Ukraine .
 Three leading reformers left Poroshenko's party in disgust to join Anatoliy Hrytsenko’s presidential campaign . Three reformist presidential candidates closed down their candidacies and subsumed them under Hrytenko's campaign .
 Poroshenko accused of vote buying involving government funds . To make matters worse, Poroshenko has been accused ofVote buying .
 Such practices are still endemic in many post-Soviet countries, including Ukraine and Russia . Such practices among well-placed politicians are known as “administrative resources’s’.
 In Ukraine they are resisted by reformers, voters and media . In Russia they can’t be challenged. In Ukraine, in Russia they are resisting reformers and voters .
 Poroshenko responded vigorously to these setbacks, but some damage had been done . Some damage was done .
 His failure to curb corrupt practices and his opposition to reform had already dented his popularity ratings . He has been criticized for his lack of support for reformists .
 Hrytsenko has a reputation for honesty, but is in a respectable fourth place in polls . New polls point to a big swing to him, lifting him into fourth place .
 Till then he seemed too far astern of the leading three candidates to challenge them . Till then, he had seemed too much astern.
 Poroshenko, meanwhile, fell behind Tymoshenko, and Zelenskiy maintained his clear lead .
 Poroshenko will probably recover lost ground and be able to use administrative resources to overtake Tymoshenko and qualify for the run-off .
Pro-Western reform forces may be the main factor impeding Ukraine’s Western integration . Zelenskiy's win in the run-off for Zelenskyy might seem to point to the strength of pro-Western forces .
 Poroshenko's defeat for Poroshenko will ring alarm bells in Western capitals and delight Moscow . It is not clear that Zelenskiy or any other candidate can fill his shoes .
 Poroshenko has done a very good job in keeping his fragile coalition in place . He has made some unedifying but pragmatically useful deals along the way .
 He has achieved remarkable success in building up the armed forces from less than modest beginnings . He has become the third-strongest fighting force in Europe, capable of blocking Russia and its proxy militias .
 He has also been successful on the international stage, acquiring much invaluable experience . He has maintained good relations with key Western counterparts, even including Donald Trump .
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew has worked with the Orthodox Church in Ukraine . He has also worked with foreign leaders, notably Erdoğan in Turkey, and with the Ukrainian diaspora .
 Autocephaly has enraged the Kremlin almost as much as Ukraine's military defiance . It threatens Russia's traditionally dominant position in the Orthodox Church in Ukraine and potentially other Orthodox communities in what the Kremlin calls the Russian World .
More generally, autocephaly weakens the influence of the Russian Orthodox Church internationally . More generally,Autocephally weakens. More generally. More Generally, autoCEphalyweakens.
 After 1917, the Bolsheviks killed priests by tens of thousands and converted the church into a tame, secret police-dominated instrument of Kremlin policy . The church has remained ever since .
 Russia's steeply declining parishioner numbers in Russia proper would justify the church's decline . The church's declining numbers are a reality poorly understood by the outside world, he says .
 Poroshenko has declared autocephaly a second independence for his country . It is a far from extravagant boast, particularly seen in a longer-term perspective .
 New Orthodox Church of Ukraine is disputed by the Moscow Patriarchate in Ukraine . Most of its administrative structures remain . But the outlook for the new church remains clouded by the prospect of clashes .
 Kiev’s security organs are focused on forestalling any violence, but doing so over the long haul will not be easy . Kiev's security organs have been focused on preventing any violence .
 Over a thousand parishes have made the transition to the new Ukrainian church . But that is still less than 10 per cent of the total, according to one estimate .
 Poroshenko has also strengthened the role of the Ukrainian language in education and public life . He has also pushed through an overhaul of language laws to favour Ukrainian over Russian .
 Hungary has repeatedly used its veto in NATO deliberations to block Ukraine’s otherwise increasing cooperation with the alliance . In the process, he has angered several neighbours whose support Ukraine needs .
 Viktor Orbán’s policy has been warmly welcomed by his partners in the Kremlin . Orbán's policy is warmly welcome by the Kremlin.
 Poroshenko has adopted as his central campaign slogan Armiya, Mova, Vira to encapsulate his main achievements . Poroshenko's campaign slogan is the same as his campaign slogan .
 In November, 80 per cent of respondents to one poll said Ukraine was heading in the wrong direction . Another poll found only 10 per cent had trust in government .
 Poroshenko has reportedly put tens of thousands of dollars into supporting national and charitable projects . The mounting success of Poroshenko's numerous business ventures while in office is clearly galling .
 Most people in Ukraine have been doing it tough through the years of enforced economic austerity since the Euromaidan . The sight of their leading politician enjoying ever-increasing wealth is political poison .
 This alienation makes it harder for the government to lift energy prices, privatise land and make other reforms required in return for financial support from the International Monetary Fund .
 2019 is a year in which Kiev faces record debt repayments . Kiev faces a year of record debt debts .
 Poroshenko has presided over some very significant national achievements . But he has also presided over many significant achievements .
 And they have been carried out without any attempt to convert the country into an autocracy . The country has not been converted into an Autocracy .
Since independence, Ukraine has been a rough-and-ready democracy, with regular elections and changes of government . Since independence, the country's democracy has been rough and ready .
Under Poroshenko it has become much more democratic, despite conspicuous imperfections . Under Poroshenko, TV channels that grossly favour the interests of their owners or their business partners are more democratic .
 The three presidential frontrunners and pro-Kremlin interests are among the conspicuous beneficiaries of this system . The three frontrunners are seen as the biggest beneficiaries of the system .
 Poroshenko’s Ukraine is also more democratic than any other former republic of the Soviet Union outside the Baltic states .
On many criteria it may also be more democratic, if much less prosperous and more chaotic, than Hungary or Poland under their present leaderships .
 The fact that it’s still unclear who will win the presidential election speaks for itself .
 The contrast with Russia’s stagnant and increasingly repressive regime is eloquent . The contrast between Russia and Russia's stagnant and repressive regime.
 Roma settlements have been implicated in vigilante actions against minorities . They have been sometimes seemingly without any response from the forces of law and order .
 Azov Battalion played a crucial role in defending the country against Russian attacks at the outset of the war in Donbas .
 Ukrainian interior ministry gave two of the more irresponsible Azov units carte blanche to supervise election processes . They did recently in Kiev and Cherkasy, injuring fifteen police officers .
 The G7 Ambassadors’ Support Group for Ukraine privately told the Ukrainian authorities to put a stop to these scandalous developments .
Hard-right formations have gained little traction in Ukrainian electoral politics . Despite their regrettable prominence, hard-right groups have gained very little traction .
 The political parties closest to them have failed to trouble the scorers in presidential elections or to gain significant representation in parliament .
 The G7 group has been urging its interlocutors in Kiev to curb the activities of these formations in the short term and consider outlawing them altogether soon after the elections .
 Ukrainian government has said it will lose Western support if it does not overcome problems . It has conveyed the message that if the Ukrainian government doesn't overcome these sorts of problems it will lost Western support .
 The difference in Ukraine is that they are not stage-managed by an authoritarian regime . The difference is that the Ukrainian government is not a government-run regime .
 Ukraine has been under attack for five years, militarily and in every other possible domain, by a neighbour armed to the teeth . Western commentary on Ukraine overstates the prevalence of hard-right formations and the grip of “nationalism,’ the latter being a strange reproach
 Russia has told Ukraine that it is an errant branch of the great Russian nation, and that the Ukrainian nation is a myth . Between blows, that neighbour, Russia, has said that Ukraine is a myths .
 Nationalism would seem to be the only healthy response in such circumstances . Nationalism, even “hypernationalism,’s” would appear to be a healthy response .
 Ukraine and its largely Moscow-administered travails have faded from Australian news coverage . What coverage there is often focuses on the country’s negatives .
 Often missing is reporting of the corresponding phenomena in Russia itself, where official hypernationalism is common .
 More than 13,000 dead, 30,000 wounded, well over a million displaced, tens of billions of dollars of losses and damage sustained by the victim nation . The prospect of further Kremlin-initiated escalation always looming .
 Last November’s attack on Ukrainian vessels exercising a legitimate freedom of passage near the Kerch Strait in the Sea of Azov came after many months of systematic trade strangulation carried out by Russia in the region .
 Russian vessels had been harassing Ukrainian cargo ships for months . The sudden use of outright military force on 25 November was unexpected .
 Twenty-four sailors were arrested and taken to Moscow, where they have been imprisoned for an indeterminate period . The sailors have been jailed for a period of time .
 It was the first time that Russia had overtly deployed military force against Ukraine without any pseudo-justification . There was no prior declaration of hostilities .
 This sequence of events was another explicit challenge to the international liberal order . The West has largely failed to react to the West's failure to react, writes David Cameron .
Donald Trump has removed several of the key ‘adults in the room’ from his administration . However, it still contains people who are officially responsible for easing Ukraine’s predicament .
 The most senior State Department official in this area, Wess Mitchell, has resigned . Mitchell is the most senior official in the State Department .
 Those remaining in the military sphere continue to discuss the prospect of further military assistance to Ukraine . But little has yet been done since Kerch .
 More serious sanctions, which would have concerned and possibly constrained Moscow, were reportedly under discussion within the administration . The sanctions could have concerned Moscow .
 Russian stock market rose in response to the package announced on 15 March . But the package was so trivial that the Russian stock markets rose .
 Putin may infer that the time is ripe for a further decisive move against Ukraine and/or possibly elsewhere . Putin may therefore infer that a further move is possible .
 His constant boasting about his new doomsday weapons and big build-up of combat-ready conventional forces suggest potential moves . His constant boast of his new weapons suggests potential moves, such as a big build up of conventional forces .
 Moscow is attentive to signals and non-signals, and it still has hopes that its man in the White House will be able to deliver a big deal . The deal opens up prospects for better bilateral relations, an easing of sanctions, and perhaps even a strengthening of Russia’s
 His book A Difficult Neighbourhood was published by ANU Press in late 2016 .