 Ukraine declared independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . It emerged from 70 years of totalitarianism, having suffered civil war in the Bolshevik revolution and famine .
 The Soviet Union was a Russian-dominated political construct with the Ukrainian communist party little more than a puppet of the central authority in Moscow . The Russian government was a Soviet-dominated party .
 Ukrainian culture and language were considered secondary to Russian . Russian was the language of science, politics, administration, and urban centres .
 Its political and cultural elites were either wiped out or syphoned off to Moscow to serve the Soviet administration .
 Ukraine was effectively colonized by Moscow, a relationship carried over from the pre-revolutionary era of Tsarist imperial Russia . As with many other Soviet republics, Ukraine was essentially colonized.
 Russia's wealth and population were exploited for the benefit of the ruling Russian class . Russia's population and wealth were exploited by its ruling class .
 Ukraine was a traumatized nation at its independence with no statecraft tradition of its own on which to build a new, independent state . Due to this turbulent history, Ukraine is a traumatizing nation.
 Russia's energy, trade, and cultural ties with Russia remained strong despite the collapse of the political union . And its energy,Trade, and culture ties with Russian remain strong .
 The story of contemporary Ukraine is largely the story of its attempts to define a new future for itself in Europe and Russia’s attempts to obstruct this new direction .
Short history of Ukraine and Russia suffered disproportionately under Soviet leader Joseph Stalin .
 The dictator’s war on land ownership affected mostly Ukrainian-speaking peasants and his forced collectivization of agriculture led to a famine which killed 7–10 million people in the early 1930s . 8 million Ukrainian lives lost during World War Two .
 During the Second World War, Ukraine was overrun by Nazi forces and subjected to a horrific holocaust . During the second World War.
 Around 8 million Ukrainians are believed to have lost their lives during the war . Around 1–2 million Ukrainian Jews were executed by Nazi death squads .
 Ukraine was a founding member of the United Nations with a nominal form of independence within the union . After the war Ukraine had a kind of boosted status in the Soviet Union .
 Leonid Brezhnev, a Ukrainian, served as president of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982 . He was the first Ukrainian president to be elected to the presidency .
 Ukraine was directly ruled by the communist party in Moscow . But the reality bore no relation to the constitution .
Ukraine became a centre for the Soviet arms industry and a location for much of the nuclear arsenal . Ukraine became a site for the Russian arms industry .
 The 1986 Chernobyl disaster created public outrage among Ukrainians at the secretive, deceitful, and inhumane handling of the incident .
 Ukraine played a key role in pushing for the implementation of human rights and freedom as outlined in the Helsinki Accords of 1976 . It subsequently contributed to the Soviet Union collapse .
 Ukraine’s protestors and emerging national-democratic opposition pushed for more autonomy post-Chernobyl . But his efforts were frustrated by Ukraine's protestors.
 Perestroika and glasnost were meant to reinvigorate the country after years of stagnation . But they served mainly to hasten the collapse and break-up of the supranational state .
 In August 1991 a coup attempt was launched against Gorbachev by Russian leaders of the KGB and armed forces who opposed perestroika . The coup attempt took place in Crimea in August 1991, with GorBachev held prisoner .
Russian leader Boris Yeltsin was released after the coup failed but weakened by the failure of his reforms . He was released by the coup but was weakened by his reforms.
 With Russian politics in such turmoil, there was nothing to prevent Ukrainian independence . There was no way to prevent Ukraine's independence .
 In early December the Ukrainian declaration was ratified by a referendum with a 90 per cent ‘yes’ vote . The declaration was signed by the Ukrainian parliament in early December .
The same month Gorbachev resigned and the Soviet Union voted itself out of existence . The same month, the Soviets voted themselves out of the USSR .
 The transition to independence had been peaceful, with both the communists and democrats agreeing to break away . The transition was largely due to the predicted economic potential of the country .
 Ukraine's large Soviet nuclear arsenal remains closely engaged due to Ukraine’s large nuclear arsenal . But it had to remain closely engaged.
 The 1994 Budapest memorandum agreed to decommission the weapons, with security assurances provided by the US, Russia, UK and France .
Ukraine’s system of crony capitalism suffered in the 1990s as its Soviet-style planned economy collapsed .
 There was widespread economic suffering, with shortages, blackouts, inflation, and spiking emigration . There was also widespread economic problems, with blackouts and blackouts .
 From 2004 to 2007, economic prosperity increased considerably, coinciding with a desire for greater democracy and human rights . From 2004-2007, prosperity increased significantly .
 The Ukraine-Russia conflict explained the origins of the current conflict . Russia’s long-standing aspiration to control its periphery was embodied by Vladimir Putin after his ascent to power in 2000 .
 Initially his strategy was soft coercion, but it became more assertive and aggressive over time . Initially he was soft coerced, but he became more aggressive and aggressive .
 The origins of the current conflict lie in Russia’s long-standing aspiration to control its periphery . The origins are in Russia's desire to control the periphery .
 The Orange Revolution of 2004 made Putin reconsider his tactics . It was the Orange Revolution that made Putin rethink his tactics.
 Viktor Yanukovych was ousted by the ballot after being implicated in rigging the election results . His favoured candidate for the Ukrainian presidency, Viktor Yanukovych, was accused of rigging the vote .
 Victor Yushchenko, a pro-western opposition candidate, came to power in his place . He is a former pro-Western opposition candidate .
 Yushchenko was poisoned during electoral race but survived to serve as Ukraine's president from 2005-2010 .
 Ukraine had signed a very unfavourable gas deal in 2008 . It committed it to being the largest buyer of Russian gas at a higher than market price .
 The media and cultural space was dominated by Russia-produced cultural product . Read the research paper Cultural Revival and Social Transformation.
 State policy in support for Ukrainian language and culture was suboptimal . State policy was in support of Ukrainian language, culture .
 The Russian Orthodox church had total jurisdiction over the canonical territory in Ukraine, with almost as many parishes in Ukraine as in Russia .
 The Russian navy's Black Sea fleet continued to be based in Crimea . A 2010 deal ensured it would remain there for decades to come .
 All Ukrainian presidents had to respond to a growing public demand for closer integration with the European Union .
 The EU offered far better economic benefits and respect for human rights than continuing ties to Russia . The EU also offered far more economic benefits than human rights .
 Yanukovych was elected to the Ukrainian presidency in 2010 . He had returned to prominence and was elected in 2010.
 Putin pressured him to reject a new association and trade agreement with the EU . He negotiated over a period of seven years with Putin .
 Russia exerted intense pressure on Yanukovych through trade sanctions, banning the import of Ukrainian goods or their transit over its territory to China .
 It also threatened Ukraine’s security, fomenting unrest in the east of Ukraine and Crimea . It has threatened Ukraine's security, and also threatened the country's security .
 Euromaidan protests of 2013 led to the Ukraine protests of the year . The protests led to a series of protests in Ukraine .
 Putin had not anticipated a strong reaction to what seemed to him like a bureaucratic trade document, or how protesters would persist with their demands .
 Over a hundred people shot by police snipers in the last days of the protests in Kyiv’s central streets .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014 . He lost all legitimacy, support of ruling elites and his own political party .
 This prompted Putin’s military take-over of the Crimean peninsula . This prompted his military take over of the strategic peninsula .
 Russia first invaded Ukraine when it annexed Crimea during February and March 2014 . Russia first annexed Crimea in Crimea in March 2014.
 It struck while Ukraine was vulnerable with a temporary government and unprepared military . It strikes while Ukraine is vulnerable with temporary government.
 Putin deployed 30,000 troops without insignia to seize control of the regional infrastructure . Then staged a referendum to legitimize the occupation .
 Putin then immediately moved to strike in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine . The West urged Ukraine not to react with force with force .
 Russia distracted international attention from the Crimean takeover which had been bloodless . By creating a new problem elsewhere.
 Russian special forces, jointly with local militias in Donbas, declared independent ‘people’s republics’ leading to open military conflict with Ukrainian armed forces .
 Malaysia Airlines flight 17 was shot down by a Russia-supplied surface to air missile operated by pro-Russia separatists . In addition, in the summer of 2014, Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 was killed by a pro-Russian missile .
 Between 2014 and 2021 the conflict cost Ukraine more than $10 billion, caused 14,000 deaths . Donbas is the most landmined area in Europe .
Putin hoped to eventually force Ukraine into concessions by waging this prolonged, low intensity conflict . Putin hoped to ultimately force Ukraine to give Ukraine concessions .
 Russia participated in diplomatic efforts like the Minsk agreements of 2014 and 2015 . Russia demanded unique powers and autonomous status for the Donbas region .
Key diplomatic players such as France and Germany shifted their position to support Kyiv’s interpretation of Minsk agreement .
 Russia’s measures were clearly intended to weaken Ukraine and keep it under Russian domination .
 Putin gradually understood that his strategy was failing. Read research paper The Minsk Conundrum .
 Ukraine was steadily integrating with the EU as part of its Association and Trade Agreement . Ukraine refused to abide by the Russian vision of the settlement . Ukraine was also refusing to abide with the Russian view of a settlement .
 He ordered a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, which began on 24 February 2022 . The invasion began in February 2022, when he ordered the invasion .
 Russian puppet government in Kyiv failed. Initial objective was to swiftly install a Russian government in the country .
 President Zelenskyy, elected in 2019, received a high level of public approval for his war-time leadership . Zelenkyy was elected in 2018 .
 Putin's hopes for collaboration from pro-Russian elements were exposed as fantasy . Putin’s hope for collaboration with pro- Russian elements was exposed asantasy .
 The Kremlin failed to achieve any strategic objective after one month of military campaigning . The Kremlin did not achieve a strategic objective .
 Ukraine’s resistance inspired NATO, the EU and the U.S. into action, launching unprecedented economic sanctions against Russia and supporting Ukraine with arms, economic and humanitarian aid . Ukraine's opposition inspired NATO and the EU into action.
 Russia has three main objectives, all of which have strong domestic motivations . Russia has a strong domestic agenda, all with strong national interests .
 First, Ukraine is viewed as belonging to the Russian ‘sphere of influence’ and a territory rather than an independent state . First, the country is considered to be part of the Russian 'spheres of influence'
 Ukraine and Belarus, as former Soviet Union states, are believed to form a single 'triune' nation with Russia . The former Soviet states are thought to have formed a single ‘triune’ nation .
 Putin started the war to destroy Ukraine’s nation-building project, aiming to restore a ‘historical Russia’ according to borders prior to 1917 .
 Ukraine's attempts to break away are seen as a direct, Western-backed attack on Russia’s sovereignty . Ukraine's attempt to breakaway is seen as an attempt to undermine Russia's sovereignty .
 This strong sense of entitlement drives the Kremlin to obstruct Ukraine’s integration with Euro-Atlantic structures, says the Kremlin .
 The 2022 invasion indicated a strategic shift as Russia sought to subjugate Ukraine by force . But this appears to have been an enormous miscalculation .
 He wants to prevent the emergence of an alternative, democratic system of government on the Russian border .
 A defeated, compliant Ukraine serves as a lesson to ordinary Russians – that revolution leads to disaster . A defeated and compliant Ukraine is a lesson for ordinary Russians, says Alexander Vatkov .
 A failed Ukraine is an antidote to democratic sentiments inside Russia, where memories of the Soviet collapse remain powerful .
 In Russian media the war in Ukraine is portrayed as a ‘special operation’ in response to a Western project to undermine Russia . The war has been described as a 'special operation'
 The terms that end the war will depend on battlefield outcomes and internal developments in Russia . The terms of the end of the conflict will be determined by the outcome of the war .
 Russia’s hopes for a swift, shock regime change in Ukraine have foundered . Russia's tactics have turned more brutal, and its tactics have been more brutal .
 Incidents of the use of banned weapons and evidence of war crimes are growing. Incidents are growing, say experts .
 Indiscriminate attacks and siege warfare are intended to grind Ukraine into a deal that meets Russian objectives .
 Ukraine, meanwhile, is determined to resist and expel Russian forces from its territory . Ukraine, however, has been trying to expel Russian troops from its borders .
 It believes that the war will bleed the Russian economy and weaken Putin . The war will also weaken the Russian president .
 Neither side felt compelled to concede after the initial fighting . Neither side feels compelled to give up .
 When a negotiated settlement does come, it will need the complete democratic consent of the Ukrainian people to succeed .
 Ukraine wants to remain sovereign to pursue any other integration and cooperation projects . Ukraine has already officially applied to join the EU and wants to stay sovereign . The country wants to pursue other integration projects .
 The best security guarantee for Ukraine is a new Russia so, until this happens, any arrangements will be shaky . The best Security guarantee for the Ukraine is the new Russia .
 Putin has used the threat of Ukrainian NATO membership as his key reason for invasion . He has used it as his reason for invading Ukraine .
 NATO members are blocking Ukraine's accession to Ukraine . Some members of the alliance are blocking the accession .
 One option is to devise a new formula outside of NATO, based on the current ‘coalition of the willing’ to offer Ukrainian people a peaceful future .
 Economic relations between Ukraine and Russia collapsed after the annexation of Crimea . Ukraine's exports to Russia fell from $29 billion in 2011 to roughly $5 billion in 2021 .
 Bilateral economic relations between Russia and Ukraine reached a watershed in 2014 when Ukraine stopped purchasing gas from Russia . China is now Ukraine’s number one trade partner thanks to industries such as agriculture and steel .
 Ukraine switched to buying it on the free European market, importing through Hungary, Poland, and Slovenia . Ukraine also used its domestic gas storage facilities to sustain supply during high-demand periods .
 Russia can no longer threaten to ‘turn off the taps’ to Ukraine to exert pressure directly through energy . Russia can therefore no longer threatening to “turn off’ the taps to Ukraine .
 Ukraine has taken urgent steps to disconnect itself from the Russian electricity grid, another Soviet legacy, and to find alternative sources of diesel fuel . More recently Ukraine has been taking steps to reconnect itself with the Russian grid .
 Ukraine will likely attempt to nationalize all Russian assets in the country in 2022 . Since the 2022 invasion Ukraine will probably attempt tonationalize all Russia assets in Ukraine .
 Russia–Ukraine gas Gas still transits across Ukraine from Russian fields into the EU . The agreement runs until 2024, an agreement running until 2024 .
 Before 2022 invasion it was widely understood that so long as this vital energy supply ran through Ukraine, Russia was unlikely to invade . The EU was compelled to mediate often conflicting Ukraine-Russian gas relations .
 In response, German foreign and energy policy has undergone a seismic shift . In response to the changes, Germany's foreign andenergy policy has changed .
 Olaf Scholz has pledged to increase German defence spending, divest itself from Russian energy supplies and arm Ukraine . The new government of OlafScholz will increase defence spending .
 The Nordstream 2 gas pipeline, long seen as a major threat to Ukraine’s security, has been effectively cancelled .
 A damaged pedestrian road sign in Krasnohorivka, in the Donbas region of Ukraine, was damaged .
 Ukraine Russia Departments Russia and Eurasia Programme Projects Ukraine Forum . Topics European Union Regions Ukraine Russia and Russia's Russia and Europe's Eurasia programme projects .
 Putin's 2022 invasion may have expedited Ukraine's integration with the EU and completely isolated Russia as a pariah state .
Until February 2022 Europe was investing in Nordstream 2, increasing its dependence on Russian fossil fuels, and undermining its own energy security . Until February 2022, Europe was spending more on Russia's fossil fuels .
 Germany's leadership was by-proxy endorsing Russian aggression against Ukraine . Germany’s support of the pipeline would have made the country the major gas hub in Europe .
Until 2022 the gas supply issue therefore empowered Russia, divided the EU, and threatened Ukraine . Until 2022, the issue threatened Ukraine. Until 2022 the energy supply issue was still a problem .
 The EU has united in opposition to Russia, compelling it to vigorously support Ukrainian democracy, and to seek alternative energy supplies . The EU is united in opposing Russia and supporting Ukrainian democracy .
 EU foreign minister says invasion signals a ‘new era’ in EU relationship with Russia . EU must ‘decrease as quick as possible’ its dependency on Russian oil and gas .
 Phasing out Russian oil and coal will happen faster than gas, but it's only a matter of time, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia's relationship with the EU is likely to remain adversarial until Russia’s strategic outlook on Europe and its neighbourhood changes . International sanctions weaken Russia and increase its dependence on China .
 Ukraine is probably closer now to EU membership than it ever has been before . Ukraine is likely closer now than it was before .
 Ukraine has armed forces capable of defending its territory . The dream of Ukraine as a settled part of a Russian sphere of influence appears to be dead .
 Chatham House’s Ukraine Forum provides regular analysis of developments in and around Ukraine .
 Ukraine Forum speaks to residents of Kharkiv in eastern Ukraine . The Ukraine Forum is held in Kiev, Ukraine's capital.
 Testimonies from Mariupol Citizens tell their stories from a city under Russian siege .
 Myroslav Shylo is a volunteer and restaurant owner from Trostianets in Ukraine . He talks about life under Russian occupation .
 Venue hire Chatham House is a world-leading policy institute with a mission to help governments and societies build a sustainably secure, prosperous and just world . The podcast Venue hired Chatham house is a podcast for the SoundCloud Podcasts .