 Ukraine is engaged in a low-intensity war with Russia, which illegally seized Crimea and continues a simmering conflict in the eastern region of the Donbas . Ukraine has more to do, and it has to pursue further reforms while engaged in low- intensity but nevertheless real war.
 Twittersteven_pifer Politics will dominate Ukraine in the coming nine months . Steven Pifer Nonresident Senior Fellow Foreign Policy.
 Ukrainians vote for president on March 31, with an April 21 run-off certain to be needed . Rada elections will take place in the fall, and the election will be held in March .
 Elections and the preceding campaign periods do not provide the best backdrop for reforms . Elections and previous campaign periods don't provide best backdrop to reforms .
 Nor is it likely to be time for a breakthrough on resolving the conflict in the Donbas .
 Moscow dislikes incumbent President Petro Poroshenko and will wait to see how the presidential and Rada elections turn out before deciding whether to change its course .
 The Ukrainian government announced that it would suspend plans to sign an association agreement with the European Union on November 21, 2013 . The Maidan has been in Ukraine for five years .
 Ukrainians poured into the streets in protest, in what became known as the Maidan Revolution . The Maidan revolution was the first of its kind .
 Three months later, security forces mounted attacks on protestors gathered on Maidan Square in central Kyiv . Three months after the attacks, protesters gathered on the same square .
 The French, German, and Polish foreign ministers arrived to try to broker a settlement between embattled President Viktor Yanukovych and the opposition . The French and German ministers arrived in February 2014 .
 Yanukovych and three opposition leaders worked out an agreement overnight . They worked out overnight an agreement between Yanukovych and the opposition leaders .
 The latter likely could not have sold the agreement to the Maidan protestors, who held Yanukovych responsible for the previous days’ bloodshed .
 Yanukovych slipped away and fled Kyiv after signing the agreement . It did not matter; after signing it, Yanukovych fled the country .
 The Rada turned a page in Ukraine's history, electing an acting prime minister and acting president . They declared their goals of signing the association agreement and bringing the country closer to Europe .
 Russia responded by using military force to seize Crimea and then, on March 18, illegally annexing the peninsula . Russia responded with military force, using military forces to seize the Crimea .
 In April, fighting broke out in the Donbas, as Russian security forces led, funded and armed a "separatist" movement . In reality, it was in reality another Russian attack on Ukraine .
 Poroshenko and the Rada made some impressive reforms over the next two years . Reforms included reforming government finances, pension reform, an e-declaration system and weaning the country off natural gas .
 The Rada has continued a ban on the free sale of agricultural land . It prevents the development of a mortgage market that could provide farmers capital to improve their productivity .
 The ongoing conflict in the Donbas has understandably drawn attention from reform . The Donbas conflict has drawn attention to reform .
 The fighting has flared up periodically, including in August 2014 and February 2015 . Regular units of the Russian army entered Ukraine to take part .
 A February 2015 settlement brokered by the German and French leaders in Minsk, Minsk . The conflict has claimed 12,000 lives since then, with no end in sight .
 New reforms will be hard to put into place in 2019, as political attention has shifted to elections . It’s an Election Year New reforms.
 There is no shortage of candidates for the March 31 presidential ballot . There are no shortages of candidates in the presidential ballot.
Central Electoral Commission has registered 44, though some may drop out . The Central Electoral Commission registered 44 .
 Recent polls put Zelenskiy on top, with Poroshenko and Tymoshenko placing second and third . The Ukrainian president is in third and third place .
 Poroshenko is running as a safe pair of hands for a country at war . But he suffers from a widespread view that Ukraine is headed in the wrong direction .
 Zelenskiy portrays the president of Ukraine in a television comedy show . He has yet to provide much in the way of detail as to what his presidency would mean for the country .
 No one will secure the needed 50 percent-plus one vote to win outright on March 31 . The vote is needed to win the required 50 percent plus one vote .
 Ukrainians will return to the polls for a run-off between the top two vote-getters . Ukrainians will vote for the first time in more than a decade .
 The election may be messy, but it will certainly be contested, and no one can tell now with any certainty who will win .
 That differentiates Ukraine’s democracy from most others in the post-Soviet space . Ukraine's democracy differs from most other countries in post- Soviet space .
 The Rada ballot will be held in the fall, perhaps in October . After April, attention will turn to the RADA ballot, which will beheld in October.
 The winner in April will seek to build a strong parliamentary presence in the Rada election . The winner will be the first to win a parliamentary seat in the country .
 Ukraine’s bifurcated executive system allows the president to appoint the foreign and defense ministers, as well as heads of other security agencies . The prime minister, elected by the Rada,appoints the other ministers .
 Getting major policies approved requires close collaboration between the president and the prime minister and Rada .
 Ukraine's civil society and the country's friends in the West are expected to push for reforms .
 Tough reforms involving difficult decisions typically are best done at the beginning of presidential and parliamentary terms . Tough reforms typically are most likely to be made in presidential terms .
 Moscow will Wait and See Suggestions in fall 2017 that a U.N. peacekeeping force could provide political cover for withdrawal of Russian and Russia proxy forces from the Donbas . Moscow will wait and See suggestions that a United Nations peacekeepers could provide cover for the withdrawal
 The Russian government almost certainly will wait to see the results of Ukraine’s elections before considering whether it needs to change its current policy of maintaining a simmering conflict in the Donbas .
 Senior Russian officials have made clear that they want Poroshenko to be a one-term president .
 Moscow has not endorsed anyone, a smart move, because a Russian endorsement would be the kiss of death for any Ukrainian candidate . Beyond that, Moscow hasn't endorsed anyone .
 Moscow will wait to see what results the Rada elections produce and may employ covert ways to influence the vote . Moscow also will wait for the results of the elections to be announced .
 The Kremlin seems to hope that following the Ukrainian elections, the Ukrainian president and Rada will prove more amenable .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and occupation of part of the Donbas is an unintended result of Russia’s annexation . The areas with the most Russia-friendly voters will not be taking part in 2019 elections .
 The Russian leadership does not appreciate how its aggression over the past five years has alienated Ukrainians .
 Overcoming that anger will take years, if not decades, and it will only begin once there is peace. Overcoming anger will only take years.
 President Putin has done as much as anything to push Ukraine away from Moscow and toward the West . President Putin wants to keep Ukraine in Russia’s orbit .
 Moscow's pursuit of its current approach until after the fall Rada elections will sadly mean continued skirmishing along the line of contact in the Donbas and a rising body count . Moscow’s pursuit of the current approach will sadly means continued skirmish along the lines of contact .
 It would require regular units of the Russian army, whose involvement could not be hidden . It would need regular units.
 Casualties would play badly with the Russian public, while the West would answer with more punishing sanctions on an already stagnant economy .
 Putin has no need to go big, with its attendant risks, when his salami tactics are working . The Russian president's salami tactic is working, and he has a lot to do .
 The November Russian attack on Ukrainian ships exercising innocent passage in the Kerch Strait drew no significant response from the U.S. or Europe .
Russia is now that much closer to asserting unilateral control over the Sea of Azov . Russia is now much more likely to assert unilateral control of the sea .
 The more interesting question will come at the end of 2019 or beginning of 2020 . The most interesting question is whether it will be at the start of 2020.
 A U.N. peacekeeping force with a robust mandate could provide the vehicle for Russian withdrawal and the transition to restored Ukrainian sovereignty . If so, it could provide a robust international administration .
 Crimea's disputed status will burden the Ukraine-Russia agenda for a long time to come . That would still leave Crimea, whose disputed status would still be a problem .
 The population could get on with restoring normalcy and rebuilding their lives . At least, however, the killing in the Donbas would stop .
 Putin could withdraw from Ukraine or choose other tactics to try to pull it back under Moscow's influence . But that all depends on the Kremlin deciding on the decision .
 The West For 2019, the West should patiently pursue its policy of supporting Ukraine . The West for 2019, The West should pursue its policies of support Ukraine .
 U.S., European and international financial institution officials should be ready to engage the Ukrainian president in the spring . The new Rada and prime minister in the fall on the country's future reform course.
 Those discussions could be delicate, particularly if populist ideas win in the elections .
 Western donors will have to resist backsliding on what Ukraine has achieved and press for completing the critical mass of reforms that would allow the economy to grow at substantial and sustained rate .
 Given assistance funds and low-interest credits, donors will have leverage . The donors will be able to leverage their assistance funds .
 One important key for Ukraine’s economic future lies in reforms that will draw in more investment .
 While the economy achieved 3 percent growth last year, it should be achieving growth levels of 5 to 6 percent .
 Ukraine will need 50 years to catch up with neighboring Poland, the finance minister said recently . At its current rate of growth, Ukraine will needs 50 years, he said .
 A settlement would also remove what now constitutes the biggest obstacle to moving relations between the West and Russia toward a more normal place . A settlement could also remove the biggest obstacles to moving the relationship toward a normal place.
 German Chancellor Merkel will have to exercise her formidable political skills to hold the European Union on course . Congress will need to ensure that President Trump does not go soft .
 A tough Western approach offers the greatest chance of affecting the cost-benefit calculation in the Kremlin . Moscow could adopt a different policy if it wants to change its policy .
 If Kyiv receives continued support from the West, the stage could be set for important change in 2020 . However, if it plays out right, it could also be set to change in the future .