 This document is solely intended for your personal, nonDokuments . We grant a non-exclusive, nonGewährt wird ein nicht exklusives, nicht übertragbares, transferable, individual and limited right to using
 All of the copies of this documents must retain den persönlichen, nicht-kommerziellen Gebrauch bestimmt . All copyright information regarding legal Auf sämtlichen Kopien dieses Dokuments müssen
 You are not allowed to alter this document in any Urheberrechtshinweise und sonstigen Hinweise . To copy it for public or commercial purposes, to exhibit the Schutz beibehalten werden .
 Sie dürfen dieses Dokument document in public, to perform, distribute or otherwise use the nicht in irgendeiner Weise abändern, noch durfen Sie document inpublic .
 Mit der Verwendung dieses dieses Dokuments. Sie die Nutzungsbedingungen an an. Mit derVerwendings dieses.
 The Unresolved Conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh in Light of the Crisis .
 The Unresolved Conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine . In spring and summer 2014, Moscow’s annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas supplied the
 Germany and its EU partners have been too preoccupied with Ukraine crisis to take appropriate notice of developments in Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh .
 The conditions for constructive regulation of these four conflicts have deteriorated steadily over the past two years at the local, national, regional, regional and international levels .
 For Moldova the fighting in Ukraine presents considerable destabilisation risks on account of its proximity to Ukraine’s contested regions .
 The Moldovan political elite have put conflict regulation on the back burner . The country's own domestic and economic instability have led the country’s own political elite to put conflict regulations on the front burner .
Georgia fears and threat perceptions concerning Russia have grown again in the course of the geopolitical crisis . In Georgia fears and threats concerning Russia are growing again, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 The integration of Abkhazia and South Ossetia into Russia’s political, economic and military space has progressed to a level close to the annexation threshold .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia see shrinking room for manoeuvre in their relations with Moscow, Tbilisi and Western actors .
 The governments of Armenia and Azerbaijan exploit the geopolitical confrontation to stabilise domestic authoritarianism . The countries shift blame for the lack of any progress to the international level .
 The escalation in April 2016 demonstrated yet again the fragility of the 1994 cease-fire . In April 2016, the escalation showed yet again. The escalation was the latest in a series of escalating incidents .
 The crisis over Ukraine and the geopolitical confrontation between Brussels and Moscow are not the only reasons for the deterioration in all four investigated conflicts since 2014 .
 Conflict regulation is also undermined by a proliferating systemic crisis that is laying bare the political and economic deficits in Russia .
 The frozen conflicts prevent sustainable development of the affected states and societies . Political and economic instability in turn make constructive conflict regulation impossible .
 Russia plays a central and highly ambivalent role in all four frozen conflicts . Russia plays an ambivalent part in all of the four conflicts .
 Moscow's weakness meant it was still amenable to cooperation with Western actors . During the 1990s, Moscow’s weakness was stillAmenable to cooperate with West .
 The mode shifted in the 2000s to competition over regional influence with NATO, the U.S. and the European Union .
 The perception of rivalry continued to escalate through to the outbreak of the crisis over Ukraine in 2014 . The Ukraine crisis began in 2014.
 At the latest since 2011/2012 the central objective of Russian foreign policy has been to secure the post-Soviet space as a Eurasian sphere of influence .
Russian political system is closely tied to authoritarian turn in the Russian political system . That prioritisation is closely linked to the Kremlin's authoritarian turn .
 Over the past decade and a half the frozen conflicts have become an important instrument of an increasingly revisionist policy towards its neighbours .
 Moscow relies on its military presence in the conflict areas, and on political and economic support for state-building efforts in the secessionist territories . Moscow relies especially on the distribution of Russian passports to their residents .
 The annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas represent the first instance where Russia has actively instigated secessionist conflicts and formally annexed part of a neighbouring country .
 Russian influence is greatest in Transnistria and South Ossetia . Abkhazia is somewhat restricted by a strong desire for autonomy . NagornoKarabakh is weakest in Nagorno Karabakh .
 Moscow’s control is smallest in the conflict which – also from its perspective – entails the greatest security risk . Moscow's control of the conflict is the largest in the world .
 The differences in Russian influence over the conflicts suggest that the key to their resolution lies not solely in Moscow, but also with the respective conflict parties .
 The crisis over Ukraine faces Germany and the EU with an unprecedented challenge . Germany's limited foreign policy and security capacities are stretched by multiple internal and external crises .
 The eastern neighbourhood contains an arc of conflicts that are interlinked at local, regional and international levels .
 The EU requires a strategy that takes account of these links as well as the specific structures of the individual conflicts . The EU needs to take account of the links between the EU and the EU .
Consistent support for democratisation and economic development remain important for stabilising the affected states from within . Consistent support is important for stability in affected states .
 Berlin, Brussels and EU partners must also develop a nuanced policy of conflict regulation . But Berlin and Brussels must also developed a nuanced Policy of Conflict regulation .
 Russian politics is presently unforeseeable, says Russian analyst . Substantial progress towards conflict resolution will be impossible without a fundamental shift in Russian politics, he says .
 Cooperation with Moscow should be sought where it proves possible and does not undermine the EU’s principles .
 I am also grateful to Polina Baigarova, Belinda Nüssel and Julia Ostanina for their contributions . Klemens Büscher, Uwe Halbach, Walter Kaufmann, Sergey Markedonov, Franziska Smolnik
 Russia has for the first time instigated secessionist conflicts with the objective of destabilising a neighbouring country . The annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas have been instigated by Russia .
 Observers regarded this as evidence that Moscow’s revisionist line against the European order, pursued since 1989/ 90, had entered a new phase .
 The annexation of Crimea was ideologically embedded in the discourse about reintegrating “New Russia/ Novorossiya’s‘New Russia’ Russia has now struck a course of systematic territorial expansion driven by nationalism .
Ethno-political conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh play a special role in Eurasia .
 Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan damage sovereignty and territorial integrity of the affected parent states . They damage the sovereignty of Moldova and Azerbaijan .
 Russia is the central external actor and mediator in all the peace processes . Its military presence and political involvement also make it a party to the conflicts .
 Moscow has used these conflicts as a lever to influence domestic and external developments in the affected states . Since they appeared in the early 1990s, Moscow has been involved in these conflicts since they appeared .
 Russian policy has to adapt to the specifics of each case, and therefore differs widely . Russian policy is different from that of other countries .
 Moscow is pursuing ‘selective revisionism’ governed by its own interests and the specific conflict constellation . Moscow is not following a revisionist masterplan, but pursuing “selective Revisionism”
 Russian policy has remained fundamentally unchanged since the outbreak of the crisis over Ukraine . This constant of Russian policy remains fundamentally unchanged, says the author .
 Moscow's selective revisionism will continue to pose a considerable security risk in the region . Even if there is currently no immediate danger of Moscow deliberately escalating any of the four frozen conflicts discussed here .
 The "Novorossiya" rhetoric quickly disappeared again from the public debate . However, the rhetoric quickly vanished again from public debate.
 The Russian leadership embeds its revisionist policy towards neighbouring states in an explanatory discourse on several interlocking levels .
 Russia sees itself facing a hegemonic Washington-led West seeking by all means to preserve the unipolar world order that emerged temporarily after the end of the Cold War .
 In this multipolar world Russia claims the status of an autonomous power centre . Russia demands equal treatment and respect for its interests from the U.S.
 The task of Russian politics is seen as countering Western unilateralism with a “democratic’s international order and protecting international law from Western violations . The task is to counter unilateralism and protect international law.
From their perspective it is the West, not Russia, that is pursuing revisionism . From their perspective, the West is not the Russia, not the West .
 Moscow has long complained that Cold War divisions have persisted in Europe – and indeed shifted eastwards to its detriment – rather than establishing unity and security for all .
 September 10 Russian Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts ideologisation and de facto revisionism . September 2016 10 Russian policy in the U.S.
 Rather than questioning geopolitical divisions, however, the adversary’s sociopolitical model was challenged .
 Western policy is criticised as revisionist on the grounds that it changes international and regional power relations and challenges both Russian interests and traditional Russian sphere of influence .
 Russia asserts the right to impinge upon the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbours . This serves the greater goal of countering the expansion and strengthening of the Western model and order .
 Russia's policies towards its Eurasian neighbours become a legitimate means for Russia to repel Western value-based revisionism . In this understanding, revisionist policies towards Russia's Eurasian neighbors become aitimate means.
Official Russian discourse remains confined within the historical frame of reference of the Soviet empire . The official Russian discourse thus remains confined to the Soviet era .
 Russia is not seeking the establishment of a classical, territorially defined empire . Its efforts to guard its own security consist largely in controlling its neighbours’ domestic and foreign policies .
 The independence of its post-Soviet neighbours has been frequently called into question since the mid-2000s . The Kremlin's recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia is the latest with the Kremlin’s recognition.
 The different historical points of reference also supply the key to understanding the mutual accusations of revisionism .
 The Russian discourse draws on the imperial Russian and Soviet past and implicitly denies other post-Soviet states the right to internal and external sovereignty . The Western discourse rests on the European system of the Charter of Paris and the sovereign right of all European states to choose their alliances freely and independently .
 NATO and EU enlargement in the 1990s and early 2000s are not to be understood as revisionist . They came about at the initiative of the new member states – and in fact overstretched both organisations .
 Russian policy denies its neighbours that freedom and is certainly revisionist in the sense of the Paris Charter, which Russia has not to date renounced .
 Russian policy in the frozen conflicts are classed as revisionist . The following, the following, are the elements of Russian policy.
 The recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia and the annexation of Crimea are the most extreme cases of Russian revisionism to date . The recognition is most extreme case of Russian Revisionism.
 revisionist elements have characterised Russian policy since the collapse of the Soviet Union . But below that level a series of revisionists has characterised Russia's policy since that collapse .
 These elements did not appear in the same combinations and intensities in all the various conflicts . These elements didn't appear in same combinations or intensities .
 The application of revisionist means in the unresolved conflicts must be seen in the context of Moscow's policy in Eurasia following the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The differences between the conflicts have a major influence on the extent to which revisionist elements have been applied and the degree to which they have been effective . The difference between the conflict and the conflict has been seen as a major factor .
 Russia assumed responsibility for the Soviet armed forces in 1992 – at the time specifically for their dissolution . Military Presence/Military Intervention is the legal successor to the Soviet Union .
 This gave it control over military bases and weapons stocks throughout the entire territory of the former Soviet Union . This gives it control of military bases, weapons stocks in the former USSR .
 The greatly weakened Russian state initially struggled to control and fund its armed forces . The greatly weaker Russian state originally struggled to fund its military forces .
 Former Soviet soldiers fought as mercenaries on all sides in the territorial conflicts that erupted in Moldova, Georgia, Azerbaijan and Tajikistan . Soviet-era stocks fed a lucrative arms trade with the conflict parties .
 In these ways the armed forces contributed greatly to the escalation of the secessionist wars, says the author .
 Moscow quickly began instrumentalising the wars for its own political interests . Moscow quickly started instrumentalising wars for own political purposes .
 Russian military support for Abkhazia and Nagorno-Karabakh grew increasingly systematic as time went on . Russian support for the Abkhaziians and for the Armenian side in the Nagorno Karabakh conflict grew more systematic .
 The 14th Army acted from the outset more as TMR's protector than a neutral peace-keeping force, Charles King says .
 The International Dimension of Post-Communist Transitions in Russia and the New States of Eurasia. Is there a Role for Security Institutions?
 Russia’s objective in Eurasia is to stabilise and expand its asserted regional sphere of influence .
 Moscow seeks economic and political integration of its post-Soviet neighbours . Moscow seeks the economic andpolitical integration of post- Soviet neighbours .
 Since the 1990s there have been numerous unsuccessful attempts to intensify cooperation in the region and deepen integration . Since the 90s there has been numerous attempts to intensify cooperation .
 The parastatal foundation Russkiy Mir’s serves a similar function, but concentrates geographically on the non-post-Soviet states .
 Russian policy in Eurasia resorts to coercion, says Fischer . Fischer Russian Policy in Eurasian Thirdly .
 Economic pressure, economic sanctions, and increasingly military force are used against states that seek to escape Russia’s efforts for influence and integration .
 Many of the ‘soft’ instruments Russia uses in its relations with its Eurasian neighbours are also found in the foreign policies of other states . Russia also uses the “soft instruments’s” instruments in relations with other states.
 Activities such as working for regional integration and promoting the national language and culture abroad do not per se represent a threat to sovereignty of other states .
 The right to interfere in the sovereign affairs of neighbours can change where regional dominance is asserted . But it can also change where a position of regional dominance can be asserted, and with it.
 The situation only changed in the first half of the 2000s, when Russia stabilised economically and politically . The situation in Russia only changed when Russia stabilized economically and political .
 Moscow's increasingly assertive policy towards its neighbours was also rooted in a fundamental transformation of the Russian political elite’s security perception . Moscow's increasing assertive policies towards its neighbour were also seen as a key part of its security strategy .
 In the 1990s neighbourhood instability was regarded as the most important source of security risks . unresolved conflicts played an important role in the region's security .
 Russian policy is directed towards containing escalation risks as well as securing influence . In this phase, Russian policy was directed towards contain escalation risks .
From the turn of the century the growing weight of Western actors in the region moved to the centre of Russian perception as the main security threat . Competition with them became the leitmotif of Russian policy .
 Moscow now increasingly instrumentalised its neighbours’ vulnerability to counter Western influence . The existing unresolved conflicts represent one aspect of that development .
 Foreign policy increasingly serves the authoritarian political leadership in Moscow as a source of domestic legitimacy . Foreign policy also increasingly serves authoritarian political leaders in Moscow .
 A majority of Russians approve of the leadership seeking to restore international respect as a major power . A majority also approve of a new Russian government .
 The linkage of internal and external policy also works in the opposite direction . But the link between external and internal policy and internal and internal policies also works.
 The political regime asserts that it is protecting Russian society from harmful external influences . The regime is supported by a majority in society .
Following the colour revolutions in Georgia and Ukraine in 2003 and 2004, the Euromaidan in 2014 greatly amplified these trends . forces in Transnistria, Abkhazia and South Ossetia cemented the new territorial divisions and secured Russian influence over the conflict parties .
 No peacekeepers were deployed to Nagorno-Karabakh . Russian military bases remained in both Armenia and Azerbaijan .
 During the 1990s Russia regarded instability in neighbouring postSoviet states as a dangerous threat to its already weakened state .
 Moscow feared that the conflicts could escalate beyond the local framework . Abkhazia has a direct destabilising effect in the Russian North Caucasus .
 Russia was already using the conflicts to exert selective pressure on neighbouring states . But its policy was still directed towards ending the wars and stabilising the situation on its borders .
 Moscow found itself holding a kind of monopoly as guarantor of cease-fire agreements . The Yugoslav Wars were absorbing the West's attention .
 Russia and Western actors were still able to agree on UN and OSCE missions to observe the Russian peacekeepers in Moldova and Georgia and to cooperate on monitoring the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
 At the 1999 Istanbul OSCE summit, Russia agreed to withdraw its forces from Moldova and Georgia . Russia also agreed to pull forces from Georgia and Moldova .
 Moscow excluded Russian peacekeeping forces from this obligation . But unlike Chişinău and Tbilisi, Moscow excluded the Russian peacekeepers .
 Russian peacekeeping troops in Moldova and Georgia became much more important for Moscow . There were no longer any Russian military bases on uncontested Moldovan and Georgian territory .
 The colour revolutions and the emerging discussion about NATO membership for Ukraine and Georgia hardened the fronts . The colour revolution and emerging discussion of NATO membership hardened the front of the debate .
 Chişinău and Tbilisi increasingly regarded the Russian-dominated peacekeepers as de facto occupying forces . Moscow saw them as a military bulwark against NATO expansion .
 The Russo-Georgian War of 2008 was another step on the road to militarisation of Russian policy in its Eurasian neighbourhood . The war was the first time Russian policy was militarised in the region .
 The fighting began with a Georgian assault on Tskhinval/i, 20 Russia had spent the years preparing for this eventuality .
 Russia established regular military bases in Abkhazia and South Ossetia under its new formal alliances with the two entities . After the war ended, Russia establishedregular military bases.
 Russia and the Conflict over Abhkazia, in Statehood and Security: Georgia after the Rose Revolution, ed.
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia use the standard Russian variants, such as Sukhum, Tskhinval and Gal . The Georgian equivalents are Sukhumi, Tkhinvali and Gali .
 No international observation of Russia’s military activities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Since then there has been no international observation.
 The poor performance of the Russian army in the Russo-Georgian War persuaded the political and military leadership to initiate a comprehensive overhaul of the armed forces . The Russian army's poor performance in the Russian war persuaded the leadership to start a comprehensive reforms .
 The post-2008 reforms professionalised personnel, command and leadership structures and invested in modernising weapons systems and technical equipment in all branches .
 The armed forces remain focused on power projection in the neighbourhood and adjacent regions and on defence against threats from the West .
Exercises and technical improvements enhanced troop mobility and special forces capabilities . Exercises, technical improvements improved troop mobility, special forces capability .
 Bases in eastern Europe, the South Caucasus and Central Asia are an important factor for Russian forces to deploy rapidly in the neighbourhood .
 Russian contingents in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and the peacekeeping forces in Transnistria . These also include the Russian contingent in Ab Khazia, South Ossetsia and peacekeeping force in TransNistria.
 The annexation of Crimea in March 2014 and the war in Donbas are outstanding examples for the militarisation of Russian Eurasia policy . The “successful’s annexation’ of Crimea and the War in Don Bas are outstanding example for the militaryisation of Russia, says the Russian
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea and expanded military presence there strengthens its strategic position in the Black Sea . Russia's annexation of the Crimea and expansion of its military presence in the region strengthens its position .
 Western discourse was dominated by the idea that conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhazia and South Ossetia would be determined by the conflict between Russia and the respective parent states Moldova and Georgia . These in turn by the overarching geopolitical conflict between Russian and the West.
 This interpretation externalised developments in the conflict areas and attributed them exclusively to the acts and interests of outside actors, with no weight of their own . This interpretation is based on outside actors' actions.
 September 2016 16 Russian Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts ical conflict would also cause the secession conflicts to disappear .
 The parent states in the South Caucasus, Georgia and Azerbaijan, take a similar view . The parent state states in Georgia, Azerbaijan and Georgia take the same view .
From their perspective interaction with political institutions and actors in the contested areas would be tantamount to at least limited recognition. From their perspective interacting with political institution and actors would be Tantamount to limited recognition .
 Even academic research on internal developments in the de facto states is sometimes regarded critically in the parent states .
 Without Russian support it would never have been possible to create elements of statehood in the secessionist entities, such as political institutions, administrations and borders .
De facto states are not the only conditions for the existence of de facto states . But those are not only conditions. But they are the only condition for theexistence of the states .
 The analytical focus on the geopolitical context obscures great differences in the role Russia plays in developing state structures and the extent of Russian influence in the territories .
 Russia’s role as security guarantor created the external conditions for the establishment of state structures in the contested territories . Russia's role in the region was a key role in creating the conditions for state structures .
 Russia granted – to greatly varying extents – economic and financial aid and political support for establishing these structures . Russia granted to greatly different extents, including economic, financial aid, and political aid .
 nationalist-leaning Russian actors were arguing for an active policy of strengthening the secessionist entities and binding them more closely to Russia .
 Yury Luzhkov was one of the first to call for the recognition of Abkhazia . Former Moscow Mayor Yury Lzhkov, who was a former Moscow Mayor, called for Abkhazi .
 Russia lifted its economic embargo in early 2008 . He began expanding his business activities there long before the embargo was lifted .
 Such figures frequently played an active role within the de facto states themselves, establishing close contacts with 25 . At the same time, this policy also has limits .
 Russia failed to persuade its Eurasian allies to recognise Abkhazia and South Ossetia in 2008 . Russia has since ceased even trying to recognise the two countries .
 TMR, Abkhazia and South Ossetia want access to the Eurasian Economic Union . This would require the other members to recognise the three de facto states .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia participate de facto in Eurasian economic integration through their growing integration in Russian economy .
 The local ruling elites exerting influence on political processes, says Fischer . Fischer's business interests are at risk for their own business interests .
 The Russian political system, legislation, political parties and institutions represented the model for the development of state structures in the contested territories .
 The Russian governing party United Russia formed in the de facto states .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia use the Russian rouble as their main currency . In the TMR it possesses the status of second currency .
 Large parts of Russia's population draw pensions and other social benefits from Russia . Russian citizenship is a key part of the Russian population .
 Many young people go to Russia to train or study . Not all the territories possess functioning education systems .
 In Transnistria and South Ossetia the desire for independence is closely tied to a wish for unification with Russia . The desire for unification is closely linked to a desire for freedom from Russia .
 The Russian and/or Russianspeaking populations in the TMR have strong ties with Russia . The Ossetians in South Ossetia identify with the Republic of North Ossetsia in the Russian North Caucasus .
 Both Transnistria and South Ossetia have adopted the Russian political model with the objective of integration into the Russian Federation . Both have adopted a Russian political system with the aim of integration .
 Moscow officially adheres to its line of upholding Moldova’s territorial integrity . Moscow stood by that stance at the beginning of the crisis over Ukraine .
Transnistria’s complex geographical situation would make an annexation on the Crimean model costly and risky for Russia . Transnistrian’'s complex geographical situations would make the annexation costly for Russia.
 Tskhinval/i’s request for incorporation has been rejected by the Kremlin . The Kremlin has not yet responded directly to the request . South and North Ossetia would favour its fulfilment .
 If Moscow were to concede the South Ossetian and Transnistrian demands it would lose an important lever of influence over Moldova and Georgia .
 Abkhazia demonstrates a clear will to limit Russian influence and mistrust towards Russian moves to intervene in the implementation of its claim to sovereignty .
 Ethnic identification with the northern neighbour is weak in the dominant Abkhaz population group . Most of the territory’s population also possesses Russian citizenship .
 Moscow in turn regularly expresses concerns over possible discrimination of Russians in Abkhazia . Moscow has repeatedly failed in attempts to enforce its interests without heed to the positions .
 Russia has found itself forced to operate more cautiously in Abkhazia, for instance during the political crisis in May/June 2014 . The debate over the agreement on alliance and strategic partnership.
 Abkhazia’s political, economic and societal integration with Russia has advanced steadily since 2008 . Like in South Ossetia, the political and economic integration with Russian has also advanced steadily .
 "Transnistria Is a Bridge too Far for Russia," says Pål Kolstø . The 28-year-old Norwegian is the author of the book, Open Democracy .
 The threshold to de facto annexation has now been reached . September 2016 18 Russian Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts economic and military agreements concluded since 2014 .
 Nagorno-Karabakh is a special case in relation to statehood and Russian political influence . The region is in the region of the Russian Republic of Azerbaijan .
 Armenia gradually assumed the function of Nagorno-Karabakh’s political, economic and societal patron . Later, it was Armenia that gradually assumed its role as a political and economic patron .
 The territory represents a touchstone of national identity for the Armenian elites and society .
 Integration of the political elites of Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia has led to reciprocal political influence . Integration of political elites has certainly led to reciprocity.
 Armenia is economically and militarily more or less completely dependent on Russia . Russian influence on Nagorno-Karabakh is considerably more limited than in TMR, Abkhazia or South Ossetia .
 Citizenship/Passportizatsiya Granting citizenship of the Russian Federation to residents of the contested territories . It represents a central element of Russian policy in the unresolved conflicts .
 The use of this instrument became established after 2002, and was boosted in South Ossetia and Abkhazia after the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 . In the meantime almost all members of these two titular nations are Russian nationals .
 Russian passports have also been issued to residents of Transnistria since 2002 . The proportion of Russian citizens there is smaller than in Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Nagorno-Karabakh looks in the first place to Armenia . The region has a history of violence and violence .
 The question of granting citizenship to Russians and Russian-speakers living abroad has characterised Moscow's policy in Eurasia since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
Twenty-five million Russians and Russian-speakers living outside the borders of the Russian Federation . It is an expression of the geopolitical conflict, but also of the identity conflict that arose when the Soviet state disappeared .
 For a long time the naturalisation question was highly controversial in Russia . The question has been controversial for years in Russia.
 Abkhazia makes up only about 30 percent of the overall population . The situation is more complex in Abkhazi, where the population is only 30 percent .
 The Georgian population of the Gal/i district in eastern Abkhazia is excluded from Russian naturalisation . The Gal/I district is in the eastern part of the country .
 It can be assumed that many inhabitants possess two or three different passports . It is thought that many people have different passports.
 The idea of opening a Russian consulate in Tiraspol has been discussed in Moscow since the 2000s . But not followed through out of consideration for Chişinău . The idea was not considered until now .
Sabine Fischer to persuade post-Soviet neighbours to introduce dual citizenship for ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers outside the Russian Federation .
 Russia's largest states rejected the initiative, not least over fears for their sovereignty . But precisely those states with the largest Russian populations rejected the Russian initiative .
 In 2002 Russia tightened the conditions for naturalisation, but until 2009 retained a simplified procedure for citizens of post-Soviet states .
 Residents of South Ossetia, Abkhazia and Transnistria benefited from the simplified naturalisation process .
 The Tagliavini Commission found that the wholesale issuing of Russian passports to residents of South Ossetia and Abkhazia before the 2008 war satisfied the definition of collective naturalisation and as such contravened international law .
 A Russian passport remains the only option for citizens of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to escape their isolation and achieve a modicum of mobility .
 Russia’s passportisation policy of the 1990s and early 2000s represented an element of humanitarian assistance, alongside the aspect of social and political control .
 Moscow has been accused of sharing responsibility for the fate of fellow-citizens in the de facto states . But at the latest from the mid-2000s it also lent support to assertions that Moscow shared responsibility .
 In 2008 war with Georgia, Russia justified its intervention with the need to protect compatriots in South Ossetia . Russia now justifies its intervention.
 Tbilisi's demands that residents of both areas travel only via Georgia with Georgian documents .
 The parties have to date failed to find an arrangement acceptable to all sides . The parties had to date to date .
 Passportization and Territoriality in the De Facto States of Georgia, master’s thesis .
 Residents of NagornoKarabakh prefer Armenian passports in order to be able to travel abroad . Nagorno Karabakh residents prefer Armenians to Armenian passports .
 Many residents of TMR have Moldovan and/or Romanian passports as well as Transnistrian, and therefore did not necessarily need Russian passports . Many residents have Moldova and Romanian passports.
 Abkhazia, Transnistria, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh as facts of post-Soviet space]. Materik.ru, 14 September 2005, was published in 2005 .
 September 20 Russian Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts tion of Russian-speaking citizens of other post-Soviet states .
 The number of Russian passports issued in Transnistria also increased . The legislation was aimed at Ukraine .
 41 Moscow has to date held back on granting citizenship to those living in the ‘people’s republics’ of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 New legislation lowers the obstacles to further instrumentalisation of Russian citizenship in future conflicts with neighbouring states .
 The naturalisation of other states’ citizens does not per se represent a violation of their sovereignty . The naturalisations of other countries' citizens do not perse represent an violation of sovereignty .
 If it is conducted on a massive scale and those naturalised retain their residence abroad, it can produce a sovereignty conflict . But if it is carried out on a huge scale, it could produce a conflict .
 Russia's Eurasia policy transformed from early efforts to find a suitable way of dealing with millions of Russians living in the newly independent post-Soviet states into an instrument of revisionist policy towards neighbouring states .
 The Russian discourse blurs the distinction between actual Russian citizens, ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers, thus opening up further opportunities for Moscow .
 Economic Support and Cooperation Russia is of outstanding economic importance for the de facto states . Russia is one of the most important countries in the world .
 At the same time, the extent of their dependency differs according to their own economic capacities and level of development .
 The South Ossetian economy is not viable on its own . Transnistria, Abkhazia and Nagorno-Karabakh all possess more or less functioning economic structures .
 Russian energy subsidies are crucial for industrial Transnistria, and benefit industry, the political and business elites, as well as private consumers .
Sabine Fischer form of pensions and social benefits for Russian passport-holders . September 21, 2016 21, is the first time Fischer has received a pension and social benefit .
 The administrative line between Moldova and Transnistria is permeable . Tiraspol maintains the most diverse external economic relations of all the de facto states .
 Most of the TMR’s exports go to Moldova and the European Union . In fact, most of the Moldova's exports are to the EU .
 Moscow raised no objections when the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement between the EU and Moldova was expanded to include Transnistria in December 2015 .
Until the Russo-Georgian War of 2008, South Ossetia conducted agricultural trade with both North Ossetian and Georgia . The region was economically strongly underdeveloped .
 Political status meant that its main sources of revenue were smuggling and black marketeering . But its unclarified political status meant its main source of revenue was smuggling and marketeering.
After the Russo-Georgian War of 2008, South Ossetia successively integrated into the Russian economic space but without any tangible domestic economic development of its own . After the Russian war of 2008.
 Corruption, a shrinking population and infrastructure damage have restricted economic activity to a minimum . Corruption, shrinking population, infrastructure damage are restricted to the minimum .
Until August 2008, Abkhazia was economically cut off on all sides, and almost completely dependent on remittances, smuggling and black marketeering with Russia and Turkey .
Russia supported the economic embargo imposed in 1996 by CIS at Georgian instigation . Russia supported the sanctions in 1996 .
 It relaxed its stance from the early 2000s, but only officially lifted the CIS embargo in February 2008 .
 Following recognition, Russia became Abkhazia’s most important source of economic aid and investment .
 Abkhazia possesses several economic attractions from the Russian perspective . The Russian capital is located in the Black Sea .
 Russian oil company Rosneft is conducting test drilling off the Abkhaz Black Sea coast . Russian firms are investing in tourism infrastructure, while Russian oil companies are conducting testing drilling .
 At the same time, Sukhum/i’s efforts to place limits on Russian economic engagement regularly create rancour .
 In 2015 only a small proportion of the originally agreed Russian financial aid and investment actually reached Abkhazia .
 Moscow was also suspected of exerting political pressure on Abkhazia . This was attributed in part to the Russian recession .
 Nagorno-Karabakh is intimately tied to Armenia economically as well as politically and politically and militarily . The region is politically and economically tied to the country .
 Armenia is in turn highly economically dependent on Russia, one can justifiably speak of an indirect Russian subsidisation of Nagorno-Karabakh in the guise of low energy prices, remittances and remittance .
Russian economic engagement in de facto states does not automatically represent a violation of the sovereignty of the parent states . Russian economic engagement is not automatically a violation, says Russian official .
Until 2008 Russian investments in South Ossetia were secured multilaterally under OSCE arrangements . Transnistrian exports to Russia are covered by intergovernmental agreements .
 In other cases, such as Abkhazia and South Ossetia post-2008, the violation of sovereignty is obvious . The violation is obvious.
 Russian Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts sought to tighten the isolation of the secessionist territories and made economic interaction with them illegal . September 22 Russian Policy.
 More recently, the Russian economic crisis has affected the de facto states as well as Russia’s Eurasian neighbours . The crisis has also affected the De facto states.
 The fall-off in financial flows from Russia is complicating the economic and socio-economic situation in these already strongly underdeveloped areas .
 Russia plays a central role in all the frozen conflicts in the eastern neighbourhood . It has tied all the de facto states – with the exception of Nagorno-Karabakh – closely to itself, politically and economically .
 In Abkhazia and South Ossetia this process has almost reached the annexation threshold . The process has nearly reached the threshold of annexation in both countries .
 Revisionist instruments such as support for state-building, military presence and security guarantees have shaped Russian policy since the 1990s .
 From the 2000s Moscow applied and expanded them in an increasingly systematic manner . The Russian capital is now the world's most populous city .
 A further intensification of revisionist measures occurred after the outbreak of the crisis over Ukraine . But their application still remains selective .
 The Kremlin continues to pursue calculated destabilisation with the aim of controlling internal and external developments in the affected states and preventing them turning to the West .
 The measures applied take different forms in Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh . The measures are not designed for territorial expansion .
 TMR's precarious situation would be both risky and costly for Moscow, as it could involve the loss of a valuable lever of influence over Chişinău .
 The pro-European Moldovan elites have discredited themselves in the eyes of the population . However, recent internal developments render stronger Russian influence superfluous anyway .
 Russian policy in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has been less characterised by revisionism . Russian policy has not been characterised by revisionism in the conflict .
 Armenia’s great dependency on Russia, this is where Moscow possesses least control over the conflict parties . Russia has to date sought to exploit the geopolitical tensions above all to strengthen their own position .
 The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict involves considerable security risks for Russia . The conflict is now further heightened by the crisis in relations with Turkey .
 The greatest danger for Russia here would be if its alliance obligations to Armenia were to drag it into an escalation . Russia maintains a lively interest in avoiding an escalation – which it maintains an interest in avoid .
 Only in the conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia did Russia break with its status-quo policy before the start of the Ukraine crisis .
 Russia has stood by its normalisation of economic relations with Georgia, even if this had already been reaching its limits before the crisis broke out . At the same time, Russia has been standing by itsnormalisation of relations.
 Georgian policy in these two conflicts will depend not least on Georgian domestic and foreign policy .
 Russia is struggling with a deepening economic crisis that is affecting its relations with the de facto states . Russia is currently struggling with its economic crisis.
 The consequences for Russian foreign policy will be largely determined by the domestic political situation . The consequences will be mostly determined by political situation in Russia . Russia's foreign policy is likely to be determined by its political situation.
 Moscow could find itself forced to make compromises on foreign policy and relax relations with the West in order to improve its economic situation . In the medium term Moscow could make compromises and relax ties with West .
 In that event, the likelihood of a sharpening of revisionist policy in the neighbourhood would fall . In that case, it would be the first time a sharpened policy in that area.
 The danger appears greater that a political leadership faced with economic weakness and domestic pressure will continue to exploit foreign policy for purposes of domestic legitimacy .
 The frozen conflicts would remain a convenient tool in Moscow’s hands. In this case the frozen conflicts will remain a handy tool.
 The Transnistria conflict that arose in 1989/90 is one of the most unusual outcomes of the lateand post-Soviet transformation processes . The TransNistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine Klemens Büscher is one.
Until 1988 “Transnistria’s” was neither a political unit nor a contemporary term in the Soviet Union . Until 1988 ‘Transnists’ was neither an political unit or a modern term in Russia .
 The territory's secession came not at the end of a longer escalation, but virtually overnight during the late-Soviet convulsions .
 The Moldovan Soviet Republic straddled two regions with different historical roots and traditions . The conflict undoubtedly fostered the conflict between the two .
 Bessarabia, between the rivers Prut and Dniester, belonged to the Russian Empire from 1812 . It retained strong Romanian linguistic and cultural influences .
 Bessarabia became part of Romania in 1918, after the collapse of the Tsarist monarchy .
 It fell under Soviet control in 1940 under the Hitler-Stalin Pact, and finally became part of the Soviet Union in 1944 . It was first part of Soviet control under the Nazi regime .
 The area east of the Dniester, on the other hand, had never been part of a Romanian or Moldovan state .
During the 1941 to 1944 occupation parts of the left-bank population suffered terribly under Romanian rule . They belonged to the Governorate of Transnistria, run from Odessa .
 The Moldovan national movement is facing increasing pressure from the Moldovan government . Heavy industry and arms factories are concentrated in the area of subsequent secession .
 Moldovanisation left the Russian-speaking elites fearing for their posts . Its objective was linguistic, and thus de facto personal, which left them fearing for posts .
In Regionale Bewegungen und Regionalismen in europäischen Zwischenräumen seit der Mitte des 19.
 The Transnistria conflict Chişinău authorities and competition with a rising Moldovan elite appeared anathema to industrial directors .
 Moldovan declaration of sovereignty in 1990 declared all property on the territory of the MSSR to be owned by the republic . The emerging rejection of a new Union Treaty by Moldovan leadership triggered the Russian-speaking autonomy/secession movement .
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine Russian-speaking elites in the republic's industrial areas .
 The Moldovan national movement was founded by the Moldovan Republic in the 1980s . They were determined to defend their dominance in the centres of industry . The Moldovans are now the most powerful country in the world .
 In the industrial cities west of the Dniester the separatists gained the upper hand in Bender, but not in Chişinău, Bălţi or smaller towns .
East of the river they captured certain agricultural areas where they enjoyed little support . East of the River, they captured some agricultural areas.
 The Moldovan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was founded in 1924 with similar boundaries within the Ukrainian SSR . It is seen as the precursor of Transnistrian ‘statehood’ and a source of historical legitimacy .
 The elites in the industrial areas succeeded in tapping pre-existing ideas within the Russian-speaking urban population, especially the internalisation of ideological dogmas of Soviet nationality policy .
 Propaganda and deliberate fear-mongering, chauvinism and a fortress mentality massively amplified the Russian-speaking population’s fears of discrimination and possible unification with Romania .
Left-bank population in demonstrations, strikes and pseudo-referendums that lent the separatist course a sheen of democratic legitimacy . It was the resulting mass mobilisation of the left-bank populations .
 Russian-speaking elites exploited their existing ties with Moscow to secure backing . Second time they exploited existing ties to secure their backing .
 The Soviet leadership officially rejected Transnistrian secession . There are clear signs that the separatists were supported and encouraged by a series of high-ranking representatives .
 It was a struggle under the flag of anti-nationalism, defending the supposed equality of all Soviet nations . As they understood it, it was an anti-Nationalism struggle .
 For an example of this ideological conviction, see “Pochemu my zabastovali?’ .
 Klemens Büscher War and “Frozen Conflict’ on the Dniester Russian support was particularly obvious in the military sphere . September 27, 2016, was the 27th anniversary of the war .
 The Soviet 14th Army was stationed in and around the largest Transnistrian city Tiraspol .
 The Transnistrian leadership seized control of the remaining left-bank government agencies and police stations . Chişinău’s vain attempt to recapture the right-bank city of Bender in mid-June 1992 led to a short but bloody war that the separatists quickly
 The 14th Army doubled as a peacekeeping force enforcing the cease-fire and separating the parties . They received massive military support from the 14th army .
 The bitter clashes in early summer 1992 cost more than one thousand lives . Well over one hundred thousand fled, and ten thousand were injured in the fighting .
 Moldovan and Russian presidents agreed a cease-fire in July 1992 . Moldovan-Transnistrian-Russian border monitoring regime with a trilateral peace-keeping force .
 The cease-fire, which still remains in effect today, cemented the territorial division created by the fighting . The fighting continues today .
 Russia recognised the Republic of Moldova in the borders of the previous Soviet republic . The status of the ‘Transnistrian Moldovan Republic’ remained unclarified .
 Moldova, Transnistria and Moldova also participated as mediators . Ukraine also participated in the OSCE, Russia and Ukraine .
 Moldovan President Vladimir Voronin withdrew his initial approval of the memorandum . The West's backing was behind the decision .
 The European Union’s growing interest in the region led in 2005 to a further internationalisation of conflict regulation .
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine the status question . September 28, 2016, is the latest in a series of events in the Ukraine crisis .
 Chişinău is offering region autonomy, which the Moldovan parliament defined in law in 2005 without reference to the Transnistrian position . Tiraspol insists on international recognition and is willing only to agree to a loose confederation of equals with Moldova .
 In the early 1990s the Moldovan government quickly reversed its Romanianisation course, not least to allay the concerns of the national minorities . 22 percent of Moldovan population outside the TMR are in Romania .
 The southern region of Gagauzia received territorial autonomy in 1994 . Most of its 150,000 inhabitants belong to the Turkic Christian GAGauz minority .
 Moldova’s minority policy as a whole has remained moderate to this day . Russian, as the most important minority language, remains strong in the mass media and commerce .
 Unification with Romania is regarded as completely unrealistic, and would hardly be an issue in Moldova were it not repeatedly raised by Romanian politicians .
 Surveys within Romania show three-quarters of the population there supporting unification with Moldova .
 In terms of ethnicity, the half million population of Transnistria comprises roughly equal numbers of Moldovans, Russians and Ukrainians . Members of other nationalities (Bulgarians, Gagauzians and others) make up 9 percent .
 The Russian language dominates all areas of public life. But behind the institutionally and rhetorically multi-ethnic façade is the Russian language .
 It is estimated that two hundred thousand citizens possess Russian nationality and the same number Moldovan . One hundred thousand have Ukrainian; multiple citizenship is commonplace .
 Complete ethnic and linguistic data from the May 2014 census will probably not be published before 2016 .
 Klemens Büscher repeatedly agreed to refrain from exerting pressure, which de facto allowed TMR leadership to establish state structures largely undisturbed .
 Today, TMR possesses almost all the attributes and institutions of an independent state . Today, indeed, the state has almost all of the attributes.
 The current form of rule can be characterised as an authoritarian presidential system with a critical human rights situation . The current system of rule is characterised by the current president as a president .
 The relative success of the Transnistrian state-building project cannot be attributed solely to the actions of regional actors .
 Russia exercises a dual role as mediator and conflict party . Russia shares responsibility for the emergence and development of Transnistrian statehood .
 Moscow appears to exercise decisive influence in questions of strategic importance, while leaving other matters largely to the local actors . Moscow seems to exercise a decisive influence.
 The EU-Moldova Association Agreement and Moldovan political crisis have affected the Transnistria conflict more recently . Ukraine Crisis and EU- Moldova Agreement have also affected the conflict .
 Tensions between the pro-European coalition government in Chişinău and the Russian leadership escalated in advance of the initialling of the Association Agreement between the EU and the Republic of Moldova in November 2013 .
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine means of threats, massive anti-European propaganda and a ban on imports of Moldovan wine .
 Chişinău initially responded to Russia’s annexation of Crimea with open criticism . But quickly sought to return to calm dialogue with Moscow .
 Moldova steered clear of provocations, not least in view of its great dependency on Russian energy supplies . Moldova's economic sanctions imposed in autumn 2013 and subsequently successively expanded .
 Moldova has been divided roughly equally between supporters of integration in the EU and those who would prefer to see their country enter the Eurasian Economic Union . Since then Moldova is divided roughly between supporters and supporters of EU integration .
 In April 2014, 43 percent feared that the crisis there would spread to Moldova, while 46 percent saw no particular risks . 40 percent approved of Russia’s annexation of Crimea, while 43 percent rejected it .
 Approval was especially strong among the national minorities, with fully 72 percent of the selfidentified ethnic Ukrainians supporting the annexation of Crimea .
 Most of the Moldovan population, including most of the Ukrainian minority, support the interpretation of events in Ukraine disseminated by Russian media propaganda .
 Russian radio and television are the second most important source of information for the population after domestic broadcasters . For the minorities in fact the most important. This is largely unsurprising .
 Russian authorities relaxed the ban on wine imports from Moldova in the following summer . Only for selected products from pro-Russian Gagauzia and Transnistria .
 In December 2015 several Moldovan journalists’ organisations demanded a ban on Russian television broadcasting of news and current affairs programmes .
 By 2003 almost half of the 42,000 tonnes of munitions originally stored there had been transported to Russia under an agreement reached at the 1999 OSCE summit in Istanbul .
 Scenarios of the kind witnessed in eastern Ukraine would also appear fundamentally conceivable in Gagauzia, Bulgaria . Russia to seek a violent destabilisation of Moldova with Transnistria’s assistance .
 Moldova tightened controls at Chişinău Airport in 2014 and in a number of cases banned male Russian citizens from entering . In order to prevent the clandestine entry of Russian soldiers.
 The Moldovan government and president have repeatedly demanded the withdrawal of Russian military forces and the replacement of the trilateral peacekeeping forces with an international civilian mission . The Moldovans have also demanded the removal of Russian forces and replaced them with a civilian mission.
 Moscow's hard stance in the question of Chişinău's relationship with the EU confirms the widespread supposition that its strategic goal is to keep Moldova inside Russia's sphere of influence and prevent it turning to the West .
 Russia’s methods include influencing Moldovan internal politics through propaganda and supplying political, practical and financial support to pro-Russian forces .
 In early 2014 Russia supported the holding of a referendum in Gagauzia, which Chişinău regarded as illegal . Almost all participants voted in favour of Moldova joining the customs union with Russia rather than the European Union .
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine unconcealed assistance from Moscow and from Russian media .
 The risk of a ‘Ukrainian scenario’ in Moldova has receded since summer 2014 . However, the risk of the “Ukrainians’s scenario has also receded, according to a report .
 Political blockades, dramatic power shifts within and outside parliament, and ensuing political instability brought the reform process largely to a standstill in 2015 .
 One led a minority coalition, while the only one with a coalition majority lasted less than one hundred days . One of the only two with a majority of a majority last less than a hundred days.
 Many observers believe Vlad Plahotniuc wields decisive influence over the country’s administration and justice system .
 The Moldovan state remains “in the hands of oligarchs’s” has attracted increasing international criticism . The fact that the Moldovan State remains ‘in thehands of oligarch’ has also attracted increasing criticism .
 The proportion of Moldovans who support unification with Romania has recently risen to 21 percent . After remaining around 5 to 10 percent for many years, the proportion has risen to 20 percent .
 The Transnistria conflict is not currently a political priority for Chişinău . The conflict is in the background of these developments .
 Moldova and Ukraine have improved cooperation since 2014 . Transnistria conflict also affects questions relating to the conflict . Moldova-Ukraine relations have improved in recent years .
 There has been no progress of late in the internationally mediated negotiating process . There is no progress in late in internationally mediated negotiations .
 Two of the five 5+2 meetings planned for 2014 did actually take place . The format has been heavily discredited by Russia’s massive violation of central OSCE principles and the conflicts between Ukraine and Russia .
 German OSCE chairmanship was held in June 2016. Not until June 2016, after intense efforts by the German OSce chairmanship, was another round of talks held in Berlin .
 Chişinău and Tiraspol affirmed their intention to resolve a series of practical issues . In a protocol signed by both sides, both sides agreed to resolve the issues .
 Western mediators and observers appear to have subordinated legitimate interests of the Republic of Moldova to their desire to achieve an outcome from the joint mediation efforts with Russia .
 Berlin on Chişinău to make concessions on acceptance of Transnistrian vehicle registration plates, recognition of TransNistrian educational qualifications and reintegration of telecommunications links . Apparently considerable pressure was exercised in Berlin.
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine sovereignty-related and symbolic matters . Without regulating the division of powers between the central state and the autonomous entity would enable Tiraspol to exploit progress in the Transnistsrian state-building process for propaganda purposes .
 The concrete challenges that reunification would produce in various policy areas are apparently not a concern of Moldovan politics . The two entities’ very different development paths and the harmonisation processes and transitional arrangements would be required .
 The Office for Reintegration is answerable to the responsible deputy prime minister . It has only minimal resources for addressing these questions .
 Prime Minister Valeriu Streleţ has announced the preparation of an “integration roadmap’s” The announcement is not the first of the August 2015 revival of the inter-ministerial reintegration commission after years of inactivity .
 Pro-Russian parties traditionally demonstrate a degree of understanding for Transnistria’s position . Pro-European currents emphasise its lack of legitimacy and the role of Russia .
 In both political camps supporters of reintegration are in the majority . But in both political parties supporters of the reintegment are in a majority .
 Moldovan society, on the other hand, appears to have accepted a development path without Transnistria . Moldova's society appears to be accepting the development path.
Reintegration is one of the country's three most important tasks, according to survey . 80 percent of respondents criticised the government's efforts to reach a resolution of the Transnistria conflict as inadequate .
 None of the numerous recent demonstra39 European Court of Human Rights cases have been heard in the past .
September 2016 35 Klemens Büscher tions and protests raised the Transnistria question . September 2016 35. Klemen Büsher tion and protests raise the TransNistria Question .
 A broad majority rejects the option of Russia annexing Transnistria .
 Even the minorities, who often show understanding and a degree of sympathy for the TMR, express reservations over the possibility of permanent separation .
 Such a move would permanently weaken Moldova's relative demographic and political weight in Moldova . The move would weaken their relative demographic, political weight.
 Moscow would now incorporate the secessionist territory east of the Dniester into the Russian Federation .
Transnistrian Foreign Minister Nina Shtanski explicitly welcomed the annexation of Crimea . She pointed to the parallels between the two areas, referring to the Transnistrians' referendum of 2006 .
 TMR’s situation has become a great deal more difficult since 2014 . It became clear that TMR's situation is more difficult than ever .
 The main problems lie in the relationship with neighbouring Ukraine, the problematic economic situation and the consequences of the EU-Moldova Association Agreement . The main problem is the relationship between Ukraine and Ukraine .
 Ukraine adopted a stance of passivity in the talks seeking a resolution of the Transnistrian conflict . For many years Ukraine adopted the stance of passingivity in talks .
 The Transnistrian state-building process has been largely undisturbed . As such it also helped the state building process to proceed largely undistsurbed .
Ukrainian politicians and businesspeople have profited on no small scale from legal and illegal trade with Transnistria .
 Ukrainian acknowledgement of Moldova’s territorial integrity . There was a degree of understanding between Kiev and Tiraspol over many concrete questions .
 Kiev maintained good relations with TMR President Yevgeny Shevchuk, an ethnic Ukrainian elected in 2011 .
 Especially close political and economic ties existed between Transnistria and the Odessa region .
 Kiev’s “benign neutrality’ has been supplanted by a critical if not hostile stance . The annexation of Crimea and the fighting in eastern Ukraine have changed Kiev's stance .
 Ukrainian and Moldovan authorities found armed 44 Institutul de Politici Publice, ed., Barometer of Public Opinion, March–April 2014 .
 Nicu Popescu and Leonid Litra in Transnistria: A Bottom-Up Solution, ECFR Policy Brief 63 (London: European Council on Foreign Relations)
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine agents from Transnistsria had participated in attempts to destabilise Odessa .
 Vladimir Antyufeyev has played a prominent role in building quasi-state structures in Ukraine . Other Transnistrian activists are also active in Ukraine’s eastern breakaway regions .
Transnistria's de facto Moscow-controlled military potential represents a real threat to Ukraine, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Transnistrian has become directly embroiled in the RussianUkrainian conflict .
 Kiev has instituted a series of counter-measures during the past two years . In view of the new threats on its south-western border, Kiev has implemented counter- Measures .
 Two bilateral agreements between Kiev and Chişinău concluded in early November 2015 . The support and mediation of the European Union Border Assistance Mission are also of great significance .
First, it was agreed to exchange data on movements across the shared border automatically and in real time .
 Pervomaisc–Kuchurhan is located in the Transnistrian section of the border on the main road to Odessa . It was decided to establish a joint control point for the border .
 EUBAM believes the agreements possess the potential to improve transparency and security at the border and facilitate free legal movement of people and goods .
 37 Klemens Büscher and control to the Transnistrian section of its external borders. September 2016 .
 Kiev’s accommodation in this question is attributable equally to security considerations, to efforts to fight corruption and illicit trade in the Odessa region, and to fulfilling the requirements of the EU Visa Liberalisation Action Plan . Kiev”s accommodation is attributable to security concerns
 Odessa's role as hub for Transnistrian trade has hurt the TMR, especially given Odessa’s role as the hub for transnistrians .
 Kiev possesses a series of other levers which it could bring into play, for example, to deliberately isolate and weaken the TMR regime in response to further Russian aggression . Kiev possesses other levers to bring in play.
 The disruption would include disruption of Transnistrian imports and exports, energy supplies and transport and telecommunications connections . These would include disruptions to Transnistsian imports, energy supply and transport .
 The new situation has exposed the TMR’s great vulnerability, created by its geographical situation and exacerbated by the changing political constellation .
 TMR finds itself squeezed between two states looking in the opposite political direction . TMR now finds itself as an outpost of the ‘Russian world’
 Tiraspol is currently actively avoiding anti-Ukrainian propaganda in order not to unnecessarily provoke Kiev . Tiraspal is currently avoiding anti,Ukrainians propaganda .
 The powerful security apparatus ensures that no politician, no NGO and no media outlet publicly challenges that set of ideas . The powerfulSecurity apparatus ensures no politician or NGO is publicly challenged by a set of Ideas .
 No deviation is discernible, even after the main domestic political conflict . Competition for resources and influence between the state leadership under President Yevgeny Shevchuk and the Sheriff group that dominates the region’s private sector .
 Ukrainian ethno-cultural organisations were funded by Kiev until 2014 . TMR leadership was also pursuing close ties with Ukraine .
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine has become more difficult . September 2016 38 The TransNistria conflict in light of the crisis over Ukraine is more difficult.
 Transnistrian industry is pressing for a strengthening of the Ukrainian vector of foreign relations . The industry is tightly linked to Ukraine and is reliant on good relations .
 The first sign of this was in January 2016, with the appointment of the reputedly pro-Ukrainian veteran politician Vladimir Bodnar as the TMR president’s parliamentary representative following the November 2015 elections .
 Massive restrictions on freedoms of opinion, expression, assembly and association make it impossible to reliably assess the actual attitudes of the population .
 A large part of the population approves of the pro-Russian political orientation and more or less shares the intensely propagated hostility towards the U.S, NATO, the European Union and Romania .
 Great doubts surround the economic viability of the TMR . The economy is strongly characterised by corruption, lack of investment and urgent need for reforms .
 Direct and indirect funding from Russia is crucial for the region's economic survival and secures considerable influence for Moscow .
 The EU market has steadily gained at Russia’s expense, despite vigorous efforts by Moscow and Tiraspol to stimulate the trade relationship .
 Transnistria can only obtain the necessary export certificates in Chişinău . The TMR’s “real” exports are formally part of Moldova’'s foreign trade .
 The outbreak of the crisis over Ukraine has noticeably worsened Transnistria’s economic environment . The outbreak has also noticeably worsened the economic environment.
Almost all its trading partners are mired in recession and aid from Russia has shrunk . Transnistria itself is now experiencing an unprecedented economic crisis .
 GDP declined by about 20 percent in 2015 and is expected to decline by another 5 or 6 percent in 2016 . GDP decline expected to fall by 5 or6 percent in 2017 and 2015.
 Many interpret TMR President Shevchuk’s insistent assertions of loyalty to Moscow over the past two years as “begging’ for further aid. Many interpret the President's insistent assertion of loyalty as ‘begging' for more aid .
 Another major threat to the TMR economy was averted at the very last minute at the end of 2015 . TMR is the largest economy in the world .
 The creation of a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area between the European Union and the Republic of Moldova fundamentally changed the legal basis for TMR’s trade with the EU . TMR.
Transnistrian businesses had enjoyed good access to the EU market through autonomous trade preferences granted by Brussels . Up until this point Transnistrians had enjoyed great access to EU market .
 EU-Moldova Association Council decided on 18 December 2015 to expand the free trade area to the entire territory of Moldova . TMR now profits from the DCFTA trade preferences and will de facto apply the Association Agreement .
 All involved apparently agreed to keep the details of the agreement confidential in order to allow the TMR to save face .
 It appears that the new arrangement represents a kind of gentlemen’s agreement . The new arrangement appears to be a sort of gentlemen's agreement .
 TMR must initially abolish import duties for only half the goods it imports from the EU . A two-year transitional period is granted for the remainder .
 Tiraspol also agrees to introduce a value added tax and cooperate with Chişinău on implementation of the technical regulations of the free trade area . Tiraspols also agree to introduce value added taxes and cooperate on the implementation of free trade regulations .
 Implementation will be veri57 Calculated from data in “Pridnestrovskiy eksport v 2015 godu upal na 17%, import – na 30%’ .
 The Transnistria Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine fied in annual reports . preferential EU market access to be withdrawn if TMR fails to cooperate adequately .
 The crisis over Ukraine and Moldova’s Association Agreement with the EU have narrowed the scope open to the Transnistrian leadership .
 At the same time, the dramatic economic crisis has intensified the entity’s dependency on Russia .
 The uncompromising loyalty to Russia propagated for years by Tiraspol and shared by large parts of the population exacerbates Transnistria’s alienation from Moldova and Ukraine . It is highly dependent on its geographical situation and close economic ties .
 Chişinău and Kiev cooperate closely, as is currently the case . This stands out all the more sharply when Chişi and Kiev cooperate closely .
 TMR’s extreme financial dependency on Russia is hard to reconcile politically with a growing westward orientation of exports . TMR's extreme financialdependency on Russia hard to reconciled politically with growing Westward export policies .
 Closure to the EU market would worsen an already difficult economic and social situation . An explicit turn to EU could lead to the loss of Russian aid and thus the collapse of the self-proclaimed state .
 Reintegrating Transnistria would come at enormous economic cost, given its growing debt and the expected loss of Russian funding .
 The accession of Transnistria's pro-Russian electorate would endanger Moldova’s pro-European political orientation . At the same time, the accession would endanger the pro- Russian electorate .
 A large section of the Moldovan elites currently sees no possibility for conflict regulation . Moldova is currently on the road towards the European Union . The growing attractiveness of Moldova may open the door for reunification .
 There are neither unbridgeable differences of mentality between the societies or deeply-rooted hatred between the two sides of the Dniester .
 For an autonomy arrangement a compromise based on existing federal or autonomy models is conceivable . For a compromise a compromise would be possible, says the author .
 Moldova takes minority protections seriously, and a constitutional right of secession for Transnistria and Gagauzia could be instituted for the unlikely eventuality of unification with Romania .
 A greater obstacle would be the Transnistrian elites’ vested interests in permanent and undisturbed control over the region’s economic resources .
 The truly decisive factor, however, is and remains Russia. September 2016.
 Some sections of the Russian elites appear to sympathise with the option of completely integrating Transnistria into the Russian Federation . Some sections may have personal business reasons or nationalist motives .
 The rest of Moldova would probably leave Russia's sphere of influence . But seen from the Kremlin's perspective, that would probably mean the rest of the Moldova completely leaving Russia’s sphere.
 Moscow continues to adhere to a geopolitical line where the TMR is essentially an instrument of policy towards Moldova . This is obviously why Moscow is still trying to maintain its position.
 Moscow, Tiraspol and Chişinău all regard the status quo as the best option . Absent such a change of government, Moscow and Tiras all regard it as a best option.
 The causes of the conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia date back long before the secessionist wars of the early 1990s .
 The integration of Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia into tsarist Russia was already a conflictual process . It was later absorption into the ethnicity-based federal structure of the Soviet Union .
 Tensions over questions of autonomy and status persisted throughout the Soviet period . Tensions continued throughout the period .
 Protest movements calling for greater political and cultural independence from Tbilisi emerged at repeated intervals . Especially in Abkhazia protest movements called for more political, cultural independence .
 In conflicts with Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia sought backing and support from Moscow . Moscow found itself in the convenient position of being able to play all three parties off against each other .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia became entangled in a web of discriminatory structures in which they were all victim and perpetrator . Georgia, Georgia, South OssETia became thoroughly entangled in an discriminatory structure .
 The situation was aggravated by the demographic situation in both regions . The demographic situation is aggravated by a demographic situation. The situation in the region was aggravated.
 The last Soviet census in 1989 put the total population of South Ossetia at about 98,000 . About 65,000 were ethnic Ossetians .
 The overwhelming majority of ethnic Ossetians, numbering about 450,000, live in North Ossetia on the Russian side of the Caucasus . The majority of the Ossetian population is in the Russian Caucasus .
 The Abkhaz have been a minority in their own region since the beginning of the twentieth century . Unlike the Ossetians, they have been in the region for over a century .
Up to half a million Abkhaz and many members of other Caucasian groups emigrated to the Ottoman Empire . In the second half of the nineteenth century, during the wars accompanying the integration of the Caucasus into tsarist Russia, up to 50 million people emigrated .
 At the same time the tsarist empire relocated Russians, Greeks, Armenians, and Balts to Abkhazia .
 According to the Soviet census Abkhazia had about 525,000 inhabitants in 1989, of whom about 17 percent were Abkhzia .
 Even if much of the Georgian population was concentrated in Gal/i, the population was mixed across the country .
 During the collapse of the Soviet Union the latent conflicts erupted into bloody wars between a nationalist Georgian government under President Zviad Gamsakhurdia and secessionist movements in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 The war lasted from early 1991 to mid-1992 and cost about one thousand lives . In South Ossetia the war lasted between 1991 and 1992 .
 The economic damage in already underdeveloped South Ossetia was enormous . The economic impact in already developing South Ossetsia is enormous .
 Russia acted ambivalently, emphasising the territorial integrity of Georgia . Russia also lending sporadic support to the South Ossetian fighters .
 A cease-fire agreement was signed in June 1992 in Sochi . A Joint Control Commission was established with representatives of Georgia, South Ossetia, North Ossetian and Russia .
 A Georgian/Ossetian/Russian Joint Peace-Keeping Force was established under Russian command . The force was established by Russian command.
 The North Ossetian and Russian presence gave the South Ossetians the overhand .
Tbilisi regarded the JPKF less as a peacekeeping force than a Russian force of occupation . Tbilisi was considered a peacekeeper force by the Russian government .
 Between 1992 and 2009 the negotiations in the JCC repeatedly ground to a standstill . There were regular outbreaks of fighting along the line of contact between the two .
 At the same time the JCC provided a forum for direct communication between the parties . The JCC also provided a forums for direct communications between the two parties .
 The Sochi Agreement also entailed economic reconstruction for South Ossetia . The Sochi agreement also entails economic reconstruction.
 An Economic Reconstruction Programme was established in 2006 at the initiative of the OSCE mission . In many cases the parties use different versions of place names .
 Refugee Return the Path to Peace, Europe Briefing 38 (Tbilisi and Brussels, 19 April 2005)
 The OSCE mission also promoted confidence-building measures between Georgians and Ossetians . The mission also promotes confidence- building measures between the two countries .
 Russia played an ambiguous role, alternately supporting either side . Here too, Russia played a ambiguous role in Russia's election campaign .
 Moscow stepped up its support for the Abkhaz separatists, placing the collapsing Georgian state under increasing military pressure .
 The Abkhaz counter-offensive in summer 1993 forced almost the entire Georgian population to flee . About 250,000 people were forced to flee the Abkhzia .
 To date only about 40,000 to 50,000 Georgians have returned to the Gal/i region on the Abkhaz side of the line of contact .
 The peace-keeping force stipulated in the agreement was nominally supplied by the Commonwealth of Independent States . But in fact it comprised exclusively Russian troops .
 The United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia was charged with monitoring observance of the cease-fire . The U.N. Observer Mission is in Georgia .
 Georgian-Abkhaz peace talks were held in the scope of the UN-moderated Geneva process .
 The situation along the line of contact remained tense, with repeated outbreaks of violence involving criminal gangs and smugglers .
Security situation was especially precarious in the Georgian-settled Gal/i district . The security situation was particularly precarious .
 Heavy fighting in August 1998 left hundreds dead in Gal/i and shattered Georgian trust in the CIS peacekeeping forces .
 The Rose Revolution and Mikheil Saakashvili’s accession to power injected dynamism into Georgian politics, says Georgian politician . TheRose Revolution and SaakASHvili.
 The new leadership tied domestic political and economic reforms to a foreign policy of Euroatlantic integration and the desire to reunify Georgia as rapidly as possible . Georgia's new leader tied domestic reforms to foreign policy.
 The EU, with €2 million, was the largest donor to the ERP, followed by the United States . The United States was the second largest donor, with $2 million .
 Georgia describes displacement of Georgian population from Abkhazia as ethnic cleansing . Georgia describes the displacement of the Georgian population as 'ethnic cleansing'
 The term is also found in a series of OSCE documents from the 1990s . It is internationally contested .
 The Abkhazian side has always rejected it, and instead accuses Georgia of attempted genocide . Georgia's government has always denied the claim .
 The Conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine nationalist rhetoric. September 2016 46 The Conflict over Ab Khazia.
 The speed with which Tbilisi restored its control over Adjara in 2004 initially appeared to justify that course . The speed in 2004 appeared to be the same as the speed with that of the previous time .
 The Georgian leadership sought to internationalise the conflicts, declaring Russia the main enemy . The political leaderships in Sukhum/i and Tskhinval/i criminal shadow regimes and puppets of Moscow .
South Ossetia had yet to recover from the economic repercussions of the war in the early 1990s . South Ossetian had not recovered from economic repercussions from the war .
Unclarified status questions in connection with South Ossetian infrastructure and the border crossing to Russia stifled trade and created conditions where smuggling and black marketeering flourished to become the main source of income . Unclarify status questions.
 Georgia’s economic blockade the CIS also imposed an embargo in 1996 . Alongside the CIS, Georgia's economic blockade was also imposed by the CIS .
 Russia supported the embargo in return for Georgia’s cooperation in the fight against Chechen separatists who had taken refuge in Georgian territory .
 The Abkhaz economy in the 1990s was based exclusively on remittances from Russia . Russia and Turkey had informal economic relations with Turkey, including smuggling .
 In Abkhazia too, the immense war damage was not repaired until well into the 2000s . The war damage in the country was not fully repaired until the 1990s .
 Matters began to improve in the early 2000s, as Russia gradually relaxed its policy of isolation .
 Moscow permitted more trade between Abkhazia and adjacent Russian areas . Now Moscow allows more trade. Now Moscow allowed more trade in Abkhazi areas .
 Russian authorities began issuing passports to residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . At the same time the Russian authorities started issuing passports.
As a result the informal dependency of Abkhazia and South Ossetia grew continuously from the early 2000s to the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 . As a result, the informal dependency of the South Ossetian War grew
 Political institutions emerged in both entities, and functioned as a framework for a political process and regular elections . Political institutions emerge in both nations and countries .
 Political elites organised in parties and movements and competed for power . Political elites organise in parties, movements and compete for power.
 During the 2000s Russian support played an ever-growing role in the development trajectories of the two de facto states . Russia's support played a large role in development of the de facto state .
 In Abkhazia, Russian influence was only one of several factors in the country's history .
 Russia's ambivalent stance during the war of secession and the 1990s left a legacy of tangible mistrust in Abkhazia’s elite and society .
Abkhaz politics is shaped by the desire to protect the Abkhaz nationality, which still makes up only about 30 percent of the population . Abkhz politics is also shaped by a desire toprotect the Ab Khaz nationality .
 In this context other ethnic groups, in particular Georgian returnees, found themselves marginalised .
 The Russo-Georgian War in August 2008 formed a watershed for both South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 It marked the climax of a long period of rising tensions between the conflict parties themselves and the West . The conflict was also in Georgian-Russian relations .
 Russia broke openly for the first time with its commitment to the existing postSoviet borders . In recognising Abkhazia and South Ossetia as independent states, Russia also broke openly .
 In autumn 2008 Moscow concluded “agreements on friendship, cooperation and mutual assistance’ with both entities . Moscow granted generous budget assistance in the following years and invested in the socioeconomic development of secessionist territories .
 Health and education services were partially restored with Russian aid . Health services were partly restored with Russia's aid .
 Moscow deployed regular forces in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and supported Sukhum/i and Tskhinval/i in securing their “borders’ with Georgia .
 The war and Russian recognition further isolated both Abkhazia and South Ossetia from Georgia and from the international community .
 The South Ossetia conflict with its hitherto permeable borders was a turning-point . The conflict is a turning point in the region .
 In Georgia they confirmed the image of Russia as aggressor and intensified the feeling of threat and insecurity . In Georgia, they confirmed that Russia was aggressor .
 Under official Russian patronage, Abkhazia and South Ossetia felt safe from Georgian aggression for the first time . Under official Russia patronage, the two countries felt safe.
 The aftermath of the war caused the societies to drift apart even more quickly than in the years before 2008 . The war's aftermath caused the society to drift faster than before 2008.
 The realities of generations growing up in Abkhazia and South Ossetia today are utterly defined by isolation . The reality of generations in the two countries is that they live in isolation .
 2008 war amplified trends in secessionist territories’ relationships with Russia and Georgia . It created fundamentally new constellations at the international level .
 Interviews by the author during numerous research trips to Abkhazia, 2008 to 2016 .
 The non-Russian international presence disappeared from Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Moscow established regular military bases in both regions in place of the peacekeeping forces .
 The SixPoint Peace Plan was agreed between Presidents Sarkozy and Medvedev . The plan was for Russian forces to withdraw behind their positions before the fighting broke out on 7 August 2008 .
 The old formats were succeeded by the Geneva International Discussions, where both conflicts are negotiated jointly .
 The European Union plays an important role in the peace process as a co-chair and through its observer mission since 2008 . The EU has been in charge of the EU's peace process since 2008.
 Georgia welcomed this, but suspicions have grown in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, where the EU is perceived as pro-Georgian .
 The annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas triggered a wave of Georgian solidarity with Ukraine . Georgia since 2014 since 2014.
 Moscow’s aggression against Kiev was understood as a continuation of its policy in the Georgian secession conflicts . Moscow's aggression was understood to be part of a policy in Georgian secession conflict .
 Russia would now also accelerate the “creeping annexation’ of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . At the same time fears abounded that Russia would also accelerate ‘creeping’ annexation .
 In 2014 NATO and Georgia agreed a Substantial NATO-Georgia Package including a new military training centre and NATO exercises in Georgia . The package includes a new Military training centre, NATO exercises and new training centre .
 The Geneva International Discussions have been held several times each year since 2008 . Georgia’s continued lobbying for a Membership Action Plan in advance of the July 2016 NATO summit in Warsaw was unsuccessful .
 In Abkhazia political conflicts left it suspended between 2012 and spring 2016 . As this study went to press it was being reactivated in protracted talks .
 IPRM implementation has repeatedly come to a standstill in South Ossetia . In South Ossetsia, too, the implementation has come to standstill .
 Georgia in turn demands a right of return to Abkhazia and South Ossetia for Georgians displaced during the early 1990s and 2008 war . Tbilisi is only willing to conclude with Russia (referring Abkhaziia andSouth Ossetian) Georgia in
 Tbilisi is working hard to implement the provisions of the Association Agreement and the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the European Union . The European Union is also working hard on the provisions.
 It has made such good progress in talks with the EU on visa-free travel that the process can probably be completed in 2016 . It has also made such progress that it could be completed by 2016 .
 The Georgian Dream coalition took power in 2012 with the intention of normalising Georgia’s relations with Russia .
 Georgian diplomat Zurab Abashidze has been conducting a dialogue with Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Karasin since autumn 2012 .
 In 2015, Georgia accounted for 29 percent of Georgia’s exports and 32 percent of its imports . This still leaves it far behind the European Union, which in 2015 accounted for29 percent of the country's exports . The EU accounted for 32 percent.
 Conditions at the Georgian-Russian border crossing Verkhniy Lars–Kazbegi were also relaxed . Conditions were relaxed at the border crossing .
 The fundamental rift over Abkhazia and South Ossetia has prevented any noticeable improvement in political relations . The rift over the two countries has not been seen in recent years .
In view of the deterioration of the geopolitical context this is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future . In view of deterioration of geopolitical context, this is likely to change .
 The debate over Russia’s actions in Ukraine also polarised the political discussion in Georgia . The debate in Georgia also further polarised.
 New Emphases in Domestic and Foreign Policy, SWP Comments 3/2013 .
 The Conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine position condemn Moscow’s actions .
 Since the beginning of the crisis over Ukraine it has been demanding massive political and military support for Kiev . Since the start of the Ukraine crisis, it has demanded massive political, military support.
 This increased pressure on already fragile governing coalition . This increased the pressure on the already fragile coalition .
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has appointed Georgian politicians and former government officials to his administration .
 This was viewed with scepticism in Tbilisi as these figures were associates of ousted President Saakashvili . This was seen as a sign of support for the ousted president .
 The greatest uproar was caused by the appointment of Saakashvili himself as a prominent advisor to Poroshenko in February 2015 . Three months later, he was governor of the Odessa region .
 Saakashvili faces charges of abuse of office in Georgia . Many in Tbilisi regarded his political career in Ukraine as an affront .
 This generated serious strain in GeorgianUkrainian relations at governmental level . This generatedserious strain in Georgia's relations with Russia .
Georgia remains a major supplier of humanitarian aid to Ukraine . Both sides swear mutual support and Georgia remains a key supplier of aid .
 The policy towards South Ossetia and Abkhazia announced by Georgian Dream in 2012 was billed as a sharp contrast to that of its predecessor .
 Saakashvili was stripped of his Georgian citizenship in December 2015 . He was formally losing the right to participate in Georgian politics . The Georgian parliament is held in the Georgian capital, the capital of Georgia .
 UNM members declared that he would continue to play a political role and exert influence . However, members of the UNM declared he would still play apolitical role . The UNM says he will continue to exert influence in the future .
Law passed shortly after the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 restricted dealings with Abkhazia and South Ossetia and set out punishments for violations .
 It applies not only to Georgian actors but also to international state and non-state organisations and economic actors . It applies to state, non- state organisations and other organisations .
 The two entities must only be entered and left through Georgian territory, and only under specific conditions .
 External actors are forbidden from conducting business in South Ossetia or Abkhazia . Political institutions and office-holders elected or appointed under legislation other than Georgian are treated as illegal .
 The law was supplemented in 2009 and 2010 by a State Strategy on Occupied Territories that proposed engagement through cooperation and followed the same principles .
 Both the law and the strategy exclude direct contacts with the political leaderships in Sukhum/i and Tskhinval/i .
 Georgia's new government keeps the law on occupied territories . Despite criticisms within and outside Georgia, the new government has kept the law.
 In practical dealings, Abkhazia and South Ossetia worked to defuse the conflict through direct engagement . In its practical dealings with the contested territories it did, however, seek a new start .
 The new minister of reconciliation, 40 Paata Zakareishvili, sent a string of offers to bring Abkhazia and South Ossetia out of isolation .
 Responses in Tskhinval/i and Sukhum/i were characterised by mistrust, partly because law on occupied territories remained in force .
 There were also differences within the Georgian government, some of whose members rejected the new course . Some members of the government rejected the course .
 Georgian foreign and conflict policy quickly became apparent. Almost unbridgeable contradictions between the driving forces of Georgian foreign, conflict policy .
 Venice Commission criticised both the law and the planned amendments . Venice Commission has criticised both law and amendments .
Until his term ended in early 2014, Saakashvili consistently denied the new government’s requests to rename it . The new government's request was denied until early 2014 .
 The Conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine stance . September 2016 52 The Conflict over Ab Khazia. September 2016. 52 Theconflicts over the conflict.
 The priority accorded to Euroatlantic integration in the wake of the crisis over Ukraine weakens the engagement-seeking currents in Georgian politics . The priority is to EuroAtlantic integration.
 Georgia's GDP has been shrinking continuously from 2012 to 2015 . Georgia’s economic weakness is also a persistent economic weakness .
 The country is still struggling with high unemployment, socio-economic inequality and a strong rural/urban divide .
 The impact of the Russian recession has been felt in the Georgian economy since 2015 . The impact has been seen in the country's economy since 2014 .
 This has led to a noticeable disenchantment with politics and the political elites . This has been seen as a result of a growing dissatisfaction with the political elite .
 In a survey conducted in March 2016 just 16 percent supported the Georgian Dream governing coalition . Only 15 percent the biggest opposition party, the United National Movement, was in the survey .
 61 percent were undecided as to which party to support in the upcoming parliamentary elections . Approval for the other parties lay between 0 and 9 percent .
 The same survey also demonstrated how little trust society places in the ability of the parties and the political elite to resolve domestic and external problems .
 The country's territorial integrity also ranked relatively high on the list of priorities . With 23 percent, the country’s territorial integrity was also ranked high .
As of the present, detailed surveys on attitudes to the conflicts are unavailable . As of the current, detailed survey is unavailable .
 In 2013 Caucasus Barometer found 73 percent clearly supporting reintegration of Abkhazia as part of the Georgian state without any special autonomy rights .
 While 33 percent supported autonomous status, 28 percent explicitly rejected it . 33 percent said they would never accept an independent Abkhazia .
 The question of territorial integrity continues to represent a political third rail .
 Remarkably it has played no role so far in the campaign for parliamentary elections in Georgia .
 In July, Paata Zarakeishvili resigned from the State Minister for Reconciliation and Civic Equality . The Republican members of cabinet resigned in July .
 Abkhazia's political leadership unreservedly supported Russia’s actions in Ukraine . At first glance, it would appear that Ab Khazia”s political leadership supported Russia's actions .
 The flow of Russian funds to Abkhazia could dry up if Moscow finds itself channelling investment into Crimea’s economic development .
 There were also worries that Russian tourists might heed their government's patriotic appeals and spend their holidays in Crimea .
 Political and civil society actors warned that the crisis could drag Abkhazia even further into isolation and dependency on Russia .
 Numerous actors spoke out publicly against association . They described it as a threat to Abkhaz independence .
 Russia's recognition of Abkhazia in August 2008. This response continued a series of disagreements that have characterised the relationship since then .
 Russia continues to regard Abkhaz as part of the canonical territory of the Georgian Orthodox Church . There are disputes over the exact demarcation of the border between Russia and Ab Khazia .
 All of these issues still remain unresolved between Sukhum/i and Moscow . All of the issues are still unresolved.
 In this already difficult political situation, tensions between opposition and government escalated in May 2014 .
Irakli Khintba, deputy foreign minister of Abkhazia, in Izvestiya, 22 April 2014 . Interview with IrakliKhintba.
 The Conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine Sukhum/i were enough to topple President Alexander Ankvab in August 2014 .
 The causes of this development lay in internal conflicts among the elites, which have long shaped life in Abkhazia .
 President Ankvab was already facing criticism for his authoritarian and centralistic style of leadership .
 His monopolisation of political power had alienated not only the opposition, but also the political parties and movements that had originally supported him .
 The crisis was triggered by the festering dispute over the question of Abkhaz citizenship for the Georgian population in Gal/i .
 During Ankvab’s presidency almost half the approximately 45,000 Georgian residents of Gal/i in eastern Abkhazia had receivedAbkhaz nationality .
 The opposition Forum for the National Unity of Abkhazia has demanded the naturalisation process be reviewed . It says the process had been unconstitutional .
 The status and citizenship of Gal/i’s Georgian population has been a bone of contention in Abkhaz politics ever since the 1990s .
 In the eyes of a large part of the Abkhaz population the residents of Gal/i represent a Georgian “fifth column’s” residents . Their integration is therefore highly controversial .
 The Georgians in Gal/i represent a significant and potentially even decisive electoral potential . Also, the Georgians are considered to have a significant political potential .
 The passports distributed in Gal/i were ‘temporarily’ withdrawn in advance of the August 2014 election . A majority of the region’s population is not expected to vote .
 The legal situation of the Georgians in Gal/i has deteriorated further since 2014 . The situation has worsened since 2014, according to reports .
 In autumn 2015 Sukhum/i announced the introduction of biometric passports across Abkhazia . But excluded the Georgians of Gal/i on the grounds that many of them had retained their Georgian citizenship .
 Ankvab was supported primarily by the veterans’ organisation Amtsakhara and the United Abkhazia party .
 The government promised modifications to lessen the impact on the population in Gal/i. In response to criticisms within Abkhazia and from the international community, the government promised changes .
 Its opponents, on the other hand, regard it as deliberate discrimination . Its opponents say it is deliberate discrimination.
 Raul Khadzhimba, leader of the opposition FNUA, has long been a central figure in Abkhaz politics .
 Sergey Bagapsh stood as Moscow’s open favourite in 2004 . But he had to admit defeat after considerable domestic turmoil .
 The Kremlin refrained from adopting official positions on the questions of association and the domestic power struggle . The Kremlin has not adopted official positions in the past .
 Vladislav Surkov, President Putin’s personal adviser on relationships with Abkhazia and South Ossetia, travelled to Sukhum/i during the May protests . Surkov conducted talks with all the parties.
 Raul Khadjimba was a familiar ally and negotiating partner, and weaker than Ankvab . He was a friend and a negotiating partner with Raul, a former ally .
 Khadjimba declared his willingness to negotiate a new treaty with Russia . Shortly after his election KhadjIMba declared himself willing to negotiate new treaty .
 He supports stricter control of the border with Georgia . He also displays more openness on the question of property purchases by Russians .
 Moscow presented its proposal for a Treaty on Alliance and Integration between the Russian Federation and the Republic of Abkhazia in October 2014 . In October 2014 Moscow presented the proposal for the treaty .
 Many of the proposed measures heavily contradicted the Abkhaz claim for sovereignty . Many proposed measures aimed at the creation of a joint foreign policy, a joint defence and security space .
 The Conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine Abkhazi title. September 2016 56 The Conflict over Ab Khazia. In Light of The Crisis over Ukrainian AbkhAZ title .
 At the same time, it still implies even closer political, foreign policy, economic and military ties . The relationship still implies close ties .
 Russia tied the signing of the treaty to promises of continuing generous financial assistance . The treaty was signed by Russia in March .
 The Abkhaz budget was delayed in the course of 2015, causing delivery delays . But the budget was reduced by more than a quarter of a million pounds .
 Observers attribute this to the Russian recession, but also to differences between Sukhum/i and Moscow over individual provisions of the new treaty .
 Higher payments were announced for 2016, 65, but it remains to be seen whether funds will actually flow .
 Abkhazia’s economic circumstances remain precarious, the country's political situation remains unstable .
 In spring 2016 the opposition launched a campaign for early presidential elections to remove Raul Khadjimba . The opposition wants to remove the former president from the presidency .
 This triggered another standoff between government and opposition forces, including Abkhaz citizens applying for Russian nationality . This triggered a standoff between the government and the opposition .
 The Russian proposal also foresaw more or less complete integration of the Abkhaz army into the Russian armed forces . The Abkhazi version insisted on an independent military .
 The Abkhaz concept proposed larger financial transfers in the economic and social spheres . The concept also proposed bigger financial transfers .
 A joint security and defence area, a joint economic and customs area, shared control of the border with Georgia, and a coordinated foreign policy are planned and implemented in subsudiary agreements .
 The first concrete effect was the sanctions Abkhazia imposed on Turkey following the shooting down of a Russian warplane by the Turkish air force at the end of November 2015 .
Abkhazia says sanctions have little effect on economic exchange with the Abkhaz diaspora in Turkey . The sanctions represent an important factor for the AbKhaz economy, it was noted .
 The sudden reconciliation between Turkey and Russia in June/July 2016 was nonetheless enthusiastically welcomed in Abkhazia .
Violent clashes in Sukhum/i in early July left almost twenty dead . September 2016 57 Sabine Fischer died in the clashes that left almost 20 dead .
 The referendum took place on 10 July but turnout was scarcely 1 percent . The referendum was held on July 10 .
 Opposition announced major street protests in autumn 2016 . In reaction to this defeat, the opposition announced major protests in 2016 .
 The political instability in 2016 is seen by many as a continuation of the events of May 2014 which left Abkhaz society with a deep sense of insecurity .
 Political apathy and disenchantment with the elite also explains the low turnout for the referendum in July .
 Widespread disillusionment over Abkhazia’s economic development possibilities also encompasses growing doubts that Russia is willing to lend real support .
 The South Ossetian leadership also euphorically supported Russia over Crimea and eastern Ukraine . The leadership also congratulated Russia over Ukraine and Crimea .
 In 1992 and 2006, South Ossetia had already voted twice to join the Russian Federation . In referendums in 1992 and2006 (which were not internationally recognised) South Ossetsia had voted twice.
 After the election, United Ossetia announced that another referendum would be held . After the vote, the government announced that a second referendum would also be held.
 Vladislav Surkov, President Putin’s personal adviser on relationships with Abkhazia and South Ossetia, repeatedly poured cold water on South Ossetsia's hopes of unification . Russia, however, responded rather cautiously, with Surkov's personal adviser.
 In March 2015 Russia and South Ossetia concluded a new Treaty on Alliance and Integration, following a negotiating process . Some 67 Liz Fuller, “Abkhaz Referendum Fails, But Political Standoff Continues’, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, 13 July
 September 2016 58 The Conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine . September 2016. September 2016 The Conflict over Ab Khazia was the latest in a series of public spat in Ukraine .
 There were compromises to be made in Abkhazia, but there were also compromises in the country . The process was more smoothly than in Ab Khazia .
 Abkhazia was originally proposed by Russia but failed to go far enough . South Ossetian side was not rejected by Russia, but in fact failed to win the title .
 The treaty includes freedom of movement across the South Ossetian–Russian “border’s’S Ossetia . Further aspects of the treaty include Russian assistance for state structures and social services in the region .
 Russian and South Ossetian security forces began fortifying sections of the boundary line between the two countries . Some weeks after conclusion of the treaty, security forces started fortifying parts of the line .
 A short section of the Baku-Supsa oil pipeline also ended up in territory controlled by South Ossetia and Russia .
 Moscow and Tskhinval/i both reject charges that they illegally occupied additional territory . Both reject charges of illegally occupying more territory .
 South Ossetia and the rest of Georgia have become even harder to cross to the other side of the border . The border between the two countries is now more difficult to cross .
 The crisis over Ukraine has made it even more difficult for the Georgian coalition government to pursue its foreign policy and conflict objectives . Conclusions – Options for Local and International Actors .
 Russia is still perceived as a threat to Tbilisi. Despite normalisation of relations with Russia, the northern neighbour is still considered a threat . The outbreak of the crisis has boosted Euroatlantic ambitions in the region .
 NATO membership is one of the principal objectives of Georgian foreign policy . NATO membership remains a key part of the Georgian policy .
 The conflict in Ukraine and Russia’s involvement there have crushed hopes of finding a peaceful resolution of the unresolved conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia . The conflict has crushed hopes for a peaceful solution .
 Tbilisi regards Moscow’s role in the crisis over Ukraine as a continuation of its policy towards Georgia . Georgia is a state of Georgia, for which it creates additional difficulties, Tbilis says .
 Moscow signed treaties with Georgia in 2014 and with Tskhinval/i in 2015 as de facto annexation . Georgia regards the treaties that Moscow signed with Sukhum/I in 2014 .
 Georgian politics and society, surveys demonstrate that they continue to possess mobilisation potential . September 2016 59 Sabine Fischer Fischer Georgian political and society surveys show that they still possess potential .
 Taking into account the levels of domestic political instability and disenchantment, this creates great risk for the government, says the author .
 The constituency of political actors who would support engagement-led conflict regulation has expanded little since 2012 . The constituency for political actors has increased little since 2011 .
 That political approach risks going under in a deteriorating international, regional and national political environment, says John Sutter .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia have become even more closely interconnected with Russia since 2014 . Abkhaziia has become more closely linked to Russia since the start of 2014 .
 South Ossetia’s desire for unification with Russia – which Moscow is currently unwilling to grant . This corresponds with South Ossetsetia's desire to unite with Russia, which Moscow has not granted .
 The change is more overt in Abkhazia, where there is still scepticism towards a complete Russian take-over . There is still skepticism towards the complete Russian takeover .
 The change of government in Sukhum/i puts Moscow in a better position to assert its interests . The change in government puts the Russian government in the better position.
 Abkhazia’s political and economic dependency on Russia further restricts the room for manoeuvre of state and non-state actors there . It is reflected in increasing pressure on those parts of the opposition and civil society campaigning for greater independence from Russia .
 Moscow has stepped up its influence in both entities since 2014 . Moscow has clearly stepped up their influence in 2014 .
 South Ossetia's political, economic and military integration to a point just short of annexation was a symbolic response to Georgia’s EU association process .
 Moscow has a crucial strategic foothold in the South Caucasus and the Black Sea region . Above all it secures Moscow political control in the territories and the territories .
 The Kremlin has shown little willingness to advance integration any further, despite South Ossetia’s explicit wish for accession . But the Kremlin has demonstrated little willingness.
 Russian leadership faces domestic political risks for the Russian leadership . South Ossetia could be annexed by the Russian government .
 Russia continues to cooperate in the Geneva Discussions and emphasises that it does not wish to endanger the process of normalisation with Georgia . Russia does not want the process to be normalised with Georgia .
 Crimea annexing Abkhazia and South Ossetia would relinquish a lever of influence that could still be useful in its relationship with Tbilisi .
 Moscow will remain ambivalent and at the same time constrain the options above all of Abkhazia . For that reason Moscow will stay ambivalent .
 The dispute over Nagorno-Karabakh is the longest-running secessionist conflict in the post-Soviet space .
 Alongside its duration, it stands out for the extent of bloodshed involved . It stands out.
 When the Soviet Union was formed, the region was largely inhabited by ethnic Armenians . tsarist Russian policies had administratively and economically connected it to Azerbaijan .
 Nagorno-Karabakh became an autonomous territory within the Azerbaijani Soviet Socialist Republic in the early 1920s . The arrangement had engendered discontent within the Armenian population .
 Karabakh-Armenians accused Azerbaijan of discriminatory politics in 1970s . Azerbaijan allegedly aimed at a “deArmenianization’ of the region .
 Armenians complained that cultural and linguistic rights were restricted . The region was isolated from the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic and disadvantaged socio-economically .
 The Azerbaijani inhabitants of Nagorno-Karabakh in turn criticised the dominance of the local Armenian majority and its efforts to portray the region as unambiguously Armenian .
 From the mid-1980s the project of leaving Azerbaijan and joining Armenia was pursued with even greater determination, driven by a broad political base .
 The Case of Karabagh is published in The Soviet Nationality Reader: The Disintegration in Context .
 The conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh Karabakh is also in the Soviet Republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan .
 Bloody fighting broke out before the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 The war fought between 1991 and 1994 is estimated to have cost between 22,000 and 25,000 lives . The war was fought between 1992 and 1994 .
 More than 700,000 Azerbaijanis and 400,000 Armenians had to flee their homes . More than 1.5 million Armenians have fled their homes in Azerbaijan .
 Armenians 6 Most of the figures are disputed, according to the Azerbaijani side . The Armenians are 6 most of the numbers displaced by the Armenians .
 The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine gained control in September 2016 . It gained control over seven Azerbaijani districts outside the former Autonomous Oblast .
 Azerbaijan sees the return of occupied districts as a precondition for any other steps towards peace . Armenians have increasingly come to regard them not as bargaining chips, but as “liberated territories’ and part of the “Nagorno-Karabakh Republic’
 No other country has recognised the territory as an independent state . Armenia remains financially, militarily and politically dependent on Armenia .
 The large-scale fighting was brought under control in 1994 by a Russianmediated cease-fire . It followed heavy losses on both sides .
 The Armenians propagate the right to national self-determination, the Azerbaijanis theright to territorial integrity . The Azerbaijanis have a right to sovereignty and territorial integrity.
 Both sides claim the region for themselves, declaring Nagorno-Karabakh the cultural birthplace of their nation . Both sides say the region is a cultural birthplace .
 It is the exclusive nature of the claims and the mythologisation of tendentious historiography that explain the utter lack of willingness to compromise – along with frequentlycited wartime atrocities and ethnic homogenisation .
 Its explosive potential was demonstrated by the latest escalation in April 2016, which caused several dozen casualties on both sides .
 displacement and a resulting homogenisation occurred on both sides. It is important to note that displacement and the resulting homogeneisation occurred in both sides .
In Osmanismus, Nationalismus und der Kaukasus, ed. Der ‘Historikerstreit’ um BergKarabach’ in Osmanistus, in Os manismus .
 The Nagorny Karabakh Conflict and the Reinterpretation of Narratives in History Textbooks . In Myths and Conflict in the South Caucasus, ed.
 Franziska Smolnik and Uwe Halbach have failed to agree to establish a joint peacekeeping force or to permit the deployment of an international mission . Since the 1994 cease-fire the parties have failed.
 There has been no effective monitoring of the cease-fire, which is regularly violated . There has also not been effective monitoring. The cease-fires are regularly violated.
 Azerbaijan and Nagorno-Karabakh face off in heavily fortified trenches, but also on border between Armenia and Azerbaijan .
 The Minsk Group of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe supplies an international presence . 14 of its 14 mediation efforts have failed to bear fruit .
 In 1992 the OSCE’s predecessor, the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe, decided to stage a conference to settle the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
 While Minsk was chosen as the venue, the conference never actually took place . The conference was held in Belarus .
 The Minsk Group was established two years later, taking its name from the planned conference venue . Instead, the Minsk group was established in the Soviet Union .
 Minsk Group’s co-chair model was introduced in March 1995 on the basis of the decisions of the Budapest CSCE summit at the end of 1994 . The Minsk group's co-chairs were introduced by Minsk in 1995 .
 In 1997 the initially bilateral arrangement was expanded into a trilateral one . Russia, France and the U.S. were co-chairs .
 The Minsk Group attracts criticism for its opaque nature and lack of a diplomatic resolution . The group's opaque nature has also been criticized for its lack of diplomatic resolution.
 Azerbaijan and Armenia have participated in consultations at this level since 1998 . Since 1998 only representatives of Azerbaijan and Armenians have participated .
 The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine has been under negotiation since 2007 . The conflict has been in negotiations since 2007.
 The escalation of early April 2016 was the worst outbreak of violence since the cease-fire signed more than two decades ago . The escalation is now the worst in the history of the conflict .
 The referendum on the status of Crimea and its subsequent annexation by Russia have again drawn attention to the contradiction between the international principle of national self-determination and that of the territorial integrity of existing states .
 Yerevan took Russia's side and voted in the UN General Assembly against a resolution declaring the Crimea referendum invalid . This reverberated in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, where Russia took Russia’s side .
 Nagorno-Karabakh held a public celebration to mark the referendum . It also demanded its return to the negotiating table in the framework of the Minsk Group .
 Baku treated the annexation of Crimea as an opportunity to draw international attention to the violation of its own territorial integrity . Baku voted for the UN resolution and thus supporting Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Azerbaijan also complained that the international community's response over Ukraine demonstrated a “double standard’s” response . It had largely accepted Nagorno-Karabakh's secession from Azerbaijan .
 The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has never truly been frozen, but the situation has deteriorated markedly since 2014 . The situation has worsened markedly in the past year .
 The low-point to date was the escalation of the first week of April 2016 . 19 2014 was at the time the most violent year since the cease-fire, with seventy-two reported deaths .
 September 2016 65 Franziska Smolnik and Uwe Halbach copter was shot down for the first time since 1994 . Drones were increasingly deployed .
 The negative trend continued in 2015, with each side accusing the other of deploying “mortars and heavy weapons’s’. The use of snipers continued in the past year .
 The worst fighting to date occurred in early April 2016, beginning in the night of 1 April and continuing until 5 April .
 Various sources speak of more than ninety deaths, including civilians, and dozens missing on both sides .
 As well as tanks and heavy artillery, aircraft were also used, although not on a large scale .
Each side accused each other of violating it, and reports of further casualties continued to come in . But the very same day each side accused the other of violations, and further casualties came in .
 Escalation into full-blown war would have devastating consequences for the entire region, not least on account of the massive military build-up on both sides .
 Azerbaijan has invested significant oil and gas revenues in new weaponry . Azerbaijan in particular has invested its significant oil, gas revenue in new weapons .
 The April escalation also revealed the kind of equipment Azerbaijan has procured . Azerbaijan has also procured.
 Laurence Broers points out that changes in information policy could account for the increase in cease-fire violations .
 The assessment of a massive deterioration since 2014 would still appear to stand. However, even if it is the case that violations are more likely to be reported, the assessment of the deterioration would still stand .
Official figures speak of thirty dead on the Azerbaijani side . This covers the period from 1 to 6 April 2016, not officially confirmed .
 The Armenian defence ministry has confirmed seventyseven deaths for 2 to 5 April 2016 and ninety-two for two to 13 April .
In each case the defence budget has increased, and that the apparent reduction in dollar terms is due to changing exchange rates .
 The proportion of the state budget spent on defence is rising in Armenia too . But the proportion of defence spending in Armenia is rising too .
 In 1994 representatives of both entities signed the cease-fire agreement with Azerbaijan . In 1994 Representatives of both sides signed the agreement .
 Yerevan took over the responsibility of representing the interests of the de facto state from 1998 . Nagorno-Karabakh itself was no longer involved in the talks led by the Minsk Group .
 Azerbaijan refuses to recognise Nagorno-Karabakh as a party sui generis . To this day Azerbaijan refuses.
 Nagorno-Karabakh representatives argue for international recognition as an independent state . They argue that they have established their own state structures and democratic processes .
 The last “parliamentary elections’ in May 2015 to highlight the progress of democratisation in the territory. They also sought to use the last ‘Parliamentary election’ to highlight democratisation .
 In 2015 the ruling party, Free Motherland, again confirmed its dominance over the six other parties . In 2015, the party was in control of the six others .
 Baku's election was accompanied by sharp criticism from Baku that it contravened international law . Baku also warned of negative effects on the peace process .
 Nagorno-Karabakh cooperates closely with Armenia on political and military matters and is reliant on its financial assistance . Access is only possible via Armenia .
Political actors from the de facto state have filled state positions in Armenia itself . Integration with its most important ally is well advanced in a series of policy areas .
 Armenia's defence minister previously fulfilled the same function in Nagorno-Karabakh . For example the current Armenian defence minister had previously fulfilled same function .
 Armenian media reported a ‘job swap’ suggesting even closer coordination of military structures . In June 2015 Armenian media reports a “job swap.’s’ suggests a closer coordination.
 Nagorno-Karabakh’s ‘defence minister’ and ‘chief of staff’, Movses Hakobyan, went to Yerevan to serve as deputy chief of the General Staff of the Armenian armed forces .
 Levon Mnatsakanyan, who vacated that post, moved in turn to Stepanakert, 33, to take the post vacated by Hakobyan . The post is now in the hands of 33-year-old Stepankert .
 Armenia and Nagorno-Karabakh have closed ranks quite openly, the development suggests . It drew local criticism that it would endanger Nagorno Karabakh's image as an at least de facto independent entity .
 Hakobyan was appointed deputy defence minister of Armenia in mid-May 2016 . In the course of a restructuring in the defence ministry after the April escalation.
 The lack of transparency in both spheres, as well as voting irregularities, has also generated great public frustration . The difficult socio-economic situation and voting irregularities have also generated public frustration.
 According to official figures, 30 percent of Armenians live below the poverty line . More than 17 percent are unemployed .
 Armenian diaspora supplies important support, in particular in the form of financial and economic assistance . Social tensions sparked in summer 2015 when up to ten thousand people took to the streets in Yerevan and other Armenian cities .
 A modified package of legislation was adopted after certain aspects had been ruled unconstitutional . The legislation was amended after certain parts of the legislation had been found unconstitutional .
 The increase in public protest was accompanied by growing repression against activists . The increase is accompanied by a growing repression.
 The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine over Ukraine was announced by Electric Networks of Armenia . The conflict was declared in September 2016 .
 The protest movement formed spontaneously, was not institutionalised . It was directed against both the government and the opposition .
 Both local and international observers interpreted it as a sign of a deep systemic crisis . As such, both local and International observers interpreted the situation as a serious crisis .
 The demonstrations were not directed against Russia . Participants also expressed criticism of the Russian InterRAO as the owner of the local electricity grid operator .
 The protests only acquired a decidedly anti-Russian component in response to their description and categorisation by Russian media and politicians .
 Russian commentators frequently castigated the events in Ukraine as an “Armenian Maidan’s” that was not spontaneous but initiated with foreign financial backing .
 This misrepresentation generated resentment among the Armenian population. This misrepresentations generated resentment, says the Armenian government .
 This was not the only point of discord between Russia and its closest ally in the South Caucasus . Russia and South Caucasus has been at odds for years .
 In January 2015, a soldier named Permyakov, who was stationed at the Russian base in Gyumri, murdered an Armenian family .
 Moscow’s decision to try Permyakov in Russia rather than handing him over to Armenian authorities angered the local population . Moscow's decision to tried Permykov in Russia angered the Armenian population .
 Armenia’s youth has an even more negative attitude towards the political elites and institutions than the average for society as a whole . Armenia's youth also has a negative attitude to political elites .
 According to the most recent published figures from Caucasus Barometer 2013 57 percent mistrust the president, 63 percent the government and 61 percent the political parties .
 The gas price was cut from $189 to $165 per thousand cubic metres . A reduction in the gas price is also announced .
 Moscow also declared its consent to an independent audit of Electric Networks of Armenia . Moscow also declares consent to independent audit.
 In 1995 Moscow established the aforementioned military base in Gyumri, where five thousand Russian troops are currently stationed . The base was established in 1995 .
 Armenia signed an agreement to join the Russian-led Eurasian Economic Union in October 2014 . Armenia became its fifth member on 2 January 2015 .
 Armenian population hopes that this reinforcement of institutional relations with Russia will boost economic growth and enhance security . The Armenian population hope that this will both boost economic and security .
 The desire for security is extremely strong in light of the Karabakh conflict . The desire to security is very strong, according to a report by the National Security Council .
 A survey by the Civilitas Foundation in autumn 2014 found EEU and EU membership both enjoying about 60 percent support . A majority believed joining the Eurasian Economic Union would also improve peace and military security .
 Armenia’s relations with the EU have not broken off completely since its ‘Eurasian turn’ and rejection of EU association . Armenia has been rejected by the EU for its “Eurasians turn” and rejected EU association.
 The EUArmenia Cooperation Council concentrates on areas where there is no risk of conflict with Armenia’s EEU membership .
Relations with the EU and NATO remain important from the Armenian perspective . Especially in relation to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
 Azerbaijan is not in Yerevan’s interest. One effect of breaking them off would be to grant Azerbaijan more space to disseminate its interpretation of the conflict .
 It remains unclear how large the leeway for such a foreign policy will remain in future . But it remains unclear.
 The balance to date of the policy of closeness with Russia, and the role of “Russia’s outpost in the South Caucasus, 44 is mixed . The balance of the policies of Russia and Russia is mixed.
 Russia’s function as security guarantor has not been tested by a new large-scale war between Armenia and Azerbaijan .
 Yerevan says it has grounds to criticise its ally . But even the "low-intensity conflict" that has dragged on for years gives Yerevans grounds to criticize its ally.
 Armeniya yavlyaetsya forpostom Rossii na Yushnom Kavkaze . Armenia is Russia's outpost in the South Caucasus .
 The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine terms about the lack of support for Armenia over Nagorno Karabakh from all CSTO members including Russia .
 April escalation supplied one of the most recent challenges to the Armenian-Russian relationship . The April escalation was one of most recent challenge to the relationship .
 Armenian officials criticise Moscow for selling arms to Armenia’s enemy . Armenia's strategic partnership with Yerevan is now being used against Armenia's troops .
 Moscow responded by reaffirming its close relations with Yerevan . Deputy Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin also left no doubt that Russia would not be changing its line on arms sales .
 The gains expected from membership have certainly failed to materialise. The gains were expected to be seen by some .
 The EEU has at least short-term negative effects for Armenia, according to the EU . Armenia's economic cooperation through the EEU is still a problem .
 Domestic producers find it hard to compete against Russia, Kazakhstan and Belarus . The country can benefit through the abolition of tariffs on certain export goods .
 Armenian National Statistical Service state that exports to Russia, as well as to Kazakhstan and Belarus, collapsed in the first half of 2015 . Media reports cite the Armenian National statistical Service state.
 EEU membership and elevated tariffs and charges on imports from countries outside it effectively prevent diversification of the Armenian economy .
 In 2015 36 percent were in favour of Armenia’s membership in the Russia-led union . In 2016, the figure fell to 25 percent in summer 2016 .
 A group of hard-line veterans of the 1990s war occupied a Yerevan police station and took several policemen hostage . This became apparent most recently in July 2016 when a group largely composed of veterans occupied a police station .
 The conflict itself has a negative influence on the economic situation, as it leaves two of the landlocked country's four borders closed .
 International exchange is only possible via Iran and above all Georgia . Whether those routes lead anywhere further depends strongly on the broader geopolitical context .
Armenia's Everlasting Protest and Its Resonance in Post-Soviet States. See also Nelli Babayan, ‘Armenian’s Everlasting protest’
Armenia’s ‘Silent’ National Security Threat’, Armenian Weekly, 3 January 2013. See also Houry Mayissian, ‘Armenian’'s “Silent. National Security threat’
 Armenia's government has failed to tackle monopolies and informal networks between politics and business . One counter-narrative argues that the ongoing conflict is the reason for lack of economic development to be merely distraction .
 Baku cooperates with the European Union above all in the field of energy . Baku seeks to position itself as an alternative to Russia .
 Azerbaijan finds its political standing enhanced as an alternative supplier of oil and gas . In the course of the crisis over Ukraine and European efforts to reduce the share of its energy supplied by Russia .
 In the past the EU has repeatedly turned a blind eye to a deteriorating human rights situation in countries that dependably supply energy .
 The freeze in relations between Brussels and Moscow appeared to bring the EU and Azerbaijan closer together on the basis of a shared interest in energy trading . The freeze is believed to be the result of a joint freeze in trade relations between the two countries .
 This “status dividend’s” made Baku a winner of the geopolitical crisis, it seemed . Baku has been in the news for months.
 In this phase the regime considerably tightened its repressive policies towards opposition forces and civil society . The regime has also tightened its policies towards the opposition forces .
 Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev has ruled since 2003 . The Euromaidan is the latest example of ‘regime change from below’
 Azerbaijan is a “reliable and strategic partner in the energy field’s energy field, Tusk says . Tusk: Azerbaijan is “a main partner” in the EU's efforts to diversify its energy supply .
 Since 2004 Freedom House has consistently given Azerbaijan the worst rating, “not free’s” rating . Azerbaijan has been given the lowest rating since 2004 .
 Western media also supplied many negative headlines about the political establishment .
 Azerbaijan's insistence on the closure of the OSCE's Baku office in July 2015. Further potential for conflict arose through Azerbaijan’s insistence.
 This measure was regarded by regional and international analysts as further evidence of the Azerbaijani government's hard line against domestic and foreign institutions that are not to its liking .
 The OSCE’s decision not to send a mission to observe the Azerbaijani parliamentary elections in November 2015 further strained relations . The decision to not observe the elections further strains relations with the OSCE .
 The relationship between the European Union and Azerbaijan hit a new low in September 2015 . A European Parliament resolution voiced unusually sharp criticism of the country .
 Baku responded without delay, cancelling the planned visit by a European Commission delegation . Baku also announced a comprehensive review of joint cooperation projects .
 President Aliyev blamed the Armenian lobby for the success of the resolution . He also claimed that they were also behind the negative reporting in Western media .
 Relations between Washington and Baku have been deteriorating for some time . Relations between the two cities have been on the decline for years .
 Baku took particular umbrage at the activities of United States or USfunded organisations and media working in the country for greater pluralism .
 The Azerbaijani leadership interpreted the change of regime in Ukraine as an act encouraged by the U.S. Like the Russians, the Azerbaijan leadership interpreted it as a act encouraged – if not in fact initiated.
 Washington's plans for their own country have further heightened wariness, they say . Their supposition that Washington harbours similar plans for its own country has further heightened tensions .
 In the U.S. there is increasingly open and vociferous criticism of the human rights situation in Azerbaijan .
 Azerbaijan Democracy Act introduced in the House of Representatives on 16 December 2015 . If adopted, it would provide for extensive visa sanctions against representatives of the regime .
 The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine is in light of the crisis over Ukraine . Officials attributed legislation to the Armenian lobby .
 Azerbaijan's relations with the West have been strained for years . Azerbaijan's relationship with the U.S. has been strained in recent years . The country has been seen as a key part of the West's relationship.
 Nagorno-Karabakh conflict has negative effects on the handling of the conflict . The conflict has also had negative effect on handling the conflict, according to reports .
 Baku’s automatic identification of the Armenians as the real cause of the problems underlines how narrow the space has become for societal reconciliation projects .
 The question also arises of the possible consequences for the work of the Minsk Group . Two of their three co-chairs are representatives of Western states .
 Relations with Russia are regarded as a legitimate alternative to a Western orientation . Azerbaijan shares a 284kilometre northern border and access to the Caspian Sea .
 The Azerbaijani political elite is well aware of Russia's role in the Caucasus and especially of the Kremlin's influence over the military balance .
 Russia has supplied Azerbaijan with highly advanced weapons systems worth almost $4 billion . Especially in recent years Russia has provided Azerbaijan with high-tech weapons systems .
Last year several meetings were held between high-ranking politicians from Baku and Moscow . Some observers interpreted as Russia’s seeking even closer – also military – cooperation between the two countries .
 Such meetings continued in the first half of 2016 – also in a trilateral format including Iran . Such meetings continue in the second half of the year .
 The activities of the Russian Sputnik group and its Azerbaijani-language radio have expanded . The offices of Western media outlets have been closed .
 Moscow possesses an advantage in the struggle for control over interpretation of events, and thus also influence . This suggests that Moscow possess an advantage. This suggests Moscow possesses a power over interpretation .
 The importance the Baku elites place on good relations with Russia was underlined by their response to Turkish-Russian tensions . The importance of good relations between the two countries is underlined in the response to Turkey's tensions .
 The Kremlin imposed sweeping sanctions affecting both economic and societal relations . The sanctions were aimed at opposing positions in the Syria conflict further heightened tensions .
 75 Baku avoided taking sides, instead assiduously offering its services as mediator between Moscow and Ankara . Ankara sought the support of its ally in the Russian-Turkish crisis .
 It is still unclear how the country’s current economic stagnation will affect its external orientation .
 The continuing weakness of the oil price is creating difficulties for the relatively undiversified Azerbaijani economy .
 The central bank devalued the manat by 34 percent in February 2015, but by December found itself forced to allow the national currency to float against the dollar . By December, the central bank had allowed a further devaluation of 30 percent .
 President Aliyev has announced a sweeping privatisation programme . He wants to recruit international experts and local and international investors .
 Exploratory talks with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have already been held . The talks are being held with the IMF and World Bank .
 It remains unclear whether this represents the beginning of a rapprochement with the West . It remains unknown whether this actually represents the start of a West-West relationship .
 Aliyev says credit risks undermine his government’s political stability . He says international financial institutions place on credit risks undermining his government .
 Some saw a direct causality between economic difficulties and escalation . Others interpreted the conflict's overshadowing of economic issues as at least a welcome side-effect .
 A wide range of possible motivations for the conflict are discussed for both sides . It would probably require a comprehensive fact-finding mission to produce clarity .
 There have been reports of individual demands made by Western governments and international human rights organisations having been fulfilled . September 2016 76 The Nagorno-Karabakh Conflict in Light of the Crisis over Ukraine months .
 It is highly dubious whether these measures will actually initiate real political change or shift relations with the West onto a more cooperative track . It is also highly dubious if they will actually start a political change .
 Baku’s recently published plans to hold a constitutional referendum in late September 2016 . The latter reading appears to be confirmed by Baku's recent published plans .
 Several members of the opposition have been arrested in the run-up to the referendum .
 Russia itself is mired in economic recession, and to that extent not an obvious source of major investment . Russia's economy is not a major source of investment .
 Baku’s differences with the West should not lead us to forget that it has its own problems with Moscow too .
 Azerbaijani government rejects Russian annexation of Crimea in the light of the violation of its own territorial integrity .
Ever since the Karabakh conflict began, Russia has been perceived above all as Armenia’s ally and thus traditionally eyed with scepticism .
 Shrinking Space for Civil Society in Azerbaijan is located in Azerbaijan . For more general information see Shrink Space for the Civil Society .
 Russia’s role in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is ambivalent . Russia's involvement in the conflict in the region has been described as 'unacceptable'
 On the one side it supplies arms to both Armenia and Azerbaijan . On the other it is a co-chair of the Minsk Group and thus one of the main mediators .
 Moscow has repeatedly taken the initiative at the bilateral level . Apart from mediation at the international level, Moscow has also repeatedly taken up the initiative .
After the Russo-Georgian War of 2008, it repeatedly brought the presidents of Armenia and Azerbaijan to the negotiating table in various Russian cities . The Minsk Group has a broad agreement of its partners.
 Russia and the other members of the Minsk Group intensified their diplomatic efforts over the past two years . Russian and Armenian-Azerbaijani border incidents flared up along the line of contact and the border proper . Russia arranged meetings of the presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia in Sochi,
During the latest outburst of violence it was again the Kremlin that intervened immediately to de-escalate . The Kremlin successfully arranged a truce on the fourth day of fighting .
 Western actors quickly came in for criticism for having reacted too slowly or not decisively enough . Western actors have been criticised for not reacting quickly or decisively enough.
 The fact that the representatives of the Minsk Group did not meet until the day the truce was agreed in Moscow was regarded as symptomatic .
 The full extent of the influence of external actors on the conflict parties is unclear. The degree to which they could push through a lasting long-term regulation of the conflict is unclear .
 The current situation suggests that the key to peaceful resolution lies above all with the conflict parties themselves . Reports of ongoing violations of the cease-fire and further deaths have been reported .
 The political leaderships on both sides have used the tensions between Russia and the West to relativise their own responsibility . They blame the impasse in negotiations on the lack 84 Moscow continued its shuttle diplomacy after the signing of the cease-fire agreement .
 German and Russian media reports about a seven-point plan with stabilising, de-escalating and solution-seeking measures . Reports of a telephone call between the Russian and German foreign ministers do suggest at least a certain degree of coordination .
 Authoritarian elites are probably the greatest obstacle to conflict resolution . Authoritar elites are likely to be the biggest obstacle to resolution .
 Both sides use the status quo to secure or stabilise their rule . On both sides, they use it to secure and stabilize their rule.
 Altering the status quo would not only call into question the stability of the political positions, but also place a redistribution of economic sinecures on the agenda . The agenda would also include the redistribution ofEconomic sinescures .
 September 2016 79 Franziska Smolnik and Uwe Halbach Democratic relations between society and state are also lacking . September 2016 is September 2016 .
 In these political systems the degree of political participation is very slight, says the author . In some political systems, political participation in the political system is a very slight.
 The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is still restricted to Track 1 level . To that extent society also has no influence over the negotiations .
 The circle of actors that could potentially become involved at Track 2 and Track 3 level is tiny. With the civil societies under pressure, the circle is tiny .
 Exacerbating matters, militaristic rhetoric and arms race between the two sides further heighten feelings of threat in these societies. Exacerbated matters, military rhetoric and the arms race are also a problem .
 Both factors – authoritarianism and lack of democratic relations between society and state – amplify distorted conflict perceptions . Both factors amplify conflict perceptions.
 Exclusive narratives and nationalistic stereotypes dominate, underpinned by tendentious historiography and backward-looking reasoning .
 Opinion polls reflect the zero-sum mentality that dominates on both sides .
 Armenian population views the socio-economic situation critically, this in no way translates into a greater willingness to compromise . Thus while – as shown above – the Armenian population sees the situation critically .
 A survey of young Armenians in 2015 found a peaceful resolution of the conflict to be unlikely . Almost twothirds believe a peaceful solution to the conflict is unlikely .
 90 percent would not accept a jointly administered zone, according to a Caucasus Barometer survey . 44 percent reject even a status of strong autonomy for Nagorno-Karabakh within Azerbaijan .
Tensions between Russia and the West engendered by the crisis over Ukraine also affect Armenia and Azerbaijan .
 conflict parties are influenced by the geopolitical context, but also seek to exploit the changing environment for their own ends . As the analysis shows, the conflict parties were influenced by geopolitical context .
 In this new system of coordinates it is unclear whether and to what extent the representatives of the Minsk Group are in a position to contribute to a coming together of the two sides or containment of the conflict .
 The Ukraine conflict and the ongoing wars in the Middle East have changed the relationships between governments of the three co-chairs . orientations and perceptions in Baku and Yerevan have also shifted over the months .
 In any case, the fronts appear harder than ever, with the latest escalation leaving little prospect of a timely resolution .
 93 percent of Armenians completely reject the idea of Nagorno-Karabakh being jointly administered by Armenia and Azerbaijan . 95 percent regard a status as part of Azerbaijan with far-reaching autonomous status as unacceptable .
 At the beginning of the 2000s the EU decided to become involved in the resolution of ethno-territorial conflicts in its neighbourhood .
 That objective was explicitly formulated in the context of the 2004 enlargement and the concomitant modifications to the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
 European Union’s political and economic weight in its eastern neighbourhood has grown considerably, to make it the most important actor in the region alongside Russia . Since then, the European Union's political andEconomic weight in the area has grown significantly .
 The EU has also become more involved in conflict-resolution processes in the region . The EU is also becoming more involved with conflict- Resolution processes .
 Since 2014 the EU has been embroiled in open geopolitical conflict with Moscow over Ukraine . Since 2014, the EU is embroiled in an open geopolitical battle with Moscow .
 The EU operates on the assumption that economically prosperous democracies are unlikely to go to war with one another . The EU has a history of its own historical experience .
 It pursues a policy of Europeanisation in its eastern neighbourhood . It is directed towards democratisation and economic liberalisation .
 At the time when the European Neighbourhood Policy was conceived, it was assumed that strengthening human rights and minority protections would also have a positive effect on the ethno-territorial conflicts .
 The EU pursues its policy via relations with the states affected by the conflicts . It is considered partial by all sides .
 EU's closeness to Chişinău and Tbilisi made it partisan as far as Tiraspol, Sukhum/i and Tskhinval/i were concerned . This has been particularly noticeable in the conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhaz
 Brussels recognised both Azerbaijan’s right to territorial integrity and Armenians’ right to national self-determination .
 The EU possesses no dedicated strategy for handling the conflicts in its eastern neighbourhood . The scope of action depends on whether and to what extent the affected governments show any interest at all .
 Azerbaijan's sceptical stance to Saakashvili's energetic efforts to draw the EU into the conflict on Georgia’s side . Georgia's attempts to draw EU into conflict on its side have been met with sceptical views .
 The EU has become directly involved in conflict regulation processes at state and nonstate level . In the past fifteen years the EU has also become directly involvement in conflictregulation processes .
 The EU has enjoyed observer status since 2005 . In the 5+2 format within which the Transnistria conflict is negotiated, the EU has had observer status .
 Between 2005 and 2010 an EU Special Representative was mandated with strengthening the Union’s role in resolving the conflict . The EU special representative was mandated to help resolve the conflict between the two sides .
 The EU Special Representative for the South Caucasus has worked with the UN, OSCE and Russia to coordinate the Geneva International Discussions on the conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 The EU Border Assistance Mission has been helping Moldova to secure the Transnistrian section of the border with Ukraine since 2005 . The mission has been working with Moldova since 2005.
 The OSCE and the UN tend to be regarded as “more neutral’ in the contested territories in the eastern neighbourhood because of the major role Russia plays in them . However, the UN and the OSCE have been regarded as 'more neutral' in the region .
 European Peace Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts lines with Abkhazia and South Ossetia since 2008 . The EU has been involved in the U.S. Peace Policy since 2008.
 The EU supports civil society initiatives promoting dialogue and reconciliation in all four conflicts . The EU is also supporting civil society projects promoting reconciliation and dialogue .
 The EU’s direct activities intensified, if slowly, during the second half of the 2000s .
 Poland, Baltic states, Sweden and others urged for more decisive backing for affected de jure states . Poland, the Baltic states and Sweden have lent them active bilateral support .
 This lack of unity hindered the emergence of a common policy and sent contradictory messages that generally bore little relation to the realities of the conflicts, and even had counterproductive effects, says the author .
 European Union policy on Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Nagorno-Karabakh has stagnated since 2010 .
 Initially this was an effect of attention being diverted to the Arab Spring from 2011 . Initially this is a result of attention diverted from 2011 to 2011 .
 The worsening euro crisis also reduced the EU’s external policy capacities, a large part of which then became tied up by developments in Ukraine, the war in Syria and most recently the refugee crisis .
 In the Ukraine conflict it was in fact not the EU that took the initiative on mediation, but the member states Germany, France and Poland . The EU was not involved in mediation in the conflict .
 Russia has increasingly included deliberate revisionist elements in its policies towards unresolved conflicts . Selective Revisionism and Controlled Instability over the past fifteen years have been included in Russia's policies .
 Moscow undermines the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its neighbours through its military presence . Moscow offers parts of their populations Russian citizenship and lending economic support to the de facto states .
 Crimea's objective is not systematic expansion, not the re-establishment of a territorial empire . The annexation of Crimea is not a re-establishing of a territory empire, but it's not a systematic expansion .
 Russia seeks to achieve this by instrumentalising the conflicts through a policy of controlled instability . Russia wants to achieve it through the policy ofcontrolled instability .
 September 2016 83 Sabine Fischer de facto states is by no means unlimited, this line has transpired to be extremely counterproductive for the Kremlin .
 Russian threat repeatedly strengthened proWestern currents in Georgia, Ukraine and Moldova during the past decade and a half . After all, it was precisely the perception of a growing Russian threat .
 Moscow’s stance in unresolved conflicts is closely connected with its policy in Eurasia and its domestic political situation . Moscow's stance in the unresolved conflicts has been closely connected to its policy.
Top priority of Russian foreign policy since 2012 has been to protect its own sphere of influence and consolidate integration formats of its own making .
 Relations with EU have grown ever more confrontational due to growing rivalry over influence in the region . Relations with the EU have become more confrontable due to the region's influence .
Conservative turn in Russian politics in 2011/12 secured Russian predominance in the neighbourhood and repelling ‘harmful Western influences’ has become an internal source of legitimacy for Russian political leadership .
 The enduring economic crisis in Russia and growing socio-economic tensions may well strengthen, rather than weaken this nexus .
Major change in Russian policy in Eurasia and in the unresolved conflicts should not be expected . For the time being, however, major change in Russia's policy in the Eurasia is not expected .
 As the Soviet Union collapsed, conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh escalated into – sometimes extremely bloody – wars . Many dead and many more displaced .
 The conflicts remain unresolved and create problems for the parent states and the entire region . Since then the conflicts have remained unresolved .
 The number of international actors involved in the conflict regulation processes has grown since the 1990s . There have been more than 100 actors involved since then .
 Russia continues to play a decisive role in all four conflicts . However, Russia is still playing a key role in many of the conflicts .
 The conflicts differ strongly in their histories and in the depth of entrenchment in the affected societies . The conflicts are very different in the history of the two countries .
 The Transnistria conflict only emerged when the Soviet Union collapsed . It was driven more by questions of resource redistribution and guarding political influence than by deep-rooted attributions of historical, ethnic and cultural difference .
 Such attributions, on the other hand, figured among the root causes of the tensions in the South Caucasus .
 Russian and Soviet empires have a long history of repression and discrimination . But these became conflated with a longHistory of repression, discrimination and repression .
 Both sides mythologise the contested territory as the birthplace of their respective nation . In the case of Nagorno-Karabakh both sides mythologicalise the territory .
 The trauma suffered in the South Caucasus wars still shapes identity discourses in all the affected societies .
 The structural difference between the Transnistria conflicts and the conflicts in the South Caucasus is reflected in the fact that the boundary line between the uncontested part of Moldova and the TMR has always remained open since the early 1990s .
 The Russo-Georgian War of 2008 ended with the South Ossetia-Georgia conflict . The last permeable conflict line between the two countries closed with the Russo-Georgia War of2008 .
 The border areas, especially in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, remain volatile spaces of violence .
 The affected societies have drifted ever further apart, while prejudices and stereotypes have flourished . The affected society have drifted further apart.
 This leads to mutually exclusive maximum positions on all sides concerning the status and future of the contested territories . This undermines any progress in the peace processes, which in turn undermines the peace process .
 Elites in the de jure and de facto states alike exploit the conflicts to secure and legitimise their power . Elite in the De Jure and De facto states both exploit conflicts.
 In parent states governments claim their policies will bring about the return of the lost territories . Opponents criticise them for not achieving exactly this .
 The leaderships in the de facto states justify their power with the need to protect their populations against the former parent state’s aggressive striving for reunification .
 The power-securing function of the conflicts continues to apply in the de facto states . The situation in the rump states has become more complex .
In Moldova the issue had been receding into the background even before 2014 . In Moldova, the issue was being receded into the back of the background .
 The prospect of reunification with the TMR raises a series of almost intractable problems for the Moldovan side . The need to integrate a large pro-Russian population would have on the pro-European political balance .
 The current political leadership of Georgia has distanced itself from its predecessors’ nationalistic ambitions . Georgia has embarked on a softer path to conflict regulation .
 The strategy shift remains controversial within the political elites in Georgian society . This change of course since 2012, like the normalisation of relations with Russia, certainly found approval within Georgian society.
 Russia's normalisation of relations with Russia resonated positively with Georgian society after 2012 . It remained controversial among the elite, but it remained controversial.
 surveys show that it as yet lacks a stable foundation in the Georgian population . The Georgian population is not yet stable, surveys show .
 There is a danger that the conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia could again give rise to nationalist mobilisations . Georgia is a state of uncertainty and political and economic problems within Georgia .
 September 2016 85 Sabine Fischer Baku has intensified continuously over recent years . The 85-year-old has been in the spotlight for several years .
 Russia has not changed its fundamental position and policy in any of the pre-existing conflicts since the Ukraine crisis . Russia hasn't changed its position and policies since the crisis over Ukraine .
 In both Transnistria and Nagorno-Karabakh Moscow adheres to the status quo . In both the two cities, Transnistsria and the Russian capital, Moscow.
 It stands by its recognition of Abkhaz and South Ossetian independence in 2008 . South Ossenia’s wish to become part of the Russian Federation was denied .
 Both territories are almost completely dependent on Russia . Both territories have frequently experienced Russian pressure. Economically too, both territories are very dependent on Russian pressure .
 Negative trends since 2014 demonstrate once again that the conflicts analysed in this study are by no means ‘frozen’ But, on the contrary, highly dynamic, according to study .
 All parties to the conflicts took positions on the crisis, thereby further deepening the rifts between them . For instance, all parties in the conflict took positions.
 The de jure states Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan insisted on the principle of territorial integrity . They sharply condemned Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the war in Donbas .
 The crisis over Ukraine has heightened the polarisation of societies across conflict lines . In Moldova and Georgia the crisis has also heightened the polarization of societies .
Transnistria is part of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict . Its geographical proximity to the contested Ukrainian regions and presence of Russian forces has in a sense made it part of it .
 The crisis over Ukraine has influenced the four conflicts over recent years . Other developments have also significantly influenced the Ukraine crisis .
 The growing geopolitical tensions between Russia and the West were complicating both the local conflict constellations and the international peace processes well before 2014 . The growing tensions between the West and Russia were exacerbated by it .
 Many of the dynamics described in this study must be seen in the context of these geopolitical tensions, says the study .
 All the de jure and de facto states face a deepening systemic crisis . The crisis is a deepening crisis for all of the states .
 The severe economic recession in Russia is spreading in waves out across the entire region . It exposes the immense functional deficits of the political and economic structures of Russia .
 The consequences are political instability, as seen in Moldova and potentially in Georgia, or alternatively in Azerbaijan and Armenia .
 The de facto states become even more dependent on their protectors Russia and Armenia – where authoritarian tendencies are also growing . The state is also more reliant on its protectors, including Armenia and Russia .
 The scope for constructive conflict policies involving the parties themselves and international actors like Germany and the European Union shrinks as those negative trends worsen .
 The study finds that conflicts are similar to those investigated in this study . That applies to all the conflicts investigated in the study, although to different degrees .
 European Peace Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts Recommendations for Germany and the European Union 12 . The first dimension of the EU’s policy for the unresolved conflicts has to date shown practically no impact in the eastern neighbourhood .
 This approach appeared most promising in relation to the Transnistria conflict, on account of its relative openness . This approach appears most promising on the account of their relative openness, according to reports .
 What these processes have not produced, however, is substantial progress towards a resolution of the conflict . The conflict has not yet been resolved .
 The EU inadvertently made itself more or less a party to the conflict between 2004 and 2008 in the eyes of Sukhum/i and Tskhinval/i through its strong identification with Georgia .
 The hope that democratisation and economic reforms in Georgia could persuade populations of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to abandon their demands for independence turned out to be an illusion .
 The gap between the two parties has grown ever deeper, according to CNN.com .
 Abkhazia and South Ossetia refuse to participate in any way in Georgia's association process . EU's announcement of a policy of engagement without recognition has done nothing to lessen their rejection .
 Armenia and Azerbaijan are not on the road to association . Brussels is forced to strongly differentiate its policy towards both countries .
 The EU's credibility has been damaged by its ambivalent position on the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and its pragmatic energy partnership with Azerbaijan .
 Neither Armenia nor Azerbaijan currently seeking Europeanisation, that option currently offers the EU no of means indirect influence . The EU currently offers no of mean indirect influence.
 The Europeanisation approach will remain important for the EU’s relationships with the states affected by the conflicts, first and foremost Moldova and Georgia . The first dimension – the Europeanisation Approach – will nonetheless remain important.
 Political and economic reforms are the only means to stabilise these states from within . Political and financial reforms are only means of stabilising these states .
 Democratisation also means promoting a political culture of peaceful conflict-resolution .
In the medium to long term such a strategy could stifle nationalistic tensions and reduce the risk of escalation . Such a strategy can stifle the threat of escalation, according to experts .
 The EU’s strengths and potential lie in the political, societal and economic fields rather than in the sphere of security . Here the EU's strengths lie in political and societal fields.
 The EU should search more actively for ways to expand exchange with the de facto states . EU should ensure greater continuity in its conflict policy in the eastern neighbourhood .
 Klemens Büscher and Franziska Smolnik have contributed to the recommendations concerning Transnistria and Nagorno-Karabakh . This has 12 of the 12 I would like to thank them.
 September 2016 87 Sabine Fischer had a detrimental impact on the confidence of the conflicting parties . September 2016 was the first time Fischer had been in charge of the team .
 The crisis over Ukraine has diverted attention away from the pre-existing unresolved conflicts . The crisis has also diverted attention from pre- existing conflicts .
 An arc of interconnected conflicts could have positive domino effects, says author . They should be seen, however, as an arc of connected conflicts whose constructive treatment can have positive effects, he says .
 The expansion of the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area between the EU and the Republic of Moldova is a positive step . The expansion is a good step for Moldova, including TMR .
 The pragmatism exhibited by Tiraspol over this matter underlines the importance it places on economic exchange with Moldova and the EU .
 The gradual implementation of the DCFTA arrangements, agreed upon by the parties, needs to be closely monitored . The gradual rollout of theDCFTA will be monitored .
 Flexibility must not be allowed to lead to an unconditional extension of trade preferences, upon which certain Transnistrian representatives are already speculating .
 Progress can only be expected if incentives are tied to strict conditionality . Progress can be expected only if incentives can be tied to tight conditionality.
 The EU will need to consider withdrawing the TMR’s preferential access to its market in the event of Tiraspol failing to implement the terms within the specified deadlines .
Transnistria’s inclusion in the DCFTA cannot serve as a model for the conflicts in the South Caucasus . Transnistrians’ inclusion inDCFTA can not serve as model for conflicts in South Caucasus.
 A pragmatic understanding could be reached despite the overarching conflict between the EU and Russia . But the fact that a pragmatic understanding can be reached could provide incentives to seek compromise solutions elsewhere .
 The Transnistria conflict should be addressed as a cross-cutting issue in all matters concerning association, and representatives of TMR should be included .
The establishment of a sub-committee on Transnistria should also be considered . The establishment of the sub- committee on TransNistria is also considered .
 TMR representatives can encourage the Transnistrian side to operate more transparently and develop competencies . Even if Tiraspol fails to participate constructively, the presence of the TMR reps can encourage them to operate constructively .
 Measures should be promoted to improve living conditions on both sides of the Dniester . Measures should also be promoted for better living conditions .
For example, the provision of funding for cooperation between businesses, education and research facilities could be made conditional on recipients jointly applying for and conducting projects . For example, funding for projects between businesses and education could be given to recipients .
 In Transnistria itself, tangible investments in the social sphere would be suited to loosen the population’s mental fixation on Russia .
 Such measures should be tailored to the region and possibly to specific target groups . Content orientated on people’s real lives, such as real lives .
 European Peace Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts is concerned about Moldova . The EU must pay special attention to crucial reforms relating to minority policy .
 The preparation, adoption and implementation of an inter-ethnic integration strategy is urgently needed . The preparation and adoption of an Inter-ethnic Integration strategy is needed .
 Such a policy could allay the minorities’ fears of Romanianisation and encourage the emergence of an inclusive civic identity . Such a Policy could also allay minorities' fears of Romaniaisation .
 It would also be of great relevance to clarify Gagauzia’s autonomous status and contested legal issues between the centre and the autonomous entity .
 Tangible progress in these areas would have a significant confidence-building effect in the Transnistrian population, says the author .
 The 5+2 process has to date failed to produce any movement on the status question . Little progress is to be expected in the future .
 Russia’s blatant violation of fundamental tenets of international law and OSCE principles in Ukraine has severely damaged the negotiating mechanism based largely on those principles . Russia's blatant violations of the principles have damaged Ukraine's negotiating mechanism .
 The latter is also disabled by the conflict between the two mediators Russia and Ukraine . The two are also disabled.
 The 5+2 talks should be continued even though the format does not offer a path to a political solution . The format doesn't offer a way to a solution to the crisis .
 It provides a mechanism for conflict prevention, for regulating practical questions, for including Russia, and for supporting confidence-building measures .
 Russia should be urged more energetically to withdraw its forces from Transnistria as agreed at the 1999 OSCE summit in Istanbul . Russia should also make its own contribution to military de-escalation .
At the same time, everything possible should be done to change the format of the peacekeeping forces in the security zone, which are de facto an instrument of Russian military control .
 The objective is to establish an independent, largely civilian peacekeeping mission . The objective must be to establish a largely civilian mission .
 In the current situation the EU should do everything it can to support both Moldova and Ukraine politically and economically, says the European Union .
 This could also involve expanding the EUBAM mandate to properly secure the Transnistrian section of the Ukrainian-Moldovan border . This is also possible to secure the Ukrainian border with Ukraine .
 The EU should continue to actively pursue association with Georgia and maintain its political, economic and security support . The Conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia should be resolved .
 Georgia has made discernible progress towards democratisation, but continues to suffer grave deficits in areas such as governance, transparency in political decision-making, independence of the judiciary, and minority protection .
 The EU should insist on democratic standards, which could also help to counteract the widespread popular disenchantment with politics .
 implementing visa-free travel to the EU with immediate effect would send a positive message to Georgian society . Implementing visa free travel to EU would send positive message.
 The rhetoric only provokes negative reactions in the de facto states and Russia, according to the Russian government .
 Geneva International Discussions have to date produced little in the way of results . The Geneva Internationaldiscussions have been held in Geneva since 2007 .
 The only existing format for negotiations on the conflicts must be continued . But they remain the only existing formats for negotiations .
 The EUMM fulfils an important function that must be maintained . Along the current boundaries between Georgia, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, the EUMM has a key role .
 Georgian governments should be encouraged to continue the policy of dialogue with the societies and political authorities of Abkhazia and South Ossetia introduced after the 2012 elections .
 The law currently prevents meaningful engagement in occupied territories . That would include substantial amendments to or abolition of the law on occupied territories. That would also include significant amendments to the law .
 Brussels and Tbilisi are pulling in the same direction on this matter. In the scope of the association process a clear message should also be sent to the Georgian population .
 The possibility of recognising the two entities as ‘conflict parties’ in the Geneva International Discussions should be considered . In the medium term, without losing sight of Russia’s role, the possibility of recognizing the two nations is considered .
 Georgia is in fact confronted with three adversaries. The present format fails to reflect the fact that Georgia is facing three adversaries . Georgia has a history of being confronted with adversaries .
 EUMM cannot be expected to be able to operate on the Abkhaz and South Ossetian sides of the cease-fire lines for the foreseeable future . Germany and the European Union should seek the restoration of a status-neutral presence of international organisations in the contested territories .
 The options include the OSCE and the UN, both of which can draw upon a long track record in both areas . The options are available in both countries .
 Germany could use its OSCE Chairmanship in 2016 to work towards the establishment of a new OSCE mission in Georgia . Germany could also use its Chairmanship to help establish a new mission inGeorgia .
 Even if this mission were not initially able to operate in the conflict areas themselves, it would still be a step in the right direction .
 A revival of the policy of engagement without recognition should be followed up with concrete steps, above all in the fields of education, health, infrastructure and infrastructure .
 In elementary sectors like energy Germany could supply expertise to reduce the contested territories’ energy dependency on Russia .
 Plans such as the establishment of EU information centres in contested territories should be reactivated .
Such measures should initially focus on Abkhazia, which offers better conditions for sensitive engagement . Such measures should also focus on the city of Abkhazaria, where the city is known for its sensitive engagement.
 International NGOs and other non-state actors should increase the number of projects they run in direct cooperation with Abkhaz and South Ossetian partners .
 Problems such as human rights violations and the precarious situation of the Georgians in Gal/i should be raised regularly .
 exceptional sensitivity for the complexities is required. Here, however, exceptional sensitivity is required .
Wherever possible measures in areas like education, health and infrastructure should be configured such that different population groups share their benefits. Wherever possible Measures in areas such as education, Health and Infrastructure should be configuration such thatdifferent population groups shared their benefits .
 Georgian fears of ‘creeping recognition’ is only promising step towards more dialogue with the Georgian side . The answer to Georgian fears is that in the present situation de-isolation is a promising step toward more dialogue .
 Germany and the EU should invest in informal Track 2 and Track 1.5 dialogue processes where steps to improve the concrete situation can be discussed . German and EU leaders should also invest in the process of improving the situation in Germany .
Residents of Abkhazia and South Ossetia have become an increasingly pressing problem . In recent years obstacles to the mobility of residents of the two countries have become increasingly pressing .
 EU member states should choose a pragmatic approach to establish such informal discussion formats . Here the EU member States should choose an informal approach .
 Russia exhibits little interest in continuing the dialogue processes outside Geneva International Discussions . Russia discourages actors from the secessionist entities from taking part in them .
 The EU side should counter this with both determination and transparency at the civil society and official levels, says the EU . The EU says it should counter the EU side with bothdetermination and transparency .
 Cooperation with Russia in the scope of the Geneva International Discussions should be continued . The Geneva Internationaldiscussions should continue .
 The escalation of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict in the so-called “Four-Day War of April 2016 has underlined yet again how fragile and dangerous the situation in this conflict is .
No international peacekeeping force or meaningful observer mission monitors the cease-fire line . No international peacekeepers or meaningful observers are needed to monitor cease-fires .
 The high degree of militarisation of the conflict parties and the hardening of hostile stereotypes on both sides undermines any kind of confidence-building . The high level of militarising of the war parties is a sign of the rise in militarisation .
 A relapse into open war would have unpredictable local, regional, regional and potentially even broader consequences . A relapse would have potentially even wider consequences .
 There is thus every reason to put this conflict on the international political agenda. There is also every reason for this conflict to be put on the political agenda .
 The most important short-term goal must be de-escalation and stabilisation in order to prevent further and worse outbreaks of violence . The goal is to de- escalate and stabilise.
 The EU has to date held back on this question and left mediation on Nagorno-Karabakh to the OSCE and the Minsk Group . The EU is still trying to resolve the issue.
 Georgia's relationships with Baku and Yerevan also offer fewer levers than for example in the case of Georgia . Georgia's relationship with the two countries also offer less levers than Baku .
 Berlin and Brussels should think harder about how the work of the Minsk Group could be made more efficient . The German OSCE chairmanship in 2016 will be held in 2016 .
 The Minsk Conference was originally planned for 1994 . It would appear pertinent to strengthen the role of the European Union, for example .
 Strengthening the OSCE mandate on the cease-fire line is of central importance in this connection . The OSCE has a mandate on a cease- fire line .
 OSCE Representative Andrzej Kasprzyk should be massively increased . Inspections currently have to be notified in advance, which should be made more independent .
 Sabine Fischer should be introduced to bring the parties together regularly in the interests of preventing violence .
 Independent fact-finding missions should be deployed in order to counter warmongering speculation with neutral information . Where incidents do occur, moreover, independent fact- finding missions should also be deployed .
 The next step to consider would be the deployment of international peacekeeping forces .
 Russia is of central importance for de-escalating and stabilising the situation in Nagorno-Karabakh . Russia is a key factor in stabilising and de- escalating the situation .
Only in conjunction with Moscow would the international community be in any position to force the conflict parties to increase their commitment to the peace process .
 The crisis over Ukraine should also give Brussels reason to make it clear in dialogue with Moscow, as one of the main mediators in the Karabakh conflict . The concept of ‘controllable instability’ is in the Caucasian as well as Ukrainian environment, says Brussels .
 In the medium to long term the Union should channel greater energy into other fields of action in the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict .
 Nagorno-Karabakh will have to accept any resolution of the conflict . More actors from the region should be included more prominently in these projects .
 Any involvement of Nagorno-Karabakh is regarded as legitimisation of the status quo . Such an approach is liable to meet with vehement rejection in Baku, where any involvement is seen as legitimised .
 If it wishes to contribute more, the European Union will have to deal with all these aspects . If it wants to contribute to the EU, the EU will need to do more .
 Expanding the European approach of engagement without recognition to Nagorno-Karabakh would be a difficult but potentially productive venture . Expanding European approach without recognition would be difficult and potentially productive .
 It is in particular the isolation of all the conflict parties that supplies fertile ground for mutually exclusive conflictprolonging narratives on all sides .
Without lasting improvements in democratic standards on all sides, substantial progress in conflict transformation is unlikely . Without lasting improvements, substantial change in conflict is unlikely.
 European Peace Policy in the Unresolved Conflicts mitting displaced persons to return to the EU .
 Western and Russian interpretations of Euromaidan fundamentally diverge, overt support for supporters of democratisation in Armenia and Azerbaijan is likely to encounter little sympathy from the governments of either country .
 Conditions for a German and European contribution to the transformation or even resolution of the conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Nagorno-Karabakh have worsened .
 This is connected with the immediate repercussions of the crisis over Ukraine and the associated geopolitical tensions between Russia and the European Union . This is linked to the ongoing Ukraine crisis .
 Russia continues to destabilise the region. But it is also a consequence of the proliferating crisis of the political and economic systems in all the involved states .
 The goal of lasting peace must become an integral part of EU policy towards the region, not only in Ukraine, but also in the conflicts that have persisted since the 1990s .
 pathbreaking progress towards resolution of the conflicts over Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and NagornoKarabakh cannot be expected in the medium term either . In view of the worsening conditions and the restricted capacities of the European Union .
Germany and its EU partners should formulate their medium-term objectives realistically . Germany and its European partners should therefore formulate their objectives realistically.
 In Transnistria this would be to preserve or restore the openness that characterised the conflict before the crisis over Ukraine broke out . This is to prevent spill-over from the tense situation in neighbouring Ukraine .
 The conflicts over Abkhazia and South Ossetia means in the first place to de-isolate the contested territories . The conflict could also be prevented if the political situation further destabilises .
 In the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict de-escalation and stabilisation are the short-term priorities, followed by medium-term deisolation of the parties .
Russian policy varies from conflict to conflict, so the possibilities for cooperation with Moscow also vary . Russian policy varies.
 Resolving the conflicts will certainly require a fundamental change in Russian policy . But that is not the only key to resolving the conflicts .