 J.S. Joint Forces Staff College Joint Forces Joint Forces Advanced Warfighting School 7800 Hampton Blvd Norfolk, VA .
 The author of this article has written permission from the author . Use this article to help people with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 ABSTRACT Russia’s renewed influence has caused strategic paralysis in the West . Russia's renewed influence.
 The root cause is a failure to understand the true nature of Russian Smart Power, according to Joseph Nye’s original theory .
 Nye defines Smart Power as the intelligent combination of coercive Hard Power with attractive Soft Power . Nye: Smart Power is the intelligent mixture of coercive hard power with attractive soft Power .
 Nye’s theory fails to explain the mechanics of Russian power and the resultant rise of Russian influence . The theory does not account for Russian deception and obfuscation .
 The apparently disconnected and ambiguous nature of the individual elements of Russian Hard and Soft Power complicates the development of an effective strategy .
 A deconstruction of recent events in Ukraine, Syria, and Turkey analyzes the importance of the interplay between coercion and attraction . It reveals the existence of a unique brand of Russian Smart Power .
 Russian Smart Power uses deception to disrupt the awareness of its target, create opportunities to apply coercion, and legitimize its attractive Soft Power .
 The paper makes recommendations to apply Russian Smart Power in reverse to restore the balance and regain the lost strategic initiative .
 Russia, Smart Power, Soft Power, Ukraine, Strategy, Strategy and Deception 16 .
 Andrew Chisholm Unclassified Unclassified unclassified 19b. This page includes a list of the most recent classifications . This page is the latest in a long list of classes that have been released .
 The FOUR DIMENSIONS of RUSSIAN SMART POWER. Not for commercial use without the express written permission of the author .
 A paper submitted to the Faculty of the Joint Advanced Warfighting School in partial satisfaction of the requirements of a Master of Science Degree in Joint Campaign Planning and Strategy .
 Russia’s renewed influence has caused strategic paralysis in the West, says the Pentagon .
 The West must change its approach or risk losing Turkey from the NATO alliance . Russia would be in a very advantageous position in the Middle East and Europe .
 The root cause of the weak response is a failure to understand the true nature of Russian Smart Power . Russian strategists are able to manipulate their adversaries at will, according to Nye .
 I cannot thank you enough for your unswerving support and unflappable temperament, says author . "Without which, the creation of this paper would not have been possible," he says .
 Keith Dickson for his patience, humorous nature, and innate ability to recalibrate his over-active creative tendencies . Dickson is known for his humorous nature and his innate ability.
Jeffrey Turner helped foster the development of the concept of the new album . Turner also helped to foster the concept and for his tireless dedication to lyrical perfection .
 The crucial input dramatically improved the quality of this paper. Combined, their crucial input significantly improved this paper .
 Russian intervention in Crimea and eastern Ukraine marked a watershed moment in post-Cold War relations between Vladimir Putin's Russia and the international community . Vita. i Intentionally left blank IV Chapter 1 Introduction .
 Russia’s use of military force in Syria exacerbated the flow of refugees into Europe, which contributed to the rise of nationalism and weakened the cohesion of the European Union .
 Russian influence on Turkey has the potential to weaken the NATO alliance and place Russia in a very advantageous position in the Middle East and Europe . Russia's influence on the country could be very advantageous to Turkey .
 The Russian economy is weaker than at any point since the 1990s, after suffering a contracting GDP, 13 per cent inflation, and more than a nine per cent drop in real wages . The economy has suffered a contracting economy, 13% inflation and 9% inflation .
 Putin's 2018 re-election campaign. Without a significant improvement in economic performance, the strain on Russian society threatens Putin’s 2018 campaign . Russia's economy is struggling to improve.
 Putin may be tempted to boost domestic support by taking military action . As a result, Putin may also take military action.
 Second natural gas pipeline to be opened to Germany across Baltic Sea . Further pipeline planned for completion through Turkey . By 2019, need for Russia to use Ukraine's gas infrastructure will be removed .
 Freedom from energy export constraints through Ukraine may make Putin feel more inclined to take aggressive action .
 The divergent responses across the political spectrum reflected a failure to understand Russian power, influence, and strategy . The inability to define Russian power and intent led to a weak collective response to Russian aggression .
 The West's ignorance of Russia’s interests and historical role in Europe and Anatolia makes Russian action seem unexpected . Vladimir Putin may take further action that could raise tensions to Cold War levels .
 The nature of Russian power is a continuing subject of scholarly debate . An initial appraisal indicates that Russia only understands Hard Power .
Joseph Nye does not believe Russia is capable of using Soft Power . Even Joseph Nye doesn't believe that Russia is able to use Soft Power.
 The debate over the primacy of Russian Hard or Soft Power is inconsequential . The West has been blind to Russia’s uses of its own brand of Smart Power .
 The West has been out-flanked and out-maneuvered in Europe and the Middle East . As a result, the West is out-furnished in the region .
 Coercive Hard Power instruments can be used to attract, while Soft Power can be employed with a traditionally coercive instrument . Soft Power is a traditional coercive instrument.
Russian Smart Power is a unique brand of Russian Smart Power . The company is based in Moscow, Russia's capital city .
 Russia employs a unique brand of Smart Power that features timely and carefully coordinated deception to enable and to disguise its Hard and Soft Power instruments . This paper argues that Russia employs the unique brand.
 Russian Smart Power is further legitimized and enhanced by the Russian worldview of power polarity that has emerged since the end of the Cold War .
 The second chapter of this paper describes Joseph Nye’s Smart Power theory . It highlights target actor awareness as the key element that converts Soft and Hard Power into Smart Power .
 Nye’s critique of Russian Soft Power is based on his view that it is limited by a cultural barrier . Nye says the failure to conform to Soft Power as a well-intentioned attractive force undermines its effectiveness .
 The third chapter examines Russian Smart Power in action across Ukraine, Turkey, and Syria in order to demonstrate how opposed actors are coerced . It also examines how neutral actors are attracted by the Russian worldview of power polarity .
 A powerful deception strategy is a crucial additional component of Russian Smart Power. It concludes that the successful attraction of opposed actors, despite the weakness of Russian Soft Power, means that a powerful deception Strategy is a key component of Russia Smart Power .
 The fifth chapter builds on Nye’s theory of Smart Power by synthesizing the true nature of the unique brand of Russian Smart Power . Nye's theory is based on the concept of the brand.
 The sixth chapter of this paper offers recommendations for offensive and defensive action that will increase the transparency of the strategic environment and facilitate the development of a coherent strategy to pierce the fog of Russian deception .
 Nye defined the concept of Hard Power as the coercive use of military force and Soft Power as attraction through persuasion, or even better, through co-option .
 Soft Power leverages an ever-present attraction that originates primarily from the popular culture or vibrant economy of a liberal society to facilitate the achievement of strategic intent .
 Nye’s Smart Power model provides a useful conceptual framework to help visualize the forces at work . Nye's Smart Power models are designed to help visualise the forces of work .
 Soft Power acts on groups in “concentric rings,’ with a magnet of attraction in the center that represents the objective .
 Aligned actors, who are generally in favor of existent policies, are already situated near the center and are predisposed to cooperate . Aligned actor, however, is not expected to cooperate.
 neutral actors are distributed further from the center and require a stronger magnet to achieve the same attractive effect . neutral actors can be found to have the same effect as neutral actors .
Hard and attractive Soft Power generates potential for destructive interference if the target actor becomes aware of deliberate attraction and coercion from the same authority .
 Destructive interference creates a cognitive dissonance that undermines Soft Power, says author .
 As a result, the target actor actively resists and becomes immune to attractive forces . The target actor is immune to the attractive forces of an attractive actor .
 If Smart Power is to be effective, the target actor’s awareness of the integrated nature of the forces acting on it must be minimized .
 Nye believes this can only be achieved by conveying intent clearly and openly, or risk undermining Smart Power’s attractive qualities .
 If Soft Power attractive force is strong and generic, it will overpower the destructive interference because of its ubiquitous and unrelated nature . If the Soft Power is strong, it would overpower the interference .
 Nye’s Smart Power theory requires the tools of coercion to be overt and its attractive component to be powerful, but naturally occurring and unforced .
 Nye posits that the Russians have fundamentally misunderstood the concept of Soft Power . Nye says they are “failing miserably’s’ by attempting to synthesize a dubious attractive force .
 Russia is not using Smart Power, only Hard Power, according to Nye . Nye says Russia is using Hard Power .
 Nye believes that Russia is failing in its application of Soft Power based on cultural limitations . Nye says that Russia has failed to apply to Soft Power.
 The Iron Curtain that once served as the physical barrier separating the Russian people from the rest of the world has been 5 Joseph S. Nye, The Powers to Lead .
 Nye’s Smart Power model is effective only within the inner reaches of the concentric rings where language does not present a cultural barrier .
 If the target actor is situated beyond the cultural barrier, Russian Soft Power is weak . If the targets are located beyond the culture barrier, they are weak .
 The existence of a Soft Power cultural barrier is a truism of any society, says the author .
 A foreign language can prevent effective communication of intentions, whether positive to attract or negative to coerce .
 Ideologically-based messages are hard to convey to a foreign culture . sociological differences can negate entirely the attractive qualities of one culture to another .
 A weak and constrained Soft Power attractive force does not preclude the presence of a Smart Power strategy. Nevertheless, a weak and constraints do not preclude Smart Power .
Mai’a Cross introduced the concept of the disaggregation of the tools from the power mode . Nye’s initial theory of Hard and Soft Power mechanics was based on the theory of hard and soft power mechanics .
 A Soft Power tool, such as military power, can be used to coerce with great effect . A Hard Power tool can co-opt or persuade through multi-national training exercises and humanitarian relief .
 Nye’s notion of Soft Power as a generic attractive force. This means that attractive forces can be actively created, which broadens Nye's notion of soft power .
 Cross's definition remains within the bounds of Nye’s classification of Soft Power as inherently well-intentioned . Nye's definition of soft power is still within the boundaries of the classification ofSoft Power .
 Russian Strategy of Deception and the Conflict in Ukraine . 47. 7 an opportunity to examine how an active Smart Power strategy is employed in the contemporary security environment .
Russian Soft Power appears to play very little part in the outcome of Russian Soft Power . But clear examples of simultaneous Russian strategic coercion and attraction exist .
 Russian attempts to use Soft Power to persuade the international community of its benign strategic intent have broadly failed . But its successful influence in Ukraine, Turkey, and Syria is undeniable, and it is undeniable .
 Nye’s theory of Smart Power does not explain how Smart Power functions in Russia . The seemingly disconnected individual elements of Hard and Soft Power are respectively ambiguous and weak .
 Nye's Smart Power model captures the key element of the target actor’s awareness of the forces at work . It relies on naturally occurring, well-intentioned, and powerful attraction to minimize the destructive interference .
 Nye’s Smart Power does not account for the use of Smart Power by a leader, government, and military . The military perfected the art of systemic deception .
 The next chapter analyzes Russian Smart Power in action by deconstructing its components in order to create an understanding of how Russia used Smart Power to enhance its influence . The next chapters will look at how Russia's Smart Power is being used in the future .
 The creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States in 1991 was Russian President Boris Yeltsin’s solution to the unexpected demand for sovereignty from Ukraine and Belarus . Chapter 3 Russian Smart Power in Action is the latest in a series of books by the Russian President .
 Cooperation was restricted to economic concerns, which limited the influence Russia could exert on security matters .
 The lack of direct control over the former republics of the Soviet Union created a split between progressive Russian politicians who sought to replace regional hegemony of the ‘near abroad’ with European integration .
 When the Russian economy declined at an average annual rate of 6. per cent between 1992 and 1998, 2 and NATO began incorporating former Soviet republics .
 The decision to avoid pursuing a U.N. Security Council resolution removed the Russian opportunity to veto the action . The decision highlighted the humiliating lack of Russian influence in European matters .
 Russia's failure to balance power against the U.S. by unifying France and Germany against the 2003 invasion of Iraq confirmed to Vladimir Putin the need to change his strategy . This episode combined with the failure of Russia to balancepower against the United States .
 The term "Putinism" is a synonym for Hard Power . The term is used in the name of “defending Russian minorities and fighting fascism’s fascism .
 New Russian strategy enabled unilateral action without any internal political consultation . 12 heads of state also sought positive interaction with other like-minded heads of states .
 Putinism may appear abhorrent to leaders of liberal democratic states, but it actually is 7.3% of the time .
 The Russian worldview of “concert-based multipolarity’ is an important component of the unique brand of Russian Smart Power . neutral actors are no longer politically isolated from Russia, as they were during the Cold War .
 Russian Soft Power is making a new, unfamiliar type of approach from Moscow . This sets the conditions for Soft Power to act where it once could not, and it is made all the more effective .
 The Russian nationalist agenda is fuelled by a complex history of ideological, religious, and ethnic attachment to its geographic neighbors . The Russian nationalists are fuelled by an ideological and religious history .
Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev describes Russians and Ukrainians as “two fraternal peoples’ that “may not be separated,” 16 and many Russian commentators believe that the existence of the sovereign nation of Ukraine is the result of an aberration of
 The idea of Ukraine as an integrated nation of the European Union and NATO is inherently unacceptable . Ukraine is currently a member of the EU.
 The annexation of Crimea in March 2014, was the necessary first hurdle to reverse the gradual slide towards Ukrainian integration into the European Union . The Orange Revolution advocated for European integration as a way to improve government accountability .
 A character assessment of Vladimir Putin written during his training as an intelligence officer criticized his lack of an appropriate sense of danger . The assessment was written during a training session for Putin .
 He is not a gambler, but he has a character trait that may enable him to pursue an aggressive foreign policy where others may take a more cautious line .
An innovative approach would be required if Putin was to force the creation of a Eurasian alliance that included Ukraine without generating discord at home and abroad .
 Putin, Ukraine, and the New Cold War (Brookings Institution Press, 2015), 228. Putin, Ukrainians, Ukraine and Ukraine.
 She believes Russian intervention in Ukraine signifies a new epoch of strategic innovation . She believes Russia's intervention is a new era of strategic Innovation .
 John Herbst posits that Putin's denial of Russian military involvement was designed to maintain high domestic support . By contrast, Herbst says Putin’s denial was purely designed to keep support in the country .
Despite the existence of Russian unified executive authority, domestic opinion appears to remain a critically important consideration . This suggests that, despite the presence of unified executive power, domestic opinions remain a critical consideration .
 Russia has adapted the Smart Power concept of simultaneous strategic coercion and attraction to fit Russian strategic culture and worldview . Russia has devised an innovative model to address Russian strategic challenges .
 The manipulation of Russian symbols as a Soft Power component of the Smart Power strategy reveals a deliberate attempt to use Russian culture in order to create an attractive effect .
 The Russian government encouraged the public display of orange and black striped ribbons in 2005 . The ribbons can be traced to the St.
 Imperial Russian interests intended to kindle nostalgia and kinship in the “near abroad’s ‘near abroad.’ The Orange Revolution associated with Ukrainian political drift towards greater integration with the European Union .
Political scientists Tomina Lankina and Kinga Niemczyk claim that Russian television shows are key contributors to Russian Soft Power .
 The intervention in eastern Ukraine follows the annexation of Crimea . It represents the attempt by Moscow to clear the second hurdle to reverse the Ukrainian integration into Europe .
 The use of Russian conventional military force for coercive effect was obfuscated by the highlypublicized humanitarian aid being delivered to civilians by deployed forces .
 Ukrainian military uses military to produce an ambiguous indirect coercive force on the Ukrainian government . This represents an intelligent use of the military. It also presents an overt attractive image to the international community through the action .
 Russia is demonstrating the use of Smart Power by acting as a neutral with masked actions of a belligerent .
 Vladimir Putin increased pressure on Ukraine to integrate into the Eurasian Union by threatening the ‘de-industrialization’ of multiple sectors within its economy . Putin also threatened the routing of gas exports to Europe around Ukraine .
Ukrainian gas pipelines and storage facilities supplied 40 per cent of all Russian gas exports to Europe in 2014 . Ukrainian gas pipelines, storage facilities supply 40% of the Russian gas export to Europe .
 Finnish Institute of International Affairs highlights an unsuccessful Russian Soft Power attempt to leverage Hungarian nationalism .
 The diplomatic maneuver was designed to legitimize Russian military activity in eastern Ukraine . It suggested that Hungary should accede parts of western Ukraine into its territory .
 This unsubtle move coincided with the 100th anniversary of the First World War . It was intended to remind Hungarians of the fact that this area was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 The message lacked plausibility and was not accorded the necessary emphasis within the Hungarian media . It relied on empathy for the Russian cause created by the narrative of an honest Russian attempt to defy United States interference in the region .
 Russian Smart Power employed in Ukraine consisted of an obfuscated and indirect coercion, followed by an overt coercive use of the economic lever of power .
 A highly-publicized humanitarian gesture was employed to gain favor with the international community . But the covert coercive force provided by the unacknowledged Russian military presence was intended to achieve psychological dominance over the Ukrainian population .
 Russia also applied simultaneous coercion and attraction by supporting the referenda in Crimea and eastern Ukraine . Russia also supported the referendum that provided the population of the Donbas region a sense of legitimacy .
 Russian coercion of Ukraine elicited a weak response from the international community, which undoubtedly undermined the resolve of certain elements of the Ukrainian government .
 The Minsk protocol, signed on 5 September 2014, placed no demands on Russia to withdraw its military forces from Ukraine . The protocol was signed in September 2014 .
 Russia inserted itself into the geopolitical struggle in Syria, not only to protect its client state and its access to the Mediterranean Sea, but also to increase its ability to influence regional affairs in order to broaden its influence .
 Vladimir Putin considers Russian interests in Ukraine, Turkey, and Syria to be strands of an interconnected web . The application of power in one theater of operations results in a desirable effect in another, says Kilcullen .
 Russia aligned global expectations of its behavior in Syria to that of a “protector’s role in the multinational fight against violent extremist groups . Russia released images of precision air strikes and cruise missile strikes on terrorist groups for the benefit of the Western media audience .
 Turkey downed a Russian SU-24 fighter aircraft over Syria in November 2015, but also indirectly to Iraq, Israel, and Jordan . In reality, the presence of Russian military forces in Syria had an indirect coercive effect on Turkey .
 The downing of the fighter aircraft offered a legitimate reason to deploy the most advanced air-defense system in the world into the region . The decision was made by the U.S. Air Force in the wake of the incident .
 Russian strategists recognized the shoot-down incident as an opportunity to establish a Russian Smart Power strategy to improve the Russian geopolitical position .
 Russia's economic sanctions on Turkey reminded President Erdogan of the extent of Turkey’s interdependence with Russia .
 The sanctions caused a loss of ten billion dollars to the Turkish economy, an equivalent of 1. per cent of its GDP . The sanctions also threatened to terminate a twenty billion dollar Russian investment in Turkish nuclear power 38 as well as the “Turkish Stream’s gas pipeline from Russia
 Turkey imports fifty-five per cent of its natural gas from Russia . The loss of the pipeline would directly affect the future expansion of the Turkish economy .
 The opportunity to execute the Soft Power component of the Russian Smart Power strategy arose in July 2016, following the failed coup in Turkey .
 During the immediate aftermath of the attempted coup, President Erdogan's position was uncertain . The international community's support was notable by its absence .
 Vladimir Putin's offer of unconditional support to President Erdogan betrays the existence of a Russian Smart Power strategy . The fact that Vladimir Putin provided an immediate offer of support to Erdogan, despite the strained nature of their recent diplomatic relationship .
 The Soft Power strategy does not stand scrutiny as a plausible, stand-alone, attractive force . The coercive measures were insufficient to meet the Russian ends, says David Frum .
 Vladimir Putin indirectly coerced Turkey using the veiled intent of the military forces in Syria and then followed up with the overt threat of sanctions . Following a similar pattern to the Russian Smart Power strategy in Ukraine.
 He then tried to attract Turkey by using an opportunistic and cynical diplomatic advance . He then attempted to attract the country by using a cynical and cynical advance .
 Russian sovereign democracy enhances Russian Soft Power appeal to authoritarian neutral actors . But the ability to attract opposed actors situated beyond the cultural barrier requires further explanation .
 These powerful images attempt to legitimize the notion that Russia is a responsible power broker in Syria . They counter the narrative of an uncontrolled, indiscriminate Russian intervention in Ukraine .
 The accompanying narrative focuses singularly on the intent to fight terrorists, rather than the West’s partners of choice .
Evidence exists of indiscriminate Russian acts of force in both theaters, including the repeated use of cluster munitions on civilians within the Syrian city of Aleppo 42 and the employment of massive area artillery attacks in Ukraine, 43 .
 The use of weapons employment footage serves the purpose of confusing and misdirecting attention away from the true target and nature of Russian tactics, while presenting the opportunity for neutral and opposed actors to justify their own lack of opposition .
 Martin Smith opines that Russia has ‘shown little interest in Soft Power’ Smith says the “analytical applicability and utility of Soft Power in the Russian context’ appears weak because it chooses instead to rely on its sovereign democracy to achieve its aims .
 Russian concert held at the UNESCO World Heritage site of Palmyra in Syria was a clumsy display of state-sponsored culture .
 This transparently cynical action indicated the true limits of Russian Soft Power, says CNN.com .
 At the same time, it provides a telling insight into Russian Smart Power . But, at the same times, it also provides a tell-all insight into Russia's Smart Power.
 The concert represents a knowingly transparent attempt to build good will, but in the meantime, the Russian air force was unimpeded in its mission to destroy large swathes of Aleppo in order to crush rebel resistance .
 The use of coercive power gained the ends because the attractive fagadc of the concert either caused sufficient confusion, or it presented an option for neutral and opposed actors to turn a blind eye .
 A Russian Soft Power strategy is clearly evident, even acknowledged by the Russian Federation as an ‘indispensable concept’ that has growing relevance . The Russian Federation has called it an “indispensible concept” that has grown relevance .
 Russian Soft Power differs from Nye’s conception of an attractive force applied in good faith . But it remains effective on opposed actors outside the cultural barrier .
 The Russian intervention in Ukraine and Syria may indicate that the Russians are quite capable of an integrated application of Soft and Flard Power . The Russian interventions in Ukraine, Syria may show that, as long as the objective is achieved, is irrelevant .
 The West perceives weak Russian Soft Power as a failure . But the unique brand of Russian Smart Power appears to use the very existence of a Soft Power component to disrupt the normal resistance provided by opposed actors .
Current Smart Power theory does not contain a component capable of creating a condition of paralysis . Current Smart Power Theory does not include a component that can create paralysis .
 Nye’s Smart Power model assumes the polar opposite to be true by prescribing the creation of an open and honest environment, or risk the failure of Smart Power .
 The unique brand of Russian Smart Power contains a powerful deception strategy as an additional component that hinders awareness and fosters confusion .
 Russia must maximize the effectiveness of its Hard Power coercive levers without causing long-term political damage . Russia must minimize the adverse reaction from the broader international community, says the author .
 A critical and essential element of this Smart Power approach is the use of a deception strategy to minimize the Western reaction and create time and space to allow coercive Hard Power to work . The strategy is to minimize Western reaction.
 The Russian concert and the use of precision weapons employment footage in Syria showed, deception legitimizes Russian Soft Power . Russia's Soft Power has been accused of using precision weapons in Syria .
 A full Russian military occupation of Ukraine would run counter to the aim of achieving indirect political control of a sovereign state . A full military occupation would runcounter to the aims of a full Russian occupation .
 Russia’s energy control measures can be countered in the long-term by the expansion of energy storage, diversification of energy sources, and the creation of greater efficiencies in energy consumption, all of which limits the utility of this coercive lever .
 Incomplete information arising from a multitude of competing narratives in the aftermath of a publicized act of violence contributes to the existence of an ambiguous strategic environment .
 verification of events in Syria and Ukraine is often impossible due to inaccessible locations and hazardous conditions . The unwillingness of the press to directly cover events leaves a multitude of narratives shaped by individuals, activists, and manipulators .
 The ambiguous strategic environment serves to amplify the effectiveness of a deliberate deception strategy . The ambiguity of a strategic environment is often used as a deception strategy.
 This highly refined means of information warfare transfers bespoke information to the intended target . It is designed to trigger a specific self-defeating action .
 The Soviet propaganda that George F Kennan described as “negative and destructive,’ 9 has evolved into a 4 U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Military Deception, Joint Publication 3-13 .
 A successful outcome relies on an ability to predict the enemy’s response to a specific input . In other words, a successful outcome depends on the ability of the enemy to predict its response .
 Russian RC relies on a coherence of narrative, perfect timing of implementation, rapid reaction to developments, and appreciation of the duration of the effect .
 The covert nature of the Russian military intervention in Crimea became an overt military deployment is a testament to the Russian mastery of deception . The gradual, matter-offact manner in which the Russian conventional military intervention became an covert military intervention is an indication of the Russians mastery of
 The relationship between the average Russian citizen and the political elite facilitates Russian deception . The relationship is a form of deception, according to Russian media reports .
 Vladimir Putin’s brand of autocratic illiberal democracy keeps Russian citizens in a state of ‘political infantilism’ due to the lack of national debate about how the levers of power are exercised .
14 is still prevalent in modem Russia, where citizens watch Russian state-sponsored news with the full knowledge that the content does not necessarily reflect the truth . George Kennan’s observation that “the very disrespect of Russians for objective truth indeed, their disbelief in its
 Vladimir Putin has greater options than some Western leaders when it comes to domestic political restrictions on the use of Hard Power . Soft Power only serves to reinforce the image of a nonthreatening Russia interested in peace and stability .
 Europe has achieved a Kantian status as a “zone of values’ and a ‘zone of peace’ in a post-Hobbesian condition of negotiation and cooperation . The weakness in the European filter is the narrative that Europe is a �
 Russia’s war with Georgia in 2008 was framed strictly as a peace enforcement campaign intended to protect ethnic Russians and naturalized South Ossetians .
 President Medvedev declared, “My duty as President from the outset was to protect our fellow citizens and not let the crimes committed against civilians and peacekeepers go unpunished.’
 The Russian RC attack estimated that European leaders would reflexively acknowledge the legitimacy of the aid convoy in Ukraine . The true purpose was to enable the apparently peaceful presence of Russian armor on Ukrainian soil .
 This intended to undermine reports of an unacknowledged, massive Russian artillery attack against a Ukrainian mechanized infantry battalion . This was aimed at undermining reports of a massive Russian attack on a Ukrainian infantry battalion.
 The siege of Leningrad resulted in four times more civilian deaths than the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki combined . Donetsk does not compare to the bombings in scale and brutality, but does not compared to Lening rad .
 A survey of mainstream German media coverage shows that the vast majority of reporting posited that Russia’s intervention was justified and humanitarian in nature .
 The primary weakness in the American information filter is the fundamental belief in an inalienable right to freedom and democracy . The need to apply military force with extreme restraint in close proximity to civilians, especially given the recent memory of the damaging and unpopular wars in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The Russian RC strategy estimated that President Obama’s ‘pivot to the Pacific’ narrative translated to a higher reflexive military response threshold due to a lack of interest in European power politics . The Russian strategy estimated the President Obama's “pivot
 The Finnish Institute of International Affairs, 141, has a narrative of a narrative . The Finnian Institute of international Affairs,141, is a narrative.
 The RC strategy created the false impression that Putin was embroiled in a crisis that he was seeking to disengage from, as would be the case if the roles were reversed . The strategy created a false impression.
 The U.S. proposals for conflict “off ramps’ fixed President Obama’s intent on pursuing a diplomatic objective that appeared to be achievable, but was permanently out of reach .
 The weakness in the Ukrainian information filter is the issue of power and money caused by a kleptocratic corruption inherent in the volatile political landscape .
 President Poroshenko’s government was severely threatened by a dispute between the Ukrainian Rada chairman, Volodymyr Groysman, and Prime Minister Yatsenyuk . The former approved of the administrative decentralization of the Donbass region in order to terminate hostilities
 The internal dispute threatened to cause another governmental collapse . President Yushchenko was the subject of the internal dispute .
 Yanukovych was coerced with “brutal” political blackmail that had the potential to financially ruin him personally . Yanukovych was at risk from physical harm at the hands of the Ukrainian oligarchs.
 Russian RC exploited weaknesses of Europeans, Americans, and Ukrainians by presenting a disingenuous and incongruous offer to “freeze the conflict in Ukraine and force another round of elections .
 The Europeans indicated a willingness to remove economic sanctions on Russia incrementally, in step with achievement-in-principle of individual aspects of the Minsk-2 agreement, as opposed to the original demands for full compliance .
 The deception disrupted the appreciation of the true nature of the Russian coercion, which caused confusion and weakened global resistance to Russian activities, says the author . The deception disrupts the perception of the real nature of Russian coercion.
 This legitimized the weak Russian attempt to persuade the world of its commitment to a political process . In turn, this legitimized Russia's attempt to convince the world to take part in the political process.
 As a result, fresh divisions resurfaced along the old political fault lines in Kiev . An element of Poroshenko's government was attracted to the principle of decentralized power in eastern Ukraine .
 The Russian use of deception leverages the adversary’s desire for stability against them by 31.7.7 .
 This fosters internal discord among adversaries, which distracts from Russian coercive action, paralyzes opposed actors, and completes the application of Russian Smart Power . This is the first time the Russian government has applied to a new program for Smart Power in Russia .
 The reaction to the downing of Malaysia Airlines flight 17 on 17 July, 2014 by a Russian BUK SA-17 missile, highlighted the impressive levels of command, control, and coordination that Russia maintains over the many elements of its deception machine .
Russian deception was essential if Russian deception was to withstand international scrutiny . Firm control of the narrative was essential for Russian deception to withstand global scrutiny .
 Vladimir Putin accused the Ukrainian government of carrying out the atrocity, using distraction techniques such as the mention of the deployment of a Ukrainian BUK missile system and the presence of a Ukraine SU-25 fighter aircraft equipped with air-to-air missiles .
 A combination of radar plots and evidence provided by Almaz-Antey, the Russian military industrial producer of the BUK SA-17, supported the narrative delivered by the Russian President .
 Conflicting information delivered by the semi-autonomous rebel leaders of Donetsk and Luhansk damaged the credibility of the deception . Also the presence of Russian conventional military forces in Ukraine in general, according to reports .
 The international outrage disappeared from mainstream media, and the desired effect was achieved . Nevertheless, the international outrage was not as widespread as usual .
 The expected duration of the deception is matched to the effective deception period required to achieve the desired effect . The expected time is matched by the time the deception occurs .
 Vladimir Putin could not plan to deceive the West as to the true purpose of Russian military activity in Ukraine permanently, he says .
 He relied on the narrow window of opportunity opened by deception to evade traditional barriers to theater entry . He then used disingenuous Soft Power to reaffirm the new status quo by making it more desirable than an alternate discord .
 It is of critical importance to understand the role of deception in Russian Smart Power . It's of critical need to understand how the power system is used .
 Russian Soft Power means by diminishing the destructive interference. Sophisticated, timely, and well-coordinated deception successfully obfuscates the true nature of Russian coercion and legitimizes the weak Russia Soft Power .
 As the effective deception period expires, overt and direct coercive measures are introduced . As theEffective deception period ends, overt, direct coercive Measures are introduced.
 Russian Soft Power would be denied the opportunity to act, which would lead to failure . Without deception, immediate application of Russian overt Hard Power would meet superior resistance .
 The analysis shows that deception-enabled Russian Smart Power resulted in European acquiescence over the adjustment to the terms of the Minsk-2 sanction removal process . U.S. resistance to Russian military coercion and the fracturing of Ukrainian unity and resolve, the analysis shows .
 Smart Power provides Russia the ability to exert influence that its Hard Power and Soft Power cannot achieve in isolation . Russia can exert influence on Russia's hard power and soft power .
 Analysis of examples of Russian coercion and attraction has shown that in Russia’s case, the combination of individual components of power is unlikely to be sufficient to influence the intended actor .
 Highlighting weak Russian Soft Power as evidence of a failure of Russian Smart Power fails to account for the Russian adaption of the concept . Highlighting weak RussianSoft Power as proof of a failed Russian Soft power is not enough .
 A target actor has the option to either succumb or not, which creates a movement in only one of two directions . Nye’s model Nye's model is a model who has been accused of coercion .
 The true nature of Russian Smart Power relies on well-coordinated and highly sophisticated deception to obfuscate the application of Hard Power, which confuses opposition actors .
 Russian coercion of opposed actors expands the reach of its Soft Power to include neutral actors .
 Deception also veils the cynical, disingenuous, and incongruous nature of Russian Soft Power, which is then legitimized due to the confusion and subsequent paralysis of opposed actors .
 The dynamics of Russian Smart Power differ significantly from Nye’s original conception, therefore, a bespoke definition is warranted .
 This paper defines the brand of Russian Smart Power as deception-enabled coercion and legitimized attraction . The paper also defines the unique brand of Smart Power .
 It functions in four dimensions by first, executing an RC attack to disrupt the awareness of the target actor, which provides a temporary window of opportunity . The RC attack is a four-dimensional attack.
 Second, obfuscated coercion alters the target actor’s behavior and triggers a movement in a reflex-driven direction . Third, obfuscation alters a target actor's behavior and trigger a movement.
 Direct and explicit coercion is applied to augment the effect and mitigate the finite period of the deception .
 Third, Russian actions are legitimized by the 35 confused response of opposed actors . Third, Russia is legitimizing its actions due to the existence of a clear Soft Power.
Fourth, the paralysis results in a de facto attraction of opposed actors to the objective, which co-opts neutral actors . Fourth, the paralyzed results in the attraction of opposition actors to an objective .
 A well-timed and carefully coordinated RC attack is depicted at Step 1 . The RC attack has been described as a well- timed and coordinated attack .
 The resultant obfuscation disrupts the destructive interference described by Nye, which triggers a three-dimensional vector of the opposed actor into the Smart Power sphere . Nye's actions are the result of the actor's obfuscation .
 The trajectory through the sphere represents the effectiveness of the RC attack and the resistance of the opposed actor to coercion, which is depicted along the line at Step 2 .
 The more directly the trajectory 36 points at the objective, the more likely the Smart Power strategy will succeed . The strategy seeks to legitimize Russian actions by confusing opposed actors before the true intent of Russian activity is exposed .
 Step 3 depicts the confusion and paralysis point of the opposed actor and the subsequent legitimization of Russian Soft Power . Step 3 shows the confusion of the opposition actor and subsequent legitimisation of Russian soft power .
 This also facilitates the co-option of neutral actors by enhancing weak Soft Power despite the existence of a cultural barrier, which is depicted by the dashed red line . This also allows the co -option ofneutral actors to play neutral actors .
 The Russian cooperative, as opposed to competitive, multipolar worldview expands the volume of the attractive inner sphere to subsume those culturally diverse, neutral actors who welcome new-found Russian openness . Russia’s ability to coerce with apparent impunity.
 The average Russian citizen does not look beyond the nationalist strategic message, so does not routinely analyze Russian activity through a skeptical lens .
 Once inside the inner sphere, all actors are attracted to the objective, as depicted by Step 4 . Step 4 is the first step in the film's journey to the world .
 In terms of the Russian Smart Power model, Russian obfuscation of the true nature of its coercion is depicted by a red shade gradient that darkens as the opposed actor travels through the sphere .
 At the point of an RC attack, Russian coercive methods are unclear and ill-defined . Russian coercive tactics are unclear, according to the author .
 As was the case in both eastern Ukraine and Turkey, obfuscated or indirect coercion became direct as the time-limited deception lost effectiveness .
 The German response to the humanitarian convoy was similar to a Soft Power strategy . By contrast, it is clear to the opposed actor targeted for attack .
 Russian Soft Power may appear weak and ineffective to actors with different perspectives, who view it as cynical and fabricated . But, Russian Soft power may appearweak and ineffective .
 This is indicated by translucent green shading at different points of the circumference . This is shown by a translucent green shade at different point of circumference .
 Soft Power's strategy to shrink the size of the Russian Smart Power inner sphere at its weakest point is represented by the opposing blue sphere . The strategy is a strong, irrefutable countervailing strategy that intends to shrink its size at the weakest point .
 The countervailing Soft Power strategy must turn Russian attractive forces, represented by the green shading, into dark red by exposing all actors to the destructive interference that should naturally occur between violent Russian Hard Power and the false premise of Russian Soft Power .
 The perceived ineffectiveness of Russian Soft Power does not provide an accurate measure of its importance to Russian Smart Power . The perceived ineffectiveness does not provide a accurate measure.
 Poorly understood integration of ambiguous Russian Hard Power with weak Russian Soft Power has, so far, enabled Russian strategic interests . Poorly understanding of ambiguous Russia Hard Power has enabled Russia's strategic interests.
 The “kaleidoscope’ of realities exacerbated the confusion over events in Ukraine, Turkey, and Syria, which led to an ineffective array of responses and subsequent strategic paralysis in the West . The "kaleidsoscope" of realities exacerbate the confusion,
 The analysis shows that Smart Power employed by Vladimir Putin differs markedly from the current Western understanding of the term .
 As the deception is expected to expire, explicit and direct coercion replaces or augments the unacknowledged use of Hard Power .
 Russia employs comparatively weak, but welcome Soft Power, which is often cynical, disingenuous, and incongruous . Amid an unclear strategic environment, Russia simultaneously employs comparatively weaker, but welcomes Soft Power .
 This creates sufficient confusion to legitimize its attractive force by paralysing adversaries . This creates enough confusion to make it easier for adversaries to paralysed their adversaries .
 This enhances Russian Soft Power and expands its reach by leveraging nationalism and Russian cooperative multipolarity . This enhances Russia's Soft Power, this enhances its reach and expands it by leveraging its reach . This is a good example for Russia to strengthen its Soft Power .
 This chapter offers three recommendations to assist in the continual task of the refinement of strategy and to improve the transparency of the strategic environment .
 The Russian Strategy of Deception and the Conflict in Ukraine, 14. 39 carries information weapons to intended targets .
 The second recommendation offers a defensive approach to prevent Russian Smart Power from capitalizing on values-based, forthright Western diplomacy .
 The final recommendation proposes the use of the Russian Smart Power model in reverse to neutralize Russia in the same way it neutralized the West . The proposal would be similar to that of the U.S.
 This offensive recommendation uses information to pre-empt and expose the Russian Smart Power strategy . The Russian government has been accused of using the strategy to undermine the Russian government .
 By correctly identifying the information filter target of Russian RC, opposed actors could improve reaction time and effectiveness of the evidence used to expose the true nature of Russian coercion and attraction .
 The disingenuous purpose of Russian Soft Power, as demonstrated by the humanitarian aid convoy in Ukraine, could easily be exposed and the beneficial effect for Russia negated . Putin's actions are anticipated and immediately countered through diplomacy and the relentless use of factual information across all media outlets .
 The role of nationalist pride as a Soft Power enhancing effect within the cultural barrier presents a potential avenue to disrupt Vladimir Putin’s Smart Power strategy .
 The weakness in the Russian information filter is the Russian people’s support for Vladimir Putin, says CNN .
 The projection of a standard anti-Russian narrative will have limited effect, but could strengthen support for Putin . However, the projection of an anti-Russia narrative could strengthen Putin's support .
 An effective attack on Russia requires a deep understanding of the Russian history, geography, ideology, and demography .
 The "golden era" of Russian studies peaked during the Cold War, followed by a sharp decline in academic understanding . The “golden period’s” of Russian Studies peaked during Cold War .
 Government-sponsored institutes for Russian studies should be increased in order to rebuild understanding of the new Russia . Investment in government- sponsored institutes should be increase in order.
 This would facilitate a more pro-active and better-focused information strategy by providing credible and effective strategic messaging to existing initiatives . This would provide credible andeffective strategic messaging.
 A comprehensive approach should include the Russian-language radio broadcast stations in Ukraine, the Baltics, and Poland, 4 television and social media outlets, and even modern-day equivalents of the Samizdat movement .
 NATO represents an enabling and supporting network for United States power that spans Europe and the Middle East . Turkey represents a critical node that must be defended to facilitate the pursuit of U.S. regional interests .
 Following the failed military coup, the lack of Western support for President Erdogan heightened diplomatic tension and threatened to drive key allies apart .
 Putin’s behavior is consistent with Russian Smart Power and the attempt to legitimize Soft Power . But the source and motive behind the coup are inconsequential because Putin's behavior has been consistent with Smart Power .
 The attractive, but cynical Russian message of support swiftly capitalized on the West’s criticism of an important ally .
 The false Russian promise of cooperative multipolarity necessitates an active defense during turbulent diplomatic events . Russian Soft Power is a false promise of cooperation, but damaging Russian Soft power .
 USEUCOM offered Turkey a warm commitment to strategic partnership . Turkey is in a fragile diplomatic situation .
 The West’s rush to chastise the Turkish government may well have been in line with universal values . It appeared to be an incongruous Soft Power attempt, which shielded and enhanced the cynical gesture by Putin .
 The coup triggered a temporary suspension of Turkish Officers from the F-35 fighter program . Turkey is a heavily-invested industrial development partner in Turkey .
 A decision to publicly take a firm opposing opening stance against an ally may backfire, unless public and private diplomacy defends key allies by pre-empting the legitimized allure of Russian Soft Power .
 Turkey has developed deep ties to the West, but Russia holds over Turkey . membership of NATO does little to mitigate Russia's leverage over Turkey, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The loss of Turkey from NATO to a Russian Eurasian military alliance would have far-reaching consequences for U.S. national interests in the Middle East and NATO’s ability to defend its vulnerable southern flanks .
 A Smart Power strategy should be used against Russia to lift the fog of a constructed uncertainty that shrouds Russian strategy . Russia to play the role of a stealth realist in a neo-liberal cooperative environment, says Peter Bergen .
 The eastward expansion of NATO into Russia’s ‘near abroad’ is portrayed by Russia as a serious threat to its national security .
 The NATO-Russia Founding Act includes Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic in 1997 . The decision was accompanied by a “set of understandings’s” intended to articulate the future security construct for Europe .
 Putin's argument against NATO encroachment reflects the honest belief in Russia’s right to counteract it in any way possible . However, Russia did not agree to this onesided “understanding,” and, as a result, Putin’'s argument reflects the truth .
 Vladimir Putin seeks a return to great power status, meaning that if the United States behaves in a manner that Russia perceives to lack respect for its ability and right to protect its national interests, then relations will continue to deteriorate .
 A NATO Article 10 expansion should not be pursued for any former Soviet republics. A NATO article 10 should not have been pursued for former Soviet Republics .
 NATO should extend an Article 10 NATO accession invitation directly to Vladimir Putin . Instead, NATO should offer Russia equality by extending the invitation to Putin .
 The offer would require diplomatic preparation of all twenty-eight members before the execution of the offer . Russia is most threatened by Russia and the countries most threatened.
 The effect would degrade the political capital that Vladimir Putin has repeatedly used to project his agenda across Europe . Putin's political capital would cause incredible suffering and hardship .
 His inevitable rebuke of the offer would remove the artificial veil of cooperative spirit and undermine his own credibility . He says it would remove a veil of co-operation .
 This course of action is the operationalization of Russian Smart Power in reverse . This is the first time the company has taken action in reverse. This is a step towards the future of the company .
 A coordinated deception strategy would disrupt the destructive interference by concealing the fact that the true nature of the offer to join NATO is a bluff that expects an 11-15 percent increase .
 The Russian people would then need to be attracted by a persuasive Soft Power strategy underpinned by an RC attack that manipulates the weakness in the Russian information filter .
 Putin would portray the offer as an affront to Russian interests . But efforts to subvert the NATO RC attack would be anticipated and countermanded by an official end to NATO's expansionist policy .
 The malign effects caused by Putin’s autocratic grip on the freedom of the Russian people would be used to separate him from the support of his citizens . The inevitable rejection of the offer would legitimize increased coercive diplomatic pressure directed solely at Vladimir Putin .
 This would create a diminishing spiral of support, which would actively shrink the Russian Smart Power sphere and Vladimir Putin’s ability to exert damaging influence . This would be the first time Putin has been able to exert a damaging influence in Russia .
 A Smart Power strategy is only an ‘intelligent combination of Soft and Hard Power’ If the interplay of the individual components provides a synergistic improvement to the whole, Smart Power says . A Smart power strategy is just an “intelligent combined combination of
 Vladimir Putin has understood the strategic environment, appreciated the weakness of his means . Putin has pinpointed the key to Smart Power that mitigates the challenges he faces .
 Russian Smart Power is a unique brand of Russian Power . The military planners of USEUCOM must be able to recognize and interpret Russian actions as they relate to the brand .
 The Russian RC attack is a Russian Smart Power strategy . The first and most important step is to understand the target and purpose of the Russian RC attacks .
 Russian Soft Power must be identified as being related to the Smart Power strategy and countered by highlighting its incongruous nature before paralysis of the target actor .
 Russia has adopted Smart Power theory to ensure success in the pursuit of its own national interests . Russia has adapted the application to mitigate its strategic challenges .
 As a result, Russia has out-maneuvred the West and re-ordered the global stage . Russia has also re- ordered the world stage .
 The West must now respond and this paper offers a starting point by shedding light on the true nature of Russian Smart Power . The West should now respond, this paper says .
 Russian Strategic Culture and What It Implies for the West. The Quarterly Journal 9, no. 1-28 .
 Fog of Falsehood, Russian Strategy of Deception and the Conflict in Ukraine. The conflict in Ukraine is the latest in a long line of conflicts in Ukraine .
 The Voroshilov Lectures Materials from the Soviet General Staff Academy . The Vorashilov lectures materials are from the Russian General staff Academy .
 He qualified as a Fast Jet pilot in 2002, flew the Harrier and Typhoon operationally . He is a Qualified Flying Instructor and is a qualified Fast Jet Pilot .
 He served 3 tours in Afghanistan between 2007 and 2009 . He completed multiple embarked flying deployments on HMS Illustrious .
 His leadership experience includes second in command of the Harrier Operational Conversion Unit . His most recent leadership experience is as the second incommand of 11 Squadron, flying the Typhoon Multirole aircraft .
 During this time, he developed UK F-35 tactics and defined UK requirements in order to assist the capability integration process . During this period, he also developed UKF- 35 tactics.
 He was responsible for contract negotiations with the prime contractor . He saved the UK over $17m in FY16 .
 Wing Commander Chisholm holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in French and Business Studies and is fluent in French . He also holds a degree in Business Studies .