 This mass invasion has been years in the making, ever since Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 . The annexation of Crimea in Crimea was Russia's first in Crimea since Crimea was annexed .
 Putin's real animus has always been that Ukraine must never escape Russian control . He loudly protested the prospect of Ukraine joining NATO in the future .
 The closer the date for invasion came, the more he dropped the NATO pretense . He declared that Ukraine was not a country and that it was conducting genocide against Russian speakers .
 Putin and his circle seem to believe that each action they have taken, from the 2014 annexation of Crimea to today's invasion, are part of a smart, strategic long game to maintain Russian control over Ukraine .
Since gaining independence in 1991, Ukraine has swayed like a pendulum toward and away from Russia . The truth is that each of these actions has driven an increasingly wider wedge between Russia and Ukraine .
 Ukraine slowly developed over the past three decades as a vibrant, contested democracy rather than a nation dominated by a single president .
 No one politician could ever consolidate total power, with each powerful faction checked by other powerful factions . No one could ever consolidate total power .
 Putin's policies and aggression toward his neighbor. That claim is the best guide possible for understanding Putin’s policies and aggressive behavior .
 A longer guide, for those who can stand to read it, is his July 2021 article . It will detail his interpretation of the thousand-year shared history of Russia and Ukraine .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has made a televised address to the Russian people . He has been criticized for his comments about the country .
 The Ukrainian pendulum swung back toward the West in 2014. It’s not business, it's personal. It's not business -- it's not personal. The West is the West's most important region .
 Viktor Yanukovych spent his term in office trying to play the West against Russia in Ukraine . He had spent his time trying to get the best possible deal for Ukraine for him .
 Yanukovych ultimately chose the Russian offer over the EU’s, much of Ukraine, but especially Kyiv rose up in mass protest .
 Yanukovych failed to quell the “Revolution of Dignity,’ and fled to Russia . Ultimately, Yanukovych failed.
 A new government came to power in Kyiv, promising to pursue closer economic integration with the EU . Putin opted for a quick victory rather than wait for the next pendulum swing .
 Putin directed Russian forces to seize Crimea and instigate separatist insurgencies in Ukraine's eastern regions of Luhansk and Donetsk .
 Crimea's annexation was quickly formalized, and Russian-supported insurgencies in the Donbas have quietly raged for the past eight years . Crimea’s annexation was swiftly formalized .
 Russia was quick to claim victory, and Putin enjoyed a surge in popularity at home . Russia wasquick to claim the victory, with Putin enjoying a surge at home.
 Putin managed to detach the most pro-Russian territories in Ukraine, transforming its neighbor from a roughly even pro-West/pro-Russian contested political environment to an overwhelmingly pro-Western orientation .
 Putin is a master tactician, taking bold actions where his adversaries hesitate, analysts say . The conflict between Ukraine and Russian-supported separatists in the Donbas has claimed over 14,000 lives .
 If he isn’t playing chess while the West plays checkers, he is a master of judo punching above his weight . If he doesn't play checkers while he is playing, he could be a master.
Conventional wisdom dictates that Russia cares far more about Ukraine than the West ever will, and Russia will be far more patient than West . The West will be more patient and more patient, according to the West .
The reality is that Putin’s aggression toward Ukraine signaled the start of Russia losing Ukraine for good. Some even argue that Russia’'s interests in Ukraine trump Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Ukrainian stadiums rang out with a rather rude chant about President Putin . Ukraine pursued and won independent status for the Ukrainian Orthodox Church .
Ties between the nations weren't just frayed by Moscow's aggression and Kyiv's reaction . Putin’s war will only accelerate that schism.
 Ukrainian hostility toward Russia further entrench Ukraine's hostility toward Putin and Russia itself .
Each move Putin and his circle have made to claw Ukraine back to Russian control have only pushed it further away . Putin’s war promises to make these past atrocities feel like fresh wounds.
 Putin launching this war, unprovoked save only in his aggrieved mind, means that he has lost the long game . Putin launched this war with the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Russia may prevail over Ukraine’s military in the days to come, but Putin has irrevocably thrust the two nations on separate, hostile paths .
Kennan Institute is the premier United States center for advanced research on Russia and Eurasia . The Kennan Institute has the oldest and largest regional program at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars .
 The Kennan Institute is committed to improving American understanding of Russia, Ukraine, and the region through research and exchange . The Institute also aims to improve U.S. understanding of Ukraine, Russia, Russia and Ukraine .
 Three Experts Offer Priorities for the Future. By Mykhailo Minakov and Blair A Ruble.