 The Russian information campaign accompanying its military movements was no more than a minor contributor to what proved to be a conventional takeover of Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
 Russian troops take Russian Dzhankoy control of Kerch ferry port . Kerch troops Ukrainian military unit Chornomorske take airfield . Russian troops are surrounded by Ukrainian troops .
 Masked gunmen Ukrainian warships seize government buildings . The Ukrainian government buildings were seized by masked gunmen .
 Ukraine's political leadership made several important errors following the Maidan revolution in Kyiv, all of which played decisively to Russia’s favor .
 These errors also provide lessons for understanding where Russia will be able to capitalize in its operations . These errors are also lessons for Russia.
 85 percent of Crimeans did not perceive themselves to be European, according to U.S. experts .
 Opinion polls indicate more generally that Crimeans were perhaps a more distinct polity than many other Ukrainians . Polls show Crimeans may be more distinct than many Ukrainians .
 The events in Crimea have been referred to as Russia’s military today . We cannot generalize the events to other broadly established concepts involving hybrid war, nonlinear warfare, or any concept of operations commonly mentioned .
 Vyacheslav Ponomarev, the mayor of Slovyansk, had supposedly moved from one business venture to another before taking ownership of a small soap company .
 41 combat-capable troops available in Ukraine . Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine is one of the country's most active forces .
 Second, Ukrainian army commanders spoke Russian and were disinclined to fight against fellow Russian speakers or order troops into civilian areas . Second, they spoke Russian. Third, they ordered troops to go to civilian areas to protect themselves .
 Oligarchs in the east had plenty to lose in the aftermath of the Maidan movement . Their patronage party was politically decimated and much to gain from backing protests as part of a bargaining game .
 Pro-Russian opportunists and ideologues hoped that they could ride the wave of public outrage into power . Russian imperialists expected Moscow would intervene militarily in Eastern Ukraine as it did in Crimea .
Fighting broke out in Mariupol between separatists and volunteer militias in April 2014 . Akhmetov sent thousands of steelworkers from his companies Metinvest and DTEK to take control of the streets .
 This was a self-interested action, but it halted fighting in the city, hindering the separatist ambitions and allowing more time for a Ukrainian response . This was the self-interest action, and it stopped fighting, but allowed more time to respond .
 In the future, Russia may avoid this approach in favor of covert action, backed by conventional forces, which worked in Crimea .
 Russia invested in a mess instead of a constructive means to achieve political objectives, says author . By employing paramilitaries, mercenaries, and ideologues, Russia invests in a Mess .
Separatism and Aggression in Eastern Ukraine 67 to effect change in countries that otherwise would have been stable . Separatism, Aggression to effect changes in countries otherwise would be stable .
 The Ukrainian experience suggests that Moscow seized the advantage during a time of national vulnerability for Ukraine . It may have behooved Russian leaders to wait and construct a more thoughtful plan for handling their neighbor .