Sometimes, wars aren't won by tank battles and infantry assaults, says Ukrainian military .
 Russia's hybrid war against Ukraine nears its fifth calendar year . U.S. companies are incrementally cutting into Russia's de facto monopoly as a supplier of nuclear fuel and coal to Ukraine .
 Russia has often leveraged its power over Ukraine through the energy economy . Since the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia has used energy to power the country .
 energy security remains a linchpin for Ukraine’s fight for sovereignty from Moscow .
 In the past year, the United States has upped its coal exports to Ukraine by more than 40 percent . The U.S. has increased coal exports by 40 percent.
 The $80 million coal deal was for Pennsylvania-based Xcoal Energy & Resources to ship 700,000 tons of thermal coal to Ukraine by the end of the year . In time for the country to stockpile its energy reserves before the winter .
 Kyiv announced it had introduced sanctions against Russia’s Yuzhtrans LLC, part of the Yuzhnaya Coal Co. The company is one of the largest suppliers of coal from Russia to Ukraine .
 Russia remains Ukraine’s top supplier of coal and nuclear fuel . Still, even after 43 months of de facto war between the two nations, Russia remains top supplier .
 U.S. companies are slowly chipping away at Russia's dominance in Ukraine's energy economy . Yet, United States companies are gradually chipping at Russia’s dominance .
 The U.S.-based nuclear power company Westinghouse now supplies nuclear fuel for six of Ukraine's 15 nuclear reactors . The company is generating about 30 percent of Ukraine’s overall energy needs .
 In June, Poroshenko announced plans to further reduce Russia’s share of nuclear fuel supplies to Ukraine to 45 percent . Westinghouse provides the remaining 55 percent of the nuclear fuel supply to Ukraine .
 Many ex-Soviet states like Ukraine rely heavily on Russian energy supplies from coal, oil, natural gas, and nuclear fuel .
 A key means for the United States to thwart Russian coercive control over Ukraine and other post-Soviet states is to provide an alternative to Russia for energy security .
 Increasing U.S. coal shipments to Ukraine will “allow Ukraine to diversify its energy sources ahead of the coming winter,’s Wilbur Ross says .
 According to Blank, Russia's leverage over Ukraine in the energy domain will require more than U.S. coal and nuclear fuel imports . Blank says Russia's influence over Ukraine will require a more than United States coal imports .
 Ukraine’s military continues to fight a grinding, static war against a combined force of pro-Russian separatists and Russian regulars that began in April 2014 .
 The conflict has killed more than 10,100 Ukrainians and displaced about 1. million people . The conflict in Ukraine has killed about 10,000 people so far .
 The war has also dealt Ukraine’s economy a body blow, particularly when it comes to the energy economy . The war is also dealing with Ukraine's economy.
 When Russia seized Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in March 2014, it cost Ukraine about $1 billion in energy production assets .
 Russia's proxy war in Ukraine's southeastern Donbas region also hit the country's economy hard . Russia’s subsequent proxy war also hit Ukraine’Southeastern Donbas.
 Russia's proxy territories in the Donbas region amount to about 5 percent of Ukraine's overall landmass . About half of Ukraine’s coal and all of its anthracite extraction prior to the conflict prior to conflict .
 Ukrainian coal production dropped by 22 percent in 2014, the year Russian launched its proxy war in the Donbas . Overall coal production in Ukraine dropped 22 percent, according to the Russian government .
Despite the de facto state of war between the two countries, Russia was Ukraine’s largest coal supplier and coal shipments still traversed the front lines out of the Donbas into the rest of Ukraine .
 Blocking coal supplies has become a key domain of Russia’s hybrid war on Ukraine .
 Russia blocked its coal supplies, forcing 22 Ukrainian power plants to shut down temporarily . Russia had blocked the supply of coal from Ukraine .
 That year, Ukraine purchased about $1.77 billion worth of coal, or about 64 percent, came from Russia . That year's coal purchase was about $2.7 billion, or roughly $2 billion .
 From January to October of 2017, Ukrainian coal imports jumped up to $2.15 billion, the State Fiscal Service of Ukraine says .
 Russia was the top coal supplier this year, accounting for 55. percent of total supplies, worth $1. billion . Russia is the world's most powerful coal supplier .
 At 25 percent of the market, the United States was the second-leading supplier . The U.S. was the third-largest supplier .
 Ukraine has turned to the European Union to divorce itself from Russian energy supplies . Ukraine has also turned to European Union for divorce from Russian supplies .
 In February 2017, combined Russian-separatist forces shelled power lines supplying the Avdiivka Coke Plant in the front-line town of Av diivka .
 During 43 months of constant combat, combined Russian-separatist forces have often fired artillery and rockets at other power plants in the war zone .
 Russian cyberattacks have repeatedly targeted Ukraine’s power grids well beyond the front lines, including in Kyiv . Russian cyber attacks have also targeted Ukraine's power grids.
 Power lines leading to the combined Russian-separatist stronghold of Donetsk in eastern Ukraine . Power lines lead to the Russian-Russian-separated stronghold of the Donetsk region .
 The attacks underscore Russia's strategy to target Ukraine’s energy economy and infrastructure with both military attacks and cyberwarfare to exert diplomatic pressure on Kyiv .
 Russia's ultimate ambition in Ukraine is to delegitimize the ruling government and to spread chaos . Such attacks affect the day-to-day lives of normal Ukrainians .
 The energy economy has also become a domestic political liability for Kyiv . Kyiv's energy economy is also becoming a political liability.
Last winter, Ukrainian political activists and volunteer battalion soldiers established a rail blockade in eastern Ukraine . They cut off the shipment of goods from the separatist territories into the rest of the country .
 The blocked coal shipments spurred an energy crisis in February that led lawmakers in Kyiv to declare a national state of emergency . Kyiv's energy crisis led lawmakers to declare an emergency .
 Russia cut its gas exports to Europe through Ukraine, plunging the Continent into an energy crisis almost overnight . In January 2009, Russia cut their gas exports.
 Putin ordered Gazprom to cut its exports through Ukrainian pipelines by about three-fifths . Putin was then Russia’s prime minister .
 The move comes amid one of the lowest recorded winter temperatures in London in a century . Fears of a sharp increase in oil and gas prices have been raised .
 In 2014, global oil prices fell from more than $100 a barrel to below $50 a barrel . Russia seized Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula and launched its proxy war in Ukraine’s coal-rich Donbas region .
 At that time, approximately 60 percent of Russia’s government revenue came from taxes on oil and gas exports . At the time, about 60 per cent of Russia's government revenue was from oil andGas exports .
About 80 percent of the gas Russia sent to Europe went through Ukraine’s pipelines . About 80 percent went through Ukrainian pipelines .
 Russia and Ukraine were locked in an energy dispute in 2014 . Russia threatened to cut off gas to Ukraine unless Kyiv recouped its debts to Moscow . Ukraine and Russia were also locked in a power dispute .
 Kyiv threatened to block Russian oil and gas from reaching Europe . In return, Kyiv vowed to block Russia's oil, gas and oil and oil from reaching European countries .
 Russian energy company Gazprom used Ukrainian pipelines to deliver about 46 percent of the gas it sent to Europe last year .
 Russia is pushing to build the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea to Germany . The pipeline will be built along a pre-existing pipeline route .
 United States sanctions on Russia for its aggression in Ukraine have hindered financing for the Nord Stream 2 pipeline . U.S. sanctions have hindered funding for the pipeline.
 The Russian oil company Gazprom has a majority-financing stake in the project . The project is being built in a Russian state-owned oil company .
 Russia is working on another route into Europe through Turkey and the Black Sea . Russia is also working on a route into Turkey through Turkey.
 Control over hydrocarbon reserves in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov is another potential flashpoint for Russo-Ukrainian relations . Some say it could escalate the simmering military conflict into a wider war .
 In 2013, Ukrainian energy firms in Crimea extracted 1.651 billion cubic meters of natural gas from Ukraine’s Black Sea and Sea of Azov basins .
 The extraction rate was projected to increase to about 5 billion cubic meters annually . That is only a fraction of what the region could potentially produce, according to a 2017 report .
 Ukraine lost control of 10 stationary sea extraction platforms, four drilling rigs, 1,200 kilometers of pipelines, and 45 gas distribution stations . Ukraine also lost control over 10 stationarysea extraction platforms and four drilling rig rigs .
 Crimea’s offshore energy extraction infrastructure cost the Ukrainian economy about $300 billion, the report says .
 There are approximately 7 trillion cubic meters of methane hydrate deposits within Ukrainian waters in the Black Sea .