 Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, took to television to declare war on Ukraine in the form of a ‘special military operation’ to “denazify’ the country . Within minutes explosions were heard near Kyiv’'s main airport .
 Video footage taken in Ukraine shows cruise missiles slicing through the air and slamming into buildings .
 Mr Putin had launched what is sure to be Europe’s most intense war in a generation . It is likely to be the largest since the second world war .
 It will shake his regime to its foundations, debilitate Russia’s economy and fracture Russian society . Russia's economy and society will be debilitated by the regime .
An initial wave of missiles had struck several of Ukraine’s airports and other targets across the country . It could well send shock waves through the global economy .
 Armoured forces had then begun rolling in not just Russia itself but also from Belarus .
 Russian forces are “literally pouring into Ukraine from Crimea’s Crimea,’ says expert Konrad Muzyka .
 The landing in Mariupol would seem to be part of a pincer movement aimed at encircling and shattering Ukrainian forces around the Donbas region in eastern Ukraine .
 The second is a drive south from Belarus towards Kyiv, which lies just 140km south of the border . The third is a road from Belarus to Kyiv.
 Attacks elsewhere in the country will be aimed at disrupting Ukraine’s ability to respond to the advances .
 He put his aggression into the context of the West having ‘tried to finish us off, to destroy us completely’ after the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Russia “is one of the greatest nuclear powers in the world and has certain advantages in the newest weapons,’ says Russian official . Russia is one of world’s most powerful nuclear powers .
 The Brent crude benchmark rose past $100 per barrel for the first time since 2014 . Nobody should be in any doubt that any direct aggression against our country will lead to crushing and most horrible consequences .
 The United States and its allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way, President Joe Biden says .
 He has imposed an initial round of sanctions earlier in the week . He said he would announce further measures on February 24th .
 A G7 video summit was called for later in the day; EU leaders are also due to discuss the crisis . The crisis in Ukraine has stunned the EU .
 The West is stepping in to negotiate a ceasefire without further territorial losses . Its best hope, he thinks, lies in the West stepping in. The West's best hope is that it will negotiate a truce without further losses .
People huddled around the tram stop to discuss the events . But trams continued to operate, and people huddle around the stop .
 Alexander Voltarnist, 27, said he would gather together the women of his family and take them home and then register for the army .
 The crazy maniac has put his nose where it isn't welcome, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he will say to the crazy maniac is that he has put it where it is not welcome .
Russia's onslaught ended a long period of uncertainty, one which in Ukraine took the form of an almost eerie calm .
 Russia was building up an unprecedented amount of firepower within striking range . There is no doubt that Russia is building up a massive force of firepower .
 The free availability of information about Russia’s build-up of troops gathered by Western governments was in sharp contrast with Mr Putin’'s opacity about his plans .
 Mr Putin gave a speech on Monday February 21st clarified things . It appeared that Mr Putin’s inner circle was not his inner circle .
 Mr Putin recognises pro-Russian “republics’ of Donetsk and Luhansk in the Ukrainian oblasts . He was also recognising their claim to the rest of the two Oblasts.
 In doing so he triggered a first round of sanctions from Western nations and a state of emergency in Ukraine . The Ukrainian president has triggered the first round.
 Russia saw a war which they saw as very unlikely to serve Russia’s long-term interests was a very unlikely war . But it was the vehemence with which he did so that shocked critically-minded Russians .
 The first part of the analysis stood; the second was thrown into doubt . That was in part because of the insight the performance offered into Mr Putin’s sense of his own position .
 In the past his talk of restoring the unity of a Slavic, Orthodox Russian homeland brought low by the collapse of the Soviet Union could be treated as cover for the regime's theft, authoritarianism and failure to deliver on its people’s aspirations .
 The president presented himself as an emperor looking for a place alongside Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great, Catherine the Great and Stalin . The speech was in principle about the separatist “republics’s” which were created during the crisis .
 Ukraine's parliament had been preparing to sign an “association agreement’s agreement with the EU . The agreement would have moved the country a lot closer to the union .
 Viktor Yanukovych, a crooked thug from Donbas, scuppered the deal. At Mr Putin’s bidding, and with financial inducements, then-president Viktor Yanukovych was scuppering the deal .
 People protesting his actions were bludgeoned by security forces in Kyiv’s Independence Square, known as Maidan .
 Mr Putin moved to annex Crimea, a peninsula in the Black Sea that many Russians considered Russian rather than Ukrainian .
Mr Putin's new vision goes far beyond supporting the purported rights of the separatists to split their oblasts off from Ukraine .
 Ukraine rejects the very idea of Ukraine as a nation state, casting it instead as “an inalienable part of our history, culture and spiritual space’ The country was formed from Russia by the Bolsheviks at the time of the revolution .
 If they wanted to be free of the legacy of communism, he said, they should also be free from territories communism had provided them . He said they should be freed of the territories communism provided them.
 State broadcasters helpfully displayed a map of Ukraine in which, shorn of those “gifts, its territory was reduced to a small yellow blob .
 Yulia Mostovaya is the editor of Zerkalo Nedeli, a Ukrainian newspaper . The display of emotion from a man schooled in the cool arts of spying was striking .
 She says: “You'll see zero emotions when he talks about NATO or America. Watch the speech, she says .
 When he talks about Ukraine he becomes consumed with a kind of squeamish loathing. When he talk about Ukraine, he becomes obsessed with the country .
 Mr Putin's speech was a clear message that his enemies were all of a piece. He hates everything about us, he said .
 Ukraine was a hostile territory run by Americans trying to take Russia down . U.S. tried to take Ukraine down as part of an effort to take down Russia .
It is America’s border, because they are the masters there, and all these…are vassals . It is America's border, as they are masters there. It is the border, and it is America.
 The nuclear weapons industry is pumping them up full of arms and trying to create nuclear arsenals . "All this will cost us in future," says John Sutter .
 The baseless fear that Ukraine, briefly a nuclear-weapons state after the collapse of the Soviet Union, might become one again is a particularly disturbing casus belli for millions of Russians fearing war .
 Kirill Rogov: "The consequences of aggression will cause greater damage to Russia and its economy than the destruction of Ukrainian infrastructure would bring to NATO.’
 Nearly four months of remorseless military build-up meant it would take something shockingly unfamiliar to stir real panic .
 In October U.S. intelligence agencies picked up signs that Mr Putin was beginning to move military forces to the Ukrainian border .
 Putin's plans to invade his neighbour with the largest military force in Europe for decades .
 The Kremlin began claiming that Ukraine had committed “genocide’ in the Donbas region and was about to seize it by force .
 There followed a series of provocations in Donbas, the shelling of Russian soil and alleged Ukrainian incursions . The government, eager to reduce damage to the economy, urged calm .
 Anastasia, a bartender in Slovyansk, a town in the Donetsk oblast which is 80km or so back from what was, until Thursday morning, the contact line between the Ukrainian army and the separatist forces, spoke for many when she said on February 22nd that she
 The calm shown by Ukrainians throughout the months of escalation had started to dissipate in the days before the new invasion began. I am very tired from all this.
 In both Donbas and Kyiv some of those with financial means and flexible lives were making plans to move . Some of those in Ukraine's west or abroad are planning to move.
 Petro Poroshenko brought together the leaders of all the country's factions in a show of unity . He also brought together his arch-rival, a man who just a month ago he was threatening with jail, to show unity .
Former Ukrainian minister of defence said military leadership was working off two base scenarios . The following day he declared a state of emergency across Ukraine .
 The first assumed that Moscow would allow itself a strategic pause, perhaps taking the opportunity to rotate tired troops, before moving into parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts which the separatists claim but do not occupy .
 Mr Putin has often paused, or even taken a tactical step back, to throw opponents off balance .
 Some of Mr Zelensky’s intelligence officials thought the war would follow might largely be confined to the existing conflict area and territory the separatists seized in 2014 but later lost .
 The assessment differed starkly from the one offered by America and Britain .
 Mr Putin had believed for months that Mr Putin intended something much larger. They had believed he intended something larger .
 The separatist claims could be used to disrupt Ukraine’s policy. The claims were the point of the ‘Minsk accords’ negotiated by Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany .
 Ukraine's Donbas conflict ended in 2015 after a bout of major battles in the Donbas . The rebels were given autonomy and veto power that would stop the rest of Ukraine from moving towards the EU, economically, and NATO .
 French think-tank FRS puts it as a form of castration of Ukraine, to deprive it of its military potential .
Ukraine's armed forces are unlikely to withstand this assault for long . If it did not do so, its military action would incur the heaviest sanctions the West was willing to impose without delivering the strategic realignment Mr Putin wanted .
 The first round of Russian air and missile strikes was almost certainly intended to destroy Ukraine’s integrated air defence network . One of the targets was an air-defence battery in Vasilkiv, a town near Kyiv .
 If Russian warplanes have command of the skies its paratroopers and helicopter-borne forces will be able to bypass large concentrations of Ukrainian soldiers in order to seize key objectives well behind the front lines .
 Russia attempted to land paratroopers at Gostomel airport outside Kyiv on February 24th .
 Ukraine claimed to have shot down some of the helicopters and captured Russian personnel . How quickly the government might fall is hard to predict .
 One unknown factor is how many Ukrainians will resist, and how many will collaborate . It is unclear how many of them will collaborate.
 In December it reportedly held war-games with the special forces and airborne troops who would lead any invasion . In December, it was reported to have held war games with special forces.
 The very idea sounds outlandish, says Michael Kofman, an expert on Russia's armed forces at CNA, a think-tank .
 Ukraine’s eastern areas plus Kyiv amount to only 18m inhabitants, he notes . The coast adds another 3m. Ukraine's eastern areas and the coast adds 3m .
 Russia enjoys advantages that those Americans did not. That would give Russia a comparable force-density ratio of troops relative to the population .
 The army will be “much more ruthless in the application of violence’, notes Mr Watling . Its army does not suffer from the same language barriers, he says .
 American impose “full blocking sanctions’ against VEB, an economic-development bank, and Promsvyazbank, which finances Russia’s defence sector, freezing their assets in America .
 The EU sanctions followed similar lines to America’s, showing that their planning had been more closely aligned than many had thought . Further institutions may now expect the same treatment .
 Nord Stream 2 was to have supplied it with Russian gas by a route that bypassed Ukraine . Germany's decision to mothball the pipeline was the most eye-catching demonstration of solidarity .
Because no gas yet flows through the pipeline this will have no prompt economic effect . Because no gas still flows, this will not have an economic effect, it will not affect the economy .
German energy policy has long argued that interdependence could be a foundation for peace . But it heralds a profound shift in both German energy policy and its attitude towards Russia .
 The countries involved said they had to keep some in reserve to deter further aggression . The countries said they would keep some of the countries involved in reserve .
 Ukraine’s foreign minister has called for ‘devastating’ sanctions on Russia . Mr Kuleba has also called for its exclusion from the SWIFT system for international financial transactions .
 Ukrainian resistance has fired missiles, and other weapons, fired by Ukrainian resistance . There is support for missiles, but also support for other weapons .
 Ukraine is awash with guns, and U.S. special forces have been training potential partisans in eastern Ukraine .
Poland and Romania would probably allow their territory to be used to get arms and communications gear over the border . Poland and Romania will probably be able to use their territory for weapons and communication gear .
In the 1940s there was significant resistance to Soviet occupation in the west of the country . Yet no one knows whether an insurgency is viable .
 The parts Russia is interested in today are the plains of the east and the centre . The areas are less well suited to a rural insurgency in the style, say, of Afghanistan’s mujahideen .
 Samuel Charap, a former State Department adviser, says he would imagine something along the lines of the provisional IRA . Such an insurgency would invite Russian reprisals against its backers, he says .
 Mark Warner warns that norms of cyber-deterrence and escalation are poorly understood . Warner chairs the intelligence committee in America's Senate .
 Russia may be hesitant about the use of such cyber-attacks, and even more so of physical strikes on resistance bases and networks beyond Ukraine’s borders .
In recent weeks America has rushed to reinforce eastern Europe with thousands of troops and dozens of warplanes .
 NATO Response Force, a 40,000-strong unit built around a high-readiness land brigade, may be deployed for the first time in its history . All 30 allies must consent to all 30 allies in order to deploy the unit .
 The process began with a combative speech that Mr Putin gave at the Munich Security Conference in 2007 .
 That has far-reaching consequences for the West in areas ranging from energy security to nuclear strategy and beyond .
If the transformation to confrontation is complete, the conflict could still escalate . It also makes yet harder America’s commitment to seeing the Indo-Pacific as the area most important to its future .
 The former Soviet republics now in NATO, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have cause for alarm over Mr Putin's irredentism .
Western officials play down the idea that Mr Putin would attack NATO . It is a very different proposition from invading Ukraine, not least because it contains three countries with nuclear weapons .
 Russia has gone through a deep change. But they have to face the possibility that Russia has been changed .
An initial wave of missiles had struck several of Ukraine’s airports and other targets across the country . It could well send shock waves through the global economy .
Western security officials expect two major Russian thrusts . Russian forces are “literally pouring into Ukraine from Crimea’s Crimea,’ says expert .
The speech with which Mr Putin announced the war’s first shots was blood-curdling . Attacks elsewhere in the country will be aimed at disrupting Ukraine’'s ability to respond to the advances .
 The Brent crude benchmark rose past $100 per barrel for the first time since 2014 . Oil and gas prices jumped in response to the invasion of oil and gas .
 President Joe Biden: Russia alone is responsible for the death and destruction this attack will bring . The United States and its allies and partners will respond in a united and decisive way, he says .
 A G7 video summit was called for later in the day; EU leaders are also due to discuss the crisis . Ukraine, for its part, was stunned.
 The historical centre of Podyl, one of the oldest districts of Kyiv, was less busy than usual as the day began .
Russia’s onslaught ended a long period of uncertainty in Ukraine . The country and its leaders resolved not to panic .
 A speech he gave on Monday February 21st clarified things . It appeared that Mr Putin’s inner circle was not his inner circle .
 The first part of the analysis stood; the second was thrown into doubt . That was in part because of the insight the performance offered into Mr Putin’s sense of his own position .
 The president presented himself as an emperor looking for a place alongside Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great, Catherine the Great and Stalin . The speech was in principle about the separatist ‘republics’ which were created during the crisis which followed what is now known as Ukraine�
 Mr Putin's new vision goes far beyond supporting the purported rights of the separatists to split their oblasts off from Ukraine .
 Mr Putin's speech was a clear message that his enemies were all of a piece. Despite that disjuncture of tone, one of the clear messages of Mr Putin’s speech was that he was all of the piece .
 The baseless fear that Ukraine, briefly a nuclear-weapons state after the collapse of the Soviet Union, might become one again is a particularly disturbing casus belli for millions of Russians fearing war .
 Some in Ukraine say the speech was a shock, for some in Ukraine it was just more of the same .
 The Kremlin began claiming that Ukraine had committed “genocide’ in the Donbas region and was about to seize it by force . Bill Burns, the director of the CIA, was sent to Moscow in early November.
 There followed a series of provocations in Donbas, the shelling of Russian soil and alleged Ukrainian incursions . The government, eager to reduce damage to the economy as capital took flight, resolutely urged calm .
 The calm shown by Ukrainians throughout the months of escalation had started to dissipate in the days before the new invasion began .
Former Ukrainian minister of defence said military leadership was working off two base scenarios . The following day he declared a state of emergency across Ukraine .
 The U.S. and Britain's assessment differed starkly from the one offered by America and Britain . Such a war might find more favour with Russians, according to the report .
 The separatist claims could be used to disrupt Ukraine’s policy. The claims were the point of the ‘Minsk accords’ negotiated by Russia, Ukraine, France and Germany .
 Russia abandoned the route to a neutered Ukraine that the never implemented Minsk Accords had offered it on paper . By recognising the republics as independent Russia abandoned.
Ukraine’s armed forces are unlikely to withstand this assault for long . If it did not do so, its military action would incur the heaviest sanctions the West was willing to impose without delivering the strategic realignment Mr Putin wanted .
 Ukraine claimed to have shot down some of the helicopters and captured Russian personnel . How quickly the government might fall is hard to predict .
 Russia is to keep the puppet it presumably aims to install in power, rather than see them driven out as Mr Yanukovych was .
 The very idea sounds outlandish, says Michael Kofman, an expert on Russia’s armed forces at CNA, a think-tank .
 Russia enjoys advantages that those Americans did not. That would give Russia a comparable force-density ratio to that of U.S. troops .
 The EU sanctions followed similar lines to America's, showing that their planning had been more closely aligned than many had thought . Further institutions may now expect the same treatment .
 Ukraine’s foreign minister has called for ‘devastating’ sanctions on Russia . Mr Kuleba has also called for its exclusion from the SWIFT system for international financial transactions .
In the 1940s there was significant resistance to Soviet occupation in the west of the country . But there the terrain is hilly. Yet no one knows whether an insurgency is viable .
Former State Department adviser Samuel Charap says he would imagine something along the lines of the provisional IRA . Such an insurgency would invite Russian reprisals against its backers .
Russia might be expected to be hesitant about the use of such cyber-attacks, and even more so of physical strikes on resistance bases and networks beyond Ukraine's borders .
In recent weeks America has rushed to reinforce eastern Europe with thousands of troops and dozens of warplanes . And the forces ringing Ukraine, along with the annexation of Belarus, have already brought Russian and NATO firepower into worrying proximity .
If the transformation to confrontation is complete, the conflict could still escalate . It also makes yet harder America’s commitment to seeing the Indo-Pacific as the area most important to its future .
 The former Soviet republics now in NATO, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania have cause for alarm over Putin's irredentism . Russia’s effective absorption of Belarus has caused alarm over its effective absorption.
 Western officials play down the idea that Mr Putin would attack NATO . It is a very different proposition from invading Ukraine, not least because it contains three countries with nuclear weapons .
 To Putin regime, now in full-on repulsive mode, isolation and confrontation reinforce each other, says Mr Rogov . It is far from a stable dynamic.
 Nobody should be in any doubt that any direct aggression against our country will lead to crushing and most horrible consequences for any potential aggressor . Britain and other countries look set to follow suit .
 Watch the speech, she says, and ‘You'll see zero emotions when he talks about "",""type" and “small" She says, "you'll see no emotions when you talk about "," she says .
 Russia has a comparable force-density ratio to the number of troops relative to the population . That would be comparable to that which 177,000 troops gave America when it occupied Iraq . Russia’s defence sector has been freezing its assets in America .
 sanctions followed similar lines to America’s, showing that their planning had been more closely aligned than many had thought .
 The Putin regime is now in full-on repulsive mode, says Russia's envoy to the European Union . There will be no escalation in the coming week either, or in the week after that, says Russian envoy .