 Ukraine, Ukraine and Russia have been under fire for recent events in Crimea, Crimea and the rest of the world . Russia's President Vladimir Putin has been criticized for his lack of attention to the region . Putin says he is not concerned about the situation in Crimea .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has ignored grave human rights concerns under Russian occupation . His assessment of Russia’s annexation of Crimea coincides with that presented by Russian President Putin and on Russian television .
 In February and March 2014 Russian troops seized control and forcibly annexed Crimea . In February 2014 Russian forces seized control of Crimea .
 Ukraine was too weak, even with the undoubted support of the Crimean Tatar population behind it, to defend its sovereign territory . Ukraine is too weak to protect its sovereignty, despite the support of its Crimean population .
 The UK's unwillingness to risk military conflict with Russia is understandable . The UK’s unwillingness torisk military conflict is understandable.
 He first expressed his views on March 8, 2014, two days after the leaders who had been installed at gunpoint had announced a largely alternative-less ‘referendum’ on joining Russia to be held ten days later .
 Corbyn did note that Russia has gone way beyond its legal powers to use bases in Crimea .
 The narrative Corbyn repeats, both with respect to Euromaidan and to subsequent events, has been repeatedly refuted by prominent Jewish figures .
 It has also been debunked by the results of both presidential and parliamentary elections in 2014 . Both far-right parties did extremely badly in both elections, according to the results .
 Russia breached international law by invading Crimea, funding and manning those who were by then already seizing control in parts of eastern Ukraine .
 Russian forces seize government buildings, airports and military units in Crimea by Russian forces .
 Poland and the Baltic States have been allowed to join NATO . Baltic republics are now seriously concerned that even such membership will not prevent Russian aggression .
 Corbyn will claim, as does the Kremlin-funded Russia Today, is all U.S. / NATO imperialist propaganda . This, he will claim.
 Corbyn is reported to have suggested that he would seek closer ties with Russia .
Members of a number of far-right and some neo-Nazi parties were invited to Crimea to ‘observe’ the March 16 ‘referendum’ and then in November ‘elections’ held by Kremlin-backed militants .
 Russia Today ignores or denies the mounting evidence of human rights abuse in Crimea and in areas under Kremlin-backed militant control in Donbas .
 The following are just some of the developments that cannot be attributed to U.S. or NATO propaganda .
 A serious attack on Crimean Tatar leaders and the Crimean Tatari Mejlis or representative assembly .
 Crimean Tatar leaders Mustafa Dzhemiliev and the Head of the Mejlis Refat Chubarov have been banned from their homeland .
 Dzhemiliev’s son Khaiser has been taken to Russia and is facing a lengthy term of imprisonment . His father is unable to even visit him and has been unable to visit him .
 Akhtem Chiygoz has been in detention since Jan 2015 on legally absurd charges of involvement in a demonstration on Feb 26, 2014, before Russia’s invasion and annexation . The Deputy Head of the Mejlis, Akhtam Chiy goz, has been
 The vast majority of Crimean Tatars opposed Russian occupation from the outset . They have been targeted in repressive measures aimed at forcing them into exile or silence .
 Chiygoz believes that his detention is specifically because he has made it clear that Crimea is his homeland and he is not leaving . He believes that he is being held in Crimea because he says it is not his homeland .
 Russia forced virtually all Crimean Tatar and independent Crimean media to close or move to mainland Ukraine . Russia forced almost all Crimean and independent media to shut down or close to Ukraine .
 Reshat Ametov was abducted from his peaceful protest outside parliament and tortured to death . The occupation authorities have made no attempt to investigate the abduction and / or forced disappearances of other civic activists .
 Oleksandr Kostenko is facing a 4-year sentence on equally absurd charges relating to an alleged incident in Feb 2014, before annexation and in Kyiv, not Crimea .
Kostenko's father has disappeared in mysterious circumstances . All attempts to get clear evidence that Kostenko was subjected to torture have failed .
 Oleg Sentsov and Oleksandr Kolchenko are on trial in Russia's Crimean show trial . The same is true of Russia’s “absolutely Stalinist” Crimean trial of renowned Ukrainian film director Olegsentsov .
 Sentsov has now been sentenced to 20 years quite literally for nothing . Sentsov was almost certainly tortured and then taken by force to Russia where he was sentenced .
At least one blogger is in detention for writing articles critical of Russian occupation . At least one is in custody for writing about Russian occupation.
 Ukrainians held a meeting where they laid flowers in honour of the Ukrainian poet Taras Shevchenko . They were prosecuted for holding a ‘prohibited symbol’ – a Ukrainian flag .
 All faiths except the Russian Orthodox Church are facing repression in Crimea . All faiths, including the Orthodox Church, have been facing repression .
 The same is also true of the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk people’s republics in Donbas . The same was also true.
 The list of very serious concerns – of hostage-taking; extra-judicial executions and torture carried out by Kremlin-backed militants in Donbas – is very long .
 Former German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder found it lucrative to move to Russia and become a spokesperson for Gasprom . This, one assumes, is the case with former German Chancellor Schroeder .
 Marine Le Pen has similar reasons for supporting Russia’s position on Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 It would be a damning position for a future leader of the United Kingdom . The UK's future leader would be in a tough position for future leaders .