 No major offensive along the high passes towards the valley was considered possible . Because of snowfall and severe winter conditions, the operating environment, especially for the attacker, was climatically disadvantageous .
Pro-Pakistani elements in the valley by staging a limited revolt against established authority could not be ruled out . But the exploitation of pro- Pakistani elements could not have been ruled out by authorities .
 To relieve D’Souza of internal security duties, a separate sector called V Sector was organised under Maj Gen Patankar . All paramilitary forces deployed in the valley were placed under his command .
 D’Souza did not have to look back while fighting on the ceasefire line to ensure the security of the valley . Unlike in the 1965 conflict, D'SouZA did not look back.
 India promotes regional connectivity and economic integration across its land and maritime borders . There is little understanding of the importance of relations with Myanmar .
 Myanmar borders four of our insurgency-prone states — Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram . We seem to forget that Myanmar borders 4 of our insurgents-prone countries — Arunchal Pradesh.
 Myanmar assumed a key position as India's land bridge to the fast-growing ASEAN economies .
 New Delhi fashioned a multi-faceted framework of dialogue for enhancing economic and border security cooperation . New Delhi also fashioned aMulti-Faceted Framework of dialogue.
 Afghanistan is finding common cause against the threat of Islamic State followers in Afghanistan . But they’re finding commoncause against threat of ISIS followers in the country .
 A bloody clash between the Afghan Taliban and followers of the so-called Islamic State late last month in western Afghanistan has exposed critical shifts in alliances in a war the United States is still trying to fight .
 Most important, there appear to be consultations between the Taliban and Iran . The self-proclaimed Islamic State is widely known .
 The battle on May 24 in the Khaki Safe area of Farah province near the Iranian border left at least 22 people dead, including 13 associated with ISIS and nine Taliban, an Afghan Taliban commander says .
Sanctions have done little to prevent Iran from spreading its influence throughout the Middle East . Sanctions have not stopped Iran from reaching out to the West .
 The nuclear negotiations between Iran and six world powers are less than three weeks away . Iran's nuclear talks are scheduled to begin on Monday .
President Obama's interview with Jeff Goldberg will fuel Iran’s involvement in the Middle East, he said .
$150 billion can buy a lot of weapons and influence, but it is also misleading and dangerous . Iranian influence has grown so dramatically over the years, says CNN's John Sutter .
 To begin to understand Iran’s rise as a regional power, it is important to examine the mechanisms with which the country wins friends and influences people .
 China's moves in the South and East China Seas have the Asia-Pacific region worried . China's move in the region has raised concerns .
 China declared an Air-Defense Identification Zone in the East China Sea in November 2013 . It was a geographic flashpoint between various powers in the region . Such talk heated up dramatically when China declared with no official advanced warning .
 unilateral action sparked intense global debate as to the logic of such a move . It also amplified larger concerns over Chinese intentions throughout the Asia-Pacific and wider Indo-Pacific regions .
 Michal Thim doesn't seem to grasp the true essence of both the East and South China Sea Peace Initiatives proposed by Republic of China President Ma Ying-jeou .
 New policy would dispatch U.S. naval ships to within 12 nautical miles of China-controlled reefs . The new policy would conduct flyovers with navy surveillance aircraft .
 The Chinese People's Liberation Army/Navy issued warnings when a U.S. P-8 Poseidon maritime reconnaissance aircraft flew over China .
 The U.S. naval vessels will cross the 12nm line. It is particularly worth noting whether they will do so .
 A warship cruising close to the man-made islands is a much stronger signal and a more real threat, at least in the eyes of the public, compared to a surveillance or anti-submarine plane flying over .
 Secretary Carter's proposal shows that the U.S. military is considering a critical shift in its bargaining strategy . The move would shift from sinking costs to tying hands .
Foreign policy analysts can be forgiven for complaining of severe whiplash at the rapid turn of events .
 One storyline that seems to have been precipitously dropped by the media is the Ebola Crisis in West Africa . The Ebola crisis has been dropped by media concerns over the Ebola crisis .
 It’s easy to forget that this issue was the dominant news theme last summer and fall . It's easy to remember that this Issue was the dominate news theme.
 In September 2014, the Centers for Disease Control offered the dire, worst case prediction that 1. million people in West Africa could be infected by January 2015 .
 Some fault the U.S. response as coming too late to help the 11,000 victims of the disease .
 China is nearing completion of an airstrip in the disputed Spratly Islands . The perennial debate over how to deal with a rising China was recently sparked again .
 The construction of the airstrip, along with wider dredging operations in the Spratlys, is just one part of China's attempt to assert its dominance over the South China Sea .
 U.S. concerns regarding an increasingly powerful and ambitious China are nothing new . American concerns regarding the increasingly powerful China are not new .
 China continues to close the power gap with the United States . The Spratlys seem to have recently taken on increased significance .
 America's democratic allies in the region may hold the key to deterring future conflict with China . America’s democratic allies may hold a key to preventing future conflict.
 CNAS describes challenges associated with the increasing use of coercive economic measures to tackle security challenges .
 The challenges include both changes to the structure of international financial system that might make it harder to use these tools in the future and a degradation of these measures’ integrity and availability .
 The authors recommend principles by which the United States and its allies can keep these measures sharp, nimble, and effective in countering adversaries and threats in the future .
 The 70 page PDF details how a budding Western extremist can survive and thrive in hostile territory .
 It lays out advice on how to search the Internet privately, how to shoot and how to fight . It also lays out how to use the Internet to find out what to do .
 Various news outlets such as Breitbart reported that Islamic State had released the guide . The guide was released by Islamic State .
 The idea that Islamic State is training moles to move through the West and tear it down from the inside should frighten everyone . The idea of Islamic State being trained to tear down the West is not surprising .
 Close reading of How to Survive in the West should calm fears. But a close reading should calm those fears.
 Nasir al-Wuhayshi, leader of al-Qaeda's branch in Yemen, was killed in a CIA drone strike last week .
 He had been designated second in command of al-Qaeda’s global network . He also had been named second incommand of the group's global network.
 U.S. has perfected capability to find the world's most wanted terrorism suspects in some of the world’s most chaotic environments and deliver lethal blows from above .
 The continued spread of al-Qaeda’s ideology and the emergence of brutal new offshoots have underscored the limitations of a U.S. strategy that remains largely reliant on “decapitation” strikes .
 Asadi is the secretary general of Jund al-Imam and the spokesperson of Popular Mobilization . The coalition of Shiite militias is sponsored by the Iraqi Interior Ministry .
 Asadi visited the United States last week and delivered a speech at the Mobilization Is our Dignity Conference in Dearborn, Michigan . He is a former student of the Iranian religious seminary in Qom .
 Ahmad Jassim Saber joined the 1991 Shiite uprising against Saddam Hussein in southern Iraq while still in college . He was born in 1971 .
 Both are doing so without much hindrance on the part of the U.S. government and others . Both are working with the government and other agencies .
 A coffee chain in 65 countries is trying to persuade 65 countries its brew is a sophisticated part of the cultural backdrop . This does not matter much when it comes to a coffee chain.
An extremist group has ambitions to enshrine its brutal ideas in the state of Raqqa . It is of huge concern when it is an extremist group with ambitions to get a ban on Apple products and buses .
 The ISIL and Starbucks analogy comes straight from a devastatingly honest memo that Richard Stengel, the U.S. state department's under secretary for public diplomacy and public affairs wrote to John Kerry .
 Islamic State fighters burst into the Iraqi village of Eski Mosul . Sheikh Abdullah Ibrahim knew his wife was in trouble .
 Buthaina Ibrahim was an outspoken human rights advocate who had once run for the provincial council in Mosul . Ibrahim was a human rights activist who had run for a provincial council .
 Under rule of extremist group, all former police officers, soldiers and people whose activities are deemed "heretical" must sign the card and carry it with them at all times .
 The Defense Information Systems Agency has released its 2015-2020 strategic plan . It lays out core agency missions and objectives in getting IT services to Defense Department users .
Demonstrators demand to know why it continues. Exhausted by war and rising poverty, demonstrators demand answers .
 Ukraine's war without end has filled the hearts of many in Ukraine with anger . Ukraine's conflict with Ukraine has been described as a war without an end .
 The national currency, the hryvnia, continues to collapse and the average salary in this European country has melted down to $150 a month . The average salary is $150.
 Many doubt their lives will improve any time soon, and many, mad as hell, are taking to the streets . Many doubt they will improve their lives soon .
 Waves of protests have erupted from Lviv in the staunchly nationalist west to Donetsk in the insurgent east .
 If the deal is achieved, in ten to fifteen years the world could see a more moderate Iran, reduced instability in the Middle East, and a stronger global non-proliferation regime . In ten to 15 years, the world would see a less moderate Iran.
 The lobbying for arming Ukraine has been underway for several months . But the passage of time has not increased the quality of what passes for a debate on this topic .
 The parties involved could soon start down a road that leads to a deepening of the conflict . This is particularly lamentable because of the parties involved. This is especially lamentable.
 On one side of the debate stands a disparate coalition that blames Russia for everything that has gone wrong since the February 2014 uprising that deposed Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych .
 Some within this camp insist that Vladimir Putin has transformed Russia into a neofascist state . Russia is determined to resurrect an empire and trample global norms and international law along the way .
 Russia may have viewed the steady movement of the EU and NATO toward its borders with apprehension . Putin’s domestic and foreign policy and betraying democratic principles to boot .
 The Pentagon is clearing the final congressional hurdles in the way of spending the entire $1.62 billion to train and equip the Iraqi and Kurdish military . The Pentagon will spend the entire money on training and equipment .
 The first dollars from the fund were spent in the week of May 18, when an Iraqi brigade was equipped with rifles, machine guns, grenade launchers, assault packs and protective masks .
 Kurdish Peshmerga units will receive similar equipment within weeks with money from the fund, the command said .
 Defense Secretary Ashton Carter and Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman General Martin Dempsey likely will be asked about the status of the expenditures Wednesday .
 Expenditures so far have been limited to incremental steps, a military spokeswoman says . The Pentagon has proposed a cost-sharing agreement with Iraq and allies .
 The required steps include submitting reports and certifications to Congress . The required step also include submitting report and certification to Congress.
 Both Russia and the West continue to stage all kind of major military exercises and demonstrations . Both accuse the other of provocation and aggressive intent .
 No, they're not — but we need to understand the real point behind these martial maneuvers, and the risks, says CNN's John Sutter .
 NATO-led BALTOPS exercise is seeing ships and men from 17 countries in the Baltic Sea . Georgia and Finland are among the countries taking part .
 This month and the next, Exercise Saber Strike sees NATO forces training in the region . The Noble Jump exercise tests the capabilities of the new Very High Readiness Joint Task Force .
 The results have created the grounds to end decades of civil war, address the Kurdish predicament and stabilize Turkey and the greater region .
 The ruling AKP has been accredited with strengthening the economy and making a number of democratic advancements. Undeniably, the ruling AKp has been accredited with strengthening.
 Treating the cyber domain like the battle zone it is will help fight growing cyber threats, said DISA Director Lt Gen Ronnie Hawkins .
 It doesn't take a lot of resources for hackers to make attempts to penetrate networks . It's not easy to break into networks, but it's easy to do so.
Security gaps can escalate into massive breaches like those recently seen at the Office of Personnel Management . In areas where there may be security gaps, those attempts can escalate.
 China allegedly broke into databases with information about millions of federal workers in the United States . Israel is accused of planting a sophisticated computer virus in hotels which hosted Iranian delegation for nuclear talks with the U.S.
 The report arrived from Eugene Kaspersky's Moscow-based information security company . This time too, it arrived from the company's Moscow based information security firm .
 Defense Department and national security political leaders are eager to attract tech minds . Defense Department, national security leaders are keen to attract technology minds .
 John McCain took to WIRED to explain how various provisions in the National Defense Authorization Act would help bring young tech minds to bear on the military's problems .
 The Defense Department will attract the services of fast-moving Silicon Valley companies and the people who work in them, Arizona Republican writes .
 The Defense Department is instituting some efforts to curb insider threats . But those policies don't go far enough beyond the bare-minimum standards, a new report says .
 DoD components have instituted six minimum standards mandated in an executive order aimed at protecting classified information and systems . The standards include providing training in insider threat awareness and providing training.
 DoD components also have implemented some recommendations from GAO, the White House and internal DoD guidance . The components have been inconsistent, to the detriment of better insider-threat protection, according to DoD .
Only three of six components reviewed have established baselines of normal activity . For example, only three of the six components have established Baselines ofnormal activity .
 DoD officials also have failed to analyze program gaps or incorporate risk assessments into existing programs, the report noted . DoD also has failed to assess program gaps, it said .
 Eight years of official, media-sanctioned cover-up of the U.S. government's trampling of the rule of law may be coming to an end .
 Federal Judge Thomas C Wheeler ruled Monday that U.S. government officials and Wall Street advisors acted illegally in nationalizing American International Group during the financial crisis in 2008 .
 The ruling comes in a lawsuit brought on behalf of AIG’s 275,000 shareholders . The lawsuit alleges that government expropriated equity control of the company . AIG's former leader, Maurice R Greenberg, alleges that AIG used AIG to funnel capital to Goldman Sachs
 The Senate is expected to pass its version of the National Defense Authorization Act this week . The Appropriations’ Committees defense bill will be brought to the floor .
Proposed use of Overseas Contingency Operations fund to evade sequestration-imposed spending limits . One smaller provision merits attention for its potential effect on future U.S. military operations and security of Israel .