Ukranian and Russian forces clash in Kerch Strait, which separates Sea of Azov from Black Sea . Both countries are on high alert as the international community takes stock of the situation .
Ukranian boats seized during the incident sitting in the Russian-controlled port of Kerch . Ukraine is on the verge of Martial Law while American intelligence gathering aircraft and drones are flying missions in the region .
 On Nov., 2018, President Petro Poroshenko signed a Martial Law decree . The decree would go into effect on Nov. 2018 .
 Ukraine's parliament is debating whether to formally sanction the measure . At the time of writing, Ukraine's legislators in the country's parliament were still debating the measure.
 Poroshenko had also gone on national television to make a public appeal . He claimed intelligence services had warned him that Russia was preparing a ground offensive against the country .
 Russia and Ukraine both accuse the other of provoking the incident in the Kerch Strait . The incident took place in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 If the Rada signs off on the Martial Law measure, Ukraine's Border Guards will be empowered to increase their presence along the border with Russia and Russian-occupied Crimea .
 The country's intelligence agency, known by the acronym SBU, will step up counter-intelligence efforts . It will focus on disrupting hostile information operations and cyber attacks .
Ukranian Ministry of the Interior would also deploy additional personnel to provide physical security at critical sites . The Ukranian government would also deployed additional personnel.
 Martial Law could give state security forces broad sweeping authority to restrict freedom of movement and assembly . State security forces could also implement curfews and censor media outlets .
 There are no clear indications that Poroshenko plans to implement any of those provisions . So far, there is no clear indication that the president will implement any provisions .
 The 12th provision of his official decree was sealed and not published publicly . However, the 12th part of the decree was not released publicly .
 Poroshenko had originally called for 60 days of Martial Law, but has reportedly agreed to limit this to 30 days in exchange for parliamentary approval . Poroshenko has reportedly said this will be limited by 30 days .
 Ukraine would return to normal law and order by the end of 2018 . With that truncated schedule, Ukraine would, barring an extension of the plan, return to the normal law .
Commercial transit through Kerch Strait has resumed . In the meantime, commercial transit through the Kerch strait has resumed.
 Russia is at present refusing to return the Ukranian boats and their crews . Russia, however, is not returning the boats and crews .
 Photos have appeared online showing Ukraine's two patrol boats, which the press has often referred to as "artillery boats" The boats were accompanied by a tug that was accompanying them in Kerch Port .
 Russia's top human rights official Tatyana Moskalkova says 24 Ukranian sailors have been detained . Three sailors are injured and recovering in hospital, she says .
 The location or locations where the Kremlin was holding the other individuals and under what conditions remained unclear .
 Neither President Donald Trump nor Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has issued a formal statement regarding the skirmish .
 Other European countries, including NATO allies Canada, Poland, and the United Kingdom, have all issued strong rebukes toward Russia . Russia is blamed for an altercation with the U.S.
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine, Kurt Volker, had already Tweeted out less official condemnation of Russian actions . Volker had already tweeted out a less official statement of Russian action .
 Trump is set to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin on the sidelines of the annual G20 meeting in Argentina . The annual meeting will begin on Nov., 2018, in Argentina.
 Russian state media has accused unspecified entities within the United States and Ukranian government of trying to scuttle talks by deliberately touching off the maritime brawl in the Kerch Strait . Russian media has already accused the unspecified entities in the U.S. and Ukraine without evidence.
 U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley offered the first real official condemnation of Russia's actions . She described the actions as those of an ""outlaw," she said .
 Russia had initially sought to set the agenda framed around what Deputy Representative Dmitry Polyanskiy described as a violation of Russia's borders as part of a broader international conspiracy against the Kremlin . Russia's Deputy Representative said the violation of its borders was part of an international conspiracy .
 Ukraine’s lawful transit through the Kerch Strait is a violation under international law," Haley said . Haley said later that Ukraine's "lawful transit" through the Strait was a violation of international law .
 NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg also extended the alliance's full support to Ukraine . Ukraine is not a member of the bloc, but is not part of the alliance .
 The U.S. Air Force and Navy will be conducting increased intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance missions in and around the Black Sea, Sea of Azov, and the Crimean Peninsula .
 An Air Force RC-135V/W Rivet Joint signals intelligence aircraft flying in the Black Sea and an RQ-4B Global Hawk drone performing a mission over Ukraine proper .
 The U.S. has been flying these types of missions regularly to monitor Russian forces . Russia illegally seized Crimea in 2014 and began supporting separatists in Eastern Ukraine .
Navy EP-3E signals intelligence aircraft are also routine contributors to that effort . Navy EP- 3E signals Intelligence aircraft are regular contributors .
 There have not been any reports of Russian aircraft aggressively intercepting U.S. planes in the Black Sea . This is also a regular occurrence .
 In February 2018, the Kremlin declared it would take more assertive actions in response to any aircraft flying near Crimea or its territory along the Black Sea .
Radio and other communications could help explain just how premeditated Russia's attempt to blockade the Kerch Strait actually was .
 Audio has already appeared online reportedly between Russian security forces on board the vessels that intercepted the Ukranian naval convoy . If confirmed, it seems to indicate that Russian Coast Guard members were actively seeking to damage or destroy the small boats .
 It remains unclear as to why Russia decided now as an opportune time to force the issue of the Sea of Azov .
 Limiting Ukraine's access to the Sea of Azov would cut off a vital trade route . It would help prevent the Ukrainians from deploying reinforcements during a flare-up in fighting in the country's restive eastern Donbass region .
 The Kremlin hoped to exploit President Poroshenko's low approval ratings heading into Ukranian elections . It is possible to goad him into cutting a deal favorable to Russia's demands .
 Russia has accused Poroshenko of creating tensions in the first place to invoke Martial Law and improve his political standing . Russia has already accused him of creating the tensions to improve his standing .
 Poroshenko insists that the Martial Law plan will not result in the postponement of the 2019 polls .
 France, Germany, and the United States all experiencing various levels of political upheaval . The primary focus in the Europe Union at the moment is the United Kingdom's plans to leave .
 The Russians may have simply felt it was a good moment to act when the international community was on a weaker footing overall . As such, the Russian government may have just felt the world was on weaker footing .
 The skirmish is the most serious incident to occur between Russia and Ukraine in years . It continues to hold the possibility of a larger and more dangerous series of events .
 The international community can find common ground to de-escalate the situation and continue pushing for a final, negotiated settlement of the conflict .
 Ukraine's parliament has formally voted to approval Martial Law for 30 days, beginning on Nov. 2018 . The law is expected to be approved by the Ukrainian parliament on Nov., 2018 .
 Russia's Federal Security Service, better known by the acronym FSB, has issued an official timeline of events in the Kerch Strait . A machine translation of which is available here.
 The transcript appears to acknowledge that the Ukranian ships were operating in accordance with international law and a 2003 agreement between Ukraine and Russia over the use of Kerch Strait and the Sea of Azov .
 Ukrainians contended that they had the right to freedom of navigation through the area under the 2003 agreement . The Ukrainians ignored demands from Russian forces to stop .
 President Trump offered his first comments on the situation in Ukraine while speaking to reporters outside of the White House .
 The United States State Department has now issued its own statement on the skirmish in the Kerch Strait . The U.S. State Department issued the statement in full .
 The FSB has released a video where one of the captured Ukranian sailors "confesses" that the incident was a provocation on their part . The video was released by the FSB .
 The legitimacy of such a confession is, at the very least, highly suspect . The legitimacy is at thevery least, according to the author .
 A Russian court in occupied Crimea has reportedly remanded two of the captured Ukranian sailors to custody for two months . It is ostensibly for violating Russia's borders .
 Another dozen individuals are awaiting hearings, with the remaining personnel to appear before the court on Nov., 2018 . The remaining personnel will appear in court on November, 2018 .
 Russia and Ukraine have been locked in a bitter conflict for years . Ukraine has been accused of killing more than 1,000 people in the past month . The Ukrainian government is accused of murdering more than 2,000 civilians in Ukraine .