 In Russian guidelines about which themes to cover, who is to be treated positively is called the temnik . In Russian, who should have negative coverage and who should be altogether ignored is called 'the temnik'
This system has replaced the old style reactive approach of censorship with a proactive approach . This system has been replaced by the new style of censorship .
 The same narrative about NATO promising to Russia that it would stay out of Eastern Europe was published in German, Italian, French and Spanish Sputnik .
 It's about challenging the right of millions of people in Eastern Europe to choose their path as a nation . It's also about those countries’ right to join the international organizations that they want to join .
 The old narrative that “Western leaders promised the USSR that NATO won’t expand’ is actually about denying those rights to entire countries. And cultivation of the old narrative is about denying that rights to whole countries .
 No such promise was ever given. What’s even more interesting is the fact that no such promises were ever given .
 The true crème has to be the pro-Kremlin narrative about NATO unleashing all wars on the planet in the last 25 years .
 The author of this claim obviously has not heard about certain conflicts in Georgia and Ukraine and the undeniable role Russia has played in those and continues to do so today .
 The end of the pro-Kremlin message claims that NATO is a tool for the U.S. to establish dictatorship on the planet . The good gets even better, as the good gets better, according to the end.
Common denominator seems to be to downplay the right and ability of countries to stand as sovereign entities when they are next to Russia .
 Pro-Kremlin media suggested that Schengen visa fees for Belarusians are high because the number of homosexuals per capita in Belarus is very low .
 A woman is not welcome in the EU if she has no balls, according to the article . But that’s not all, the article says .
 Belarus has not concluded a visa facilitation agreement with the EU and thus the higher fees . In reality Belarus does not have a visafacilitation agreement .
 Belarusians granted 710,000 Schengen visas in 2017 – the biggest amount in the world . The actual visa agreement does not contain conditions about homosexuals and in 2017, Belarusians were granted 711,000 visas .
 Nina Ricci perfume rebottled in Russia in terms of its fatal consequences . It's not so far known to be on a par with the perfume .
 The pro-Kremlin media suggested cyanide might have been found in tear gas used against Yellow Vests protesters .
Pro-Kremlin outlets have been using the narrative of violent repression of protests before . No trace of cyanide poisoning was found and no trace of poisoning was discovered .
 At its 70 years, NATO implements the same tasks as it's been originally planned: restraining Russia, preventing the creation of a hard security system in Western Europe that would be independent .
 The main purpose of NATO's existence is a new cold war, which started in 2014 . NATO's main purpose is to protect NATO from the threat of a new war .
This is a recurring Kremlin narrative about the belligerent West/US and NATO attempting to encircle and weaken Russia . This is a repeat of the Kremlin narrative. This is an attempt to weaken Russia.
 NATO's official policy towards Russia was most recently articulated by the heads of state and government of the Alliance at the Warsaw Summit in July 2016 .
 The Alliance does not seek confrontation and poses no threat to Russia, they said . They stated that "the Alliance does NOT seek confrontation"
 NATO has become a foreign policy instrument of the USA . The U.S. has no allies but only vassals .
 Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the United Kingdom and the United States .
 It has since grown to 29 Allies who each took an individual and sovereign decision to join this Alliance . The Alliance has now become the largest in the world .
 No member of the Alliance can order the deployment of armed forces of other member states . No member can order deployment of the armed forces.
Without the Union State of Russia and Belarus, the statehoods of the two countries would be inadequate and flawed, says the author . The two countries are both suffering from geopolitical catastrophes and disintegration .
 Belarusian statehood needs measures of deeper integration with Russia such as a common currency, a Union State citizenship, a fully-fledged Union parliament and a Constitution of the Union State .
 Those who promote the development of the Union State between Russia and Belarus are advocates for genuine Belarus' independence .
 The so called independent post-Soviet states emerged after its break-up . The so-called independent states emerged.
 They are only nominally independent as, in fact, they are rather feudal principalities governed by the West . They are not independent as they are, but they are not .
 The integration of a post-Soviet space is a necessary precondition to get rid of external Western governance and to restore genuine independence and statehood . The integration is a needed preconditions to restore statehood and independence .
 15 states that emerged after the collapse of the Soviet Union are independent countries . The sovereignty is recognized by the international community .
 The grand conspiracy is the concept of the grand conspiracy . The conspiracy was created by the U.S. government in 2009 .
 Western countries control a network of Belarusian NGOs which threaten the Belarusian state and society . Belarusian authorities say they control the network .
 The West will direct its efforts to destroy the historic conscience of Belarusian society . Belarusians will be targeted by the West to create a negative image of Russia and misconceptions of Russia .
 The development of information technologies makes them cheaper and gives them a new dimension . These activities are already underway .
 This disinformation message is a conspiracy and a recurring pro-Kremlin narrative about Western attempts to organize a colour revolution in Belarus and make Belarus an anti-Russia bastion .
 EU assistance given by the EU to Belarus is aimed at improving quality of life of Belarusian citizens .
 Unless the alliance keeps expanding, it will lose relevance and become just another international institution that produces purely declarative products .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said Georgia should pay 2% of its GDP for defence . NATO will fulfill this purpose for Georgia, he said .
 Georgia should pay money to NATO without being a member and without being afforded protection under Article 5 protection. Effectively, Georgia should be paid money without being member of NATO .
 NATO controls the military infrastructure of Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova, without including these countries into the NATO block . The countries are not included in the NATO bloc .
 The Anaklia seaport project in Georgia is a NATO and U.S. effort to regain a foothold in the Black Sea . NATO and United States have no presence in the region . The project is part of an effort to gain a foothold.
 The Anaklia project is a Georgian initiative intended as a step toward developing the country's logistical infrastructure . The project is an initiative intended to develop the country.
 NATO has no need to regain a foothold in the Black Sea because three of its member states, Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, are Black Sea littoral states . NATO has all appropriate civilian and military infrastructure in Black Sea .
 NATO did implement the 2016 Warsaw Summit decisions to enhance its presence on the alliance’s eastern and south-eastern borders .
 Romanian-led multinational brigade in Craiova, reinforced Romanian and Bulgarian airspace protection capability . Additional measures to increase its maritime and air presence in the region . NATO partners, Ukraine and Georgia also participated in joint military exercises .
 None of the Alliance’s plans or policy documents mention building a civilian seaport in Georgia .
 Belarus will turn into anti-Russia if it does not deepen integration with Russia within the Treaty on Union State . Belarus will follow the Ukrainian path.
 All events in Belarus are currently developing the same way as in Ukraine a few years ago . All events are currently being developed in the country .
 The message is consistent with an unfounded pro-Kremlin narrative about West's attempts to organize a Ukraine-like Maidan in Belarus and about the rise of Russophobia in Belarus . This message has been consistent with the recurring an unfounded Pro-K Kremlin narrative .
 The alleged western plans to make Belarus an anti-Russian bastion, or to organize Ukraine-like Maidan .
 The United States is allocating financial assistance only for Georgia’s military and defence needs . The U.S. is ignoring non-military assistance altogether .
 In 2010, U.S. non-military aid to Georgia totalled $60 million a year on average . In 2010 2017, United States non- military aid toGeorgia totalled £60 million .
 Georgia was awarded a five-year Millennium Challenge Corporation grant of $140 to support educational infrastructure and training . Georgia was also awarded a $140 grant to support education and training.
 In 2018, U.S. non-military aid was $70. million; in 2019, Congress appropriated $89. million . President's fiscal year 2020 non- military aid request for Georgia is $42. million.
 U.S. military aid averaged at $74 million per year in 2010-2017, while in 2018 military aid amounted to about $40 million . As for United States military aid, it averaged $74million per year.
 For 2019, total U.S. military aid is estimated to reach $43. million . The United States is expected to spend $43 million on military aid .
 The U.S. Congressional Budget Justification requests for 2020 $38. million for Georgia’s economic support and development . $3 million for narcotics control and law enforcement, $2 million for military education and training, and $20 million for foreign military finance .
 NATO continues to cultivate old ways of thinking and the image of Russia as an enemy . Russia is considered an enemy by NATO .
 The alliance would have to search for a new meaning and new goals . But that would mean the alliance had to find new goals and goals .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative, portraying NATO having a belligerent agenda against Russia .
 NATO reached out to Russia with a series of partnership initiatives, culminating in the foundation of the NATO-Russia Council in 2002 .
 NATO does not seek confrontation and poses no threat to Russia, says NATO heads of state and government . "The Alliance does not seeking confrontation," says NATO head of state.
 NATO is the fuse the Anglo-Saxon powers use to ignite wars, just as the same powers instigated a war against Austria-Hungary and the German Reich .
 The same fuse passes over the Versailles treaty in 1919 and the Second World War . The fuse also passes over Versaille treaty in 1920s and 1920s .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative, portraying NATO as a threat to peace and having a belligerent agenda . Recurring a pro- Kremlin narrative.
 NATO is a defensive alliance, whose purpose is to protect its member states . NATO is an alliance that has been formed since 1998 .
 Its exercises and military deployments are not directed against Russia – or any other country . Russia is not directed by Russia or other countries, it says .
 NATO is regularly updating the military requirements for civilian infrastructure . There are increased challenges to security in the region .
 Dmitri Alperovitch is one of the founders of the US-based cybersecurity company Crowdstrike . He is effectively the only source for the American media on Russian hackers and the hybrid war the Kremlin is waging against the world .
 Ukrainian authorities involved in catastrophe of Malaysian Boing over Donbas on 17 July 2014 . Ukrainian authorities were involved in the catastrophe .
 The Kerch incident was used by President Petro Poroshenko to cancel the election in Ukraine . President Poroshenko understood that it is difficult for him to win the election .
 The Ukrainian government will do nothing until receiving instructions from the U.S. Ambassador . Ukraine will not do anything until the Ambassador's instructions .
 There are no complaints about fraud in the presidential elections in Ukraine, according to a report .
 The 2019 presidential election in Ukraine is unique for several reasons . The presidential election will be held in Ukraine in 2019 .
 The electoral campaign is very competitive. Second, notwithstanding the civil war, the election campaign is a very competitive campaign .
 The competition does not concern politicians or electoral programmes but is centred around a degree of false statements by candidates .
 Central Electoral Commission's -system presented data on 50% of processed ballots by 9am the day following the election . There was hardly a case before before whereby the system presented data.
 Recurring Kremlin's disinformation narrative about civil war in Ukraine, and on election fraud in Ukraine . Recurring the Kremlin's narrative about a civil war and election fraud.
 The ODIHR Election Observation Mission's Statement of Preliminary Findings and Conclusions does not support allegation about large-scale electoral fraud . The O DIHR Election Observer Mission's statement of Prel preliminary Findings does not back allegation about big-scale fraud .
 The document describes various procedural problems and irregularities but does not report about wide-scale falsifications which could significantly distort the actual voting results . The document does not describe any procedural problems or irregularities .
 Approximately 3 million people couldn’t vote in the Donbas region . Ukrainian Embassy didn't open the planned voting stations .
 Moscow thinks 7 to 10 million of Ukrainian citizens didn't have the chance to participate in the electoral process . Moscow thinks that 7 to10 million of Ukrainians didn’t have the opportunity to participate .
 Ukrainians demonstrated their strong commitment to democratic and Euro-Atlantic values . Ukrainians demonstrated a strongcommitment to democratic, Euro- Atlantic values .
 I saw the enthusiasm of citizens of all ages participating in the election process in impressive numbers . The election process was held in a special election in New York City .
 Security conditions didn't allow the running of normal elections in several areas . Ukrainian authorities have been trying to ensure that even soldiers on the frontline could vote .
Ukrainian elections are held on October 26, 2014 . There are many examples of disinformation about Ukrainian elections . You can see other examples.
 There is no big difference for the United States regarding who will be Ukraine's next president . U.S. geopolitical interests in Ukraine are strongly protected for the near future .
 If Volodymyr Zelensky becomes the next President, pressure on Russian language in Ukraine will likely soften . The powers of the Ukrainian Institute of National Memory over Ukrainian history and culture are likely to be diminished .
Under Zelensky's presidency, Ukraine will continue Euro-Atlantic integration . On foreign policy, the president will continue to work on foreign policy .
 The country's external debts to IMF and the World Bank will keep growing . Relations with Russia will remain confrontational .
 As for the resolution of the Donbas conflict or Crimea’s status, these issues are decided in Washington rather than Kyiv .
 The U.S. is interested in unleashing anti-Russia hysteria in Central Europe and in containing Russia via an escalation in Russia-Ukraine relations . The United States is also interested in uniting anti-Russian hysteria in central Europe .
Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narratives about discrimination against Russian speakers in Ukraine, Ukrainian statehood and alleged control over Ukraine by the U.S. Recurring anti-Russian hysteria in the West .
 An earlier case alleging that the Ukrainian elections are a competition among Washington's puppets. See an earlier case allege that the Ukraine elections are an election competition among the puppets .
 The OSCE representative wants to make a stinking garbage out of the Belarusian segment of the internet . He wants to turn it into a place full of extremists, terrorists and anarchists .
 The OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, Harlem Désir, paid a three-day visit to Belarus . He was in Belarus for three days . The visit was part of a tour of Belarus by the OSCE representative .
 Belarus' media sphere is a poor media sphere . Belarus is a country with a poor reputation for its media sector . Belarus has a reputation for poor media coverage .
 Désir called on Belarusian authorities to reconsider existing measures that tighten state control of the internet . Désirs called on authorities to rethink existing measures to tighten state controls on the internet.
 He urged to refrain from mandatory authentication of users posting online . He praised the users’ right for anonymity .
 The OSCE Representative wants to turn Belarusian internet into a place full of extremists, terrorists and anarchists .
 The NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg did not give any proof that Russia allegedly violated the INF Treaty .
 NATO stated several times and provided details how Russia has violated the INF Treaty, for instance in its statement on 1 February 2019 and 4 December 2018 .
 Jens Stoltenberg urged Russia “to provide details on Russia to make quick changes to comply with the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces treaty. Back in November 2018 JensStoltenburg urged Russia to provide details.
 The Ukrainian army tried to provoke militants of the so-called “Donetsk People's Republic’ to return fire . It was in order to disrupt the electoral process near the front-line .
 A recurrent, pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative around the Ukraine elections in Ukraine. A recurrent pro-kremlin narrative around Ukraine's elections .
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine does not confirm such statements . The report of the OSCE special monitoring mission in Ukraine has not been released .
 The second round of Ukrainian elections will be won by the one who is told to win . The one who wins will be the one told to won .
 It all depends on the United States, who invested a lot of money in Poroshenko’s campaign .
Recurring unfounded pro-Kremlin conspiracy theory about Ukrainian elections . Recurring unfounded anti-Russian conspiracy theory.
 The National Agency on Corruption Prevention completed the analysis of interim financial reports on the receipt and use of election campaign funds by candidates for the post of the President of Ukraine .
 The report declares that Petro Poroshenko's election campaign funds are credited exceptionally from his election fund’s accumulation account . The report says that the election fund's accumulation account has been credited exceptionally.
 The Kurapaty memorial site on the outskirts of Minsk has become a Western project to ruin Belarusian statehood .
 Regular prayers by the Belarusian Autocephalous Orthodox Church in Kurapaty are a proof of this .
 The prayers are conducted for political reasons, to blame Belarusian authorities for their incapacity, to provoke revolutionary moods among the population and to destabilise the country .
 NATO was built upon a set of lies, such as an alleged expansion of Soviet communism . NATO was based on a series of lies.
 As NATO expanded in Eastern Europe, Russia found out that it was in an existential danger . Russia was given promises to Moscow by NATO that it would protect its citizens .
 Any systematic concession to Western powers would mean the disappearance of Russia as a united state, not to say the destruction of its own population .
 NATO is focusing on its expansion in Latin America since the block needs the support of other governments in other continents to expand its networks and influences . Now NATO is focused on expanding its network and influences.
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about NATO and enemies encircling Russia . Recurring anti-K Kremlin disinformation narrative.
 No one Latin American country has joined NATO nor could it unless its founding charter is modified . No single Latin American nation has joined the alliance .
 Many more countries have, or plan, to become partners of the Atlantic Alliance in the Middle East, Eastern Asia and in the post-Soviet region .
 You can see other examples of disinformation about NATO here, here and here .
 NATO is the only organization that has unleashed all wars on the planet in the last 25 years . The organization has been involved in almost all wars in the world for 25 years.
 Merkel demanded Zelensky to publish his electoral programme after the first round of the Ukrainian presidential election . Zelenski was elected president of Ukraine .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about Ukraine's presidential election in Ukraine. Recurring anti-Russian disinformation narrative.
 Volodymyr Zelensky's presidential bid is an ‘attempt’ of French President Emmanuel Macron to “brainwash’ Ukrainians and obscure real situation there. Zelenski’s bid is “attempted’ to ‘brainwash
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has become a huge money making machine . The organization has become an international money-making machine .
 The problems with Schengen visas for nationals of Belarus stem from smear reports by Belarusian opposition to EU about banned gay prides in Minsk .
 EU politicians do not want to let Belarusians in, nor lower the visa fees, because the rights of sexual minorities are violated . The number of gays per capita in Belarus is too low, EU politicians say .
 Belarusian opposition does not mention a couple of thousand of Belarusians gays in its quarterly reports to the EU . No better EU's attitude towards Belarus can be expected in the near future, says EU .
 Conspiracy theory consistent with recurring pro-Kremlin narrative about EU's moral decay and aimed at discrediting the Belarusian democratic opposition .
 Belarus-related cases with this narrative can be seen here and here . Similar Belarus- related cases can be found in other Belarus-based cases .
 Belarusians have to pay a higher visa fee and to undergo more complicated application procedures for Schengen visas compared to the nationals of the countries with functioning VFAs .
 Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine have been granted a visa-free regime with the EU . Azerbaijan, Armenia and Russia have functioning VFAs with the European Union . Belarusians have a standard Schengen visa fee of EUR 35 .
 Minsk started negotiations over visa facilitation and readmission agreements in 2014 . Minsk began negotiations in 2014, later than other countries .
 VFAs do not contain conditions about gender equality or the numbers of homesexuals in the country . VFas do not include conditions on gender equality and the number of homes exuals .
 Belarus is among the countries with the lowest Schengen visa refusal rates . Belarus is one of the lowest countries in the world.
 In 2017 around 710,000 Schengen visas were issued in Belarus by EU countries' consulates . The refusal rate was as low as 0.3%, official EU statistics show .
Demonstrations number 19 and 20 of the Yellow Vests . Protesters claim to have been hit more violently than with tear gas usually used by the police .
 Some Twitter users relaying the results of medical tests that demonstrate cyanide poisoning . The chemical compound has created controversy .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative on the violent repression of the Yellow Vests protests . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin disinformation narrative.
 A Yellow Vest member posted a copy of her medical test and a comment suggesting she was poisoned after inhaling tear gas at demonstrations .
 The concentrations of thiocyanates found in the blood of this patient are compatible with concentrations observed in smokers . The concentrations would have to be at least 10 times higher to indicate poisoning .
 In 1993, Washington called for either a change in direction, or closure of the organisation .
 The Alliance invaded the Balkans under United States command. These slogans had a powerful effect and then the Alliance invaded.
 Kyiv has not advanced in the way of Europe, but only moved away from Moscow . The State Duma recalled that over the past five years, under the leadership of Petro Poroshenko, Kyiv hasn't advanced .
 Polish Orthodox Church confirms it does not recognise the autocephaly of the "new church" in Ukraine .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about the autocephaly and Ukrainian Orthodox Church . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin disinformation narrative.
 Such steps are necessary to either bring Poroshenko to power or for cancelling the elections . Poroshenko is currently in power.
 Conspiracy theory, consistent with recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about provocations and presidential election in Ukraine.
 The disinformation message appeared in relation to the statement of the Ukrainian minister of foreign affairs that Ukraine needs to get back its occupied territories Crimea and Donbas .
 No matter who wins the second round of the Ukrainian election, the country will fall apart .
 If Zelensky wins, Poroshenko will call on the nationalists to hit the streets . If Poroshenko wins, then Tymoshenko will calls people to the streets. If Zelenky wins.
 Ukraine will fall apart and the south eastern regions must become a part of Russia . Russia will become part of Ukraine.
 NATO's bombing in former Yugoslavia killed 2,500 people in 1999 . NATO bombing in ex- Yugoslavia killed more than 2,000 people .
 The war in former Yugoslavia was fought in the 1990s. See here for similar disinformation cases about the war .
 At the time of German reunification, NATO promised Gorbachev that it would not expand to the East in the case the USSR gave up the Warsaw Pact .
 A Canadian ship is standing in the Odessa port, all the sailors are sitting at the bar . Three days later someone from Donetsk is charged with the accusations . The Canadians respond .
 Poroshenko receives 53% of votes in the election . Three days later, Poroshenko delivers a speech and receives a speech .
Pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about provocations and Ukrainian presidential election. Consistent with recurring pro-K Kremlin disinformation narrative. Consististent with repeated pro-Russian disinformation narrative .
 Poland and Hungary are becoming increasingly disenchanted with the rule from Brussels . The two countries are also becoming increasingly disillusioned with the Brussels rule .
 Other member states could follow suit and accelerate the bloc's disintegration . UK's exit from the EU is a looming prospect for other member states .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative on the EU falling apart see previous examples . See previous examples here .
 In both Poland and Hungary, citizens supporting their country's EU membership outweigh those opposing it by overwhelming margins .
 87% of Poles and 79% of Hungarians opined that their country "has on balance benefited" from EU membership . 7% and 14% of those who disagreed disagreed .
All general indicators measuring support for the European Union have spiked since the UK referendum . Crucially, "nearly all general indicators" have spiked .
 Were an EU membership referendum held in a member state, an average 66% of voters would vote to remain .
 Poroshenko is about to stage a serious provocation as he has no other way to win the elections . Poroshenko has no way of winning the elections as he is not expected to win.
 Germany refused to participate in provocations in the Black Sea, while Canada agreed and sent its ships . Canada agreed to send its ships.
Without investments, it will be very difficult to revive the Ukrainian economy . Without investments, Ukrainian economy will be hard to revive .
 Recurrent disinformation narratives about the EU abandoning Ukraine and the collapsing Ukrainian economy are repeated .
 The European Union supports Ukraine in ensuring a stable, prosperous and democratic future for all its citizens .
 Since spring 2014, the EU has stepped up its support for economic and political reforms in Ukraine . The EU has also stepped up support for political and economic reforms.
 The EU is Ukraine's largest trading partner, accounting for more than 40% of its trade in 2016 . The EU's biggest trading partner is Ukraine, which is the largest in the EU .
 Ukraine accounts for 0.9% of the EU's total trade, with a turnover of €29. bn in 2016 . Ukraine is one of the most populous countries in the EU, with 1.5% of its trade .
 Total trade between the EU and Ukraine increased by 27. % from January to August 2017 vs January 2016 . The EU and the Ukraine are the largest two countries in the EU .
 In that period, exports from EU to Ukraine increased by 26.6% . imports from EU-Ukraine increased by 27.7% . In the same period, imports from the EU to Ukrainian increased by 25% .
 Georgia intends to join the NATO, after which it will become a military protectorate of the U.S. Georgia plans to join NATO, which will be a military protectionorate .
 With the war against Yugoslavia 20 years ago, NATO made the world a theatre of war . With the War against Yugoslavia, which was contrary to international law, NATO became a theater of war.
 Juan Guaido represents the fringe right segment of the anti-Maduro opposition . Guaido is the US-recognized interim president of Venezuela .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin narrative disinformation narrative about Juan Guaido and Venezuela . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin narrative narrative about Guaido.
 He is the President of the National Assembly of Venezuela . He stepped in as an interim president on the basis of the Venezuelan Constitution .
 Juan Guaido was recognized as the interim president of Venezuela by at least 47 countries . 14 countries expressed their ongoing support for Nicolas Maduro .
 No evidence testifying to shrinking crowds at Guaido rallies is supplied . Multiple opinion polls contradict the claim about the opposition leader's low public approval .
 Between 61% and 74.4% of respondents hold a favourable view of Juan Guaido, against Maduro's "all-time low" of 14%. Between 63. and 77.9% recognize Guaido as the legitimate president of Venezuela, against 5-14.5% recognizing
 Hundreds of angry farmers protested in Warsaw, demanding that the anti-Russian sanctions be lifted . They say the sanctions put farmers on the brink of a ruin .
 Polish farmers protested against sanctions but they have actually demanded Russia to lift its sanctions imposed on the EU . The sanctions prevent Polish farmers to sell their products in Russia .
 All demands of the protesting farmers, associated in the organisation Agrounia, can be found here .
 The words 'occupation' or 'annexation' are completely inapplicable to the Crimea neither de facto nor de jure . The words are not de facto or de facto .
 The self-proclaimed people's republics of Luhansk and Donetsk were repelled by Kyiv . Everything that happens in the region is a consequence of the policies of Ukraine's current leadership .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin narrative about the Russian aggression in Ukraine and on the illegal annexation of Crimea . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin narrative about Russian aggression and on Crimea .
 Russia started the war against Ukraine in 2014, violating Ukraine's territorial integrity by the illegal annexation of Crimea . Russia has been supporting and arming separatist groups in Eastern Ukraine .
 The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has stated that the situation within the territory of Crimea and Sevastopol amounts to an international armed conflict between Ukraine and the Russian Federation .
 The European Union does not recognise the illegal annexation of Crimea . Russia’s illegal actions remain a direct challenge to international security, says the EU .
 NATO leaders condemned in the strongest terms Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine . Also, at the NATO Summit in Wales in September 2014, they condemned the Russian military intervention .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin admitted Russia's military presence in Ukraine and Russian involvement in the occupation of Crimea in 2015 .
 Ukrainian administration, the secret service and the military are under U.S. control .
 EU's interference in Ukraine always comes across well as "support" Russia is called to respect Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narratives about the EU and U.S. relations with Ukraine and Ukraine and Ukrainian statehood .
 Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity are respected by most of the free world, but were violated by Russia in 2014 . Russia violated Ukraine's sovereignty, territorial integrity in 2014.
 The relations between the U.S. and Ukraine are bilateral relations between two independent countries . The United States and Ukraine have bilateral relations .
 The United States recognised Ukraine as an independent state on 25 December 1991 . The U.S. recognised the country as a state in 1991 .
 United States policy is centred on realising and strengthening a stable, democratic, prosperous, and free Ukraine . Ukraine is more closely integrated into Europe and Euro-Atlantic structures .
 In June 2014, EU and Ukraine signed an Association Agreement, including a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area . The agreement promotes deeper political ties and stronger economic links .
 Both Poroshenko and Zelensky are puppets of Western imperialism and enemies of Ukrainian people . Both are puppet of West imperialism, they are enemies of Ukrainians .
 Conspiracy theory, no evidence given about alleged Western influence over Ukrainian electoral process . No evidence given.
This is a recurring disinformation narrative about Western meddling in Ukraine's elections and Ukraine as a state under foreign control . This is a repeated disinformation narrative, says John Sutter .
Earlier cases naming Ukrainian presidential candidates United States puppets . See also earlier cases naming Ukraine presidential candidates .
 The OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media, Harlem Désir, wants Belarus' civil society to take part in discussion about reforms of media sector .
 Civil society actually means pro-EU activists, rather than the NGOs which promote the Union State between Russia and Belarus .
 If pro-EU activists are not included in the reforms process, then the OSCE will not consider citizens of Belarus as Europeans .
 This message is a conspiracy and consistent with pro-Kremlin narrative about EU strategy to organize a colour revolution in Belarus through financing of controlled NGOs . The message is consistent with the pro-kremlin narrative. This message was a conspiracy, says the author .
Excessive state control over the internet in Belarus was raised by Harlem Désir in his meetings with the Belarusian authorities . The aim to define the contours of reforms necessary for developing a more favourable and pluralistic media environment .
 Normally international organizations including the OSCE prefer seeing specialized NGOs as part of consultation process with state authorities, regardless NGOs' foreign policy priorities .
 The OSCE Representative meant the NGOs with a proven expertise in the issues related to media freedom and functioning of the media sector . In this case, the OSCE representative meant the NGO with aproven expertise in media freedom .
 OSCE has never conditioned the acknowledgement of a country as European by the participation of certain NGOs in the reforming process . OSCE never Conditioned acknowledgement of country as EU country by participation of NGOs .
 The OSCE's 57 participating states are located in Europe, northern and central Asia, and North America . In fact, the 57 states are in Europe.
 The Western community is concerned that the war in Ukraine could end after the Ukrainian presidential elections . The Ukrainian presidential election is expected to be held on Sunday .
 Integration with the EU would mean a complete loss of Belarus' independence . Belarus is now part of the EU .
 Belarus' independence is achieved through the development of the Union State between Russia and Belarus . The Union State is a state between the two countries .
 This message is consistent with pro-Kremlin narratives about negative effect of EU's membership on national sovereignty and generally about the EU's decay . This message was consistent with the pro-kremlin narratives.
 Belarus statehood is incomplete without a close union with Russia . It goes in hand with another narrative about the incomplete statehood .
Closer cooperation with the EU does not require partner states to share their sovereignty and lose their independence . Closer cooperation is not required to share sovereignty with partner states .
 The United States and the European Union are controlling the Presidential elections in Ukraine . The U.S. and European Union is controlling the elections .
 The direct influence of American and European politicians is not only on the election campaign, but also on the future outcome of the Ukrainian elections as a whole .
This is a direct intervention of the United States and the EU in the internal affairs of Ukraine . American or European observers in Ukraine are agents of foreign influence .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative around the Ukrainian elections. Recurring Pro-K Kremlin disinformation narrative about Ukrainian elections .
 U.S. experts have shown how to resist Russia's interference in the electoral process in Ukraine . Ukraine's elections will be transparent, they say .
 NATO experts also helped Ukraine in the field of security . This concerned not only military-technical assistance in the war with Russia, but also protection of Ukrainian cybersystems from foreign interference during the elections .
 NATO experts help the Ukrainian CEC in ensuring the stability and security of the electronic system from external influences .
 The EU analysts helped Ukraine in countering disinformation during the elections . The EU helped Ukraine fight disinformation during elections .