 Atlantic Council’s experts have you covered when major global news breaks . Fast ThinkingFast Thinking is a fast-thinking, forward-looking analysis .
 New AtlanticistNew Atlanticist is where top experts and policymakers at the Atlantic Council and beyond offer exclusive insight on the most pressing global challenges .
Inflection Points is a weekly column by Atlantic Council President and CEO Frederick Kempe . Inflection Points focuses on the global challenges facing the United States and how to best address them .
 UkraineAlertUkraineAlert is a comprehensive online publication that provides regular news and analysis on developments in Ukraine’s politics, economy, civil society, and culture .
 UkraineAlert sources analysis and commentary from a wide-array of thought-leaders, politicians, experts, and activists from Ukraine and the world .
 MENASource offers the latest news from across the Middle East, combined with commentary by contributors .
 IranSourceIranSource provides a holistic look at Iran’s internal dynamics, global and regional policies, and posture through unique analysis of current events .
 The Kremlin has succeeded in occupying Crimea and a large swathe of territory in eastern Ukraine’s borderland Donbas region .
 Russian influence over the remaining 92.8% of Ukraine has plummeted to lows not witnessed for more than three hundred years . At the same time, Russian influence in Ukraine has fallen to low levels .
 Ukraine's departure from Russia's sphere of influence has led to Ukraine's exit from Russia’s sphere of Influence .
Evidence of this historic shift can be seen throughout Ukrainian society . Evidence of this historical shift is seen throughout the country .
 Politically, support for Ukraine’s pro-Russian forces has collapsed to significantly less than half pre-war levels . Support for Ukraine's pro-Russia forces has fallen to less thanhalf pre- war levels .
 Ukrainian political parties that were capable of forming parliamentary majorities and winning presidential elections less than a decade ago now struggle to pass the 20% barrier . They are heavily reliant on an ageing electoral base driven by nostalgia for Soviet stability .
 This leaves little scope for any future revival in political fortunes . This leaves very little scope to any future political revival .
 Russia’s ability to dominate Ukraine economically has also greatly diminished . Russia's ability to control Ukraine economically is also diminished .
 Prior to the war, Russia accounted for around 30% of Ukraine’s annual trade balance . Prior to that war, the country's trade balance was 30% .
 Ukrainian trade with China and the European Union has flourished during the same period . Ukraine's relationship with China has flourished.
 Ukraine’s sizeable migrant workforce has voted with its feet, turning away from traditional Russian destinations since 2014 in favor of EU alternatives .
 post-Soviet Ukraine had been Russia’s greatest soft power success story. Prior to the outbreak of hostilities, post- Soviet Ukraine was Russia's greatest softpower success story .
 The formerly indivisible Russian and Ukrainian showbiz scenes have undergone a sharp separation due to the war . The showbiz scene has been split between the two countries .
 Many Russian celebrities are officially banned from Ukraine, while others are no longer welcome . Many celebrities are banned from the country .
 Ukrainian TV channels have drastically reduced their Russian-made content . Most Russian channels have been forced off the Ukrainian airwaves .
Radio station playlists now increasingly favor Ukrainian-language artists . Thanks to a quota system, radio stations now favor Ukrainian artists .
 With Russian social media sites blocked, millions of Ukrainians have switched to Facebook and other platforms .
 The establishment of an internationally recognized Orthodox Church of Ukraine independent of the Moscow Patriarchate has accelerated the already declining influence of the Russian Orthodox Church in Ukraine . The 2019 establishment of the internationally recognized church has accelerated its declining influence .
 Many in Moscow had hoped the spring 2019 election of Russian-speaking Jewish candidate Volodymyr Zelenskyy would reverse Russia’s catastrophic loss of influence in the country .
 Zelenskyy has launched a crackdown on remaining avenues of Kremlin influence in Ukraine . On the contrary, Zelensyy himself has launched an anti-Putin crackdown .
 He recently shut down Kremlin-linked Ukrainian TV channels . He has imposed a range of sanctions on Russia’s leading Ukrainian allies . Also adopted a strategy for the de-occupation of Crimea .
 The UkraineAlert offers the best Atlantic Council expert insight, from the UkraineAlert online publication and beyond . Use this weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on UkraineAlert .
 Ukrainian opinion polls consistently indicate majority support for future membership of both the European Union and NATO . It is difficult to imagine any way back for Russia.
 Vladimir Putin looks destined to enter the Russian history books as the man who lost Ukraine . Instead, Vladimir Putin appears to have lost Ukraine to Russia .
 The loss of Ukraine is a crushing blow to Putin’s dreams of imperial revival and his obsession with reversing the humiliations of Soviet collapse .
 It represents a resounding defeat for the “Russian World doctrine’s” doctrine . It has served as the unofficial ideology of the Putin regime for more than a decade . It also represents a Resounding defeat.
 Putin’s commitment to a so-called ‘Russian World’ that extends beyond the borders of modern Russia first began to take shape in the mid-2000s . It gained considerable momentum following Russia’'s 2008 invasion of Georgia .
 The "Russian World" encompasses populations throughout the former Czarist and Soviet empires . Russia is bound together with Russia by the Russian language, culture, and world view .
 Ukraine lies at the heart of Putin’s ‘Russian World’ and is central to his imperial ambitions . Ukraine is at the very heart of his “Russian World.’
 Ukraine's natural place within the ‘Russian World’ played a crucial role in Moscow’s decision to invade the country .
High levels of Russian public support for separatist republics created and maintained by the Kremlin in eastern Ukraine . This deep-rooted belief has since helped to maintain high levels of public support.
 "Russian World" ideology has been out of touch with Ukrainian public opinion for many years . In reality, the “Russian World’s” ideology has not been in touch with Ukraine for years .
 attitudes have hardened in response to the undeclared and ongoing Russo-Ukrainian War . This gap has widened significantly as attitudes have been hardened in recent years .
 Putin appears to have fallen victim of his own propaganda to such a extent that he genuinely believed he could orchestrate pro-Russian uprisings across Ukraine .
 The Kremlin's hybrid assault on Ukrainian sovereignty sparked a wave of popular opposition . It has had disastrous consequences for Russian interests in the country .
 For the time being, the uncertainties of the unresolved conflict in eastern Ukraine have delayed the inevitable fallout from this historic setback . The uncertainty of the conflict has delayed the outcome of the crisis .
 When the reckoning finally arrives, it promises to be painful for the Kremlin . However, when it comes to the Kremlin, it will be painful .
 modern Russian national identity is inextricably tied to notions of imperial destiny . The same is simply not true for Ukrainians, according to the author .
 The “Russian World’s doctrine did not strike a chord among a majority of Ukrainians even before the 2014 crisis . For this reason, the “ Russian World” doctrine didn’t strike a chords among Ukrainians, says the author .
 The trends have continued to strengthen since the onset of hostilities seven years ago . Predictably, these trends have continue to strengthen .
 Ukraine has slowly but steadily embraced democracy, leading to the emergence of a highly competitive if imperfect multi-party political system . After gaining independence in 1991, Ukraine has gradually embraced democracy .
 Ukrainians take free and fair elections for granted and have also grown used to robust criticism of the authorities and a pluralistic media environment .
Following constitutional changes adopted in 2020, Putin now looks set to remain president of Russia until 2036 . Meanwhile, following constitutional changes, Putin is expected to remain in power until 2020 .
 Ukrainians remain deeply dissatisfied with the country’s often dysfunctional democracy . Few have any desire for a return to a one-party system dominated by a dictator in the Kremlin .
 Ukrainian approval of Putin in international affairs fell from 56% in 2007 to just 11% in 2019 . Putin's approval of the Russian leader fell from a 56% approval in 2007.
 No wonder today’s authoritarian Russia has proven such a hard sell to Ukrainian audiences .
 Negative views of Russia were not particularly common among Ukrainians outside of western Ukraine . Prior to 2014, negative views of Russian were notparticularly common in Ukraine .
Since the outbreak of hostilities, such attitudes have become increasingly mainstream in all regions of the country . However, since the outbreak, these attitudes are increasingly mainstream .
 The number of Ukrainians holding positive views of Russia has collapsed from 80% to 40% according to data from the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology and Russia's Levada Center .
 A generation of young Ukrainians with no personal memories of the Soviet past now knows Russia primarily as an aggressor and an adversary .
 The seven-year war between the two countries represents a watershed event that has permanently transformed Russian-Ukrainian relations . Regardless of any future developments towards peace and reconciliation, the war remains a watershed.
 One of the central pillars of the ‘Russian World’ doctrine is the Russian Orthodox Church . The Orthodox Church is one of the main pillars of its doctrine .
 Russian Orthodox Church continues to exert formidable influence over Ukraine . On paper at least, the Russian Orthodox church continues to influence Ukraine .
 The Orthodox Church of Ukraine will become an independent Orthodox Church in 2019 . However, the influence was already in decline prior to the outbreak of hostilities in 2014 .
 The internationally unrecognized Kyiv Patriarchate had gained ground on the Russian Orthodox Church’s Moscow Patriarchate in the competition for Orthodox Ukrainian loyalties .
 Moscow Patriarchate supported military aggression against Ukraine in 2014 . This shift gained further momentum following the start of hostilities in 2014.
 Moscow Patriarchate priests have provoked numerous scandals over the past seven years . They refuse to officiate at funerals for fallen soldiers and reject public calls to honor the country's defenders .
 In May 2015, Moscow Patriarchate leaders sparked fury when they refused to stand in the Ukrainian parliament to honor Ukrainian soldiers killed in the war .
 Ukrainians question Moscow's attempts to link the modern Russian Orthodox Church with the ancient Orthodox traditions of the Kyiv Rus era . Ukrainians also question Moscow’s attempts to links the modern Orthodox Church to the ancient Ukrainian traditions .
 Survey conducted on eve of Ukraine's January 2019 breakthrough towards Orthodox independence . Majority of Ukrainians identified modern Ukraine as the successor to the Kyiv Rus legacy .
 The Russian Orthodox Church remains a powerful force in Ukrainian everyday life with millions of believers and thousands of parishes .
 Looking ahead, it cannot hope to play the kind of unifying role in pluralistic Ukraine that it performs inside Russia itself .
 Ukraine and Russia have diverged on a number of key historical questions ever since the Gorbachev era .
 Many Ukrainians do not agree that Crimea “was always Russian,” for example . Many Ukrainians also reject Russian attempts to claim the historical legacy of the Kyiv Rus .
 These competing approaches towards the common past are hardly surprising .
For centuries, Russia was able to dictate a highly russo-centric version of Ukrainian history . For centuries, Russian history was a very rus so-centric .
 Ukrainians faced wave after wave of russification policies designed to stifle Ukraine’s own statehood aspirations .
Russian history of repression makes it significantly harder for modern Ukrainians to identify with imperial past . But Russians do not share such qualms .
 Most Ukrainians now regard Stalin as a tyrant, but high numbers of Russians see him as a hero .
 In recent years, the space separating rival Ukrainian and Russian historical narratives has grown ever wider . The space separating Russian and Ukrainian historical narratives is now wider .
 Inevitably, conflicting accounts of the shared past remain central to the information war raging between Russia and Ukraine .
 The two post-Soviet nations have been pulling the two nations in different directions . This proved a grave miscalculation that has accelerated a number of existing trends .
 The entire ‘Russian World’ concept is rooted in outdated nineteenth century imperial myths that have no place in the twenty-first century .
 Russian-Ukrainian ties have had an incredibly damaging impact on Russia's ties . Such thinking has had a direct role in the drive towards war seven years ago and fueling the subsequent escalation of the conflict .
 This imperialistic approach now serves as a barrier to peace and possible future reconciliation, says the author . The author says it is now a "barrier to peace"
Until modern Russia is able to reject the toxic “Russian World’s doctrine, it will continue to poison relations with Ukraine and widen the divide .
 Russia must annex east Ukraine, says Kremlin TV chief Margarita Simonyan . The move signaled an escalation in Moscow’s seven-year hybrid war against Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s 2004 Orange Revolution is often overlooked but it is worthy of more attention as one of the great geopolitical turning points of the early twenty-first century that set the stage for today's Cold War climate .
 Ukraine bans Kremlin-linked TV channels on February 2 in a move portrayed as a major blow to Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine . President Zelenskyy shut down three Kremlin- linked TV channels.
 The step has sparked debate over the balance between national security and free speech . The step is the latest in a long line of steps taken in recent years .
 The views are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Atlantic Council, its staff, or its supporters .
 UkraineAlert is a comprehensive online publication that provides regular news and analysis on developments in Ukraine’s politics, economy, civil society, and culture .
 The Eurasia Center’s mission is to enhance transatlantic cooperation in promoting stability, democratic values and prosperity in Eurasia, from Eastern Europe and Turkey .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin addresses the crowd during a March 2018 event in Moscow . It will mark the fourth anniversary of the annexation of Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula .
 Russian military aggression against Ukraine has played a major role in driving the two formerly close post-Soviet nations apart . Now in its eighth year, Russia's military aggression has played an important role.
 The Council's best work is on the world's most important global issues . The Council has been working on the most important issues in the world for years .