 Professor Dugin’s nationalist ideology is certainly not the State nationalism as desired or interpreted by The Kremlin .
 Professor Dugin claims his removal from his post was directly linked to his support for Novoriussia . He claims that his removal was linked to the support of the country .
 Anybody who has read Professor Dugin’s “Fourth Political Theory may possibly consider his removal apt reward for having wasted hours of their life in reading it .
 Russian citizens raised to “hero’ status by the Russian media during the conflict in eastern Ukraine. By logical extension, the same question arises with regard to what to do with other Russian citizens .
 Neither the USA, the EU and its Member States, nor President Poroshenko are likely to hold off on action over eastern Ukraine . Decisions within The Kremlin need to be made swiftly this weekend .
 The Kremlin decision is to secure its borders to stop the flow of fighters and weaponry entering Ukraine . It does so knowing that the fighting paramilitary elements in Ukraine will not last long .
 Some will die there, others will be captured and jailed, and yet more will make it back to Russia . Some have fought on for a while longer before eventually leaving .
 If they are not killed or captured in Ukraine over the coming weeks, when they return to Russia, they will return as high profile nationalist heroes . Unless they are swiftly recast by the Russian media into far lesser beings prior to their return, they are likely to return to
 The return of well known nationalist leaders, popular enough to challenge the Kremlin narrative and definition of “nationalism, may be quite problematic . The return. of well-known nationalist leaders may be very problematic .
 Some will eventually realise they have been used by The Kremlin in eastern Ukraine . Some will be genuine, extreme, nationalists who will finally realise they are used .
 The Kremlin has a problem with well known leaders from the same fight to rally around . The Kremlin needs to get back in touch with Russia's leaders .
 Ukraine dropped its developmental anchor amongst the European nations of the EU with the signing of the Association Agreement and Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements .
 RADA ratification will undoubtedly happen very swiftly, putting Ukrainian political direction on a firm and legally binding foundation . RADA ratified will undoubtedly occur very swiftly .
 It is also a symbolic breaking of its Soviet legacy – which raises the issue of turning that symbolic break into real, tangible and comprehensive reforms . It is a symbolic break of the Soviet legacy .
 Ukraine is a nation that is being seen and felt to have immediate effects across society . It is an intense and fierce war on corruption and the imposition the rule of law and equity before it .
 The sacking of almost 17,000 employees within the Ministry of Internal Affairs is only part of that war, and the tip of the iceberg undoubtedly .
 17,000 Ministry of Internal Affairs personnel would have neither the desire or opportunity to engage in corruption in the first place . There are many models to chose from that would produce a significant reduction in the daily corruption the average Ukrainian faces .
 The ceasefire ends today in eastern Ukraine . Another undeclared war that will rumble on and on without some form of decisive action will continue .
 The World Cup is a major event in the history of the World Cup . It will be the first time the tournament has been held in London since 2004 . The event will take place at the end of the year .
 Ukraine, Georgia and Moldova signing EU Association Agreements and Deep and Comprehensive Trade Agreements . Ukraine currently taking by far the most grief of the three nations from The Kremlin . The other two nations are not going to be spared some form of retribution either .
Russia does not see any need for holding talks for the sake of talks, says Sergei Gubarev .
 The Kremlin's “realist’s perception of the world and how it should work may be fair enough .
 The Kremlin may be looking to look to events in either Russia or Moldova in September . Perhaps, however, it is also necessary to look at events in both countries .
 The Russian military may have no connection to the Russian military, although that may have been the case . It is not clear what would undoubtedly follow by way of western reaction .
 The 5+2 negotiations may just be enough to tip the scales away from another pro-European parliamentary term . September would provide for the negotiations taking place at the beginning of the electoral campaign cycle .
 Any new Communist majority would probably not undo any such agreements, it can be expected to slow implementation of these agreements down to a snails pace . However, any new communist majority would likely not undo such agreements .
 The Kremlin is unlikely to throw spanners into the 5+2 negotiations in July . It would seem premature considering the far greater impact that can be had by doing so at the start of parliamentary election campaigning in September .
Tomorrow, back to Ukraine and a signed AA/DCFTA with the EU and a simultaneously expiring ceasefire in the east . Tomorrow, back in Ukraine and back to the Ukraine and the EU with the European Union and a sign of a ceasefire .
 The election and inauguration of President Poroshenko was a few weeks ago . That normalisation has – arguably for some – been established .
 Putin yesterday let it be known he has asked the Russian upper house of parliament to rescind that authority . Naturally that authority will be rescinded.
 The Kremlin line that President Poroshenko’s election equals the normalisation of the political situation is likely to be the Kremlin line . There is no need for such an authority for Russian troops to enter Ukraine .
 Those threatened business sectors were/are to be technology, defence and finance . In case any reader is interested, readers will be able to read about the threats .
 President Putin's request to use troops in Ukraine was granted last time . The request from President Putin was granted by President Putin last time.
 There is no reason to believe it would be any more difficult or lengthy for him to gain that authority once again in the future .
 The cancellation of this authority means very little, despite any hyperbole to the contrary, says the author .
 Ukraine's borders would be more important to Ukraine at the present time . It would be the securing of Russian borders to stem the flow of fighters and increasingly advanced weaponry .
 Readers can either believe that Russia has lost control of its own borders – a clear indication of a weakened State – or that it is at the very least complicit in allowing such people and weaponry to travel through its territory and cross into Ukraine .
 The Kremlin is not yet so weak that it has lost control of its own borders . The choice is one or the other – and the Kremlin is one of the two – and The Kremlin has not yet lost control.
 There is little chance of any meaningful offensive until the end of September/early October . It should also be noted that due to current internal issues within the Russian Army itself, there is no chance of a meaningful offensive .
 Russia is in the midst of a conscript release and induction/training period . Russia has been in the middle of an induction/ training period .
 To mass 40,000 troops once more on Ukrainian borders will require a good deal of trained conscripts as well as the contract and elite troops .
 The Kremlin wants to mirror events leading up to the Ukrainian presidential elections . That October timing, parallels with the proposed new RADA elections in Ukraine .
 Russian troops passed its window of opportunity in mid-May, and it will not reappear until the end of September . The cancellation of this military authority is not a full scale or meaningful overt incursion into Ukraine .
 One should perhaps be mindful of these words – “Never fight with Russians’s’ – ‘Never fight’
 Otto Von Bismark: "On your every stratagem, they answer unpredictable stupidity. On yourEvery stratagam, they answers unpredictable stupidity"
 General Gerasimov raised some questions for the Russian military in March 2013 . Much of which has been seen to be put into play both in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 The Kremlin wants to be sure such people do not turn their attention toward it . These two very different versions of Russian nationalism will need to be reconciled somehow .
 The EU, its Member States and the U.S. have also had the opportunity to try out a fairly new strategy against a sizable aggressor . This is one of targeted financial and economic warfare that increases in intensity .
 The European Council have been quite wise in the timing, says the European Council . Despite the screeching of the geese and the braying of asses across the social and main stream media calling for immediate introduction of Stage III sanctions .
 To have implemented Stage III sanctions prior to the signing of EU-Ukrainian agreements would have presented the Kremlin with a “nothing to lose’ scenario. To have implementation of Stage 3 sanctions before the signing would have given the Kremlin a ‘nothing to lost
Keeping powder dry until signatures are placed on agreements has left all parties options . Keeping that Stage III powder dry is a good way for all parties to sign agreements .
 Stage III sector sanctions will probably now be left on the table for some considerable time . But they are unlikely to be implemented if the Kremlin decides to secure its borders over the coming week .
 Sanctions imposed in relation to Crimea seem destined to remain in place for many years to come . Sanctions have been in place since the Crimea region was annexed in 2004 .
 One feckless regional leader is replaced by another as time goes by . They are likely to expand by way of names on the list .
 It will undoubtedly be expensive financially and require a great deal of unrelenting political energy . Even with a willing Ukrainian partner, it will be expensive financial.
Only the deluded will consider the Kremlin threat to Ukraine to be diminishing . In the meantime, only the deluding will consider The Kremlin threat.
 Ukraine is now – and will remain – a front line State for Kremlin shenanigans. To be crystal clear, Ukraine will remain - a front-line State for the next decade .
 Ukraine would be very wise to use this time to prepare for a possible return to such a threat by the Autumn . It may appear that Russian military aggression toward Ukraine is removed from the equation .
 The U.S. has had a major cleansing of its incredibly infiltrated military and law enforcement ranks during this period too .
 Perfection will not be achieved of course, but real improvements can be achieved even in such a limited time frame .
 Such time is not to be wasted whether tensions rise again in the Autumn – or not in the autumn .
 This one far longer than normal, but that reflects a return to the world stage of geopolitics in almost every region of the globe . This one of the world's most significant changes in the past decade .
 Many entries in this blog have been written over the years . The blog has been written by many people over the past decade .
 Rule of law and institutional support a continually banged drum. “There is an equally – if not more – important need for ‘the west’ to support the Ukrainian institutions of state quite separately from the government,’s spokesman says .
 Ukraine's political class should plant a “keep off the grass’ sign for the political class of Ukraine. Now is a time for those institutions to firmly plant a 'keep off grass' sign .
 The “west’s’ need to actively encourage the institutions to do so – now – immediately – today . The ‘West’ needs to encourage the ‘west” need to help them, says the author .
 The most obvious requirements still remain the most obvious now. Simply stating the most blatant requirements are still the most common now .
 European Council aims to support institutions of state – and in particular the judiciary and police . It is encouraging to read something from the European Council that specifically aims at supporting the institutions of State .
 Euromaidan will not be the political class that prematurely ends any such revolution within Ukrainian society . The country's political class will not have a revolution that ends in a revolution .
 The surviving political class will continue to cast a wary eye and receptive ear toward civil society, for fear of a repeat of February’s events .
 The changes demanded by society will be prematurely ended by the failure to change the profiles, culture, and systems within judicial system and police . The changes will be premature ended by society's failure to make changes .
 In short the rule of law and equality before it – or lack of it – will end any societal revolution far swifter than current political elite .
 The political class may set the legislative/constitutional scene for an independent judiciary and accountable police force . But once done the expectation of the judiciary to be politically led need end.
 Civil society need to continue highlighting corrupt judges and police officers. Civil society needs to continue to highlight corrupt judges.
 Society need refrain from trying to buy judicial results or paying off the police . Society need to refrain from buying judicial results and paying off police .
 The judiciary and police need to be encouraged to voluntarily clean their own house before being forced to do so . The judiciary should be encouraged – robustly if necessary – to voluntarilyClean their own home .
 As Utopian as it would be to sack everybody and start again, these institutions must still continue to work . As U topian, the U.S. should be able to sack all of its institutions, it should be to start again .
 Only the most serious of recent corrupt/questionable verdicts need to be investigated . offenders prosecuted to send a message within the judiciary, prosecutors offices, public defenders and police .
Thereafter all current and future nefarious activities investigated and prosecuted as standard procedure . Thereafter allCurrent and future activities investigated as normal procedure .
 Changes to institutional structure can be made almost overnight, but there is also a need to recognise that in the pursuit of the best solutions, throwing out the good and being left with the bad is not a wise course to take .
Results take time to manifest themselves and must be given time to do so . Results take time. Results must be shown how they will manifest themselves .
 The question is how much time to give when measuring the results to define success – or failure – or success .
 A wise government may decide to share such evaluation time lines with the public . Government may make suggestions to the public about how they can support the reforms .
 To be blunt, in the current circumstances, it is not wise to sack everybody when other actors are trying to set up an alternative State within Ukrainian territorial borders .
 It would perhaps be remiss to provide those people with trained and embittered judiciary and police capable of setting up new institutions within an alternative State . It would be a remiss for those with trained, embitters judiciary and Police to set up a new state .
 EU support by way of a CSD Mission certainly cannot harm the necessary processes of reform, says the EU . EU support is needed to remove political dependency and internal institutional reforms themselves, says EU official .
 The support of the Council of Europe, OSCE and Venice Commission recommendations also exist and are there to be utilised . The support for reform also exists, according to the Venice Commission .
 Ukraine is not the first and will not be the last nation to undergo an effective rule of law evolution . Ukraine will be the first nation to have an effective law evolution. Ukraine is the first country to have a law change .
 Some nuanced issues may need tweaking specifically to Ukraine . But a generally successful framework is already known, tried and tested for such reforms .
 The CSD Mission has the energy and presence in Ukraine to monitor recommendations, implementation and results . It is dependent upon Ukraine to accept and make the most of the assistance being offered .
 Putin has anointed his close friend Viktor Medvedchuk as his “peace envoy to eastern Ukraine’s eastern Ukraine . Medveschuk is a close friend of President Putin's and Putin's .
 Mr Medvedchuk became the permanent Kremlin whisperer in ex-President Yanukovych’s ear . He was also one of the most despised men in Ukraine at the same time .
 The “Ukrainian Choice’s public movement media campaign delighted in the U.S. turn of President Yanukovych . The then president took flight from the Ukraine .
 President Putin is also the god father of Viktor Medvedchuk’s daughter . Putin is the father of the president's daughter .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is the Kremlin's “peace envoy’s ‘peace envoy.’ It displays limited intent from a Kremlin that has nothing to gain by attaining anything like a genuine peace .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is trying to gain some public traction within Ukrainian political circles . He says this is an opportunity to try and gain public traction once more within the political circles.
Ambassadors he expects to meet and discuss eastern Ukraine remains unclear . Quite which ambassadors he expect to meet will discuss Ukraine .
 The People’s Republics have no ambassadors that any Ukrainian ambassador would meet for it implies recognition .
 Mr Medvedchuk as a Ukrainian citizen would be no problem. Having a chat with him as a citizen would not be a problem .
 President Putin's "peace envoy" presents little problems either, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he has a chat with him as Putin's 'peace envoy'
 Should he don any form of official appointment from either region within any unrecognised administrations – it is the end of any role as interlocutor .
 OSCE will of course meet with Mr Medvedchuk – it is within their remit . OSCE is in its remit.
 OSCE has already publicly stated that it supports President Poroshenko’s plan and asks all to support it . OSCE says it supports Poroshenko's plan.
 If President Poroshenko's plan works then it works to the benefit of Ukraine – but not to the benefits of Kremlin interests . If President's plan does not work then it will work for Ukraine, not for the Kremlin .
 Nobody should be under any illusions that the Kremlin will continually seek to undermine and subvert Ukraine for a decade or so to come.
 Mr Medvedchuk will no doubt be speaking to Boris Lozhkin, the new head of the Presidential Administration .
 Mr Lozhkin is not about to abandon the presidential plan or sell out President Poroshenko for the sake of Mr Medvedchuk . However, he is not going to abandon his presidential plan .
 The first to try and paint a picture of Kremlin attempts to deescalate the situation in eastern Ukraine . The first attempt is to avoid further sanctions from the Europeans in particular .
 The second is to provide a well known Ukrainian voice parroting the Kremlin line once more . The second will be to provide the voice of a well-known Ukrainian.
 Promoting Viktor Medvedchuk back onto the Ukrainian political stage, a tried, tested and trusted voice may gain some traction – or not .
 The game plan bonus should Mr Medvedchuk gain a little traction in the Ukrainian media, to erode the presidential plan .
 As unlikely as all of this is to succeed, it will be tried nonetheless, it is not likely to succeed .
 RADA needs to work for as long as it can have even the slightest drag effect. Perhaps it need only work until new RADA elections are held .
 Kremlin attempt to apply a very thin veneer of “peaceful deescalation’ for the sake of appearances, while continuing to try and undermine Ukrainian direction westward .
 Sometimes sideshows make it all the way to Broadway . Nevertheless, as with all sideshow, watching it can be an interesting way to pass the time now.
 You are currently browsing the Odessablog's Blog blog archives for June 2014 .