 Russia’s confrontational approach towards Ukraine and the West has made energy security bells ring in many European capitals and in Brussels . The Ukraine Crisis Jakub M Godzimirski has madeEnergy Security bells ring.
 Ukraine is the country through which more than 50 per cent of Russian gas destined for the EU is shipped . Russia is the most important external supplier of energy to the EU, according to the European Union .
 The EU learnt earlier, in 2006 and 2009, how tensions in gas relations between Russia and Ukraine may influence the European gas market .
 The EU is on course to change its energy policy and relations with Russia . This time, however, it will change its security and limit the possibility of energy blackmail .
 Russia's energy cooperation with the EU has created strong interdependence between the two . Russia depends on access to the EU energy market that generates the lion's share of Russia’s revenue from the sale of energy commodities .
 Such a strong interdependence should result in better political relations and smoother cooperation in other fields, but it has not prevented the outbreak of the current crisis, says the author .
 Russia has created a set of negative incentives that prompted Russia to intervene militarily in Ukraine and annex Crimea, which in turn has forced the EU to react to this blatant violation of international law and Russia’s undermining of the existing international order .
 This document presents data on the volume of energy trade between the two countries . The document was published by the British government .
 Russian mineral product exports reached $377 billion in 2013 . The value of Russian mineral products reached $ 377 billion in the year .
 Russia needs an oil price higher than $117 in order to balance the state budget . At the same time, approximately 50% of Russia’s state budget revenues are generated from the production, sale and export of energy commodities .
 The Russian-Ukrainian crisis has affected the EU's energy security and energy policy in the long-term . It is important to examine the elements of EU energy security that have been at risk since the outbreak of the open conflict in March 2014 .
 affordability means not just lower, but also stable, prices, and equitable access to energy services . Availability relates to the relative independence of and diversification of energy fuels and services .
 Stewardship focuses on the question of sustainability, ensuring energy systems are socially acceptable and not harmful to the environment .
 Efficiency has to do with improved performance and the deployment of more efficient energy equipment and changes in the behaviour of producers and consumers .
 First is the question of the impact of energy use on the competitiveness of the EU’s economy .
 Second is the question of the sustainability of energy production and use . Third is the issue of energy use and energy production .
 A player that has to import 53% of energy to cover its own energy needs. Last is the question of security of supply .
In the case of the ongoing crisis, the question of energy availability, especially of gas, is central . Other elements of the EU’s energy security may also be affected .
 Russian actions in Ukraine may help the EU to promote renewable energy as an alternative to the sources supplied by Russia . Russia's actions may improve the overall sustainability of the European energy mix .
 LNG supplies to Europe as an alternative to Russian gas may in the medium and long-term perspective change the European gas market . More players compete for shares and resulting in lower gas prices for European consumers .
 This in turn could make energy more affordable and improve the competitiveness of the European economy . This could also improve the economy's competitiveness .
Tensions in relations with Russia may also boost the work on building a single energy market and development of energy infrastructure .
 The Ukrainian crisis has had a negative impact on the EU’s energy security, as it has contributed to severely damaging relations between the EU and Russia .
 More than 50% of gas exported from Russia to the EU has to be shipped through Ukraine . Ukraine has been de facto at war with Russia since Russia’s military intervention in Crimea .
 Russia's gas debt to Ukraine is the biggest problem in Ukraine's gas market . Russia has not agreed on future supplies of gas from Russia to Ukraine . Ukraine is in the midst of a crisis of gas shortages .
 Russia stopped gas supplies to Ukraine on 15 June 2014 . The lack of agreement on those issues resulted in Russia stopping gas supplies in Ukraine .
 There was also a real danger that gas supplies to the EU could also be disrupted, as in the previous Ukrainian gas crises in 2006 and 2009 .
 Slovakia and Bulgaria face most critical situation as they receive all their Russian gas through Ukraine . Six EU Member States that depend on Russia for their gas imports could be affected .
 The Russian–Ukrainian crisis that broke out in February 2014 has lifted the issue of energy security higher on the EU political agenda . The Russian-Ukrainia crisis has also lifted the issues of energySecurity higher on EU political agendas .
 The EU published its European Energy Security Strategy on 28 May 2014 . The report was accompanied by an In-depth study of European Energy security .
 Immediate actions aimed at increasing the EU's capacity to overcome a major disruption during the winter of 2014/2015 .
 Strengthening emergency/solidarity mechanisms, including coordination of risk assessments and contingency plans, protecting strategic infrastructure . Strengthen emergency/ solidarity mechanisms.
Improving coordination of national energy policies and speaking with one voice in external energy policy . Improving coordination with national energy policy and speaking in external policy .
 EU and U.S. impose restrictive measures on energy cooperation between Russian and Western energy companies working in the deep-water and offshore areas of the Russian Arctic . Another factor influencing current and future energy relations.
 Restrictions on access to Western capital and credit for Russian energy sector companies are also a factor to be reckoned with .
 The measures are aimed primarily at new projects in the Russian oil sector . Russian partners need Western funding, expertise and technology .
 Russia may delay completion of projects that are to help Russia maintain current level of oil production . Such measures do not, for the time being, have a direct impact on oil flows between Russia and the EU .
 Russian reactions to the West’s sanctions have also contributed to raising the stakes in energy relations . Russia's reaction to the sanctions has also contributed.
 The increasing tension between Russia and the West has boosted the Russian leadership’s work on diversification of Russian energy markets . A number of energy deals with China have been concluded, in order to increase the share of the Asian market in Russian energy exports .
 The Sila Siberii project was concluded in May 2014 . The first deal, for the supply of 30 bcm/year of gas from eastern Siberia, was concluded .
 The second, relating to the construction of the Altai gas pipeline linking Russian gas fields in western Siberia with the Chinese market, will increase Russian gas exports to China by another 30 bcm/year .
 Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, announced in December 2014 that the South Stream project that was to supply the EU with 63 bcm of Russian gas was to be shelved . In response to the EU's policy, Russia's and EU's transit dependence on Ukraine is to be
 Russia is trying to offset this decision by creating a gas hub in Turkey close to the border with Greece . It would open the way for an alternative access route to the EU in the future .
 The EU official statements on energy security were made during the Ukrainian crisis . They proposed a set of measures to be taken to map and reduce the risks to energy security .
 The European Commission carried out energy security stress tests to simulate a disruption in the gas supply for the coming winter . The EU’s energy system could cope with such risks .
 The stress tests were conducted in 38 countries during this summer and autumn . The European Commission’s launch of the European Energy Security Strategy in May 2014 .
 Russian gas imports to the EU for a period of one month, and of six months, were considered . Four scenarios were considered during this exercise, including a complete halt to Russia's gas imports .
 The tests demonstrated that supply disruption would have a substantial impact on the EU, and particularly on EU countries in Eastern Europe, and other members of the Energy Community .
 All countries cooperated with each other in the event of a six-month disruption . protected consumers would receive the supplies required even in the case of a disruption .
 stress tests also resulted in some recommendations on how to deal with the situation in the months to come . The stress tests were conducted to help ensure supplies and a better functioning internal energy market .
 Countries should follow a market-based approach, avoid interventionist measures, and increase energy coordination with each other, it was recommended .
Short-term behavioural changes should be encouraged to boost energy efficiency and lower demand . Public authorities and industry should share responsibility through the implementation of the EU’s Security of Gas Regulation .
 The EU was also to engage with its international partners to develop new solidarity mechanisms for sharing natural gas and the use of gas storage facilities . The EU is also to develop a new solidarity mechanism to share natural gas.
 Russia and Ukraine sign a new deal on gas supplies . EU also decides to play a role in making Russia, Ukraine sign new deal . In order to reduce the risk of gas supply disruption, the EU also plays a role .
 The deal concluded on 30 October 2014 solved some of the most burning short-term issues in their gas relations, without solving the most crucial medium and long-term questions .
 The EU's strong energy dependence on Russia has reduced the immediate risks to the EU’s gas supplies . The most crucial medium and long-term risks to EU energy security are yet to be properly addressed .
 The EU also decided to improve its energy governance by making energy policy one of the areas on which the new European Commission is to focus . In response to the Ukrainian crisis, the EU decided to focus on energy policy .
 This new approach is reflected in a new structure and new goals assigned to those responsible for designing and implementing the common EU energy policy . The new approach was reflected in the new structure of the EU Energy Policy .
 Maroš Šefčovič was appointed new vice-president of the Commission for Energy Union . He was the former Slovak ambassador to the EU and graduate of the Moscow State Institute of International Relations .
 He is to steer and coordinate the work of several commissioners . His cooperation is crucial for making the EU’s common energy policy more comprehensive and more efficient .
 His cooperation with the commissioners for climate action and energy, transport, will be crucial for the EU’s future energy policy and security, he says .
 New commission will have to pay special attention to areas identified as most crucial in recent study on energy security .
Conclusions Russian actions in Ukraine have challenged the very basic norms promoted by the EU . Conclusions Russian action has gravely undermined the existing international order .
 Russia's violation of international norms in Ukraine has had consequences for the EU’s thinking about energy cooperation with Russia . The EU's thinking about Russia's energy cooperation has also had consequences .
 The Russian-Ukrainian crisis has also made the EU more aware of the risks to which its energy security is exposed, partly due to the lack of diversification of suppliers and supply routes, and even more so because of its dependence on imports from Russia .
 Russia is re-emerging as a power in Europe, but more action is needed to translate those new ideas into an efficient energy policy . Russia's energy policy is becoming more efficient, according to experts .
 The EU had apparently lost hope that its energy interests could converge with those of Russia .
 Russia's decision to withdraw from the Energy Charter Treaty in 2009 was a clear sign that the EU's policy of building a common legal space for energy cooperation between producers and consumers had not been successful .
 It was hoped Russia could still be persuaded to act in a rational manner and see energy cooperation with the EU as a win-win game . It was however hoped that Russia would still be persuade to act.
 The EU launched its Third Energy Package and tried to project its regulatory power in that manner . Russian and other players wanted to have access to the highly profitable EU energy market .
 The increasingly assertive Russia, ruled since 2012 by Putin, was not very receptive to those attempts . Putin decided to act as a revisionist power, undermining the stability of the existing postCold War order .
 Russian actions in Ukraine have forced the EU and many Member States to seriously reconsider their energy relations with Russia . EU and Member States must design and implement measures to address short, medium and long-term energy-related challenges .
 The EU decided that the time was ripe to improve its energy governance, as a response to new energy security challenges emerging from the Russian-Ukrainian crisis . The EU also decided to improve the energy governance of the EU .
 The EU institutional machinery has been reset and the new energy policy towards Russia is being designed . The new energy policies towards Russia are being designed, says the EU .
 The EU is forced to reinvent its energy partnership with Russia . The trust upon which attempts to build relations between the two over the past 20 years seems to be dead and gone .
 The EU will most probably seek to reduce its energy dependence on Russia further, by trying to attract new suppliers, reducing its energy consumption . Other sources of energy available locally, most probably renewables and other more environmentally friendly and less politically challenging types of energy .
 There is no doubt whatsoever that the Russian-Ukrainian crisis has dealt a heavy blow to EU-Russian political relations . The crisis will continue to have a mostly negative impact on these relations in years to come, says CNN.
 The shape of the new EU energy policy is still unclear, but the crisis has given a new lease of life to the European debate on the future of the European energy system .