 The IMPORTANCE of 2016 RUSSIAN ELECTIONS is posted and can be watched free on YouTube . The IMPortance of the 2016 R USSIAN elections will be posted and watched free .
 Latest events in Syria include the U.S. bombing of Syrian army positions and killing over 60 people . Kerry/Lavrov Syria talks and UN clashes have been held in Syria .
 Lada will give her prediction on whether there will ever be a direct military confrontation between the U.S. and Russia .
 Lada Ray’s original take on what is going on among U.S. elites . Why there is so much flip-flopping and inconsistency and how all this is connected with the developing Earth Shift and the crash of the United States Empire .
 How Russian voters were prevented from voting in Ukraine and the ‘funny way’ in which it backfired.
 What is happening with gas and coal and how Ukraine will survive this winter. What's happening in Ukraine? What's going to happen with gas, coal and coal?
 Can the Crimea precedent help and how PMR is different from Crimea or Donbass? Can the Crimean precedent help? Can PMR be different?
Why pro-West parties had a crushing loss, why United Russia won, and more. Why pro- West parties had crushing losses, why they had more to do .
 PART 2 is all about Russian Elections 2016, including the overview of main 4 parties, their platforms and their platforms . United Russia won back the constitutional majority .
Pro-West ‘neo-liberal’ parties received almost zero votes . We’ll talk in detail how more and more women are elected .
 2018 Russian Presidential Elections will take place in Russia's first presidential elections .
Why there is a fight between patriotic parties and organizations? Why there is presently a fight among patriotic parties.
 United Russia learned its lesson and what it did differently this time this time. How United Russia learn its lesson?
 The explosive ADDENDUM will talk about the recent arrest of the police colonel Zakharchenko on charges of corruption . The explosive addendum will discuss the arrest of ZakhARChenko on corruption charges .
 In his possession was found a stash of 8bln rubles and 1. tons of U.S. dollars .
 What is not being said and what this colossal cash stash was planned to be used for is not known . What is being said is not what was planned for the stash .
 Ukraine junta and USA's role in that failed plan. What was being planned after September 18, Ukraine's junta.
 LadaRay.info, Pridnestrovie, Russia, Russian Duma Elections, Ukraine, United Russia, USA, Vladimir Putin.com, Lada Ray Youtube channel, LADARay.com and Lada ray.info .
 As to U.S. elections and Russia’s influence, there will be a piece on that in October .