 Former imperial states are reluctant to see emerging powers shape the global agenda . To some, it implies a world dominated by former imperial states .
 A term from the Cold War could exclude democracies far from the North Atlantic, such as Australia, Brazil or Japan .
 That parts of the West from time to time fail to uphold these ideals does not make them less important . The West's failure to uphold the ideals doesn't make them more important, says the author .
 European Union, an important pillar of the West, is fragile, so is the rules-based global order .
 The West has suffered several reverses since 2003 . The world looks a lot uglier than it did in 2003, since when the West had suffered reverses .
 The messy consequences of the invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq tarnished the reputations of the U.S. and its close allies .
 The financial crisis of 2008 encouraged hostility to American-led globalisation . So did the financial crisis.
 The Arab spring from 2011 onwards led many to conclude that the Middle East was not ready for Western political values .
 It has become more politically repressive at home and more assertive in its neighbourhood . It has also become more aggressive in its neighbourhoods .
 China deploys its economic muscle to ensure that governments temper their criticism of its domestic politics and refuse to meet the Dalai Lama .
 Some of Russia's top military strategists talk in a relaxed way about using tactical nuclear weapons . They appear to regard them as merely conventional weapons .
 The government in Moscow thinks that large countries are entitled to establish spheres of influence in their vicinity . The government says neighbours should neither criticise them nor have independent foreign policies .
 To many Russians, it is obvious that the annexation of Crimea is justified by their country's historical ties, size and power, whatever international law says .
 Many Chinese view their assertion of sovereignty over islets in the South China Sea as superior to any ruling by the international courts .
Several of Russia's and China's neighbours are scared of them . Several of Russia’s and China’S neighbours are, unsurprisingly, scared.
 A number of important emerging powers, such as Brazil, India and South Africa, make a point of not supporting democratic causes internationally . The South Africa and Brazil, though democratic at home, are among the countries that make the point .
 Aung San Suu Kyi was imprisoned in Burma when she was imprisoned . She has generally followed strongly “realist’s foreign policies, for instance, by not backing her when she is imprisoned .
 They have avoided criticising Russia’s annexation of Crimea or its military adventures in the Donbas .
Anti-American feelings that influence some of these countries’ elites are just as evident in certain European social-democratic parties . Their unwillingness to line up beside Western powers that not long ago ruled or exploited them is perhaps understandable .
 The current Western model of development, based on pluralism and human rights, is outmoded . The reluctance of many emerging powers to support the liberal order has strengthened the hand of some .
 The presidency of Barack Obama, elected in 2008, has not done much to help the West . Obama's presidency has not helped the West.
For very understandable reasons, he reacted against the failed interventions of his immediate predecessor . He wanted minimal military entanglements overseas .
 He has done little to promote democracy and human rights through U.S. foreign policy or military intervention, he has said . He has been accused of failing to promote human rights in the United States .
 His patient pragmatism has delivered tangible achievements, such as détente with Cuba and the deal with Iran to limit its nuclear programme .
 Moscow, Beijing and many Arab capitals thought Obama was a weak leader who could be pushed around . But his refusal to punish President Bashar al-Assad for crossing the red line of using chemical weapons reinforced the perception in Moscow and Beijing that he was weak .
 The Centre for European Reform was founded in the late 1990s . It was an almost unremitting success story about enlarging the club and building a single currency .
Financial crisis exposed major flaws in the construction of the euro . But the financial crisis exposed big flaws in construction of euro .
 The eurozone's leaders have taken important steps forward, such as creating a bailout fund and parts of a banking union . But they have erred in overemphasising austerity, thereby damaging growth and increasing the burden of debt .
 The recent refugee crisis has made the EU look reactive, poorly led and acrimonious . The EU is now looking reactive and poorly led .
 More than a million refugees and illegal migrants entered the Schengen area of passport-free travel last year . More than one million refugees, illegal migrants and refugees entered the area last year.
 Several governments have imposed temporary border controls in an effort to stem flows of refugees .
Schengen will not survive without drastic, sovereignty-eroding reforms . Schengen's sovereignty will not be able to survive without radical reforms .
Most important, the external border needs strengthening, and not only with more effective physical barriers . Most important, it needs stronger physical barriers, and more effectivephysical barriers, says David Cameron .
 The several EU databases that cover criminal records, fingerprints of asylum-seekers and visa information are not currently connected .
 Police forces and officials overseeing border areas cannot easily access these databases or alerts on suspected terrorists . Some of those involved in the Paris attacks in November were able to enter the Schengen area without being detained .
 EU needs to speed up creation of reception centres near Schengen frontier where asylum-seekers’ applications can be processed .
 Those rejected need to be sent home swiftly, to deter others from making the journey . Those rejected must be sent back swiftly .
 A scheme for sharing out bona fide asylum-seekers is essential in some capitals . Most of them will end up in Sweden and Germany .
 EU leaders must do what they can to tackle the root causes of the refugee flows, says the EU . EU leaders need to address the root cause of refugee flows.
 Peace in Libya would help; a reconciliation between the two rival governments is a diplomatic possibility .
 A ceasefire in Syria remains a distant prospect, but conditions in refugee camps in the Middle East could be improved .
 President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has promised to clamp down on migrant flows in return for EU giving money and visa-free access . Erdogan has also promised to take refugees from Turkish camps .
 EU leaders are in fact moving ahead with several of the measures required to save Schengen .
 Schengen agreed to create a new border force and coastguard to strengthen its external border in December .
 European Parliament had been blocking links between databases on grounds of privacy . The European Parliament has become more co-operative .
 There are still big divisions among the member states on what to do about the refugees . But there are still large divisions among member states.
 EU leaders will do just enough to stop Schengen falling apart, but not enough to make it successful and confidence-inspiring .
 Schengen area could cease to exist in its present form, or simply shrink . But the area could also shrink, or just shrink .
 Both the euro and the refugee crises have already done much to nourish anti-EU populism across much of Europe . Both the Euro and refugee crises are already helping feed anti- EU populism .
 The slowing of the EU's geographical expansion has weakened the Union’s ability to influence its neighbourhood .
 membership had risen from 15 to 28 countries between 2004 and 2013 . Serbia, Albania, Kosovo, Macedonia, Moldova and Ukraine were among the countries in the group .
 The EU’s failure to put sufficient energy and resources into its neighbourhood policy has contributed to the instability afflicting parts of eastern Europe and the Arab world .
 The EU is a long way from disintegrating, but its weakness and unpopularity matter for all those who care about the West, its values and its contri­bution to global order .
 The Union has brought peace and stability to its own members and much of the European continent . The EU has brought stability and peace to its members and many of the continent .
 It is a beacon of Western values – democratic government, rule of law and market economics . It does its best to make its neighbours respect those values, sometimes successfully, sometimes not .
 The EU is a muddled and messy organisation but is in essence a community of law . The EU's chief mission is to spread the rule of law, and its chief mission was to spread law .
 The EU can act alone or in alliance with the US, often tempering the unilateralist instincts of the Americans . The European Union can also act alone.
Without the EU, the West would be a much more American concept – with important satellites such as Britain, France, Germany and Japan following in the Americans’ wake .
 The Europeans are strong believers in global governance, another unfashionable but important concept . The Europeans believe in the concept of global governance .
Without effective international institutions and rules, strong countries can bully weak ones . They understand that, without effectiveinternational institutions, strong nations can bully weaker ones .
 The U.S. is often lukewarm in its commitment to global governance, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It is not surprising that the Americans are luke warm in their commitment to international governance .
 The Europeans play a pre-eminent role in the UN, the international financial institutions and the World Trade Organisation . It is the Europeans who play an important role in global financial institutions .
 The United States is sometimes slack in paying its UN dues and more often prepared to act militarily without the authorisation of the UN Security Council . An IMF reform will allow China’s voting power to surpass that of Belgium .
 The EU has pioneered global efforts to limit carbon emissions since the 1990s . The US, China and India have often dragged their feet on efforts to tackle climate change .
 The EU and its member states have taken the lead in forging a host of arms control agreements . The United States has boycotted those on landmines and cluster munitions .
 The United States has not ratified either the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty or the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea . The U.S. continues to spurn the International Criminal Court .
 Global governance has little connection to the real world, but it matters. Cynics may see global governance as high-minded hot air .
 A lawless world is inherently dangerous, especially when, as is the case now, so much is in flux . A lawlessness world is inherent dangerous, says the author .
 Strong, emerging powers are less likely to frighten neighbours if they are constrained by institutions of the sort that did not exist in Europe in 1914 .
 The EU gets this, and so does the U.S. sometimes, says the United States . The lack of effective regional institutions in east Asia is worrying, the EU says .
 EU exists, it will bang the drum for global governance and implore the Americans to be more respectful of it . So long as the EU exists.
 The EU is also important in resolving many conventional foreign policy issues . The EU has been a key part of the European Union's success in the past .
 The EU works through unanimity and so can act only when all its members agree . In this domain the EU works by unanimity .
 Its best-ever foreign policy was to enlarge into the former communist countries of central and eastern Europe . It was to expand into the ex-communist countries.
 Eleven of them have now joined the EU, having to jump through a series of hoops before being allowed in . They have now been allowed into the EU.
 Michael Gove and Liam Fox have acknowledged the EU’s positive role in fostering democracy in central Europe .
 The performance of Viktor Orbán’s Fidesz government in Hungary has been problematic .
 Pressure from the European Commission forced him to back-pedal on measures that endangered the independence of Hungary’s media regulator, the central bank and the judiciary .
 The commission has warned the new Polish government over its steps to limit the independence of the constitutional court and state broadcasters .
 One should not pretend that the EU is always a useful or effective diplomatic actor . The EU should not be a useful and effective diplomat, says David Cameron .
 It has consistently failed to contribute much of value to the Middle East peace process, partly because its own members disagree about how to deal with Israel and Palestine .
 Many people are unaware of the crucial and positive role that the EU has played in resolving some major diplomatic conundrums in recent years .
 EU's rule of law mission in Kosovo has improved judicial system, police force and customs service . The EU's “rule of law’s ‘rule of Law’ mission has improved the judicial system and police force .
 EU police trainers and peacekeepers have been making life safer for Bosnians .
 EU’s anti-piracy naval mission off the Somali coast has helped to bring about a sharp fall in attacks on shipping .
 In 2003, the British, French and German foreign ministers, plus the then EU high representative, Javier Solana, launched a diplomatic effort to limit the programme . The UK, French, German and British foreign ministers were among those involved in the effort .
 Iran finally decided to go for a deal after 12 years of on-and-off talks . UN, U.S. and EU sanctions hurt the Iranian oil industry .
 Iran trusted Solana and her successor, Ashton, which allowed them to play a pivotal role . Iran trusted both Solana, who died in 2009, and Ashton, who had a key role in Iran .
 A fourth instance is Burma, where EU sanctions discouraged foreign companies from investing . Burma is a fourth instance of EU sanctions against foreign companies .
 The EU told Aung San Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy was allowed to contest elections . If political prisoners were freed, the sanctions would go .
 The EU has subsequently funded peace talks between the government and ethnic rebel groups . The EU also trained the Burmese police and trained the police .
 The uprising in Kyiv's Maidan was triggered by the then president, Viktor Yanukovych, rejecting an EU trade agreement .
 The EU responded to Russia’s actions in Crimea and the Donbas with sanctions . Some of which make it hard for Russian firms to raise capital in Western markets .
 Chancellor Angela Merkel cajoled several reluctant EU partners to back sanctions because Germany was outraged by the Russians’ violation of international law .
 The falling oil price hurt Russia even more than the sanctions . President Vladimir Putin appears keen to get them lifted, which may explain why the Donbas has been quieter .
 The refugee crisis and the Paris attacks are spurring greater co-operation on policing and counterterrorism . The Paris attacks and refugee crisis have been spurring more cooperation on policing .
 Britain may opt in to only those EU measures that it likes. In this area Britain has a special position, as it could opt in.
 Theresa May has maintained Britain’s involvement in the most important parts of justice and home affairs . Many Conservatives urged her to pull out of everything .
 Britain is still part of Europol, the police co-operation agency . Britain is part of the Europol police agency .
 This has an impressive track record of breaking up pan-European criminal networks, including those that profit from abusing children . It is now starting to play a role in counterterrorism .
 Britain will remain involved in several of the EU’s criminal databases . Britain will be involved in many of the European criminal databases.
 It will also stay in the European Arrest Warrant scheme, which allows suspected terrorists and criminals to be extradited speedily . Hussein Osman fled to Italy just after the 21 July 2005 London Tube attacks .
 Most Britons view the EU as a mainly economic enterprise, but should not forget its role in making the European continent more peaceful and secure .
 Many of the arguments in the coming referendum campaign will focus on the economic costs of membership .
 EU leaders have made mistakes in managing the euro, but the single market remains a success story . The single market is the biggest market in Europe .
 The EU has negotiated trade-opening agreements with about 60 other countries . Japan, India, Australia, Thailand, the U.S. and the Mercosur countries of Latin America are in the pipeline .
 Firms ranging from investment banks, drug manufacturers and car companies to consultancies invest in the UK to gain access to the single market .
Little has been written about the impact on the British economy on the EU itself or on the wider world .
 The UK’s departure would undoubtedly weaken the EU by energising Eurosceptics across the continent .
 The British are the biggest champions of extending the single market, negotiating trade agreements and cutting red tape .
 British have been extremely influential in leading co-operation on counterterrorism and providing the current head of Europol . So would co-operate on justice and home affairs, say the British .
 Britain has contributed a global perspective and deep expertise in some critical areas, including the five instances mentioned above . EU foreign policy would also carry much less weight, because Britain has also contributed to many critical areas .
 For the first time in the history of the EU, one country is preponderant . For the second time in history, the EU has had a country that is preonderant.
 Germany’s power has grown over the past five years, because of the strength of the German economy . Merkel's skills and experience have given her great sway with other EU governments . The waning influence of the European Commission and British government's unwillingness to play leading role in Europe.
 A British departure would accentuate the problem of German hegemony, creating all sorts of tensions in Berlin and other capitals .
 In the US, senior officials and strategists usually understand these issues more clearly than do many Europeans . In the U.S., senior officials, strategists and senior officials often understand these problems more clearly.
 The EU's crucial role in strengthening the West against those who would weaken it. They see the EU’s key role in supporting the West .
 Germany has become the chief interlocutor of the U.S. on economic issues, and France on many security problems .
 An EU minus Britain would be economically weaker as well as less influential strategically, U.S. officials say . But U. S. officials know that the British help continental Europeans and Americans to understand each other better .
 Britain wants a strong EU to help tackle many challenges to Western interests and values . They see that the world is an increasingly dangerous place, and they want Britain in it .