 Extremists and neo-Nazis occupy high positions in the police, army and government .
 The regime is a source of instability as well as embarrassment for its pro-Western neighbours, notably Poland. What's more is more, the regime is an embarrassment for Poland .
Ukrainian ultranationalists who allied with Nazi Germany during the Second World War are being rehabilitated as national heroes in Ukraine . Poles are not happy that they allied with Nazis during the war and conducted massacres of their Polish forebears .
 All of this creates a public relations problem for Western governments and their NATO alliance that can explode at any time . The NATO alliance has been criticized for its poor relations with the West .
 A case in point is the arrests in early August of several bands of Ukrainian ultranationalist saboteurs . They infiltrated across the Ukraine-Crimea border with explosives in hand .
 The operation was foiled on August 6 when the infiltrators were discovered and quickly rounded up . The Ukrainian army provided cross-border covering fire .
 When the smoke cleared, one Russian soldier and one Russian policeman were dead . One Russian soldier was killed by a Russian policeman .
 A statement by Russia's Foreign Ministry on August 11 says the mission was planned by Ukrainian Defence Ministry's Chief Intelligence Directorate .
 Russia's national security police, the FSB, has released photos and videos of the material carried by saboteurs .
 It has released information gathered from initial interviews with the arrested . It has also released information from initial interview with the arrestees .
 Ukraine is a tragic victim of Russian aggression following the Maidan coup, er, ""Revolution of Dignity," that saw Ukraine's elected president overthrown in February 2014 . This is a big public relations problem for the regime in Kyiv and its backers in the West .
 News of a terrorist infiltration plot is hardly conducive to selling the Ukraine-as-victim story. Needless to say, news of a terror infiltration plot isn't likely to sell the story .
 President Vladimir Putin has promised new measures will be taken to protect Crimea . He has also said that Ukraine's government and army will pay a price for their folly .
 Turkey shot down a Russian fighter plane last year . Russia doesn't take kindly to rogue military operations which kill its servicemen .
 There have not even been the ritual statements from Western governments of support for Ukraine that I expected . In the event, the most surprising fact about the Crimean incident is that there have not been the rituals of support.
 On the contrary, Western governments have publicly said virtually nothing about the incident . The incident occurred in the early hours of Monday morning .
 A meeting of the UN Security Council did take place on August 11 to discuss the incident . The meeting took place in closed session so scarcely anything is known about it .
 The calls for restraint would be made by the West to Ukraine in private, I said . By contrast, the calls are being made in public as well, he said .
 The reaction of Western media has been quite aggressive, going on the propaganda offensive . But the reaction of the Western media is quite aggressive .
 It has waged a two-front offensive in the week following the August 6 arrests . It is the first time it has waged an offensive since the arrests of August 6 .
 He gave lots of space to the denials of any involvement by the Ukrainian government . He gave a lot of space for denials.
Germany's state broadcaster Deutsche Welle also featured the denials of the Ukrainian government . Germany's state TV also featured denials.
 Many reports used a clever twist in describing one of Russia's reactions to events in eastern Ukraine . Russia cancelled participation in a planned briefing with Germany and France over the situation in Ukraine which was to take place next month in China .
 The BBC's Sarah Rainsford wrote on August 14, "No video footage or independent confirmation of that incident has yet emerged"
 Ukrainian government denials complete with Ukrainian claims of a Russian conspiracy against them .
 Russia is attacked by saboteurs, who received cover fire from the Ukrainian army . Russia has been attacked by the Ukrainian military .
 The Ukrainian side killed a Russian soldier and a policeman . The infiltration has stoked fear of a flat-out, new front of global terrorism opening up along the Ukraine-Crimea border .
 Russia is upset and angry and is promising stronger measures to defend its citizens in Crimea . In response, Russia is angry and promises stronger measures in response .
 The claims of innocence by Kyiv, repeated widely in the Western press, are disproven by the evidence provided by Russia since August 6 .
 There is an additional reason to discount Ukraine's claim of innocence and discount Ukrainian and Western media conspiratorial distractions .
 Crimean citizens have suffered terrorist attacks by Ukrainian ultranationalists . It is not the first time that the citizens of Crimea have suffered terror attacks by the ultranations .
 violent threats being voiced by Ukrainian right-wing paramilitaries against Crimeans are real and imminent . In Donbass, eastern Ukraine and in Odessa, violent threats are being widely voiced by right- wing paramilitary groups .
 In September of 2015, right-wing, ultranationalist paramilitaries mounted a road transport blockade against Crimea .
 Three months later, it made the transport blockade official government policy . On the contrary, three months later it made it official government government policy.
 The extremists mounted their boldest attack on Crimea since the Korsun massacre . Then in November 2015, they mounted theirboldest attack since the massacre .
 All four electrical service lines serving Crimea from Ukraine cut most of the peninsula's electrical supply . They blew up electricity pylons on all four service lines .
 The rightists blocked crews from conducting repairs and once again the government condoned their actions . The government in Kyiv condoned the actions .
 Ukraine has cut bus, train and air passenger travel to Crimea . It has cut water supply with nary a peep of concern from Western media .
 Crimea became heavily dependent on water from Ukraine's Dnieper River during post-World War Two reconstruction . The North Crimea Canal was built during the 1960s .
 Western media should discredit the efforts of Western media to dismiss or downplay the latest sabotage against Crimea, says the Russian leader .
 The road and electricity blockades of 2015 were reported perfunctorily and then quickly erased from the news . The road, electricity and road blockades were reported in 2015 .
 The blockades were certainly never reported as being violations of human rights and international diplomacy that they were . They were certainly not reported as human rights violations .
 The acceptance by many on the political and antiwar left in Western countries of the "Russia annexed Crimea" meme makes matters worse . The acceptance of the meme makes it worse for many of the left in the West .
 Western media has flat out to "manufacture consent" for its claim that Russia illegally seized and annexed Crimea .
 The vote was prompted by longstanding grievances over Crimea's second-class status in Ukraine . Crimea became to be a part of Ukraine in the first place .
Right-wing coup regime in Kyiv to which they rightly accorded no legitimacy. It was also prompted by imminent threats against the rights and personal security of Crimeans by the regime .
 The 'Russia annexed Crimea' story is a centrepiece of NATO war threats against Russia . The underlying threat of nuclear war is expressed in the United States government posture .
 Pressure is needed on the government in Kyiv to end its military attacks in eastern Ukraine . The political resolution of the conflict is spelled out in the Minsk-2 ceasefire agreement of February 12, 2015 .