 armed members of Russian occupant troops attacked an armored car of the Ukrainian military . The armored car was attacked on Monday by armed Russian troops .
 On July 17, OSCE observers in Ukraine expressed concerns that an internal document of the OSCE SMM was possibly handed over to Russia .
 OSCE workers contained a lot of personal information about the types of women they were attracted to, their financial situation and whether they were susceptible to alcohol . It was said that they contained information about them, including their financial situations and their personal information .
 The Organization stressed it never collected personal data from its operatives . Later, the Organization stressed that it did not collect personal data .
 An armed provocation by pro-Kremlin militants resulted in civilian casualties in Yenakieve, Donetsk region . Four people died due to the gas leak at a waste-pumping station .
 DNR mercenaries arrested Ukrainian journalist Stanislav Aseyev, the media reported . The media reported the arrest Wednesday .
Militants claim he was involved in the murder of their leaders, Givi and Motorola .
 publications started appearing in the militants’ online media which tell about Stanislav’s diaries .
 Some chapters are being published in which the militants are trying to show him as a spy . He was carrying out the orders of allegedly Ukrainian security forces .
 HQ of the Joint Forces Operation ordered to test weapons from time to time . The weapons remain withdrawn from combat area in Donbas .
 American President Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin met in Helsinki for a bilateral meeting on July 16 .
 First, the sides talked tete-a-tete and then held the press conference . Then, the two sides held a press conference.
 Trump congratulated Putin on holding one of the best World Cups in the world . He also claimed that the United States will compete with Nord Stream 2, the Russian gas pipeline .
 The issue of Crimea is closed for Russia and it legally became the part of the Russian Federation . In his turn, Putin stated that the issue of the Crimea is closing for Russia .
 Russia's President passed the note with the set of proposals on nuclear disarmament to Trump . Also, the President of Russia passed the proposal to Trump.
 Putin emphasized that the construction of the Nord Stream 2 will not affect the transit of the gas through Ukraine .
 Russian leader offered Trump to consider the possibility of the referendum's holding in Donbas . Later it became known that the Russian leader had offered Trump a chance to consider a referendum .
 The meeting was highly criticized by a number of politicians and media. Totally, this meeting was extremely criticized .
 Natalia Balukh said she would not ask Russian leader Vladimir Putin to pardon her son . Volodymyr BalukH is a Ukrainian political prisoner in Crimea .
Deputy Leader of Mejlis of Crimean Tatars Akhtem Chyigoz said that the detention facility administration in Simferopol pays no attention to the grave condition of Balukh .
 Crimean who is detained in the pre-trial penitentiary system on the Russian territory is getting worse . Emir-Usein Kuku's condition is also getting worse, he says .
 Kremlin political prisoner Oleg Sentsov has had a second health crisis . Sentsov refused to be hospitalized after a hospitalization .
 Ukrainian ombudswoman Lyudmyla Denisova told the press about Oleg Sentsov's current health conditions . Later, she told the media about the health of the Ukrainian politician .
 Many Ukrainians bowed their heads to pay tribute to victims of two accidents in July . The accidents appeared to be close in time, which appeared to have happened in time .
 One of these tragedies is to be remembered as a mass murder, the other is viewed as a possible political assassination .
 On July 17, rallies in memory of MH17 victims took place in Ukraine and the Netherlands .
 In July 2014, the plane was shot down by the anti-aircraft missile, fired from Buk, the AA missile system .
 The tragedy took place in the sky over the militant-held section of Donetsk region .
 Most of the victims, 196, were Dutch, but there were citizens of other nine countries as well . Most of those killed in the attack were Dutch .
 Netherlands and Austria have officially condemned Russia in crashing the MH17 flight . Previously, the Netherlands, Austria and Netherlands have condemned Russia .
 Investigators from the Netherlands have found confirmation that the MH17 flight had been shot by Russia .
 July 20th marks the second anniversary of the murder of Pavlo Sheremet, the famous reporter of Belarusian origin .
 On this day in 2016, Sheremet died in a bomb explosion in Kyiv, as he was going to work by car . He was killed by a car bomb in 2016 .
 A mourning action took place at the crossroads of Ivana Franka and Bohdana Khmelnytskoho streets in Kyiv .
 About a hundred of people came to pay tribute to Pavlo's friends and colleagues .
 Among those present was U.S. Ambassador in Ukraine Marie Jovanovitch .
 The journalist was laid to rest in Minsk, Russia, where he was buried in his homeland .
 On July 17, it was reported that Kyiv may run out of liquid chlorine stocks in one month . It was reported on July 17.
Residents of the Ukrainian capital could be left without drinking water as this substance is used to disinfect the water .
 On June 15, Dniproazot chemicals company producing liquid chlorine has suspended its work for indefinite time . The company's work has been suspended since June 15 .
 Dniproazot for the recent years became de-facto a monopolist in this sector . By the way, the company has become a monopolists in the sector .
In Ukraine, there is no other enterprise producing this compound so important for water disinfection . In Ukraine, the compound is so important that it can be used to clean water .
 Officials started negotiations on importing chlorine from other countries and on July 19, it has started arriving to Ukraine from Romania .
 Security Service of Ukraine began checking actions of Dniproazot officials that led to the liquid chlorine deficit .
 Dniproazov announced it would start producing the substance starting the same day . The substance will be produced on July 20 .
 The enterprise says the suspension was a "necessary measure" connected with the high prices on energy resources and unprofitability of further production . The suspension was "a necessary measure"
 66 illegal searches were recorded on the territory of occupied Crimea during 6 months of 2018, 56 of them – at the houses of Crimean Tatars . interrogations and 98 arrests are also reported .
 The number of attacks on Crimean Tatars by both law enforcers and various social elements has vastly increased . The number has increased.
 The Mejlis of Crimean Tatar people have grounds to believe that Russia intends to banish Crimean Tatars from the occupied peninsula, according to Eskender Bariyev . Boers, the South Africans of European descent, have been removed from Crimea .
Diplomats will prepare a new resolution on Crimea for the next session of the UN General Assembly . Earlier this week President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko announced that diplomats will prepare the new resolution for next session .
 He reminded that the General Assembly had twice supported the Ukrainian position, including in regard of Crimean Tatars rights violation in Crimea .
 The UN International Court once again urged Russia to cancel the ban . The ban prohibits the activity of the Mejlis of Crimean Tatar people .