 Oleksandr Zakharchenko and his immediate region neighbors from Donbas have been eliminated . A new stage of property redistribution has begun in Donbas .
 Russian special services compete for sphere of influence in occupied territories . Each conflict situation is solved in the high offices of the Kremlin .
 Russia supports temporarily occupied part of Donbas with the federal budget . By this time, Russia supports the temporarily occupied area with the budget .
 This proves once again that these are artificially created surrogates, which are held not only due to military but also to socio-economic assistance . The civilian population receives something at least a bit, but of course this is not enough, says the author .
 Russia does not allocate generous funds from its own budget, vice versa . It constantly demands from the local occupation administrations to secure the transfer of so-called own incomes to the budgets of these territories .
 The Russian Federation demands that all expenditures aimed at supporting so-called stability are based on the principle of 50 percent from local sources and fifty percent from the federal budget .
So-called revenues to local budgets can be divided into several sources . So-called revenue to local budgets can be divided into several sources.
 The first is the proceeds from the management of the captured Ukrainian property . The second is the money from the owner of the property .
 Most of the captured Ukrainian enterprises are not working, so it does not heal the economy . But most of them do not work, so they do not heal economy .
 The second source is direct assistance, which comes from the material and technical reserves of the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation is the second source of assistance .
 The third source through the "Humanitarian Aid Commission" is headed by Deputy Minister of Economy Serhei Nazarov . The Commission is based in Russia .
 Russian government is responsible for temporarily occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 The fourth - they collect funds from local businesses in the form of so-called taxes . The fourth – they collect money from local business owners in the forms of ' taxes'
 This is just a fee that has been set for local businessmen for entrepreneurial activity . In fact, this is just the fee for local businesses .
 revenues go in the pocket of "dealers" who organize shadow schemes, according to Russian media .
 Over the past year about 4 million tons of coal have been stolen from Ukrainian mineral resources . For example, about 4million tons of Coal has been stolen in Ukraine .
 The lion's share of profits from this coal went not to provide the population of the temporarily occupied territories, but to the pockets of transnational organized criminal groups .
 These groupings are controlled by special services of the Russian Federation . The groupings were controlled by the special services.
 The Russian Federation has different representatives in the occupation administrations . conflicts between them are also constantly arising, for the influence on the president of Russia .
 Such schemes are used in order not to allocate funds from the budget of the Russian Federation .
High-quality anthracite coal mined in temporarily occupied territories very often goes overseas . In addition, high- quality anthracites mined in temporary occupied territories go overseas .
 A number of people are enriched due to this process, ranging from the bottom to the top in Moscow .
 The occupant is obliged to ensure the vital activity of the population at the proper level, which does not take place in reality . The occupant has to ensure that the activity is at a proper level .
The part of civilian population in the occupied territories needs humanitarian assistance . The part of the civilian population needs humanitarian help .
 This is just humanitarian aid, and these funds are not directed towards the development of the occupied territories . This is not the only humanitarian aid .
 The International Committee of the Red Cross is at the level of $ 60 million annually . The Red Cross budget for the previous years was $60 million .
 Ukrainian officials say they do not need Ukrainian help . Their statements sounded that, for example, they did not refuse . They do not refuse.
 Ukrainian authorities can't work in the temporarily occupied part of Donbas . They work through the international mechanism providing humanitarian assistance exclusively through UN agencies and ICRC .
 Such organizations, through a simplified procedure, cross the contact line . Such organizations can use a simplified process to cross the line .
 Ukraine maximally simplified the access of humanitarian cargos to the occupied territories in order to help Ukrainians, which meets the provisions of the Minsk Agreements .
 The occupation administrations imposed additional barriers and expelled some international organizations . Instead of that, they imposed a number of additional barriers .
 EECP at the line of contact in the Luhansk oblast, in Zolote, has been in place for more than two years . The opening of additional E ECP is expected to take place in the region .
 Ukrainian side spent more than UAH 1 million there to build the infrastructure for organizing the contact line crossing . The Ukraine side spent over 1 million on the project .
 The issue was originally agreed in Minsk, but then the Russian side and occupation administrations refused to open the check point . The point is that they do not give any reason to be discussed .
After all, the greater the tension, the more negatively people begin to treat Ukraine . This is one of the reasons why Ukraine is being treated badly, says the author .
 Social discontent takes place among employees of enterprises in settlements, which are dependent on these enterprises . For example, in the temporarily occupied part of Donbas, social discontent took place among the employees .
 In response to the Soviet model, there is formed a group, which includes the representative of the occupation administration, and a representative of Ministry of State Security .
 Does Russia need coal from Donbas, if its energy sources seem to be enough? Russia itself no. Well, is it not the Soviet way?
 This is exclusively a scheme how not to allocate funds from the budget of the Russian Federation . This is only a scheme to avoid allocation of funds from Russia's budget .
 The coal is supplied to different countries, not only to the Russian Federation . It can be "set up" under the corruption scheme in Russia, but on this purpose the price should be significantly reduced .
In this case, the falsification of documents takes place, to show that it is Russian coal .
 To Turkey, for example, to Turkey, to other countries of Europe, even to EU member states . Turkey is one of many countries in the EU, including Turkey, and other countries in Europe .
 This does not mean that these countries deliberately encourage such schemes . Just the falsification of documents takes place, says the author .
 Ukrainian coal crosses the line of the Ukrainian-Russian border, which is not currently controlled by the Ukrainian authorities . According to falsificated documents, Ukrainian coal has a different origin, according to falsified documents .
 It is very difficult to establish, for example, in Italy that coal, which according to Russian documents comes from Russia, in fact is Ukrainian . In Italy, coal comes from Ukraine, according to the documents .
 The South Ossetian Bank has correspondent accounts in the Russian Federation . For example, the company is located in South Ossettia .
 A system is created when the company that is created or physically exists in the occupied territories of Ukraine opens an account in the bank created by quasi-state entities .
 The accounting electronic system is connected with the electronic system of "" layer"" in South Ossetia . This platform has access to the Russian bank .
 Russian Federation has access to financial system of the Russian Federation . This all is provided with access to the financial system. This is provided by the Russian government .
 The financial system of the Russian Federation and the occupied territories are connected .
 Russia tries to make a coalition of unrecognized "republics" as if they form a circle of "friends" and not friends in reality .
 Organizationally they are included in the Southern Federal Military District of the Russian Federation . They are also included in Russia's Southern Federal military district .
 The Southern Federal Military District is the military system of the Southern Federal military District . It means that these divisions, in matters of subordination and organization of their activities, are included .
 The so-called "Kyndzhal" system can be seen not in animation, but as if on real photos . So, its items, which can't be seen in animation. So, the system is called the "KyNDzhal"" system .
 The first "Kyndzhals" are already in service in the Southern Federal Military District, which covers Crimea and occupied Donbas .
 The civilian branch is represented by the so-called commission of the RF Government on humanitarian assistance . It is headed by Serhii Nazarov, the head of the civilian branch .
All these structures in the occupied territories have their own people . All these structures are in occupied territories .
 The conflict arises between two centers of influence, then strangely enough, this conflict is solved in Moscow . So imagine if one is a proxy of one center of influence.
 Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts have been transferred to Moscow offices . A number of conflicts are taking place at the level of Donetsk andLuhansk.
 Moscow officials in Moscow are in a tense relationship because of the situation in Donbas . They say in media that after elimination of Zakharchenko, Olexandr Yanukovych and Serhii Kurchenko actively distribute spheres of influence and financial flows .
By 2014, the firm with this name was registered in Ukraine and controlled by Mr Kurchenko . By 2014, by the way, by 2014, it had been registered in the Ukraine .
 Ukrainian citizens have joined the Russian Federation and provide support to the occupation regime . This is one scheme, which uses citizens of Ukraine to provide support for the occupation .
 Russia builds schemes allowing to deny plausibly the intervenes in the affairs of Ukraine and the support the regime of occupation . Russia also builds schemes to deny the intervention in Ukraine .
 The schemes are built so that it is difficult to reach Russia, they say . They say that they are not afraid of anything and anyone, but they are building schemes .
 Ukraine is now on the edge of a great election process. As for Yanukovych, I do not think that he has a significant influence there .
 If IDPs can vote in presidential elections, they will not be able to elect deputies in parliamentary races . If the IDPs are able to vote in the presidential election, they can't vote in majoritarian elections .
 The bill was passed by the Verkhovna Rada in 2010 . The bill has been obtained by the Rada . The IDPs receive the right to vote in majoritarian and local elections .
 Internally displaced persons should be given the right to vote in all elections without exception . Why is it so delayed? Why is the election process so delayed.
 It seems to me that now the political situation in the Verkhovna Rada is such that it does not allow to adopt this law . Perhaps the deputies are simply disadvantaged to give the right to vote to IDPs, after all, the less voters we have, the more convenient
 If there are any doubts about respecting human rights in Ukraine, it is unprofitable for anyone who supports democratic values. If you support democratic values, it's unprofitably for anyone in Ukraine to support such values .
 This question of voting involves a whole range of decisions, not one bill . However, this question is not a single bill .
 It is easy to say that we will now adopt one bill, and it will change everything, but in fact, we need system solutions . It's easy to says that we'll now adopt a bill, but it will changed everything, and we need systems solutions .
 All internally displaced persons should be guaranteed the right to vote in Donetsk and Luhansk, they say . They say that all internally displaced people should be protected from where they were expelled .
 elections should be held in Donetsk and Luhansk, says Vladimir Putin . If we are talking about the peacekeeping mission, that elections will be organized, says Putin .
 In the separatist mass media of eastern Ukraine, for more than half a year, the issue of possible use of the chemical weapons by the Armed Forces of Ukraine arises . But I fully support that all Ukrainian citizens should be involved in the election process, regardless of other factors .
In temporarily occupied territories they do not adhere to the rules of dealing with hazardous wastes . There are significant problems with ensuring the safety of those industries located on the line of contact .
 In our opinion, it is just a smokescreen to hide the possible failures of the occupation administrations, we say . In our Opinion, it's just a smokecreen to hiding the possible failure of the occupations administrations .
 A branch of the ammonia pipeline goes to the Odessa Port Plant . For example, at the “Styrol plant, there is a branch in the ‘Styrol’ plant .
 In order to protect the population, it is necessary to take serious measures that have not been carried out there for the last 4-5 years .
 Ukrainian army is trying to do something, and if something happens, Ukraine will be guilty . To say that the Ukrainian army was trying todo something, it's not clear what it is .
 In many industries, there are threats of harmful substances entering the groundwater, in particular, in the water supplied through the channel “Siverskii DonetsDonbas’s”
 The quality of surface water in Donetsk has deteriorated during the last 4 years, due to the fact that they stopped pumping out water from mines .
 There were taken the water samples in Donetsk's surface reservoirs for analysis . This is not the official analysis, but simply monitoring the situation .
 This can lead to a complete stoppage of water supply in the region. What will it lead to? This can also lead to the end of the current water supply .
 It seems to me that many people just do not fully understand what is happening. It seems that many are not fully understanding what's happening .
 For me, this is about the same as the threat of committing a terrorist act . This is about same as a terrorist attack, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Two years ago, $ 70 million were allocated from the state budget to support the water utility company "Water of Donbas" Only to ensure that water supply for residents of the region would not stop .
 Ukraine is struggling to support the water supply system, although it is economically ineffective . Are they trying somehow to make money with it? Yes, this is also a question of money for them.
 The occupation administrations have set such low tariffs to show that they are "successful" managers .
 The fact that the company, in principle, has no means to exist does not confuse them . The company has no way to confuse them, says the company .
 9 people have died at the EECPs when crossing the line of contact since the beginning of the year . In Minsk, the question will be raised about the need for serious international discussions .
 Ukrainian side has more throughput, than occupied territories, says Russian official . Ukrainian side is more throughput than the occupied territories .