 Ukraine was the center of the first eastern Slavic state, Kyivan Rus, during the 10th and 11th centuries . The state was the most powerful state in Europe during the 11th and 10th century .
 It has been going through changes every couple of years, but has failed to achieve stability . Since then, it has gone through changes. Since then it has been trying to improve its stability .
Ukrainian territory was absorbed by the Russian Empire piece by piece in the 1800s .
 Following the collapse of czarist Russia in 1917, the country achieved a short-lived period of independence until 1920 . The country achieved an independent period until 1920.
 Ukraine achieved final independence in 1991 with the dissolution of the USSR . democracy and prosperity remained elusive to the unstable country .
 President Putin ordered the invasion of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula shortly after the departure of President Yanukovych back in February 2014 . The invasion took place shortly after Yanukovych's departure from the presidency .
 Russia claimed the invasion was because he wanted to protect ethnic Russians who were living in the region . Russia claimed it was to protect the ethnic Russians living in Russia's region .
 Just two weeks later, a "referendum" was held regarding the integration of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 The Ukrainian Government asserts that Crimea remains part of Ukraine and fully under Ukrainian sovereignty . The "referendum" turned out to be illegal, and the Ukrainian Government says it remains under Ukraine sovereignty .
 Protests in Donetsk and Luhansk regions escalated into an armed pro-Russian separatist insurgency . Protests have escalated into a pro- Russian separatist insurgency.
 From late 2014, Eastern cities outside of the Donbass combat zone, such as Kharkiv, Odessa, Kiev, and Mariupol, were struck by many bombings .
 Continued fighting has led to the region being more vulnerable and unsafe, according to reports . Continued fighting in the region has led the region to be more vulnerable.
 The security situation remains unstable and volatile, and many are in dire need of health services . Many are in need of medical care, according to experts .
 Recent numbers estimate that more than 5 million people are affected by the humanitarian crisis in the eastern part of the country . The humanitarian crisis is the largest in the country.
 1. million of the 5 million affected people are considered in need of health assistance . A total of 1.1 million of 5 million people are thought to be affected by health issues .
 Access to primary, secondary and emergency health care services, as well as medicine, is critically needed . Access toPrimary, secondary, emergency and emergency care services is critical needed .