 Study of relations between Ukraine and Romania in the post-communist period . Study of ties between the two countries in the past .
Controversial relations between Kyiv and Bucharest on historical and socio-cultural views . Controversial relations on historical, socio- cultural views .
 The emergence of a stage of bilateral rapports based on the "security first" approach . The emergence is based on a "securityfirst" approach to rapports .
 Russian violation of Ukraine's territorial sovereignty is the gravest challenge to the European order in over half a century1 . It serves as an essential precondition for gauging relations between Ukraine and its direct neighbours .
 Ukrainian-Romanian relations in historical perspective, explore new avenues of cooperation between the two states and analyse prospects for sustainable dealings in future . This article aims to reveal Ukrainian- Romanian relations.
 It focuses on the impact of Russian illegal annexation of the Crimea and its active support of the secessionist enclaves in South-Eastern Ukraine on both countries . It also focuses on impact of Russia's annexation of Crimea and the support of secessionists in the South- Eastern Ukraine .
 Special attention is given to the studies on Romanian foreign policy and Ukrainian-Romanian relations .
 Romania was one of the first countries that recognised Ukraine as an independent state and established diplomatic relations with it in 1992 . Romania was the first country to recognise Ukraine as independent state .
 Romania was one of the last neighbouring countries to formalise the frontier with Ukraine . Yet, Romania was not the last country to formalised the frontier .
 In 2009, the International Court of Justice in the Hague settled final territorial disputes between Ukraine and Romania2.2. In 2009.
 A deeper retrospective analysis of bilateral relations lies beyond the scope of this research . It mainly focuses on the most sensitive and troublesome issues between the two countries .
For better understanding turbulent relations between Kyiv and Bucharest they should be analysed from the historical and socio-cultural perspective. Generally, for better understanding the relations between the two countries should be examined from a historical and social perspective .
 The shared history of membership in the same communist bloc did not favour mutual trust between the states .
 Romania looked at Ukraine as a former Soviet Union state, which had close relations with Russia . Romania also had close ties with Russia, which was a former Russian state .
 Kyiv was perceived through the Moscow's prism, which added further venom to great and small irritants between the countries . Kyiv is perceived through Moscow's Prism, which adds more venom to the country .
 From the historical perspective, political legacy has determined relations between the two states .
 collective memory about the Second World War has a great influence on both nations . For example, collective memory of the war has a big influence on the two nations .
 At the beginning of the war, the countries were fighting on different sides . At the start of the conflict, the war was on a different side .
 Romania sided with the Nazi Germany in the War, while Ukraine was a part of the Soviet Union .
 This operation was executed by the Romanian Government under the pressure of the Nazi Germany .
 The period between 6 August and 16 October 1941 saw widespread loss of life . The period was the worst period of the war .
 Romania lost northern Bukovyna, currently Ukrainian Chernivtsi region, and Bessarabia, a part of which represents southern part of Ukrainian Odessa region .
 Ukraine perceived by Romanians as part of the Soviet Union and later an ally of Russia . As a result, territorial losses aggravated tension between the two countries .
 territorial issues in Ukrainian-Romanian relations served as a delayed-action mine, which exploded at the beginning of the 1990s . The mine exploded in the early 1990s.
 Bucharest insisted on the necessity to reverse the effects of the treaty and return Bessarabia and northern Bukovyna to Romania .
On June 24th, 1991, Romanian Parliament unanimously passed the Declaration on the Ribbentrop-Molotov Pact and its consequences for Romania6.
 Romanian Parliament required from the President, Government and all political powers of the country to act in order to protect the legitimate interests of the population residing on the Romanian territories .
 Romania made territorial claims to Ukraine attempting to revise post-war order in Europe7. In 1991, the Supreme Council of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic made it clear .
 Romanian Parliament unanimously adopted the Declaration on the Referendum in Ukraine, planned for December 1, 19918 . In addition, on November 28th, 1991, Romanian Parliament adopted the declaration on thereferendum .
 Bucharest treated the referendum organized by the Kyiv authorities on the Romanian territories, as null and void . The referendum was held in Bucharest, Romania . The territories were annexed by the authorities, which forcefully annexed these lands .
 Government and the Government of former USSR in Bucharest, February 27th, 1961 . Government and Government of ex-Soviet Union.
 The Treaty served as a legal base for Ukrainian-Romanian boundary line . The Treaty was signed by the Ukrainian government in 1991 .
 Bucharest confirmed denunciation of the treaty on a unilateral basis later in 19949 . Bucharest confirms denunciation on unilateral basis in 199 49 .
 Maritime boundary was another insidious territorial problem, which prevented Ukraine and Romania from signing an important political treaty . The border was also a territorial problem .
 In 1996, Romania denounced the Protocol on determination of the state border line between the People's Republic of Romania and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . Snake Island in the Black Sea came under USSR jurisdiction .
 Ukrainian Minister of Foreign Affairs Hennadiy Udovenko and Presidential Advisor Volodymyr Horbulin were considered open by Bucharest in 1996 .
 Kyiv qualified such moves as an open denial of existing state border line and as those whetting Bucharest's appetite for related territorial claims against Ukraine . Kyiv is also keen on territorial claims.
 Romania renounced territorial claims to its neighbours . The country is now part of the European Union and NATO .
 A political treaty was signed in 1997. This decision helped two countries come to terms on controversial territorial issues . As the result, a political treaty is signed .
 In 2003, the Border Regime Treaty was signed between Ukraine and Romania .
 Under the treaty, Bucharest recognised Ukrainian right to Snake Island in return for a commitment to deploy no offensive weapons .
 Romanian diplomacy succeeded in avoiding the questions relating to the continental shelf and exclusive economic zone . At the same time, Romanian diplomacy failed to avoid the issues relating to continental shelf .
 The parties agreed to settle the Black Sea dispute at the International Court of Justice in the Hague in case the bilateral negotiations didn't yield an agreement . In other words, the parties agreed.
 The Court delivered its judgment on this dispute in 2009,11 establishing a single maritime boundary . The Court settled the 40-year maritime dispute in the Black Sea in 2009 .
 Ukrainian project on the Danube-Black Sea Deep Water Navigation Canal has been one of the topical questions on the Ukraine-Romania bilateral relations agenda for over a decade . The project is part of the Ukrainian project.
 New 10-kilometre connection between Danube and the sea passes through the Danube Delta . Romania has urged Ukraine to stop this project, given the fact that it violates a number of international conventions .
 Romania made a submission to the Implementation Committee of the Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context . The Government of Romania expressed concerns about Ukraine's compliance with its obligations under the Convention . The Danube-Black Sea Deep-Water Navigation Canal in the Ukrainian Sector of the Dan
 Ukraine argues that Romania's claims are only a tool by which a neighbouring state impedes the completion of the project, pursuing its own economic interests .
 The canal facilitated control of the Danube's mouth by a non-NATO member15. In addition, the canal was also used to control the mouth .
 The Deep Water Navigation Canal was put into operation in December 2008 . In December 2008, the Deep Water Canal was placed into operation .
 In November 2007, Ukraine approved the Final Decision on the implementation of the Deep Water Navigation Canal project for full development . It was adopted in violation of a number of procedures of the Espoo Convention .
 Ukraine forced to stop the implementation of Phase II of the project . Ukraine was forced to revoke the Final Decision and take measures for implementation of the Convention16 .
Ukraine should adopt the relevant draft legislation and bring the Project into full compliance with the Convention by the end of 2018 . The Implementation Committee prescribes that Ukraine should adopt a draft legislation .
 Ukrainian government is also obliged to submit a report on concrete legislative measures adopted by the end of each year . Ukrainian government also must also submit report on legislative measures.
 Ukraine should inform Romania about existing monitoring of the overall project results . Ukraine should consult with Romania on the post-project analysis. Ukraine should also inform Romania of the project results and consult .
 Ukraine and Romania are encouraged to develop the bilateral agreement for improved implementation of the Convention17. Finally, the two countries will be able to work together to develop a bilateral agreement .
 The rights of the Ukrainian minority in Romania and of the Romanian minority in Ukraine is another sensitive issue in Kyiv and Bucharest relations . The rights in Ukraine and in Romania are also sensitive issues .
 The 2011 population census revealed 50,900 ethnic Ukrainians in Romania . The 2011 census revealed that 50, 900 ethnic Ukrainians were in Romania.
 They live in Marmaroshchyna, Timish, Suceava, CarashSeverin, Tulcea and Galats .
 Since 1990 Romanian legislation has provided parliamentary representation for ethnic minorities . The system of special mandates -ex officio - independently of the number of votes .
 Only organisations represented in the Council of National Minorities can nominate candidates . Only organisations representing in the council can nominate candidate .
 These organisations are registered as non-governmental organizations with the special status of political parties . They are registered with the status of the political parties. The organisations are also registered asnon-governmental organisations .
The representation of minorities in the Romanian parliament is mainly symbolic . The representation of minority groups in the country's parliament is mostly symbolic .
The votes of the MPs representing ethnic minorities are of importance only to minority governments . The votes of MPs representing minority governments are important only to minorities .
 There are no special legislative provisions for the minority representation at the local level . There is no special legislation for minority representation in the state .
 Romanian political parties do not pay any special attention to the situation with the Ukrainian minority . This issue is considered to be a task assigned to non-governmental organisations representing the minority .
Ukrainian minority is hit by Bucharest assimilation policy which splits it into Ukrainians, Ruthenians and Huzuls .
 The Union of the Ukrainians of Romania was turned into “front’s organisation controlled by the Romanian authorities . Rendiuk argues that the Union was used to criticize Ukrainian position on key interstate questions until 200520 .
Both central and local Ukrainian authorities have maintained a strict distinction between ethnic Romanians and Moldovans since 1991 . The apparent consternation of Bucharest is the reason for the distinction .
 According to the last population census in 2001, 151,000 Romanians and 258,600 Moldovans live in Ukraine . Chernivtsi, Zakarpattia, and Odessa regions are compact communities .
 There has been a general trend for the number of Romanian-language schools in Ukraine to decline steadily .
Mainly it was caused by the lack of interest from both Ukrainian authorities and parents . Mainly it is caused by a lack of Interest from both Ukraine authorities and Parents .
 Ukrainian authorities reluctant to encourage Romanian language studies to avoid pressure on multi-ethnic character of Ukrainian state . Ukrainian authorities have been reluctant to promote Romanian language study .
 Ethnic Romanians, especially typical of the Odessa region, are perceived with suspicion by Ukrainian authorities because of Russophile sympathies .
 This emotional adhesion resulted from Russian propaganda, nostalgia for the USSR, and Ukraine's poor economic performance . The adhesion was caused by Russian propaganda.
 The churches frequented by the Romanian minority are subordinated to the Moscow Patriarchate .
 Bucharest has limited financial resources allocated by Bucharest to its diaspora since 1991 . Most of them have been spent almost exclusively on maintaining “emotional’s relationships with Romania .
 Money is mainly spent on folk festivals and publications covering historical themes . Money is mostly spent on festivals, publications and festivals .
 Local leaders of the Romanian community are fiercely competing for the favours from Bucharest . Local leaders are fiercely battling for favours.
 Those who identify themselves as Moldovans are hostile to any initiatives that come from the government of Romania . Those who say they are also hostile to government initiatives .
 Romanian community has also failed to promote a generation change at the level of leadership . In addition, the Romanian community is also failing to promote generation change .
 Local government executives from the regions inhabited by ethnic Romanians express distrust of Bucharest intentions . They reject Romanian projects and social initiatives .
22.22. 22.22 .22 . 22. 22 . 22 .22.
 Bucharest's decision to grant Romanian citizenship to those whose ancestors kept it during the interwar period and were deprived of it without their consent is another insidious problem, which affects Ukrainian-Romanian relations . Bucharest has granted Romanian citizenship.
 According to the Ukraine's Constitution “There shall be a single form of citizenship in Ukraine” 23.23.
 A citizen of Ukraine has acquired the citizenship of another state or more than one other state, according to the Law on the Citizenship of Ukraine . This person shall be treated only as a citizens of Ukraine in legal relations with Ukraine .
 Romanian citizens can seek employment in Western EU countries, with nationalist aspirations or patriotic feelings being of lesser importance .
 Investments in Kryvyi Rih Mining and Processing Works of Oxidized Ore in the eastern part of Ukraine is the largest Romanian foreign investment of all time25 . Another controversial question in Kyiv-Bucharest relations in the post-communist period .
 The German Democratic Republic, Socialist Republic of Romania, the USSR, the Hungarian People's Republic, Czechoslovak Socialist Republic and Bulgaria were all part of the Soviet Union . The USSR, Hungary, Bulgaria and the Czech Republic were also included .
 Payment was planned to be in the form of pellets for \0 years from the moment of its launch 26.26.
 Bucharest's decision to get involved in the project was mainly economically motivated . The project was mostly economically motivated, says Bucharest .
 Romania expected to receive 3 million tons of pellets per year for the Sidex plant in Galati28 .
 Bulgaria and Germany left the project. Following negotiations among the investors, Bulgaria andGermany left theproject .
 The main shareholders remained Ukraine with 56 per cent of the shares, Romania -28 per cent and Slovakia -15. per cent . The main shareholder remained Ukraine.
In 2007, Romania planned to sell its stake in KGOKOR to steel and mining group ArcelorMitall . In 2007, the group planned to sold its stake to steel group ArCElorMittal Galati . The group doubled steel production at its Romanian plant.
 ArcelorMitall also made an offer to Ukraine for KGOKOR but a planned tender was cancelled unexpectedly following a face-off between the Ukrainian government and the then president of Ukraine, Viktor Yushchenko .
 In 2010, the Ukrainian government announced a new initiative to sell off the unfinished plant . The plant will be sold off.
 mining activity in the region was hit by the Russia's open aggression towards Ukraine in 2014 .
 Russia's aggression committed against Ukraine started with illegal annexation of the Crimea . Russia's annexation of Crimea was illegal .
 Kremlin is further destabilising Ukrainian society with support to armed separatists in Donbas region . Kremlin is also supporting armed separatists.
 According to art. of Resolution for an armed attack, which was committed by one State against the other, to be qualified as an act of aggression, legally it does not necessarily matter whether the war was formally announced or not30 .
Roadblocks between the mainland and the peninsula of the Crimea were put up . Also, Sevastopol Belbek Airport was blocked, and roadblocks between mainland and peninsula of Crimea .
 Vladimir Putin declared that the “green men’s were Russian military32. It is noteworthy that at his annual questions and answers session in 2014, Vladimir Putin, the President of the Russian Federation, declared the ‘green men' were Russia's military32 .
 State Duma's deputy Sergey Mironov introduced a bill on simplification of procedures for the adoption of new subjects to the Russian Federation . The bill was introduced on February 28, 2014 .
 March 16, 2014, was held an illegal referendum to let the people of the Crimea decide whether the peninsular should remain part of Ukraine or instead secede and become part of Russia .
 The sovereign Republic of the Crimea including Sevastopol was declared in a unilateral manner . The referendum was based on the results of the referendum .
 The Russian Federation and Republic of the Crimea signed a treaty of accession of Crimea to Russia on March 18, 2014 . The new subjects -so called “Republic of Crimea” and Sevastopol - became part of Russia33 .
 Moscow's annexation of the territory has been followed by a major, systematic expansion of Russia's military presence in the Black Sea region .
 The Russian Black Sea Navy military personnel grew from 12,500 service members in the early 2014 to 25,000 in 2016 . Ukrainian military intelligence estimates 24,000 servicemen -it exactly doubled .
 38th Fighters Air Regiment in Belbek, 39th Helicopter Regiment had been deployed within 27th Mixed Aviation Division of the 4th Air Force and Air Defense Army of the South Army Command of the Russian Military Forces .
 In January 2017, 18th Sevastopol-Theodosia Anti-Aircraft Missile Regiment went on duty .
 Moscow had deployed the S-300 PMU systems in the Crimea in the wake of the annexation .
 One of the main threats sparked in the course of militarization of the Crimean peninsula is readiness of Russian troops to deploy nuclear weapons there .
 Experts of the Ukrainian Institute for the Future refer to the tactical nuclear bombs carrying capabilities of the SU-24 aircraft .
 The “nuclear version of these missiles was not used in the USSR . The experts were not concerned with its presence in the Crimea .
 Russia would be expedient for the military and political command in Russia to deploy such kind of nuclear weapons in the Crimea . However, in the context of discussions on perspectives for deployment of antiaircraft systems in Romania, it would be an expedient.
Russian naval forces are also prepared to deploy nuclear weapons on ships and submarines . Russian naval forces will also be prepared to use nuclear weapons.
 The flagship of the Russian Black Sea Navy cruiser ‘Moscow’ is equipped with the anti-ship systems P-1000 Vulkan . The cruiser is equipped.
 Russia has shifted the security balance in the Black Sea, Eastern Mediterranean and Middle East by establishing large anti-access/area-denial exclusion zones . Russia has ultimately shifted security balance by establishing anti- Access/area/denial zones .
 Russia can use A2AD to impede the ability of the U.S. to defend its NATO allies by disrupting air forces to access conflict zones in the event of a crisis .
 Moscow sent its armed forces under the guise of volunteers and “donated’s military equipment to Donbas .
 Russian government failed to realise their coup de force strategy, which they succeeded with in the Crimea, for the second time38.
 The international community has not recognised the legitimacy of the Crimea annexation . Russia has also condemned Russia's aggressive actions in South Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia's invasion within the Crimean and Donbas territories of Ukraine has had a great impact on the world order established after the Second World War .
 This military aggression against the neighbouring state might bring a new world, the true face of which is no one can yet predict . It is not known what the real face of this military aggression is .
Experts say invading Ukraine aimed to reverse the transformations of the postCold War era . Russia lost its satellites, withdrew militarily forces from Central and Eastern Europe .
 Moscow's primary strategic objective is to create a Eurasian “pole of power’ or a bloc of states under predominant Russian influence . The goal is to undermine and reverse NATO influence throughout Europe's east .
 The Kremlin attempts to neutralize nearby states by preventing them from moving into Western institutions, particularly NATO and the European Union . Even where it cannot pressure or entice its neighbours to integrate in the Eurasian Economic Union and the Collective Security Treaty Organization .
 Ukraine and Romania intensified their bilateral relations . Russia's revisionist policy and being aware of common security threats intensified their relations .
 Romania is geographically located closest to the illegally annexed and militarised the Crimea and Donbas region . Unlike other countries of the Eastern flank of the NATO and the EU, Romania is located close to the border with Russia .
 Russian emergence in the North of the Danube Delta in Odessa region in addition to its military presence in Moldova, Transnistria .
 Crimean annexation complicated the division of the Black Sea continental shelf and exclusive economic zones among riparian countries .
 Romania cannot cope with this threat alone. De facto, being a direct maritime neighbour of Russia, can't cope with it alone .
 Romania has few options but to look for new allies, seek further integration in European blocs . Donald Trump is in the White House with Donald Trump in the House41.
 Bucharest did not recognise illegal annexation of the Crimea and accused Russia of supporting the secessionist enclaves in Donbas region violating sovereignty .
 Traian Basescu, President of Romania, declared that ‘Romania is unreservedly supporting Ukraine's independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty.’
 Romania believes that any presence on Ukraine's soil of troops of the Russian Federation without Ukraine's consent means aggression against Ukraine”42.42. Romania believes any presence of troops on Ukraine’s soil of Russian Federation troops of Russia is ‘aggressive’
 The Security Council and the UN inactions created the impression that unlawful territorial gains, such as those in Ukraine, were tolerated43.43 . Traian Basescu's successor, Klaus Iohannis, noted the inactions .
 Romania will continue to support the political and diplomatic efforts to solve the conflict in Ukraine . Romania will also support the full implementation of the Minsk Agreements”44.44.
 Dacian Ciolos called for greater support for the Republic of Moldova, Georgia and Ukraine providing better defence46 .
 Support of Romanian Parliament to Ukraine in the ratification of the Ukraine-EU Association Agreement on July 4, 2014 was a turning point in the relations between the two countries .
 Romania was the first EU-member state, which ratified the agreement . It is important to note that Romania is the first state to ratify the agreement.
 Romania worked energetically to increase U.S. and NATO force presence in the Black Sea region . Romania worked to increase United States and NATO forces in the region .
 It intends to increase defence spending up to 2 percent of gross domestic product as soon as possible . It plans to increase defense spending to 2 per cent of the country's GDP .
 Bucharest has asked for a permanent NATO fleet presence in the Black Sea since 201447 . Bucharest assumed responsibility to lead the Ukraine Cyber Defence Trust Fund, adopted during the 2014 Wales NATO summit .
 Bucharest Format brings together nine NATO members under Romanian leadership to follow recent NATO commitments . There have also been developed alternative multilateral groupings .
 The nine members also share concerns about Russia's military resurgence in the Crimea . They advocate for NATO's continuous enlargement .
 Romania trails only the United States and Great Britain, which have 62 and 44 observers, respectively50. This is a high number, considering that Romania trails the U.S. and Britain, respectively 50.
 Change of the political leaderships in both countries is an additional factor which led to the intensification of bilateral political cooperation between Kyiv and Bucharest .
 The Agreement on small border traffic between the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and Government of Romania was signed on October 2, 2014 .
 The agreement regulates the conditions on conducting the small border traffic . Residents of Ukraine's or Romania's border area plan to remain in the border area of the other state for three months .
 The agreement applies to inhabitants of an area of 30 kilometres on both sides of the common border . The area can be extended to maximum 50 kilometres from the border where the administrative-territorial units are located .
 On June 7, 2014, the President of Romania participated in the inauguration ceremony of the new President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko .
 The first Poroshenko's meeting with the new elected Romanian President Klaus Iohannis was held in Paris on January 11, 2015, during the march .
 On February 13, 2015, the Presidents met in Brussels discussing development of security situation in Donbas53 .
 The aim of this visit was preparation for the Romanian President's official visit to Ukraine . It is evident that the aim of the visit was to prepare for the President's visit .
 Security issues and mobilisation of the ethnic Romanians in Ukraine's Armed Forces were among the items on agenda too55 . Security issues were also on agenda.
 Klaus Iohannis paid the first official visit to Ukraine on March 17, 2015 . In a month, he visited the country for the first time .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko stated the transition to the new phase of Ukrainian-Romanian relations .
 The parties agreed to resume the activities of the Joint Presidential Commission and hold its next session in the course of the Ukrainian President's visit to Bucharest .
 New guidelines for cooperation in trade-economic, energy, environmental, transport, infrastructure and other areas were developed . New guidelines were developed for cooperation.
 The issue of the Danube -Black Sea Canal was discussed . Bilateral relations were also discussed .
 The governments agreed to continue constructive dialogue on these issues at bilateral level and at the level of international organizations .
 An agreement on the necessity of substantial modernization of the security system in the Black Sea region was also reached . An agreement also was reached on the need to modernize the system .
 Special attention was paid to the Republic of Moldova, particularly in Transnistria .
 The Presidents agreed to coordinate their actions on Transnistria in order to facilitate the unfreezing of the given conflict and help sovereign and independent Moldova regain its territorial integrity and reintegrate the region .
 Significant progress in a small border traffic mechanism was reached too. Significant progress has been reached too, according to a report .
 It was agreed to restore direct air connection between Kyiv and Bucharest . Furthermore, it was agreed that it would restore directAir connection between the two cities .
56.56. The regional cooperation between Ukraine, Poland and Romania was another item on the Presidents' agenda .
The next meeting at the presidential level was held on February 12, 2016 . The next meeting was held during the informal EU summit and Munich Security Conference .
 The leaders discussed the fulfilment of the agreements reached during the visit of Klaus Iohannis to Ukraine in 2015 . They discussed the settlement of Transnistria conflict and the Russian aggression against Ukraine57.57 .
 On April 21, 2016, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko paid official visit to Bucharest .
 The Ukrainian-Romanian Joint Presidential Commission resumed its work after nine years since the first and the second session in 2016 . The first and second session was held in Ukraine in 2008 .
 The session focused on economic cooperation, bilateral agreements on local border traffic and opening Orlivka-Isaccea border-crossing point . The session also focused on the economic cooperation and bilateral agreements .
 The leaders discussed the opportunity to sign the agreement on free-of-charge issuance of long-term national visas between Ukraine and Romania . In return for the opening of the Romanian Consulate in Solotvyno.
 The questions discussed during the talks concerned the prospect of supplying natural gas from Romania to Ukraine . The talks also discussed the prospects for the further utilization of interconnectors of transit pipelines passing across Romania .
 Great contribution was made to solving transport connection problems, particularly to the restoration of direct railway and direct air connection between the capitals of Ukraine and Romania, as well as bus connection between Bucharest and Ukraine .
Security enhancement remains the issue of top priority in Ukraine-Romania negotiations . Security enhancement remains a top priority for the Ukrainian government .
 It was declared that there cannot be any discussion about loosening sanctions against the country-aggressor until the aggression is terminated .
 Any partial loosening of sanctions in exchange for partial fulfilment of the Minsk agreements poses a direct threat to the resolution of the situation in Donbas .
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin held a meeting with his Romanian counterpart Lazar Comanescu in a region on a common frontier, Solotvyno and Sighetu Marmafiei .
 The Agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of Romania on free-of-charge issuance of long-term national visas was signed60.
 In practice, it was the Ukrainian price for the Romanian Consulate in Solotvyno opened on the same day . Romania insisted for a long time that it was Ukrainian .
 The next working visit of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine to Romania took place on October 29, 2016 .
 The visit began with the participation of P Klimkin in the opening ceremony of the bust of Taras Shevchenko in Sighetu Marmapei61 .
 In the course of the visit a wide range of issues from cross-border infrastructure projects to sensitive political situation in Moldova were raised .
New border crossing checkpoint at Ukrainian-Romanian state border Shibeny -Poienile de sub Munte . Could connect Ivano-Frankivsk region with Maramure§, a region in Romania where the main part of the ethnic Ukrainians live .
 The parties discussed the ways of the intensification of bilateral cooperation between Ukraine and Romania . The parties also discussed the EU strategy for the Danube Region and other topics of mutual interest .
 The parties agreed to activate some particular working groups in order to develop comprehensive cooperation in the spheres of mutual interest . The parties agree to activate certain working groups.
 It was agreed to hold a bilateral meeting at the ministerial level with the purpose to analyse road transport and transport questions in September 2017 .
Bilateral Ukrainian-Romanian relations were established in postcommunist period . In conclusion, there is no easy, quick-fix solution to the problems in bilateral relations .
 Both countries need to come to terms with some heavy historical baggage . Both countries have some historical baggage.
 Russian aggression against Ukraine forced the two countries to revise their relations . The host of problems that were accumulated over more than 20 years of tense relations have not been settled yet .
 Ukraine and Romania have been developing trustful cooperation based on the security-first principle . However, lately, they have beendeveloping trustful cooperate based on security first principle .
 Romania condemned Russia's aggression against Ukraine, did not recognise illegal annexation of Crimea . Romania accused Russia of support to secessionist enclaves in Donbas region .
 Bucharest backed sanctions on Russia and provided Ukraine with financial and material assistance to overcome the economic crisis and implement structural reforms . Bucharest backs sanctions against Russia .
 Security risks are the converging point of Ukraine's and Romania's interests. Security risks have been a key issue for the two countries .
 An awareness of common security threats caused by Russian aggression was the reason for intensifying bilateral relations . Russian aggression is a reason for intensified bilateral relations.
 Governments in Kyiv and Bucharest moved from discussions and disputes with regard to questions of a sensitive nature to constructive cooperation . The aim to strengthen security in the Black Sea and limit Russian dominance in Donbas, the Crimea and Transnistria .
 It remains within the countries' fundamental national interests to promote further cooperation implementing mutually beneficial projects in the energy, transport and infrastructure sectors .
Change of leadership in Ukraine and Romania opened up new perspectives for ongoing cooperation between the two states .
 Ukraine and Romania should seek more robust foundation for long-term bilateral relations in the spirit of partnership and mutual trust . But in the context of high insecurity caused by Russian militarist policy, they should seek a robust foundation .
Working out a clear multilevel midand long-term foreign policy strategy has become a priority for developing sustainable relations between the two states .
 Ukraine will ensure the implementation of the platform for the future effective deals . By enhancing and coordinating the ties between foreign relations departments and national security institutions, Ukraine will increase the team of competent and motivated specialists .
 Basic Treaty of 1997 as the Basis for Development of Ukrainian-Romanian Relations in the 21st century .