 Commonwealth of Independent States is a regional intergovernmental organization of 10 post-Soviet republics in Eurasia . It was formed following the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
 It has an area of 20,368,759 km² and has an estimated population of 239,796,010 . It is located in an area that is estimated to have a population of 25,000 km² .
 The CIS encourages cooperation in economical, political and military affairs . The CIS has certain powers to coordinate trade, finance, lawmaking and security .
 When the USSR began to fall in 1991, the founding republics signed the Belavezha Accords . The Soviet Union would cease to exist and proclaimed the CIS in its place .
 A few days later the Alma-Ata Protocol was signed, which declared that Soviet Union was dissolved and that the Russian Federation was to be its successor state . The Russian Federation is to be the successor state of Soviet Union .
 The Baltic states, which regard their membership in the Soviet Union as an illegal occupation, chose not to participate .
 Ukraine, which participated as an associate member, ended its participation in CIS statutory bodies on 19 May 2018 . Ukraine was a member of the European Union's European Union Commission .
 Eight of the nine CIS member states participate in the CIS Free Trade Area . Eight of nine member states are part of the region .
 Three organizations are under the overview of the CIS, namely the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Union ; and the Union State .
 The first and the second are military and economic alliances . The third aims to reach a supranational union of Russia and Belarus with a common government, flag, currency and so on .
 Mikhail Gorbachev proposed a federation by holding a referendum to preserve the Union as the Union of Sovereign States . In March 1991, the president of the Soviet Union proposed the federation .
 The Council of Foreign Ministers met in Dushanbe, Tajikistan on 11 April 2003 to discuss the War in Iraq and consider a draft program for the fight against terrorism and extremism . The need for an international role in post-war Iraq was further addressed at the May summit in
 There are nine full member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States . There are also nine full members of the UK and Australia .
 Ukraine chose not to ratify the CIS Charter as it disagrees with Russia being the only legal successor state to the Soviet Union . Ukraine was one of the founding countries and ratified the Creation Agreement in December 1991 .
 The Charter of the CIS was not a member, as it never ratified the aforementioned charter . Thus it does not regard itself as a member of CIS .
 Ukraine kept being allowed to participate in the CIS, although not being formally a member . Nevertheless, Ukraine was allowed to join the CIS despite being a member.
 A bill was introduced to Ukraine's parliament to denounce their ratification of the 1991 Agreement Establishing the CIS . The bill was never approved by Ukraine's Parliament .
 Ukraine was not formally a member of the European Union . It did not need to withdraw formally, in any other way apart from ceasing to participate .
 The Soviet Union ceases to exist and the former Soviet Union states participating in these treaties take over the Soviet Union's legal obligations . This series of treaties and declarations also define that the Soviet Soviet Union cease to exist .
 Georgia 3 December 1993 19 April 1994 18 August 18 August 2008 18 August 2009 19 August 2009 Withdrew as a result of the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 . Georgia 3.3 December 23 April 1994 19 April 18 August 1998 18 August 19 August 2008 19 August 19 September 2009
 CIS did not need to withdraw formally, in any other way apart from ceasing to participate . As Ukraine was not a member, it did not needs to withdraw .
 Ukraine had mostly ceased to participate in CIS since 2014, after the pro-Russian unrest in the eastern part of the country . On 19 May 2018, it passed a decree to officially stop participating at all .
 CIS leaders signed the Convention on the Interparliamentary Assembly of Member Nations of the Commonwealth of Independent States on 26 May 1995 . Nine parliaments ratified the Convention by nine parliamentarians .
 CIS Air Defense System was created in 1995 . CIS member states are part of the joint joint air defense system . CIS is a joint military and defense alliance .
Military personnel of the joint CIS Air Defense System grew twofold along the western, European border of the CIS, and by 1. times on its southern borders . Over the years, the military personnel in the CIS have grown twofold .
 Yevgeny Shaposhnikov was appointed as Commander-in-Chief of the CIS Armed Forces in May 1992 . His staff were ejected from the MOD and General Staff buildings and given offices in the former Warsaw Pact Headquarters .
 In 1994, negotiations were initiated between the CIS countries on the free trade area . No agreement was signed .
 A proposed free trade agreement would have covered all twelve then CIS members except Turkmenistan . A proposed deal would have included all 12 then CIS member countries .
Common economic space between the Commonwealth of Independent States countries of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan . Agreement in principle about the creation of this space was announced after a meeting in Moscow suburb of Novo-Ogarevo .
 The Common Economic Space would involve a supranational commission on trade and tariffs . It would initially be headed by a representative of Kazakhstan, and would not be subordinate to the governments of the four nations .
 The ultimate goal would be a regional organisation that would be open for other countries to join . It could eventually lead even to a single currency .
 A Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia was created in 2010 . A single market was envisioned for 2012, with a single market for 2012 .
 The data is taken from the United Nations statistics division and the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency .
 The organisation continued in 1994 as the Central Asian Economic Union . Tajikistan and Turkmenistan did not participate in the organisation .
 In 1998 it became the Central Asian Economic Cooperation, which marked the return of Tajikistan . In 1998, it was the first time the country was back in the region .
 Uzbekistan will join the Eurasian Economic Community and that the organisations will merge . On 7 October 2005 it was decided between the member states that Uzbekistan would join the Economic Community .
 The post-Soviet disputed states of Abkhazia, Artsakh, South Ossetia, and Transnistria are all members of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations . It aims to forge closer integration among the members .
 The CIS-Election Monitoring Organisation is an election monitoring body that was formed in October 2002 . It was formed following a Commonwealth of Independent States heads of states meeting .
 CIS-EMO has been sending election observers to member countries of the CIS since this time . They approved many elections which have been heavily criticised by independent observers .
 The final round of the Ukrainian presidential election, 2004, was questioned by the CIS . The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe found no significant problems .
 CIS observation teams challenged the validity of an election, saying that it should be considered illegitimate . This was the first time ever that the CIS observation team challenged an election's validity .
 Ukrainian Independent Information Agency quoted Dmytro Svystkov that Ukraine has suspended its participation in the CIS election monitoring organisation .
 Moldovan authorities refused to invite CIS observers in the Moldovan parliamentary elections, 2005 . The action was criticised by Russia for not inviting CIS observers .
 Many observers from Belarus and Russia were stopped from reaching Moldova . Many of the observers were stopped by Russia and Belarus .
 In 2017 a festival for national sports and games was held in Ulyanovsk .
 The main sports were sambo, tug of war, mas-wrestling, gorodki, belt wrestling, bandy, kettlebell lifting, chess and archery .
 Ukraine is a country-participant, but not a member country, according to the Ukrainian-Russian Relations . Ukraine is also a member of the European Union .
Ukraine's withdrawal from CIS to take one year to take a year to complete .
 Protokoll über Beitritt zur GUS-Freihandelszone in Kraft getreten.ru 28 December 2013 .
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Commonwealth of Independent States . The Commonwealth of independent States is a member of the Commonwealth.
 Legal Aspects of the Regional Integration Processes in the Post-Soviet Area . Legal Aspect of the regional integration process.