 The Kremlin has not masked its interest in Ukraine's March 2019 presidential election . Ukraine's presidential election is scheduled for March 2019 .
 Moscow responded with retaliatory restrictions on Ukraine’s political and business elite . In November, nearly five years after Kyiv sanctioned Russia for the annexation of Crimea.
 Russian coast guard vessels sparked the first-ever direct clash between the two countries’ militaries by firing on Ukrainian ships off the coast of Crimea .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea and the proxy war in the Donbas remain the largest political issue among Ukrainian voters . The timing of Moscow's escalations is not a coincidence.
 Over the past several years, the Kremlin has upped its efforts to influence democratic politics abroad . The Kremlin has been trying to influence democracy abroad for years .
 Moscow has supported candidates of uncertainty. Backing Eurosceptic, anti-immigrant, and isolationist parties, Moscow has rejected status quo .
 Yulia Tymoshenko is the current frontrunner in Ukraine’s presidential election . Former Prime Minister and current frontrunner Yulia.
 Tymoshenko proffers uncertainty that may well jeopardize Ukraine’s interests and benefit its hostile neighbor to the east . Campaigning on a ‘new course’ for Ukraine.
 The country’s current lifeline is a $3. billion agreement with the International Monetary Fund . In turn, it unlocks conditional financing from the European Union and the World Bank .
 To receive IMF funds, Ukraine must implement reforms to improve macroeconomic stability . Ukraine must also improve macro economic stability .
 The IMF’s terms include tightening contribution requirements for pensioners, increasing heavily subsidized consumer gas prices, approving a budget with less than a 2. percent deficit, creating a credible anti-corruption court and legalizing the sale of farmland .
 The first three have seen progress, while the second two remain at a standstill . The first two have seenprogress, but the other two have remained at a standingstill .
 The IMF-mandated reforms are critical to keeping Ukraine solvent . Although politically unpopular, the reforms are politically unpopular .
 Ukraine’s previous $17. billion IMF package ran its course with only $8. billion disbursed due to sluggish reform progress . Indeed, Ukraine's previous $ 17. billion package ran their course with just $7.5 billion .
Without cooperation with the IMF, Ukraine would also not have received 3. billion euros in financial assistance from the EU . The most EU aid ever offered to a non-member state, $5. billion from the World Bank since 2014 .
 The Fund’s support, an implicit guarantee that Ukraine will not default on its debts, further enabled Kyiv to tap global capital markets . Kyiv raised $5 billion in Eurobond issuances since 2014 .
 Ukraine must become a functioning market economy with stable macro-economic fundamentals, a welcoming business environment, and strong labor and financial markets . To join the bloc, Ukraine must be a thriving market economy.
 The EU will not lend to Ukraine absent Kyiv’s cooperation with the IMF, let alone seriously consider a path toward accession .
 Ukraine will struggle to join Western military or political-economic institutions while a secessionist conflict simmers in the Donbas and Crimea remains occupied by Russia .
 Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization requires member states come to an Ally’s aid in the event of an attack .
 It would not be wise to accept a new member already at war with one of the world’s largest militaries .
 Russian involvement in a country’s frozen conflicts is a non-starter for NATO accession . Georgia's experience of Georgiapromised a path to membership over ten years ago .
 The EU's concept of the four freedoms is similarly troubled by disputed borders . The EU’s concept of free movement of goods, capital, services, and labor within a common market is similar to disputed borders.
EU accession is ultimately possible for Ukraine if the war in the Donbas freezes . EU accession could also be possible for the country if the conflict in the region freezes .
 Crimea and the Donbas are not a viable option for Kyiv . But effectively surrendering Crimea and Donbas is not an option for the country .
To do so would not only be an act of domestic political suicide, but would capitulate long-established international norms in the face of aggression . To do so, it would be a act of political suicide.
 Reintegrating the territories as part of a federal state is similarly disadvantageous . Reintegration of the territories is similar to that of the U.S.
 Moscow to end the increasingly unpopular war in the Donbas, win sanctions relief, and ease the financial burden of supporting two self-proclaimed republics . It would allow Moscow to stop the unpopular war.
 A federal Ukraine would also grant the Kremlin an avenue to influence its neighbor’s politics on a national level .
 There is no doubt that the Kremlin would use this influence to advance its primary goal of preventing Ukraine’s Western integration .
 Ukraine has steadily bucked the Kremlin’s interests in these two areas . Over the past five years, Ukraine has been bucking the Kremlin's interests in both areas .
 The Ukrainian government has been slow to implement economic reforms . It has made enough progress to keep an IMF agreement alive and to negotiate a new aid package for 2019 .
 President Petro Poroshenko and his allies have pushed through several unpopular fiscal policies . In September, they committed to a 23. percent increase in household gas prices and voting in December to end the moratorium on agricultural land sales .
 Preventing a sovereign default by maintaining relations with the IMF has been a key achievement of Poroshenko’s presidency .
 Once the political cycle ends in October 2019 following parliamentary elections, the current administration will likely up the pace on the IMF’s long-demanded reforms .
 Kyiv will eventually push ahead, says IMF Chairwoman Christine Lagarde . Ukraine's Western backers have their frustrations with the Poroshenko administration .
 Neither Ukraine nor Russia-backed separatists have observed a ceasefire and withdrawn troops . Kyiv has to pardon the leaders of the Lugansk and Donetsk People’s Republics, support local elections, and recognize the region's autonomy in the Ukrainian constitution .
 2018 saw fresh discussion of deploying a UN peacekeeping force to the Donbas as an avenue to end the stalemate .
 Moscow wants to deploy a mission to the contact line . Kyiv insists that the force extend to the entire region, including the Ukrainian-Russian border .
 Russia is an aggressor, and the Donbas is an illegally occupied territory . The Donbas has been an illegal occupied territory.
 There will be little room for the Kremlin to extract beneficial concessions. So long as the status quo continues, there will be no room for a change .
 Tymoshenko offers uncertainty on both the economic and security fronts . Theoshenko has been in power since 2007 .
 Tymoshenko's predisposition for change will likely play into the Kremlin’s hands . In some areas, such as Western-oriented economic reforms, she is likely to be more open to change .
 Tymoshenko’s anti-establishment proposals offer the Kremlin an opening to change the unfavorable status quo .
 Tymoshenko's "new course" means a departure from Ukraine’s IMF program as currently conceived. Economically, it means a departures from the current program .
Anti-IMF sentiment has become cornerstone of former PM's campaign . Former PM's strong pro-EU and pro-NATO orientation has become a cornerstone of her campaign .
Without reforms, Ukraine will lose the support of the IMF, the organization keeping the country solvent . Without reforms, the IMF will lose its support of Ukraine, says the IMF .
 They make promises to improve socio-economic conditions and resist unpopular austerity measures . They also resist unpopularusterity measures .
 Tymoshenko's track record shows a genuine disregard for measures intended to decentralize the Ukrainian economy, secure energy independence and boost government revenues .
 In 2009, Tymoshenko’s government promised to hike gas prices by 20 percent to receive a $3. billion aid tranche . The government also promised to raise gas prices to receive the aid .
 She canceled the hike and effectively ended the IMF’s financial support . Months later, she effectively ended IMF's financial support, she said .
 Tymoshenko’s resistance to IMF-mandated reforms worries Western economic organizations . It is not just her resistance to reforms that worries Western economies .
 At the heart of her economic plan are populist policies that threaten macroeconomic stability, she says . She says they threaten macro economic stability .
 Tymoshenko wants to increase public expenditures to develop industry, infrastructure, agriculture, and high-tech innovation centers .
 She foresees fiscal stimulus deriving from cheap domestic credit and increased lending from multilateral development banks . The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Finance Corporation, the European Investment Bank, and the European Bank for reconstruction and Development .
 Analysts have noted that Tymoshenko’s economic plan is heavily borrowed and contains numerous contradictions . Analysts say that the Ukrainian leader's economic plan contains many contradictions .
 It is clear that she does not have a thought-out plan for how she will finance the government or implement populist promises while maintaining macroeconomic stability .
 This uncertainty is a detriment to Ukraine’s relationship with Western economic institutions, says the author . This uncertainty will advance the Kremlin's interests.
 Tymoshenko promises to overhaul the current diplomatic process in the East . He says he will overhaul the diplomatic process .
 As an opposition candidate, her best argument is that Poroshenko has failed to deliver on his promise to end the war . Her best argument for election is that he has failed.
 Tymoshenko asserts that it is time for Ukraine to discuss new strategies . The Minsk peace agreements helped limit the scope of the conflict .
 The former prime minister proposes to renew discussions on the war within a broadened version of this diplomatic format . German, French, Chinese, and EU representatives would be included in the new format .
 Tymoshenko believes she will not only be able to secure a peace deal, but also restore relations with Russia . Through this arrangement, she believes she'll not only have to secure the peace deal .
 She is adamant that federalism is not an option for Ukraine, as it will only engender separatism . She insists she will not accept peace on Putin’s terms .
 Ukrainians are wary that Tymoshenko may be too willing to cut a deal with the Kremlin . However, Ukrainians are also wary of the deal .
 As a member of parliament since 2014, she did not vote to declare Russia an “aggressor country’s” to demand the de-occupation of the Donbas . She has not voted to call Russia a ‘aggressors’ or to revoke
In 2008, she refrained from commenting on the Russo-Georgian war, as the West uniformly condemned Russian aggression . Similarly, while prime minister in 2008, in 2008 she refrained from commenting.
 Tymoshenko is keeping her options open to play the role of an agile dealmaker . She is keeping options open.
 The Kremlin's ideal scenario is not the Kremlin’s ideal scenario, it is a vastly better outcome for Russia than for Ukraine . But that is not an ideal scenario.
 Tymoshenko has cut unfavorable deals with the Kremlin before, most notably the 2009 gas deal that led Ukraine to pay more for gas than any other country in Europe .
 To end the war, Kyiv must give something from Moscow to end it . To end it, in order to get something from Kyiv, the country must give it something .
 Whatever that may be, it could jeopardize the future of Ukraine’s Western integration .
 A Tymoshenko presidency is a danger to both Ukraine’s IMF program and the war in the east . It is hard to say what the Ukrainian president will do once elected .
 Tymoshenko administration to negotiate a better settlement on either. Fresh ideas are essential for Ukraine’s political and economic modernization, but it will be challenging for a Tyloshenko administration .
 The loss of Western support, or selling out Ukraine’s interests to Russia, are huge, says David Frum . If things go poorly, the downside risks are huge.
 Stephanie Petrella is a Research Associate in Eurasia Program at the Foreign Policy Research Institute . She is a Deputy Editor of the daily political economy news brief BMB Russia .