 This creates a precedent that might also have direct implications for Moldova and Georgia . This is the first time this precedent has been used in Moldova .
 There are differences in how the political elites of EU member states perceive and understand the current Russian-Ukrainian crisis .
 EU member states share a common understanding of what is at stake and how the problem can be dealt with . EU is confronted with external challenges, it takes time for it to form a critical mass of member states .
Long-term developmental trends in or concerning Europe following the end of bipolar conflict. They are inevitable outcomes reflecting long-term development trends in Europe after bipolar conflict .
 Europe's integration dynamics are completely different in western and eastern halves . The integration dynamics have been completely different over the last two decades in Europe .
 The collapse of the Communist bloc helped to deepen the integration process in western Europe . The EU also pushed the EU into becoming more engaged in its neighborhood .
 The former Yugoslav republics look up to the EU as a source of stability and know-how . But they are clearly not trying to become part of the Russian Federation .
 The Lisbon Treaty and the institutional design of the present EU could not have become 6 P Shakarian . “Sanctions against Russia are dividing Europe more than you think,’ says Russia Direct .
 The EU is guarantor of peace and stability in the Western Balkans . It is preparing the former Yugoslav republics for their accession to the EU .
 The EU was not involved in the Yugoslav crisis of the 1990s, because it did not yet exist in its current shape . The EU did not participate in the crisis because it was not in its present shape .
 The EU remains a unique project in the history of international relations . We can rightly criticize the EU for many things, but the EU is a uniqueproject in the world .
 Malta with its 400,000 citizens has equal voting rights in EU decisions on legislation and policies to Germany with its population of 80 million . It is a unique situation that is not found anywhere else in the world today nor in history .
 The EU in 2014 is a qualitatively different project, internally and externally, to the European Communities before 1993 . The EU is in 2014, but it is a different project.
 Prague, 7 May 2009,” 8435/09 , Council of the European Union, May 7, 2009 . .
 None of the integration initiatives aimed at creating order in the former Soviet Union can be labeled successful . Some former Soviet countries over the last two decades can be labelled successful .
 The disintegrated former Soviet Union was supposed to be replaced by the Community of Independent States set up by the presidents of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus in 1991 .
 Russia and Belarus have been trying to renew the common federal state since 1994 . Today few recognize We need to consider what the abbreviation CIS refers to .
 Today only Russian and Belorussian and more in order to recall that project . Only Russian andBelorussian. Today only only Russian.
 Putin's Russia in 2004 came into conflict Ukrainian crisis with its largest ally – Lukashenka’s Belarus – the same country with which Yeltsin wanted to create a federation . The current Russian-Putin's Russia was unable to implement a successful EU response.
 Belarus was first to be confronted with the shutdown of its natural gas supply from Russia in 2004 and then again in 2007 and 2010 . The first gas war between Russia and Ukraine occurred in 2007, 2009 and 2009 .
 Russia used military force on the territory of former Soviet republics during the civil wars in Georgia in 1991 and in Moldova in 1992 . Russia employed force again in August 2008 in Georgia and in 2014 in Georgia . This time it has also annexed part of Ukrainian territory .
 Belarus and Kazakhstan signed an agreement to establish the Eurasian Union in May 201414 . Russia has not been able to offer its post-Soviet neighbors a constructive agenda in the last 20 or so years .
 Hunting for an example of Maltese–German style equal status cooperation in the post-Soviet region in the last 20 years would be pointless. Hunting for a Maltese-German styleequal status cooperation is pointless .
 This is the substantial difference between western Europe today, and the post-Soviet region . This is a significant difference between the two regions .
 The contrast between the increasing integration in western Europe versus the continuing fragmentation in the eastern part are erroneous to trends that are shaping the pan-European refer to the crisis as agenda, including EU–Russia relations .
 The crisis "Russian sphere" in the post-Soviet area in is systemic and wholly the last 20 years speak for themselves . The crisis “Russian sphere’s’ Russian sphere in the past 20 years speaks for themselves.
 The two different European worlds came to clashes in 2013 and 2014 . Ukraine and Ukraine have been involved in a series of clashes between the two countries .
 It is erroneous to refer to the crisis as a “Ukrainian crisis,’ since it is no chance occurrence . The crisis is not a crisis, but it is a crisis.
 The crisis is systemic and wholly European; it represents a confrontation between the two European worlds that have developed and formed over the last 20 years . The crisis has been described as "systemic and whollyEuropean"
 As efforts at co-habitation have not been successful, there is only one Europe, confrontation had to occur sooner or later . There has been only one European attempt to co-exist in the past .
 The idea behind the Common Economic Space was that the EU and Russia would create a free-trade zone within 15 years . This was called ‘Common Spaces’ and was in operation between 2003 and 2006 .
 Russia did not like the “color’s revolutions in eastern Europe, while most EU member states were sympathetic . Most EU members were sympathetic to Russia .
 The EU did not accept the Russian request for Gazprom to have privileged status on the EU’s gas markets . The EU has not accepted the request .
 Putin, French President Chirac and German Chancellor Schröder lost their political positions in their home countries .
 The EU included the AA/DCFTA in their 2008 offer to post-Soviet countries . Russia decided to walk away from the free-trade deal with the EU at the end of 2006 .
 The EU had offered a free-trade deal to Russia back in 2003, long before it proposed its deal for other postSoviet states .
 EU response to Russian tanks 15 See A Duleba, ed., search for new momentum in EU–Russia relations. In other words, the EU response is to Russia .
 Conflict began in Georgia in 2008, and continued in Ukraine in 2013 and 2014 . Conflict started in Georgia, and continues in Ukraine since 2013 .
 This conflict could have been avoided as it mirrors development trends over the last 20 years in the two parts of post-cold war Europe .
Despite all the difficulties, the EU became the agenda-setter in Europe, including the East . Despite all the challenges, the European Union became the EU's agenda-settingter .
 The EU’s achievement in the Western Balkans within the last two decades made it the key international actor in/for Europe .
 The Western Balkans case illustrates the nature of the EU as an international player . The EU is a member of the European Union as a player in the Balkans .
Russia accused of triggering trade war with Ukraine . The EU is modernizing access to the EU market .
Before the Russian-Georgian crisis in 2008, the Western Balkans had achieved similar to what the West Balkans had done . The EU and Russia could hardly have hoped for anything distantly similar to the Balkans .
 Russia's military intervention in Georgia in 2008 came as a shock to EU leaders . Russia’s military intervention was a surprise to European leaders .
 Russia recognizes South Ossetia and Abkhazia . The military operation lasted only a few days and the outcome was Russia recognizing the two countries .
 Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine are among the countries authorized to draft a new offer for Georgia . Georgia and Armenia are also included in the new offer .
 French President Nicolas Sarkozy launched the Union for the Mediterranean during the French Presidency of the EU Council in 2008 . The aim was to counterbalance the then French president’s launch of the union .
 Russia's intervention in Georgia in August 2008. It is questionable whether the Eastern partnership and proposal for deeper integration with the EU would have ever seen the light of day had it not been for Russia’s intervention .
 The association agreements offered to Eastern Europe meant that the partner countries will adopt around 95 per cent of the EU economic and market power . The EU capacity to project its power in external relations (as a civilian power, normative power, and/or market power) see Ch.
 Successful legal harmonization would in fact make them part of the EU single market . Successful harmonization could make them a part of Europe's single market, according to the EU .
 Moscow responded by imposing trade sanctions against Ukraine in July 2013 . The then president Yanukovych said signing the agreement with the EU was not a good idea .
 Putin agreed to provide a 15 billion USD loan and to lower gas prices to Ukraine if Yanukovych decided not to sign the agreement . In November 2013 Putin agreed.
 Russia started the military invasion of Crimea on 25 Author’s interview with representatives of the DG Trade of the European Commission who were part of the EU negotiating team for talks on the AA/DCFTA with Ukraine .
 Portugal's PM disagrees with Poland's PM over political aspects of EU relations with Russia . It might be the case that the prime minister of Portugal disagrees with the PM .
 Portugal and Poland agree that if there is any opportunity in the EU's external relations with other countries for a contractual deal that would facilitate the expansion of the EU’s single market, that would bring more trade and jobs, then that would be a good deal .
 The offer was made to Eastern Europe with the view that the deal was a win-win one and that it would benefit everyone .
 There are always groups of member states who securitize an issue in international relations trying to get it onto the EU agenda .
 The practice of EU decisionmaking in external relations shows that members who connect securitized issue with economic benefits for all member states are more successful .
It is often the case that the expansion of the single market becomes the key common ground among member states for finding consensus on external relations .
 The EU responded to Russian tanks in Georgia in 2008 with a consensual decision to expand the single market into the post-Soviet area .
 The EU is directly involved in the Russian-Ukrainian crisis and will have to adjust its institutions and policies in order to deal with the problem . That is why the EU is direct involved with the crisis .
 The EU cannot give up on what it is and on how it has dealt with European crises in the past and delivered the European integration process for over the last two decades .
 The EU cannot stop its enlargement policy for the east European nations which are willing to join the project . The EU can't stop its policy for east European countries that are willing.
 The only force which could stop EU enlargement in eastern Europe would be if the people of the partner countries were incapable of accepting the necessary and painful reforms or if their political elites were to fail .
 The EU cannot afford a deal with Russia that would be at the expense of the state sovereignty of partner countries .
 The political part of AA should not become subject to trilateral talks, says AA . AA's political part should not be subject to the talks .
 Russia had reasonable trade, social and/or economy based arguments. What might be discussed is extending the transitional periods if selected trade items were to be included in the DCFTA .
 Sanctions against Russia should continue unless solutions can be found for Donbass and Crimea that are acceptable to Ukraine . Sanctions should continue against Russia.
 The EU can only recognize Crimea as part of Russia on the proviso that Ukraine does so first . The EU is only recognizing Crimea as a part of the Russian state .
 Second, the challenging task for EU diplomacy will be to use trilateral talks to bring about the more realistic prospect of the launch of FTA talks with Russia/Eurasian Union .
 The task should be two-tiered; that is, not only to sustain the association agreement with Ukraine, but also to encourage Russia into engaging with the EU on the FTA deal . The task is to maintain the agreement and encourage Russia to engage in the deal .
 The EU can do anything except act against its nature, it should come up with a positive agenda to offer Russia . But, exclusively within the prospects of moving Russia closer to a contract with the EU, that might facilitate expansion of the EU single market .
 The EU should consider a combination of an AA/DCFTA for partner countries with the option of concluding sectorial agreements . Ukraine or any other willing partner country should be ready to proceed more quickly in harmonizing with the EU acquis on a particular sectorial policy .
 Ukraine and Moldova are European Energy Community members . First, it should expand the Energy Union it started developing so as to strengthen energy security .
 The EU’s capacity to sustain its identity as a European integration project is being tested in eastern Europe .
 The current crisis poses questions as to what Europe will look like in 20 years to come . The EU has achieved within the last two decades to come, as well as what it has achieved .