 The EU's failure to predict Russia's actions does not make it responsible for them, says the EU .
 Since the fighting began, the EU has done a lot to help Ukraine and constrain Russia’s behaviour .
 Many of those demanding 'Brexit' are adamant that the EU blundered into Ukraine, a country it little understood .
 This encroachment on Russia’s sphere of influence was bound to provoke the bear to lash out, they say . This encroaching on Russia's sphere of Influence was bound for the bear, they said .
 Sweden and Poland are two countries they regard as 'anti-Russian' They criticise the EU for allowing them to shape the ‘eastern partnership’ that the EU unveiled in 2008 .
 The EU promised association agreements, including ‘deep and comprehensive free trade agreements’ to promote trade .
 The Russians see the eastern partnership as an EU scheme to undermine their sway in eastern Europe . The Russians say the EU scheme is to undermine them in the region .
 The EU negotiated the association agreement with Ukraine, the neighbour that matters most to Moscow . The agreement will have dire consequences for the Russian economy, says the Kremlin .
 The agreement was the proximate cause of the popular uprising that overthrew the regime of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014 .
 There was a national consensus in Ukraine – extending to those like Yanukovych who were relatively sympathetic to Russia – to pursue the EU deal .
 By 2012 the negotiations were complete, and the text was initialled by EU and Ukrainian leaders . By 2012, the text had been signed by the EU and Ukraine leaders .
 Ukrainian presidents of different political stripes had asked Brussels for the promise of membership since the mid-1990s . The agreement said nothing about that possibility .
The prospect of such a backward country joining their club horrified most EU leaders . The prospect of the country joining its club horrified many EU leaders.
 The EU tried to consult the Russians on the negotiation of the agreements . Despite Russian claims to the contrary, the EU attempted to consult them on the negotiations .
 At twice-yearly EU-Russia summits, the Commission always put the agreements on the agenda . The EU-Russian summits are held twice a year .
 Igor Yurgens, a senior adviser to then Russian President Dmitri Medvedev, recalls that at these summits the Commission’s president, José Manuel Barroso, urged the Russians to discuss the agreements .
 Putin returned to the Russian presidency in 2012, for a third term . All this changed when Putin returned for the third term.
 Putin learned that if Ukraine implemented the DCFTA, it could not join the EEU, which would have high common external tariffs . Putin learned in the spring of 2013 that Ukraine would not be able to lower tariffs .
 Putin took exception to the EU-Ukraine deal, but also to similar agreements that Brussels was negotiating with Armenia, Georgia and Moldova .
 Yanukovych insisted that he was still committed to the agreements with Brussels . In Kyiv, Yanukovych insisted he is still committed.
 These were due to be signed in Vilnius, at a summit between the EU and its eastern partners, in November 2013 . The summit will take place in November.
 Sergei Glaziev, a close aide of Putin, said that if Ukraine went ahead with the DCFTA, the economic consequences would lead to the break-up of the country .
 Russia warned Moldova that proceeding with its EU deal would lead to its exports being stopped and its guest workers being expelled . At the same time Russia warned that Moldova would be expelled from the EU .
 In September Putin persuaded Armenia to scrap its association agreement with the EU and join the EEU instead . In September, Putin persuaded Armenians to scrap the agreement and join EEU .
 At that point, neither analysts such as myself, nor key EU officials, realised how steamed up Moscow was becoming over the association agreements .
 We cannot be sure of what Putin said to Yanukovych in the next few weeks . We can't be sure what he said to the Yanukovych.
 Senior officials in EU institutions, European governments and the Obama administration were shocked by the outcome .
 Putin and Yanukovych were equally surprised by what followed in Kyiv . The rejection of the EU agreements led to a popular uprising .
 In February 2014, more than 50 protestors were shot by snipers in a single day . The security forces started to drift away from Yanukovych, who fled the country .
 Putin may have expected the new government, led by those who had been in opposition, to be a puppet regime .
 Ukrainian peninsula of Crimea was taken over by Ukraine in March . It was annexed in March, leading to Crimea's annexation .
 Western governments were once again wrong-footed, having failed to imagine that Putin could carry out such a brazen and illegal act .
 By April, anti-Kyiv rebels, backed by Russian special forces, were taking over parts of the Donbass region in Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia tried to talk to the Russians about its agreements with Ukraine . But they were not interested until after the texts were initialled .
 Even after the agreements were signed, the EU bent over backwards to keep the Russians informed and involved .
 The EU accepted this and agreed to a Russian request that officials from the Commission, Ukraine and Russia should meet regularly to discuss the deal’s impact on Russia . The EU agreed to the Russian request.
 EU officials concluded that the DCFTA would have zero impact on the Russian economy . None of its provisions would prevent or disrupt trade between Ukraine and Russia, they said .
 The EU can be criticised for not thinking through the strategic consequences of its policies on Ukraine . The longer answer is that the EU should not think through the consequences.
 In Paris and Berlin, some officials complain that the Commission and the European External Action Service are too technocratic and process-driven .
 Russia should have thought more about Russia’s political response to the association agreement, the argument goes . Russia's political reaction to the agreement should have been more focused on its political response .
 If the Russians refused to talk about it, the EU side should have insisted, it would have insisted .
 EU policy on Russia is driven mainly by the key national capitals, notably Berlin, Paris and London . The job of the Brussels institutions is largely to implement the line set by governments .
 The governments which supported the EU’s eastern partnership and its association agreements mis-read how Russia would respond .
 To realists who take a Kissingerian world-view, such words might have been appropriate .
 Realists strongly believe Russia and China are in the right to establish spheres of influence .
World-view is incompatible with the Western principle of self-determination, says the author . But that world-view isn't compatible with the West's view of selfdetermination, he says .
 Ukraine, as a sovereign state, has its own foreign policy orientation . If you subscribe to the latter, you have to allow Ukraine to choose its own policy orientation.
 principles such as realism and self-determination cannot be followed absolutely. Evidently, principles like realism can't be followed completely .
 Most Western governments would not want to see Ukraine join NATO, for fear of the consequences . The Ukrainian government has said it will not join the alliance .
 The EU was right to stand by its principles in supporting Ukraine’s bid for closer economic ties . But unless one takes an extreme realist line, the EU is right to support Ukraine's bid to closer economic links .
Once Putin had invaded Ukraine, the EU led the international effort to stabilise the situation . After Putin's invasion, the European Union led the effort to stabilize the situation.
 €4 billion in macro-financial assistance committed or disbursed since the start of the crisis in 2014 . It has provided humanitarian aid for victims of the conflict, including displaced persons. It has given technical assistance to help with reform, including the fight against corruption .
 sanctions have been surprisingly effective in depriving major state-backed Russian companies of access to capital . Despite grumbling from some member-states, it has maintained pressure on Russia .
Without sanctions, Russia might have been tempted to take more Ukrainian territory . Without sanctions, the possibility that they could be strengthened, Russia could have taken more Ukraine .
 The EU can be chided for not doing a better job of explaining to the Ukrainian people how they would benefit from closer ties .
 The EU cannot be blamed for Russia’s annexation of Crimea or its military incursions into the Donbass .
 It deserves at least some praise for how it has since responded to the conflict . And it deserves some praise. It has since been criticized for its response to a conflict .