 Stalin loaded the Crimean Tatars on trains in the course of a few days and sent them to Central Asia . The action is almost universally recognized and denounced as an act of genocide .
 Vladimir Putin is doing much the same thing but in slow motion and getting away with it . But today, he is doing the same things but inslow motion .
 In the five years since invading and annexing Crimea, the current Kremlin leader has expelled some 40,000 Crimean Tatars and destroyed almost all of their cultural institutions .
 Rafis Kashapov is the former leader of the All-Tatar Social Center . He is the current émigré head of Free Idel Ural . Kashapova is a former leader.
 "Such a horrific tragedy many peoples experienced this was the continuing practice of the communist regime,’ the activist says .
 Tragically, that old would not yet heal; and it is being made worse by new ones . The old would have not yet healed .
 The occupiers have closed schools, mosques, newspapers and governing institutions .
 The world is fully justified to speak about a new “deportation’s’. But it has not been total or all at once. The world should speak about the new ‘deportations’
 Crimean Tatars are continuing to struggle against the occupation of Crimea . Fortunately, they are still fighting against the Occupation .
 Many expelled from their homeland are in countries like Ukraine and Turkey where they can continue the fight and are doing so .
Too many in the West are unwilling to see Putin's crime for what it is – a recrudescence of Stalin’s .
 Russia's hybrid military forces mounted two attacks on Ukrainian army positions in Donbas on March 16 . One Ukrainian soldier reported as killed in action and another one as wounded in action .
 The situation in the area of the Joint Forces Operation remains under control of Ukrainian troops . The situation is still under control.
 Russian occupation forces violated ceasefire six times in the Joint Forces Operation area in eastern Ukraine over the past day .
 The weapons banned under the Minsk agreements were used thrice . The weapons were used in Ukraine .
 The video was uploaded on Facebook by Anatoly “Shtefan’ Shtirlitz, an officer in the Ukrainian Armed Forces . The video is posted on Facebook .
 They are contractors, they are willing to shoot at even their own people for money . They are not only contractors, but they're willing to shot at even themselves for money.
 President Petro Poroshenko stressed that the Ukrainian Armed Forces had radically changed and received new modern equipment and weapons thanks to the support of the entire Ukrainian people .
 He especially noted the complete re-equipment of the army, including the provision of troops with new secure communications, which became strategic in the context of the war .
 Petro Poroshenko: "Revived the army and the entire security sector, which were literally saturated by corruption and FSS officials"
 I personally visit the ceremonies of transferring weapons and equipment to the troops . I personally visited the ceremonies.
 modernized equipment, and sometimes a completely new and modern weaponry, is not yet repaired . It is already not repaired, but modernized technology, and often new and new weaponry .
 From April 1, snipers, paratroopers and military mountain assault brigades will receive 24,000 UAH if they are on the frontline .
 President, Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko instructed the Minister of Defense to resolve the issue of raising the amount of financial support for servicemen of the mountain assault units .
 A group of Ukrainian aviators flew from the airfield of the Boryspil airport to the airbase ‘Aalborg’ of the Royal Air Force of Denmark on the Il-76MD aircraft .
 Five ground service representatives and four flight crew members will be involved in the task for the first time in Greenland this year .
 The Air Force will be replenished with personnel who will gain experience in the extreme conditions of the Far North . All the time it is necessary to work in conditions of low temperatures, now it can be lowered to the mark minus 50 degrees Celsius .
 Difficulty adds a strong gusty wind, a limited runway at the station “Nord’s length of 1800 m and the absence of any visible landmarks . The station is located in the middle of the city's central area .
 Ukrainian military transport aircraft IL-76MD allows loading and unloading of large cargoes with the help of crane equipment of the aircraft and take-off and landing on truncated bands . The aircraft is minimally equipped with navigational aids .
 C-130 ‘Hercules’ and C-17 “Globmaster’s’ transport aircraft have certain limitations . The transport aircraft can fly to the station ‘Nord’
 "Globmaster" does not have crane equipment, which makes it impossible to transport large-sized tanks . The ‘Hercules’ has considerably less possibilities for transportation of dimensional goods .
 How law enforcement authorities turn a blind eye on corruption in defense sector.
 Several hundred people have gathered in Kyiv at a protest organized by a far-right group to call for arrests of figures linked to an alleged military corruption scandal .
 The rally in the center of the Ukrainian capital on March 16 was called by the National Corps, the political wing of the Azov battalion . The rally was held in the capital's center .
 The state enterprise “Ukroboronservis’s’ has put to the buyer in the United States of America another party of almost three thousand Mosin rifles .
 In December 2018, "Ukroboronservis" put the same company in the party with 3200 Mosin rifles . Earlier, in December, “Ukroborservis’s” put the company in a party.
 The USA is the largest buyer of small arms in the Ukrainian market, according to reports from the State Export Control Service of Ukraine .
During 2007-2017, American companies bought in Ukraine over 400,000 rifles and carbines . In particular, during 2007- 2017, American firms bought in Ukrainian weapons .
 In March 2016, the first batch of rifles was handed over to the National Guard .
 On a chilly morning in early spring, humid mist and low clouds hang over the air base of Vasylkiv, Ukraine . The city of 36,000 people is 30 kilometers southwest of Kyiv .
Ukrainian Air Force's 40th Tactical Aviation Brigade is home to the Ukrainian Air Force’s 40th tactical Aviation Brigade . The brigade is based in Kiev, Ukraine .
 By midday, the sky has cleared, and to the great joy of the brigade's pilots, the base’s flight control center gives the go-ahead for a flight session . For the first time in this week of poor weather, the weather has cleared .
 A silver Mikoyan MiG‑29 fighter with blue-and-yellow tridents on its twin tail fins is towed to the runway . The session starts with meteorological reconnaissance .
 After a half-hour of tinkering, the aircraft is fully fueled and ready to go .
 The pilot locks the glass dome of his cockpit, and the jet slips in the gray skies . The jet's turbofan engines roaring and spitting trails of hot smoke .
 The Ukrainian Air Force or UAF regularly conducts such practice flights . But this was not always the case .
 Many Ukrainian pilots were frequently grounded for want of jet fuel, while their warplanes were being scrapped or sold off by the dozen .
 The defense budget has been skyrocketing since 2014 to a record-breaking $8 billion planned for 2019 . Almost 6 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product is in the defense budget .
 The UAF is trying to rise again as a combat-potent force . Crippled by years of underfunding, drastic post-Soviet cuts, and a rapid loss of skilled personnel .
 The mission is now to prevent Russia, the world's second greatest air power, from encroaching on Ukraine's integrity and independence .
 The UAF is now feverishly training more pilots and modernizing their aircraft . With swarms of Russian warplanes based closer to Ukraine’s borders every month, the UAF has been training new pilots .
 The fleet, inherited from Soviet times, is drawing close to the end of its operating lifetime . But its aging fleet is drawing closer to its end in Russia .
 UAF needs a new fleet of modern warplanes capable of conducting a full spectrum of military operations . Ukraine’s skies will be largely defenseless.
 The list includes approximately 37 MiG‑29 and 34 Su‑27 fighters, 14 Su‑24M attack aircraft, and 31 Su‑25 close air support aircraft . The list also includes 32 L‑39 training planes, five Ilyushin Il‑76 and three An‑26
 The force also has a pool of 14 Mi‑9, 30 Mi‑8, and two Mi‑2 helicopters .
 Ukraine still remains among the few nations operating all principal branches of air power . Today's UAF is a shadow of what it was in 1992 .
 Increased spending on air power, reaching a total of Hr 8. billion in 2019, has allowed the gradual resumption of regular practice flights .
 Ukrainian fighter pilots now get between 40 and 60 flying hours a year, and all airbases hold two or three flight sessions every week .
 There are no illusions regarding the strong adversary the young pilots will face in the case of all-out war .
 The old hands drill them in close-combat tactics, they believe, would somewhat negate Russia’s technological superiority in combat .
 They are trained hard to fly as low as possible to avoid Russian radar detection . They are also trained to avoid Russia's radar detection.
 The UAF from time to time suffers tragic accidents that take the lives of even its most experienced flyers . Like any active air force, the UAF suffered tragic accidents .
 The overall increase in defense spending due to the war has allowed the UAF to upgrade some of its aircraft . The UAF has been able to increase the strength of some of the aircraft .
UkrOboronProm, Ukraine’s giant state-run defense production concern, received over 50 modernized and repaired aircraft in 2018 . Better navigation systems and radars were installed on some of the UAF”s workhorse jets .
 A more serious and strategic problem is the aging of warplanes that have operated since 1970s and 1980s . The aging of the warplanes has been a problem since the 1970s.
 The UAF could be left with no planes to fly, he says . The nation needs to start thinking about purchasing new aircraft abroad, he adds .
 Swedish-designed Jas‑39 Gripen fighters have been mulling since 2014 . Plans to launch the licensed production of the fighters have ended in nothing .
 The only purchase made so far was of 12 Turkish Bayrakatar strike drones in late 2018 . The drones were purchased in Turkey by a group of 12 people .
 In terms of target acquisition, we’re lagging behind both Western militaries and the Russians .
 He said the UAF still has up to two decades of operational life left . But that’s the most upbeat assessment, he said .
 Ukraine's modernized warhorse fighters, such as the MiG‑29 and Su‑27, are 4th generation jet fighters . Russia operates the more advanced 4+ generation Su‑30 and Su 33, and the 4++generation Su‑35 warplanes .
 Anatoliy Baronin appointed to the position of Acting Rector of the Foreign Intelligence Service Institute of Ukraine . He is reforming the school in accordance with NATO standards, Ukraine's Foreign Intelligence service says .
 Baronin joined the Service on November 13, 2018 as the lead adviser on the analytical work of the Foreign Intelligence Service head . From February 12, 2019, he was entrusted with the duties heading the Foreign intelligence Service Institute .
 FIS: "He is a brilliant analyst who, from the beginning of Russian aggression on volunteer principles, worked to counteract the hybrid aggression of the Kremlin"
 The direction of Ukraine's movement was determined by millions of Ukrainians, who participated in the Revolution of Dignity .
 A MEMORIAL COMPLEX featuring photographs of brave protesters fills Kiev’s Independence Square, or Maidan .
 Displays reproduce Ukrainians’ Facebook posts from key moments during the movement that overthrew the former president, Viktor Yanukovych, five years ago .
 Yulia Tymoshenko has been Ukraine’s prime minister twice . She was the global face of a revolution, imprisoned by two different presidents . The target of an operation to discredit her by President Donald Trump’'s former campaign manager .
 Facebook introduced new transparency requirements for ads related to politics and elections in Ukraine on March 18 . Ukrainians are to vote in presidential elections on March 31 .
 It already functions in the United States, United Kingdom, Brazil, and India . It already operates in the U.S. and Brazil .
 A similar policy has also been rolled out in Israel ahead of the election to the national legislature on April 9 .
 Facebook users must provide a “Paid for by by’s disclaimer, which has to be approved by Facebook . They also must confirm their identity and provide a disclaimer . Facebook users also must provide their identity .
 Authorized Facebook pages in Ukraine will display all locations of the page administrators in the “Info and Ads’ section .
 Facebook has created a public database with all Ukraine-related political ads with disclaimers that will be archived for seven years . In addition, Facebook has also created an archive of all Ukrainian political ads .
 The library will also contain ads that run without a disclaimer if they are reported and are determined to contain political content . The library is also determined to be determined to include political content.
 Facebook is the most popular social networking site in Ukraine with about 13 million users . Facebook is most popular in the country with 13 million people .
 A lot of disinformation is distributed in a form of organic content through news sites and individual accounts, as well as on social media platforms such as YouTube and Twitter .
 Deynychenko points at the fact that the information about sponsors of political ads will be valuable to investigative journalists and scrupulous users . For most users the new feature won’t change anything .
 Facebook drastically reconsidered its approach to political ads on its platform after the exposure of a network of fake accounts operated by so-called “troll factories’ in Russia . The fake accounts were used to artificially boost support for Donald Trump and discredit Hillary Clinton .
 Last February, U.S. Special Counsel Robert Mueller indicted 13 Russians and three companies for interfering in the election .
 Petersburg-based Internet Research Agency, a company linked to the Kremlin, is linked to Kremlin .
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko is in central city of Poltava . Ten people were reported arrested after nationalist protesters attempted to disrupt a campaign appearance .
 The country is strengthening the border with Russian-annexed Crimea and with the breakaway Transnistrian region of Moldova . In the run-up to presidential elections, national security is a top issue .
 A major provocation involving violence is being plotted in the occupied Donetsk, says Dmytro Tymchuk . On March 31, Ukrainians are set to vote in the presidential election .
 Tymchuk says a terrorist attack cannot be ruled out, which could become a pretext for a full-fledged Russian invasion of the Ukrainian territory . The Ukrainian government says a terror attack is not ruled out .
 The results of said elections could have major repercussions on both Ukraine’s internal developments and the surrounding region . Ukraine struggles to keep its territorial integrity in the view of Russian military and economic moves in eastern Ukraine and the Black and Azov seas .
 The polls conducted in February gave 41-year-old Zelensky 25% of the vote, a 10-point lead over Petro Poroshenko and Yulia Timoshenko .
 The current leader of the race reflects the thinking of many Ukrainians nowadays and their mistrust towards the ruling political elite . The popularity of the current leader reflects the thought of many Ukrainian people .
 Zelensky is associated with one of the powerful Ukrainian oligarchs, Ihor Kolomoyskiy, who recently endorsed him publicly . He is also associated with a Ukrainian oligarch who recently also endorsed him .
 Ukraine saw a veritable divorce with Russia in almost every aspect of geopolitics . Despite numerous allegations that his government has been marred in deep corruption, it was still under Poroshenko .
 Kiev has managed to reinforce the Ukrainian army amid ongoing conflict and contain the conflict with Russia to eastern Ukraine and the Azov Sea . The Ukraine crisis broke out following the annexation of the Crimean Peninsula .
 Ukraine also ratified the Association Agreement with the European Union . The non-signing of which actually deposed the former president Viktor Yanukovych was the first .
 Ukraine got visa-free access for its citizens to the EU and four other Schengen-associated countries . Ukraine also got visa free access for citizens to EU and other countries .
 Recently, Ukraine’s Orthodox Church gained autocephaly from the Russian Church .
 Ukraine's trade has been redirected to Europe rather than Russia, as was the case before 2014 . Ukraine’s trade is now mostly dependent on Russia .
 Ukraine is unlikely to become pro-Russian or even try to be neutral. In addition, there is also a very simple reason why Ukraine is not likely to become a pro-Russia .
 The very fact that Russia has taken away Crimea and supports the separatist elements in eastern Ukraine will always keep Kiev’s willingness to cooperate deeper with the West. The fact that Crimea has been taken away will always be kept in place .
 Moscow is pressing too hard on Ukraine, leaving very little, if any, possibility for improvement in the relations or hope that Kiev will abandon its pro-Western path .
Before the 2008 Russo-Georgian War, some sections of Georgian political and cultural elite argued that it would still be possible to work with the Russians and maybe get back control of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region .
 Russians dissipated hopes among Georgians for a geopolitical rapprochement with Moscow .
 Pavlo Klimkin, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, stood for the idea of dual citizenship legitimization for the Ukrainian diaspora .
 The Minister of Foreign Affairs outlined new criteria on which dual citizenship could be issued . Ukraine should implement new criteria, on which the dual citizenship can be issued.
 Klimkin: We lose thousands and thousands of Ukrainians, who could work here and not only in state organizations, in bureaucracy, but in business field . "We lose thousands"
 The status of dual citizenship should be legitimized in Ukraine, according to the Foreign Minister of Ukraine .
 Foreign Minister specified that dual citizenship will allow involving foreign specialists for the work . Foreign Minister said dual citizenship would allow foreign specialists to work .
 We should come to it but clearly determine who can apply for it, Klimkin said . We should be able to apply, he said .
 On March 15, Uzhhorod International Airport resumed its work after a three-year break . The airport was closed for three years .
 The Foreign Intelligence Service of Ukraine has refuted the information regarding its leadership . The information was previously provided to UNIAN news agency .
 A plaque honoring slain Russian opposition politician Boris Nemtsov has been unveiled at a park near the Russian Embassy in the Ukrainian capital .
 A public garden named after Boris Nemtsov was opened in Kyiv Friday, March 15 . The public garden was named after the Russian-born Russian politician .
 The daughter of the murdered Russian opposition leader attended the opening ceremony . She was accompanied by Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko, accompanied by the mayor .
 Korb is now in Ukraine beyond the immediate reach of the Russian siloviki . One hopes he will receive political asylum until changes in his homeland allow him to return to Omsk .
 One can only hope that he will remain safe and active and that those changes will come sooner rather than later .
 The U.S. Embassy in Ukraine released a “Demonstration Alert’s’ upcoming rally of National Corps activists set to be held March 16 . The rally will be held at Kyiv's Maidan Nezalezhnosti .
 The group has been linked to violence and public disorder, the Embassy stressed . The Embassy stressed that the group is linked to public disorder .
 The Ukraine Crisis Media Center's founding, March 5, is the fifth anniversary of its founding . Ambassador Marie Yovanovitch made the remarks .
 Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty is alarmed at increasing pressure directed against its investigative journalists in Ukraine . No fewer than three incidents in recent months have been reported .
 Almost half of Ukrainians communicate with their closest relatives mostly or only in Ukrainian . Survey conducted by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology .
 Russian is the only or major language spoken in the family for 28.1% of Ukrainians . The survey says Russian is only the only major language in the Ukrainian family .
 In 2013, the German native’s Ukrainian wife took their first son on a trip to Ukraine .
 Jung has spent over six years fighting to have a relationship with his children . Jung has been married to his children for more than six years .
 Under the best conditions, he was allowed to see them for six hours per month in his ex-wife’s presence . He was also allowed to visit them for 6 hours a month .
 In Ukraine, thousands of fathers say that their former partners have prevented them from being part of their children’s lives . Lawyers who have represented such disputes say such disputes have occurred in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's confusing legal system and byzantine bureaucracy are confusing for anyone . But they are especially mystifying for foreign fathers who often don’t know the language .
 Ukraine has a longstanding problem with failing to enforce court decisions, legal experts say . Legal experts say Ukraine is a problem with not enforcing court decisions .
 The culprits are the country’s weak judiciary, ineffective police, and biased local government committees .
 The Kyiv Post tried to contact mothers who allegedly kept their kids from their dads . Only one responded and consented to an interview .
 Jung’s ex-wife refused to answer her door, despite being home when the Kyiv Post came to ask for her comment . She didn’t answer requests for comment sent via Facebook .
 Love gone wrong Jung met his future wife, Iryna Jung, while hiking in Crimea in 2010 . Jung met her while hiking with her husband in Crimea .
 Jung worked as a safety engineer in Munich County, Germany . The couple then moved to Munich County in Germany, where Jung worked.
 Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Kyiv Patriarchate Filaret explained under what conditions the newly created church could receive the status of the Patriarchy .
 Filaret stated that he was not invited to Istanbul on the ceremony of granting Tomos because he has the Patriarch rank . The Orthodox Church of Ukraine has the status of the Metropolitanate .
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew has not ruled out the possibility of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church being given the status of patriarchy . The Patriarch has not rule out the possible status of the Orthodox Church .
 We are the patriarchy, but only in Ukraine, in other words, we have not been recognized yet . We are not yet recognized yet, but we are not the patriarchy .
 Moscow Patriarchate is continuing the uniting process with the parishes and clergy of the Russian Patriarchate . That’s why our aim is to continue the united process.
 When we are united, we will ask the Ecumenical Patriarch to grant us the status of patriarchy, Filaret said . Filaret added .
 Patriarchate Filaret said he is not pleased with the current status of the Ukrainian church granted by Constantinople .
 The current status of the Ukrainian church does not appeal to him enough, according to Filaret . The next Pomistnyi Cathedral will have the Statute.
 Earlier, it was reported that the members of the Synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate signed the Tomos on providing autocephaly for the Ukrainian Orthodox Church .
 Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew passed the Tomos of autocephaly and bishops’ crosier to the apostle of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine Epifaniy .
 Patriarch of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church, Kyiv Patriarchate Filaret said he is not pleased with current status of Ukrainian church granted by Constantinople .
 The current status of the Ukrainian church does not appeal to him enough, says Filaret . The next local convention will adopt the Statute of the Orthodox Church .
 The church should have its own Ukrainian status, which has to be approved on the Pomistnyi Cathedral . We are the autocephalous church, so we should have our own status, so it should be approved .
 The Orthodox Church of Ukraine should adopt the new status for its church, says Filaret .
 For others, it will be possible to be temporary members of the Synod in turns . The Synod is a non-profit organization .
 The constants members of the Synod should be authoritative bishops from different regions, says Filaret . All of Ukraine could be represented by constant members, he says .
 Filaret does not think that the conflict with Constantinople could appear due to the change of the status .
 Our acts are lawful ones, not against the Ecumenical Patriarchate, Filaret said .
 Another attempt to seize the temple of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church by representatives of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine was made in Vinnytsia region .
 This is reported by Strana with reference to the press service of the UOC Vinnytsia Diocese . This is said to have been reported byStrana .
Supporters of the UOC poured locks on the doors of the Spaso-Preobrazhenska Church with resin to prevent the Divine Liturgy scheduled for Saturday morning .
 parishioners broke locks and spent the whole night in the building . However, they were able to stay there for the night .
 The UOC supporters closed the parishioners of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church inside the temple on Saturday morning .
 Archbishop Varsonofiy, together with hundreds of believers in the village, performed a liturgy .
 Authorities in Vladivostok, Russia, plan to erect a gigantic statue of Jesus Christ on a site once designated for a monument of Vladimir Lenin .
 The statue will stand on top of a hill looking east over the Pacific Ocean . It will be the first statue of a statue to be erected on a hill .
 Soviet authorities issued orders for the construction of a 98-foot-high bronze statue of Lenin at the site in 1972 .
 Another statue, of Soviet dictator Josef Stalin, was planned to be built on a neighboring hill . Another statue was planned for a nearby hill .
 Construction hitches meant plans repeatedly were postponed, before eventually being scrapped altogether in 1990 .
 Supporters of the Jesus statue are enthusiastic, despite the lack of details about the project .
 Attempts by Religion News Service to contact the Vyatsky Center for comment were unsuccessful .