 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy visits the war-hit Donetsk region, eastern Ukraine, on Oct., 2021 .
 Ukrainian and Western officials are worried that a Russian military buildup near Ukraine could signal plans by Moscow to invade its ex-Soviet neighbor .
 The Kremlin insists it has no such intention and has accused Ukraine and its Western backers of making the claims to cover up their own allegedly aggressive designs .
 The Kremlin insists it has no such intention and has accused Ukraine and its Western backers of making the claims to cover up their own allegedly aggressive designs .
 Russian military buildup near Ukraine could signal plans by Moscow to invade its ex-Soviet neighbor . Kremlin insists it has no such intention and accuses Ukraine and its Western backers of making the claims to cover up their own allegedly aggressive designs .
 Ukraine won independence as the USSR broke up in 1991 . Ukraine was part of the Russian empire for centuries before becoming a Soviet republic .
 The country has moved to shed its Russian imperial legacy and forge increasingly close ties with the West . The country is moving to shed the imperial legacy of Russia .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rejected an association agreement with the European Union in favor of closer ties with Moscow in 2014 . The decision sparked mass protests that led to his ouster in 2014.
 Ukraine and the West accused Russia of sending its troops and weapons to back the rebels . Russia responded by annexing Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist insurgency .
 The commander-in-chief of the Ukrainian armed forces says Russia has about 2,100 military personnel in Ukraine's rebel-controlled east . Russian officers hold all commanding positions in the separatist forces, he says .
 The Kremlin has accused Ukraine of failing to honor the 2015 peace deal . The West has criticized the West for failing to encourage Ukrainian compliance .
 Ukraine has pointed to cease-fire violations by Russia-backed separatists . Ukraine insists there is a continuing Russian troop presence in the rebel east despite Kremlin's denials .
Putin has strongly emphasized that Ukraine’s aspirations to join NATO represent a red line for Moscow . He also expressed concern about plans by some NATO members to set up military training centers in Ukraine .
 Putin’s foreign affairs advisor, Yuri Ushakov, said the Russian leader will push for guarantees in a video call with U.S. President Joe Biden set for Tuesday . Former United States and NATO diplomats say any Russian demand to Biden would be a nonstarter .
 Russia rejected talk of an invasion plot as a Western smear campaign . Russia charged the claims could conceal a Ukrainian intention for an attack in the east .
Some observers interpret the troop buildup as a demonstration by Putin that Russia is prepared to raise the stakes to convince NATO to respect Moscow's red lines . Ukraine denies such plans .
 U.S. officials conceded that Moscow's intentions are unclear, but pointed to Russia’s past behavior as a cause for concern . Biden pledged Friday to make it “very, very difficult’ for Putin to attack Ukraine .
 Ukraine and the West accused Russia of sending its troops and weapons to back the rebels . Russia responded by annexing Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist insurgency that broke out in Ukraine's east .
 Russia is prepared to raise the stakes to convince NATO to respect Moscow’s red lines and stop sending troops and weapons to Ukraine . Ukraine denies such plans .
Putin’s foreign affairs adviser Yuri Ushakov dismissed the sanctions threat during a conference call with reporters . She told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Tuesday that if Russia invaded, “our expectation is that the pipeline will be suspended’
 Putin took park by video link because of concerns about COVID-19 . Sullivan: “It was a useful meeting,’ allowing Biden to lay out in candid terms where the United States stands .
 U.S. intelligence officials have not been able to independently verify that accusation . Ukrainian officials charged Russia had further escalated the smoldering crisis by sending tanks and snipers to eastern Ukraine .
The leader-to-leader conversation was one of the most important of Biden’s presidency . Sullivan said the leaders would direct their staffs to continue negotiations on that .
 Russia has massed 70,000 troops near the Ukraine border and has made preparations for a possible invasion early next year . U.S. intelligence officials believe Putin has not yet made a final decision to invade .
 Republicans are framing this moment as a key test of Biden’s leadership on the global stage .
 Biden vowed as a candidate to reassert American leadership after President Donald Trump’s emphasis on an ‘America first’ foreign policy . Biden said he would be a candidate for the White House .
 He also spoke with them again following his call to brief them out the outcome . He also to speak with them once again following their call to tell them what happened .
Putin apparently sees the current situation as a moment to readjust the power dynamic of the U.S.-Russia relationship . Biden is also expected to speak with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Thursday .
 U.S.-Russian relations are overall in “a rather dire state,’s Kremlin spokesman Peskov said . Peskov: Russia has never planned to attack anyone .
 He characterized the Biden-Putin call as a “working conversation during a very difficult period,” when “escalation of tensions in Europe is off the scale, extraordinary.”
 Ukraine and eastern Europe – there is this effect of rising tensions, or at least it is perceived .
 Iran enriches uranium closer to purity level required for a weapon . Former President Donald Trump withdrew the United States from the agreement . Biden has made rehabilitating the accord a top priority .
 The United States condemned the test as “recklessly conducted’s” The test sparked new fears about the militarization of space . The tests could pose hazards to space exploration and development for generations to come .
 The Biden-Putin discussion will also come weeks after China was revealed to have tested a hypersonic sub-orbital weapon .
 The White House says Biden will raise the importance of “strategic stability in the nuclear and space domains’ on the call . Two former U.S. Marines, Paul Whelan and Trevor Reed, are imprisoned in Russia on charges the United States contends are unjust .
 The United States and Russia are in the midst of a years-long tussle over staffing at diplomatic outposts in one another's country . Talks have been under way for months to ease tensions .
 The United States shuttered two Russian compounds in 2016 in retaliation for Russian election meddling . The U.S. also expelled some Russian diplomats on spying charges .
 Russia retaliated by shuttering U.S. outposts and curtailing America’s ability to hire local workers in Moscow .
 The row escalated in recent months over visas for U.S. diplomats in Russia . The row resulted in critical staffing issues .
 Biden pressed Putin to crack down on malicious cyber actors . Earlier this year, Putin sanctioned some companies and individuals associated with the effort .