 The alleged reason for joining the operation is that Russian aggression against Ukraine breaches international law . Sweden’s ‘defence’ minister Peter Hultqvist said .
 The first successful test of that BMD or “Ballistic Missile Defense’s’ system occurred on 19 May 2016 . The test had occurred in Hawaii .
 The first installation of the system took place in Romania on May 12th . Just seven days earlier than that test, the system was installed .
 U.S. rulers have started to install the ultimate mass-killing system, for the ultimate conquest . It’s the system to block an enemy from defending itself from an invasion .
 Russia is increasingly surrounded by an expanding NATO, and that expansion up to Russia’s borders is supposed to be accepted by Russia as if it is not aggressive .
 NATO has already been prominently promoting the lie that Russia invaded Ukraine and stole Crimea from Ukraine . The lie is the basic lie upon which NATO is preparing to invade Russia .
 Swedish officials are already using that baldfaced lie in order to fool the Swedish public to accept their country's becoming a staging area for NATO’s buildup to invade Russia . Russia is supposedly to ‘defend’ Sweden and NATO countries from being invaded by Russia .
 The lie that Russia ‘seized’ Crimea suffices. Since they can’t find any realistic excuse for preparing to invade Russia, the lie is a lie .
 The United States Embassy was already starting by no later than 1 March 2013 to organize the overthrow that occurred in February 2014 . Not part of the official line is that the U.S. Embassy was started by no late March 2013 .
 The EU's membership offer to Ukraine came with a $160 billion price tag, and so was entirely unaffordable .
 The West needed an excuse to explain the ‘Maidan democracy demonstrations’ that provided a pretext for the overthrow of the government .
 If one is starting on 1 March 2013 to organize a fascist coup that’s to occur a year later, then one won’t want to provide the victim an offer that will be accepted by him .
 One will need the offer to be rejected in order to have a ‘justification’ to overthrow the victim .
 All post-Soviet Ukrainian leaders have been corrupt, but they didn't mention that all have been . Such a ‘justification’ was that he was corrupt, says the author .
 Crimea is especially important here, because Russia refused to accept Donbass into the Russian Federation Russia did accept Crimea . Crimea is important here because of its importance to Russia . Russia did not accept Crimea, but it is important for Russia to accept Crimea.
 Crimea had voted 75% for Yanukovych and had also wanted to become again a part of Russia . Nikita Khrushchev arbitrarily transferred Crimea from Russia to Ukraine in 1954 .
 Russia supplied protection for Crimeans to be able to hold a peaceful plebiscite on 16 March 2014 in order to exercise their right of self-determination . 97% chose the latter, and Western-sponsored polls in Crimea showed similarly high support for rejoining Russia .
 Russia's President, Vladimir Putin, who was merely protecting Crimeans, and in the process, protecting all Russians, from an enemy .
 ‘seizure of Crimea’ is actually the pretext upon the basis of which Obama’s NATO alliance is now mobilizing to invade Russia .
 The upcoming NATO Summit will take place in a security environment that continues to be challenging . The summit will be held in the United States .
 First of all, the security order that was established in Europe after the Cold War is challenged by Russia . Russia is challenging the order established after Cold War .
 The illegal annexation of Crimea is the first time in more than 70 years where one European state has occupied territory belonging to another state using military force .
 If we allow the annexation to become a status quo we make ourselves guilty of destroying one of the very pillars of the European security order as we know it .
 We see no signs that Russia has changed its position or has softened that . We also see no sign that Russia is changing its position .
There are no indications that Russia is planning to leave the Donbass region . There are no signs that Russia will leave the region .
 Russia is building up its proxy army there, with 25,000 soldiers and more tanks than any EU Member State has . Russia has more tanks and soldiers than any other EU member state has .
 The intensity of the conflict in eastern Ukraine can be increased or decreased depending on what best serves the interests of the Kremlin at any given moment .
 He alleged that all violations of the Minsk agreement were from the Donbass side . But evidence clearly contradicts that lie, he said .
 The United States doesn’t actually need additional military bases in countries such as Sweden . The U.S. doesn't actually need more military bases.
After the coup in Ukraine, America's aristocracy has been giving an extra yank at every opportunity, says CNN's John Sutter .
In 1990 the precondition on the basis of which the Soviet and then Russian leader Mikhail Gorbachev dissolved both the Soviet Union and its NATO-mirror the Warsaw Pact . If that happened, then NATO would not expand “one inch eastward’