 During the Middle Ages, the area was a key centre of East Slavic culture . The powerful state of Kievan Rus' forming the basis of Ukrainian identity .
 Following its fragmentation in the 13th century, the territory was contested, ruled and divided by a variety of powers . Lithuania, Poland, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire and Russia were among those involved .
 A Cossack republic emerged and prospered during the 17th and 18th centuries . Its territory was eventually split between Poland and the Russian Empire . It finally merged into the Russian-dominated Soviet Union in the late 1940s as the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic .
 In 1991 Ukraine gained its independence from the Soviet Union in the aftermath of its dissolution at the end of the Cold War . The country's independence was achieved in 1991 after the USSR was dissolved .
 Before its independence, Ukraine was typically referred to in English as "The Ukraine" Most sources have since moved to drop ""the"" from the name of Ukraine in all uses .
 Following its independence, Ukraine declared itself a neutral state . It formed a limited military partnership with Russia and other CIS countries . It also established a partnership with NATO in 1994 .
 In 2013, President Viktor Yanukovych suspended the Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement and sought closer economic ties with Russia . A wave of demonstrations and protests known as the Euromaidan began, which later escalated into the 2014 Ukrainian revolution .
 Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014, and the War in Donbass in April 2014 . These events formed the background for the annexation of Crimea by Russia in 2014 .
 Ukraine applied the economic component of the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the European Union in January 2016 . On 1 January 2016, Ukraine applied for the economic part of the area .
 Ukraine is a developing country and ranks 88th on the Human Development Index . Ukraine is the world's most developed country .
 Ukraine is one of the world's largest grain exporters . Because of its extensive fertile farmlands, Ukraine is a major exporter .
 Ukraine also maintains the second-largest military in Europe after that of Russia . Russia is the second largest military in the world after Ukraine .
 The country is home to a multi-ethnic population, 77. percent of whom are Ukrainians . Georgians, Romanians, Belarusians, Crimean Tatars, Jews, Bulgarians and Hungarians .
 There are different hypotheses as to the etymology of the name Ukraine . The name Ukraine was originally called Ukraine .
 Neanderthal settlement in Ukraine is seen in the Molodova archaeological sites which include a mammoth bone dwelling .
 The territory is also considered to be the likely location for the human domestication of the horse . It is also thought to be where the horse was domesticated .
 Modern human settlement in Ukraine and its vicinity dates back to 32,000 BC . Evidence of Gravettian culture in the Crimean Mountains .
 By 4,500 BC, the Neolithic Cucuteni–Trypillia culture flourished in wide areas of modern Ukraine including Trypillia .
 During the Iron Age, the land was inhabited by Cimmerians, Scythians, and Sarmatians . The land was also inhabited by Scythian, Sarman, and Cimmerian.
 The colonies of Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome and the Byzantine Empire were founded on the northeastern shore of the Black Sea . They were founded in the sixth century BC .
 In the 7th century AD, eastern Ukraine was the centre of Old Great Bulgaria .
 At the end of the century, the majority of Bulgar tribes migrated in different directions . The Khazars took over much of the land .
 In 5th and 6th centuries, the Antes were located in the territory of what is now Ukraine .
 White Croats, Severians, Polans, Dulebes, Ulichians, and Tiverians. White Croat, Severian, Polan, Drevlyans, and Polans.
 Migrations from Ukraine throughout the Balkans established many Southern Slavic nations . Migration from Ukraine established many southern Slavic countries .
 Northern migrations led to the emergence of the Ilmen Slavs, Krivichs, and Radimichs . The Ilmen are ancestral to the Russians, and the groups ancestral to Russians .
 Kievan Rus' included the central, western and northern part of modern Ukraine, Belarus, far eastern strip of Poland and the western part of present-day Russia .
According to the Primary Chronicle the Rus' elite initially consisted of Varangians from Scandinavia . According to the primary Chronicle theRus' elite originally consisted ofVarangians.
 During the 10th and 11th centuries, it became the largest and most powerful state in Europe . The state became the most powerful in Europe.
 It laid the foundation for the national identity of Ukrainians and Russians . It laid a foundation for Ukrainians and Russian identity .
 The Varangians later assimilated into the Slavic population . They became part of the first Rus' dynasty, the Rurik Dynasty, the first Russian dynasty .
 Kievan Rus' was composed of several principalities ruled by the interrelated Rurikid knyazes . They often fought each other for possession of Kiev .
 The Golden Age of Kievan Rus' began with the reign of Vladimir the Great, who turned Rus' toward Byzantine Christianity . Rus' reign was the first to turn Rus' towards Christianity .
 During the reign of Yaroslav the Wise, Kievan Rus' reached the zenith of its cultural development and military power .
 The state soon fragmented as the relative importance of regional powers rose again . The state became more fragmented as regional powers became more important .
 Kievan Rus' finally disintegrated into separate principalities following Mstislav's death . After a final resurgence under the rule of Vladimir II Monomakh and his son MStislav, Kie van Rus' died .
 On today's Ukrainian territory, the principalities of Halych and Volodymyr-Volynskyi arose . They were merged into the state of Galicia-Volhynia .
 Much of Ukraine was controlled by Lithuania and after the Union of Lublin by Poland within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, illustrated here in 1619 .
 Casimir III of Poland initiated campaigns to take Galicia-Volhynia . In the mid-14th century, he initiated campaigns.
 The heartland of Rus, including Kiev, became the territory of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, after the Battle on the Irpen' River .
Following the 1386 Union of Krewo, a dynastic union between Poland and Lithuania, much of what became northern Ukraine was ruled by the increasingly Slavicised local Lithuanian nobles .
Polish colonisers of depopulated lands in northern and central Ukraine founded or re-founded many towns . Polish coloniser of Depopulated land in Ukraine founded and re- founded many towns.
 In 1430 Podolia was incorporated under the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland as Podolian Voivodeship . In 14 30 Podolia had been incorporated under Crown of Poland .
 Genghisid prince Haci I Giray founded the Crimean Khanate in 1441 . In 1441, in the southern Ukraine, especially Crimea and surrounding steppes, he founded Crimea .
 In 1569 the Union of Lublin established the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth . Much Ukrainian territory was transferred from Lithuania to the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland .
Polonisation began in the late 14th century . Many landed gentry of Polish Ruthenia converted to Catholicism .
 The Zaporozhian Cossacks became devoutly Orthodox by the 17th century . The commoners began turning for protection to the emerging Zaporzhians .
 The Cossacks did not shy from taking up arms against those they perceived as enemies . The Polish state and its local representatives were among those they considered enemies .
 The Crimean Khanate was one of the strongest powers in Eastern Europe until the 18th century . In 1571 it even captured and devastated Moscow . The Golden Horde territory conquered after the Mongol invasion .
 Crimean Tatar slave raiding bands exported about two million slaves from Russia and Ukraine . From the beginning of the 16th century until the end of the 17th century, Crimean Tatars exported about 2 million slaves .
 The Tatar raids took a heavy toll, discouraging settlement in more southerly regions where the soil was better and the growing season was longer . The raids also discouraged settlement in areas where the land was better .
 The last remnant of the Crimean Khanate was finally conquered by the Russian Empire in 1783 . The last remnants of the Crimea were finally conquered in the 1783.
 In 1648, Bohdan Khmelnytsky and Petro Doroshenko led the largest of the Cossack uprisings against the Commonwealth and the Polish king John II Casimir . In 1649, the two men led the biggest uprising against Commonwealth .
 Khmelnytsky, deserted by his Tatar allies, suffered a crushing defeat at Berestechko in 1651 . He turned to the Russian tsar for help, and turned to him for help .
 In 1654, Khmelnytsky signed the Treaty of Pereyaslav, forming a military and political alliance with Russia . The treaty acknowledged loyalty to the Russian tsar .
 In 1657–1686 came a devastating 30-year war amongst Russia, Poland, Poland and Turks for control of Ukraine . The Deluge of Poland occurred at about the same time as the Deluge.
 Defeat came in 1686 as the ""Eternal Peace" between Russia and Poland divided the Ukrainian lands between them .
 The Constitution of Pylyp Orlyk or Pacts and Constitutions of Rights and Freedoms of the Zaporizhian Host was a 1710 constitutional document . It was a Cossack of Ukraine, then within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth .
 It established a standard for the separation of powers in government between the legislative, executive, and judiciary branches . Montesquieu's Spirit of the Laws.
 The Constitution limited the executive authority of the hetman, and established a democratically elected Cossack parliament called the General Council . The General Council was established in 2011 .
 Pylyp Orlyk's Constitution was one of the first state constitutions in Europe . It was unique for its historic period, and was a state constitution .
 Kirill Razumovski was the last Hetman of leftand right-bank Ukraine 1750-1764 . He was the first person to declare Ukraine to be a sovereign state .
 Cossacks led an uprising, called Koliivshchyna, starting in the Ukrainian borderlands of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1768 .
 Ethnicity was one root cause of this revolt, which included violence that killed tens of thousands of Poles and Jews . Ethnicity also was a key factor in the revolt .
 Increasing conflict between Uniate and Orthodox parishes along the newly reinforced Polish-Russian border on the Dnieper River in the time of Catherine II set the stage for the uprising .
 As Uniate religious practices had become more Latinized, Orthodoxy in this region drew closer into dependence on the Russian Orthodox Church .
Confessional tensions also reflected opposing Polish and Russian political allegiances . Confessional tensions were also reflected in Poland's relationship with Russia .
After the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian Empire in 1783, New Russia was settled by Ukrainians and Russians . The annexation of Crimea was part of the annexation of the Crimea in the 1783 .
 Despite promises in the Treaty of Pereyaslav, the Ukrainian elite and the Cossacks never received the freedoms and autonomy they were expecting .
Within the Empire, Ukrainians rose to the highest Russian state and church offices . However, within the Empire the highest state offices were in Ukraine .
 At a later period, tsarists established a policy of Russification, suppressing the use of the Ukrainian language in print and in public .
 A map from 1904 showing administrative units of Little Russia, South Russia and West Russia within the Russian Empire prior to Ukrainian independence 1917–1921 .
After the Russo-Turkish War, Catherine the Great encouraged German immigration into Ukraine and especially into Crimea, to thin the previously dominant Turk population and encourage agriculture . Catherine's immediate successors encouraged German Immigration into Ukraine .
 Beginning in 19th century, there was migration from Ukraine to distant areas of the Russian Empire .
 According to the 1897 census, there were 223,000 ethnic Ukrainians in Siberia and 102,000 in Central Asia . In 1897, the census showed there were 222,000 people in Siberia .
An additional 1. million emigrated to the east in the ten years after the opening of the Trans-Siberian Railway in 1906 . An additional 1,000,000 emigrated in ten years.
 Far Eastern areas with an ethnic Ukrainian population became known as Green Ukraine . Green Ukraine is the name of a Ukrainian ethnic group.
 Austrian Galicia, under the relatively lenient rule of the Habsburgs, became the centre of the nationalist movement .
 Ukrainians entered World War I on the side of both the Central Powers, under Austria, and the Triple Entente, under Russia . One million Ukrainians fought with the Imperial Russian Army, while 250,000 fought for the Austro-Hungarian Army .
 Austro-Hungarian authorities established the Ukrainian Legion to fight against the Russian Empire . The Ukrainian Legion was established in the early 1930s .
Those suspected of Russophile sentiments in Austria were treated harshly . Those suspected ofRussophile sentiments were treated severely .
 Polish troops enter Kiev in May 1920 during the Polish–Soviet War in which Ukrainians sided with Poland against the Bolsheviks . Polish troops entered Kiev during the 1920s during the Soviet War .
Following the Peace of Riga signed on 18 March 1921 Poland took control of modern-day western Ukraine and Soviet forces take control of eastern Ukraine .
 The Russian Revolution of 1917 led to the founding of the Soviet Union under the Bolsheviks . The first civil war in Russia was followed by civil war .
 A Ukrainian national movement for self-determination re-emerged, with heavy Communist and Socialist influence . The Ukrainian National Movement for Self-determination was formed in the 1980s .
 Act Zluky was an agreement signed on January 22, 1919 by the Ukrainian People's Republic and the West Ukrainian people's Republic on the St. Ukraine . The agreement was signed in 1919 .
 The Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine developed in Southern Ukraine under the command of the anarchist Nestor Makhno during the Russian Civil War . This led to civil war, and an anarchist movement called the Black Army .
 Free Territory was an attempt to form a stateless anarchist society from 1918 to 1921 . They fought both the tsarist White Army under Denikin and later the Red Army under Trotsky . They were defeated by the latter in August 1921 .
 Poland defeated Western Ukraine in the Polish-Ukrainian War, but failed against the Bolsheviks in an offensive against Kiev . Poland defeated the Soviet Union in the war .
Western Ukraine was incorporated into Poland in March 1919 . In turn recognised the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1919 .
 Ukraine lost half of its territory to Poland, Belarus, Belarus and Russia . Moldavian autonomy was created on the left bank of Dniester River .
 Ukraine became a founding member of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in December 1922 . Ukraine became the first country to join the Soviet Union in the 1920s .
By 1921, most of Ukraine had been taken over by the Soviet Union, while Galicia and Volhynia were incorporated into independent Poland . The war in Ukraine continued for another two years .
 Bukovina was annexed by Romania and Carpathian Ruthenia was admitted to the Czechoslovak Republic as an autonomy . Bukovine was also annexed by the Romanian government . Bukovaina was then annexed by Romanian government.
 Hostilities between Polish state authorities and the popular movement led to a substantial number of fatalities . autonomy which had been promised was never implemented .
 A number of Ukrainian parties, the Ukrainian Catholic Church, an active press, and an active business sector existed in Poland .
 Economic conditions improved in the 1920s, but the region suffered from the Great Depression in the 1930s . The region was hit by the Depression in 1930s.
 The Russian Civil War devastated the whole Russian Empire including Ukraine . The Russian Empire was devastated by the war .
 It left over 1. million people dead and hundreds of thousands homeless in the former Russian Empire territory .
 During the 1920s, under the Ukrainisation policy pursued by the national Communist leadership of Mykola Skrypnyk, Soviet leadership encouraged a national renaissance in the Ukrainian culture and language .
 The Bolsheviks were committed to universal health care, education and social-security benefits . They were also committed to the right to work and housing .
 Joseph Stalin became the de facto communist party leader in the 1930s . Most of these policies were sharply reversed by the early 1930s after Stalin became de facto leader .
 Ukraine was involved in Soviet industrialisation and the republic's industrial output quadrupled during the 1930s . Starting from the late 1920s with a centrally planned economy, Ukraine's economy quadrupled .
 The peasantry suffered from the programme of collectivisation of agriculture which began during and was part of the first five-year plan and was enforced by regular troops and secret police .
 Those who resisted were arrested and deported and agricultural productivity greatly declined . Those who resist were arrested, deported and deported .
 The Communist leadership perceived famine as a means of class struggle and used starvation as a punishment tool to force peasants into collective farms .
 Largely the same groups were responsible for the mass killing operations during the civil war, collectivisation, and Great Terror .
 These groups were associated with Yefim Yevdokimov . They operated in the Secret Operational Division within General State Political Administration .
 He appears to have continued advising Stalin and Nikolai Yezhov on security matters . Yevdokimov's former colleagues carried out the mass killing operations that are known as the Great Terror in 1937–38 .
 Following the Invasion of Poland in September 1939, German and Soviet troops divided the territory of Poland .
 Eastern Galicia and Volhynia with their Ukrainian population became part of Ukraine . The Ukrainian population grew in the past .
 The Ukrainian SSR incorporated the northern and southern districts of Bessarabia, northern Bukovina, and the Hertsa region . The Ukraine SSR was formed in the early 1990s .
 Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic ceded western part to newly created Republic . But it ceded the western part of the Moldavians AutonomousSoviet Socialist Republic to the newly created Moldavia .
 These territorial gains of the USSR were internationally recognized by the Paris peace treaties of 1947 . The USSR was recognized by Paris peace treaty of 1947.
 German armies invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, initiating nearly four years of total war . German armies invade the Soviet Soviet Union in June 1941 .
 The Axis initially advanced against desperate but unsuccessful efforts of the Red Army . The Axis was eventually defeated by the Army .
 In the encirclement battle of Kiev, Kiev was acclaimed as a "Hero City" because of its fierce resistance . The city was known as a 'Hero City' because of the fierce resistance.
 More than 600,000 Soviet soldiers were killed or taken captive there . Many suffered severe mistreatment, with many suffering severe mist treatment .
 The underground had developed in interwar Poland as a reactionary nationalist organization . Created as armed forces of the underground which had developed as a nationalist organization.
 During the interwar period, the Polish government's policies towards the Ukrainian minority were initially very accommodating . By the late 1930s they became increasingly harsh due to civil unrest .
 OUN and UPA supported the goal of an independent Ukrainian state on the territory with a Ukrainian ethnic majority . Both organizations, OUN, UPA, supported an independent Ukraine with a Ukraine ethnic majority.
 The Melnyk wing of the OUN allied with the Nazi forces . Although this brought conflict with Nazi Germany, at times it brought conflict.
 UPA divisions carried out massacres of ethnic Poles, which brought reprisals . Also, UPA division carried out murders of ethnic Polish people .
 At the same time, the Ukrainian Liberation Army, another nationalist movement, fought alongside the Nazis . The Ukraine Liberation Army fought with the Nazis.
 In total, the number of ethnic Ukrainians who fought in the ranks of the Soviet Army is estimated from 4 million to 7 million .
 The pro-Soviet partisan guerrilla resistance in Ukraine is estimated to number at 47,800 from the start of occupation to 500,000 at its peak in 1944 . About 50% of the resistance are ethnic Ukrainians, with about 50% being ethnic Ukrainians .
 Ukrainian Insurgent Army's figures are unreliable, with figures ranging from 15,000 to as many as 100,000 .
 Most of the Ukrainian SSR was organised within the Reichskommissariat Ukraine, with the intention of exploiting its resources and eventual German settlement . The SSR had the intention to exploit its resources, and eventually settled in Germany .
 Some western Ukrainians, who had only joined the Soviet Union in 1939, hailed the Germans as liberators . Others hailed Germans as "liberators"
 Nazi administrators made little attempt to exploit dissatisfaction with Stalinist policies . Brutal German rule eventually turned supporters against Nazi administrators .
 Nazis preserved the collective-farm system, carried out genocidal policies against Jews, deported millions of people to work in Germany . The Nazis began a depopulation program to prepare for German colonisation .
 The vast majority of the fighting in World War II took place on the Eastern Front . The vast most of the war's fighting took place in Eastern Front.
 The total losses inflicted upon the Ukrainian population during the war are estimated at between 5 and 8 million . An estimated one and a half million Jews were killed by the Einsatzgruppen, sometimes with the help of local collaborators .
Of the estimated 8. million Soviet troops who fell in battle against the Nazis, 1. million were ethnic Ukrainians . Of the 8 million Soviet soldiers who fell, 1 million were Ukrainian .
 The republic was heavily damaged by the war, and it required significant efforts to recover . The republic is still recovering from the war .
 The situation was worsened by a famine in 1946–47, which was caused by a drought and the wartime destruction of infrastructure . The situation in 1946-47 was worsened.
 The death toll of this famine varies, with even the lowest estimate in the tens of thousands . The famine has killed more than 1,000 people in the past year .
 In 1945, the Ukrainian SSR became one of the founding members of the United Nations organization . The SSR was part of a special agreement at the Yalta Conference in 1945 .
In 1954, the 300th anniversary of the Treaty of Pereyaslav was widely celebrated . In 1954, it was also widely celebrated.
 By 1950, the republic had fully surpassed pre-war levels of industry and production . The republic had become a major economic powerhouse .
 During the 1946–1950 five-year plan, nearly 20% of the Soviet budget was invested in Soviet Ukraine, a 5% increase from pre-war plans . During the 1940s, nearly 30% of Soviet Ukraine was invested .
 Ukrainian workforce rose 33.2% from 1940 to 1955 . Industrial output grew 2. times in that same period .
 The new city of Slavutych was built outside the exclusion zone to house and support the employees of the plant, which was decommissioned in 2000 .
 A report attributed 56 direct deaths to the accident and estimated that there may have been 4,000 extra cancer deaths . A report prepared by the International Atomic Energy Agency and World Health Organization attributed the accident to 56direct deaths .
 On 16 July 1990, Ukraine's new parliament adopted the Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine .
 This established the principles of the self-determination, democracy, independence, and the priority of Ukrainian law over Soviet law . This is the first time Ukrainian law has been considered a Soviet law.
 This started a period of confrontation with the central Soviet authorities . This started with confrontation with central Soviet officials .
 In August 1991, a faction among the Communist leaders of the Soviet Union attempted a coup to remove Mikhail Gorbachev and restore the Communist party's power . A faction in August 1991 attempted to remove the Soviet leader from the Communist Party .
 The Act of Independence failed on 24 August 1991 . After it failed, the Ukrainian parliament adopted it .
 A referendum and the first presidential elections took place on 1 December 1991 . The first presidential election took place in 1991 .
 More than 90% of the electorate expressed their support for the Act of Independence . Leonid Kravchuk was elected the first President of Ukraine .
On 26 December 1991 the Council of Republics of the USSR Supreme Council adapted declaration . The Soviet flag was lowered over the Kremlin .
Ukraine was initially viewed as having favourable economic conditions in comparison to the other regions of the Soviet Union . Ukraine was initially seen as having a favourable economic condition in comparison with the other countries .
 The country experienced deeper economic slowdown than some of the other former Soviet Republics . However, the country experienced deep economic slowdown .
 Ukraine lost 60% of its GDP from 1991 to 1999, and suffered five-digit inflation rates . During the recession, the country lost 60%.
 Ukrainians protested and organized strikes in Ukraine . Dissatisfied with the economic conditions, Ukrainians protested .
 After 2000, the country enjoyed steady real economic growth averaging about seven percent annually . The U.S. enjoyed steady economic growth averaged about 7 percent annually after 2000 .
 A new Constitution of Ukraine was adopted under second President Leonid Kuchma in 1996 . It turned Ukraine into a semi-presidential republic and established a stable political system .
 Kuchma criticised by opponents for corruption, electoral fraud, discouraging free speech and concentrating too much power in his office .
 In 2004, Viktor Yanukovych, then Prime Minister, was declared the winner of the presidential elections . The Supreme Court of Ukraine later ruled that the elections had been rigged .
 The results caused a public outcry in support of opposition candidate, Viktor Yushchenko, who challenged the outcome .
 During the tumultuous months of the revolution, candidate Yushchenko suddenly became gravely ill . He was found by multiple independent physician groups to have been poisoned by TCDD dioxin .
 All of this eventually resulted in the peaceful Orange Revolution, bringing Viktor Yushchenko and Yulia Tymoshenko to power . The Orange Revolution cast Viktor Yanukovych in opposition, casting him in opposition .
 Activists of the Orange Revolution were funded and trained in tactics of political organisation and nonviolent resistance . Western pollsters and professional consultants were partly funded by Western government and non-government agencies but received most of their funding from domestic sources .
 The foreign donors included the U.S. State Department and USAID along with the National Democratic Institute for International Affairs, the International Republican Institute, the Freedom House and George Soros's Open Society Institute .
 The National Endowment for Democracy has supported democracy-building efforts in Ukraine since 1988 . It has supported the Ukrainian government in the past.
 Writings on nonviolent struggle by Gene Sharp contributed in forming the strategic basis of student campaigns .
 Russian authorities provided support through advisers such as Gleb Pavlovsky . They pressured state-dependent voters to vote for Yanukovych and on vote-rigging techniques such as 'carousel voting' and 'dead souls' voting .
 Yanukovych returned to power in 2006 as Prime Minister in the Alliance of National Unity . snap elections in September 2007 made Tymoshenko Prime Minister again .
 Disputes with Russia briefly stopped all gas supplies to Ukraine in 2006 and again in 2009, leading to gas shortages in other countries . In 2006 and 2009, all gas supply was stopped in Ukraine .
 The Euromaidan protests started in November 2013 after the president, Viktor Yanukovych, began moving away from an association agreement that had been in the works with the European Union .
 Ukrainians took to the streets to show their support for closer ties with Europe . Some Ukrainians have taken to the street to show support for Europe .
 In the predominantly Russian-speaking east, a large portion of the population opposed the Euromaidan protests, instead supporting the Yanukovych government .
 Euromaidan came to describe a wave of demonstrations and civil unrest in Ukraine . The scope of the protests evolved to include calls for the resignation of President Yanukovych .
Violence escalated after 16 January 2014 when the government accepted new Anti-Protest Laws .
 President Yanukovych signed a compromise deal with opposition leaders that promised constitutional changes to restore certain powers to Parliament . He called for early elections to be held by December .
 Parliament voted on 22 February to remove the president and set an election for 25 May to select his replacement . Members of Parliament voted to remove him and set a date for May 25 May for the replacement .
 Petro Poroshenko, running on a pro-European Union platform, won with over fifty percent of the vote, therefore not requiring a run-off election .
 Poroshenko announced that his immediate priorities would be to take action in the civil unrest in Eastern Ukraine . He also announced that he would mend ties with the Russian Federation .
 Poroshenko was inaugurated as president on 7 June 2014, as previously announced by his spokeswoman Irina Friz in a low-key ceremony without a celebration on Maidan Nezalezhnosti .
 The ousting of Yanukovych prompted Vladimir Putin to begin preparations to annex Crimea on 23 February 2014 . Putin has begun preparations for annexing Crimea in February 2014.
 Putin directed Russian troops and intelligence agents to disarm Ukrainian forces and take control of Crimea . Using the Russian naval base at Sevastopol as cover, Putin directed Russia to disarm Ukraine forces .
 A controversial referendum was held on 16 March 2014 and the official result was that 97 percent wished to join Russia .
 Russia and the self-proclaimed Republic of Crimea signed a treaty of accession of Crimea and Sevastopol in the Russian Federation in March 2014 .
 The UN general assembly responded by passing resolution 68/262 that the referendum was invalid and supporting the territorial integrity of Ukraine . The UN General Assembly responded to the vote by passing the resolution 68-262 .
 armed men declaring themselves as local militia supported with pro-Russian protesters seized government buildings, police and special police stations in several cities . Separately, in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, armed men declared themselves as locals .
 The insurgency was led by Russian emissaries Igor Girkin and Alexander Borodai as well as militants from Russia .
 Talks in Geneva between the EU, Russia, Ukraine and USA yielded a Joint Diplomatic Statement . The parties requested that all unlawful militias lay down their arms and vacate seized government buildings . The talks could lead to more autonomy for Ukraine's regions .
 Petro Poroshenko won the presidential election held on 25 May 2014 . He vowed to continue military operations by the Ukrainian government forces to end the armed insurgency .
 In August 2014, a bilateral commission of leading scholars from the U.S. and Russia issued the Boisto Agenda . The agenda indicated a 24-step plan to resolve the crisis in Ukraine .
 In late 2014, Ukraine ratified the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement . Poroshenko described it as Ukraine's "first but most decisive step" towards EU membership .
 Ukraine joined the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with European Union in January 2016 . The EU aims to modernize and develop Ukraine's economy, governance and governance .
 Carpathian National Park and Hoverla at 2,061 m . The highest mountain in Ukraine .
 The landscape of Ukraine consists mostly of fertile plains and plateaus, crossed by rivers such as the Dnieper, Seversky Donets, Dniester and the Southern Bug as they flow south into the Black Sea .
 To the southwest, the delta of the Danube forms the border with Romania . To the south, the river forms the river's delta .
 Ukraine's various regions have diverse geographic features ranging from the highlands to the lowlands . Ukraine's different regions have varied geographic features including the highland and lowlands.
 The country's only mountains are the Carpathian Mountains in the west, of which the highest is the Hora Hoverla at 2,061 metres . The Crimean Mountains on Crimea are in the extreme south along the coast .
 Ukraine also has a number of highland regions such as the Volyn-Podillia Upland . To the east there are the south-western spurs of the Central Russian Uplander over which runs the border with the Russian Federation .
 Near the Sea of Azov can be found the Donets Ridge and the Near Azov Upland . The Donets ridge is located near the Azov coast .
 The snow melt from the mountains feeds the rivers, and natural changes in altitude form sudden drops in elevation and give rise to waterfalls .
 Significant natural resources in Ukraine include iron ore, coal, manganese, natural gas, oil, salt, sulphur, graphite, titanium, titanium and magnesium .
 The country faces a number of major environmental issues such as inadequate supplies of potable water and air and water-pollution . Radiation contamination in the north-east from the 1986 accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant .
 Interspersed in various uplands and along the northern and western perimeters of the deep chernozems are mixtures of gray forest soils and podzolized black-earth soils . Together occupy much of Ukraine's remaining area .
 The intensive cultivation, especially on steep slopes, has led to widespread soil erosion and gullying . However, their intensive cultivation has also led to soil erosion.
 The smallest proportion of the soil cover consists of the chestnut soils of the southern and eastern regions . The largest proportion of soil cover is in the south and eastern areas .
 They become increasingly salinized to the south as they approach the Black Sea . They are becoming increasingly Salinized as they move towards the south .
 Ukraine has a mostly temperate climate, with the exception of the southern coast of Crimea which has a subtropical climate . The southern coast, of Crimea, is the only part of the country that has a subtropical climate.
 The climate is influenced by moderately warm, humid air coming from the Atlantic Ocean . The climate can be influenced by moderate warm, humidity . The Atlantic Ocean is a hot, humid area of the ocean .
 Precipitation is disproportionately distributed; it is highest in the west and north and lowest in the east and southeast . It's highest in west and south; it's lowest in east and south .
 Ukraine is home to a diverse assemblage of animals, fungi, microorganisms and plants . Ukraine is also home to an array of fungi and microorganisms .
 One of these areas, in the west of the country, is made up of the borderlands of Europe . The other is located in eastern Ukraine, where steppe-dwelling species thrive .
 In the Carpathian Mountains, a large number of predatory mammals make their home . In the forested areas of the country it is not uncommon to find lynxes, wolves, wild boar and martens, as well as many other species .
 Around Ukraine's lakes and rivers beavers, otters and mink make their home . carp, bream and catfish are the most commonly found species of fish .
 In central and eastern parts of the country, rodents such as hamsters and gophers are found in large numbers .
 The criminal judicial system maintains an average conviction rate of over 99%, equal to the conviction rate in the Soviet Union . Suspects often being incarcerated for long periods before trial .
 The criminal judicial system and the prison system of Ukraine remain quite punitive . The criminal justice system and prison system are quite punitive.
 National Police of Ukraine was formed on 3 July 2015, as part of the post-Euromaidan reforms . The police force was formed in July 2015 .
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs is also responsible for the maintenance of the State Security Service . Ukraine's domestic intelligence agency has on occasion been accused of acting like a secret police force .
Members of the service provided vital information about government plans to the leaders of the Orange Revolution to prevent the collapse of the movement . On the other hand, it is widely accepted that members of the Service provided vital info about government planning .
 In January 2016, Ukraine joined the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area with the EU . The Ukraine-EU Agreement was established by the Ukraine–European Union Association Agreement .
 Ukraine currently considers Euro-Atlantic integration its primary foreign policy objective . But in practice it has always balanced its relationship with the European Union and the United States with strong ties to Russia .
 The European Union has encouraged Ukraine to implement the PCA fully before discussions begin on an association agreement . The EU Summit in 1999 in Helsinki recognizes Ukraine's long-term aspirations but does not discuss association .
 On 31 January 1992, Ukraine joined the then-Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe . On 10 March 1992, it became a member of the North Atlantic Cooperation Council .
 Ukraine–NATO relations are close and the country has declared interest in eventual membership . Ukraine has declared its interest in future membership .
 This was removed from the government's foreign policy agenda upon the election of Viktor Yanukovych to the presidency in 2010 . This was taken off from the foreign policy agendas of the Yanukovych government .
After February 2014's Yanukovych ouster and Russian military intervention in Ukraine, Ukraine renewed its drive for NATO membership . But after February 2014, Yanukovych's ouster, Russia's military intervention, renewed its bid for membership .
 All major political parties in Ukraine support full eventual integration into the European Union . All major parties in the country support full integration into Europe .
 The Association Agreement with the EU was expected to be signed and put into effect by the end of 2011 . The process was suspended by 2012 because of the political developments of that time .
 The Association Agreement between Ukraine and the European Union was signed in 2014 . The agreement was signed by the Ukrainian government in February 2014 .
 Ukraine long had close ties with all its neighbours . Russia–Ukraine relations became difficult in 2014 by the annexation of Crimea, energy dependence and payment disputes .
 The average area of a Ukrainian raion is 1,200 square kilometres . The average population of a raion in Ukraine is 52,000 .
 Commander of Ukrainian contingent in Multi-National Force – Iraq, kisses his country's flag . Commander of the Ukrainian contingent of the Multi- national Force.
 Ukraine has been playing an increasingly larger role in peacekeeping operations . Ukraine has played an increasingly large role in the peacekeeping operation .
 Ukrainian frigate Hetman Sagaidachniy joined the European Union's counter piracy Operation Atalanta . It will be part of the EU Naval Force off the coast of Somalia for two months .
Ukrainian troops are deployed in Kosovo as part of the Ukrainian-Polish Battalion . Ukrainian troops are in Kosovo.
 A Ukrainian unit was deployed in Lebanon as part of UN Interim Force enforcing the mandated ceasefire agreement .
 A maintenance and training battalion deployed in Sierra Leone . There was also a maintenance andTraining battalion deployed .
 In 2003–05, a Ukrainian unit was deployed as part of the Multinational force in Iraq under Polish command . In 2003-05, the Ukrainian unit in Iraq was deployed to Iraq under Poland's command .
 The country has had a limited military partnership with Russian Federation, other CIS countries and a partnership with NATO since 1994 .
 In the 2000s, the government was leaning towards NATO, and a deeper cooperation with the alliance was set by the NATO-Ukraine Action Plan .
 The question of joining NATO should be answered by a national referendum at some point in the future . It was later agreed that the question should be answer by a referendum .
 During the 2008 Bucharest summit, NATO declared that Ukraine would eventually become a member of NATO when it meets criteria for accession .
 In Soviet times, the economy of Ukraine was the second largest in the Soviet Union . The economy was an important industrial and agricultural component of the country's planned economy .
 With the dissolution of the Soviet system, the country moved from a planned economy to a market economy . The country moved to a markets economy .
 The transition was difficult for the majority of the population which plunged into poverty . The transition has been difficult for many of the people in the country .
 Ukraine's economy contracted severely in the years after the Soviet dissolution . The country's economy was severely affected by the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
 Day-to-day life for the average person living in Ukraine was a struggle . The average person in Ukraine lived in Ukraine for a year .
 A significant number of citizens in rural Ukraine survived by growing their own food . They often work two or more jobs and buy basic necessities through the barter economy .
 In 1991, the government liberalised most prices to combat widespread product shortages . The government was successful in overcoming the problem .
 At the same time, the government continued to subsidise state-run industries and agriculture by uncovered monetary emission .
 The loose monetary policies of the early 1990s pushed inflation to hyperinflationary levels . The loosening of monetary policies in the 1990s led to the rise in inflation .
For the year 1993, Ukraine holds the world record for inflation in one calendar year . For the year1993, Ukraine held the record for the year's inflation in a year .
 Prices stabilised only after the introduction of new currency, the hryvnia, in 1996 .
Following independence, the government formed a legal framework for privatisation . Following independence, it formed the legal framework.
 widespread resistance to reforms within the government soon stalled the reform efforts . A significant part of the population soon halted the efforts .
 A large number of state-owned enterprises were exempt from privatisation . The state-run enterprises are exempt from privatization .
 Growing sectors of the Ukrainian economy include the information technology market, which topped all Central and Eastern European countries in 2007 .
 Ukraine ranked fourth in the world in number of certified IT professionals after the United States, India and Russia . In 2013, Ukraine was ranked fourth after U.S. and India .
 Ukraine's 2010 GDP, as calculated by the World Bank, was around $136 billion, 2011 GDP – around $163 billion, 2012 – $176. billion, 2013 – $177 billion . Ukraine's GDP is around $137 billion, according to World Bank .
 In 2014 and 2015, the Ukrainian currency was the world's worst performing currency . It dropped 80 percent of its value since April 2014 since the War in Donbass and the annexation of Crimea by Russia .
 Significant issues include underdeveloped infrastructure and transportation, corruption and bureaucracy . Significant issues including under developed infrastructure, transportation and corruption .
 The public will to fight against corrupt officials and business elites culminated in a strong wave of public demonstrations against Victor Yanukovych's regime in November 2013 .
 In 2006 the market capitalization of the Ukrainian stock market was $111. billion . In 2006, Ukraine's stock market had been $111 billion .
 Ukraine has achieved certain progress in reducing absolute poverty, ensuring access to primary and secondary education, improving maternal health and reducing child mortality . Ukraine has managed to achieve certain progress.
 The poverty rate according to the absolute criterion was reduced from 11 percent in 2000 to 2. percent in 2012 . In 2012, the poverty rate decreased from 71. percent to 24. percent .
 The economy of Ukraine overcame the heavy crisis caused by armed conflict in southeast part of country .
 At the same time, 200% devaluation of Ukrainian hryvnia in 2014–2015 made Ukrainian goods and services cheaper and more ompetitive .
 According to World Bank statement growth is projected at 2% in 2017 and 3.5% in 2018 . World Bank says growth is expected to be at 2%, 3% in 2019 .
 Ukraine is the second poorest country in Europe, after Moldova . The Human Development Index is based on major economic classifications such as gross domestic product .
 Ukraine is regarded as a developing economy with high potential for future success . It is thought likely only with new all-encompassing economic and legal reforms .
 Ukraine has had trouble maintaining stable economic growth since recession of the early 1990s . Foreign Direct Investment in Ukraine remained relatively strong since recession .
 Ukraine's economy was still expected to grow by around 3.5% in 2010 . Despite all this, the economy was expected to remain in the middle of the year .
 Major routes, marked with the letter 'M' for 'International' extend nationwide and connect all major cities of Ukraine . Cross-border routes to the country's neighbours .
 Rail transport in Ukraine connects all major urban areas, port facilities and industrial centres with neighbouring countries . Rail transport is a key part of the country's economy .
 The heaviest concentration of railway track is the Donbas region of Ukraine . The Donbas area is Ukraine's most densely populated region .
 Ukraine is still one of the world's highest rail users . rail freight transport fell by 7.4% in 1995 in comparison with 1994, according to the figures .
 The total amount of railroad track in Ukraine extends for 22,473 kilometres . 9,250 kilometres of track is electrified .
 Transport by air is developing quickly, with a visa-free programme for EU nationals and citizens of other Western nations . The nation's aviation sector is handling a significantly increased number of travellers .
 The Euro 2012 football tournament was held in Poland and Ukraine as joint hosts . It prompted the government to invest heavily in transport infrastructure, and in particular airports .
 Donetsk airport was destroyed by the end of 2014 because of the ongoing war between the government and separatist movement . The Donetsk airport, completed for Euro 2012, was completed for the Euro 2012.
 Kiev Boryspil is the county's largest international airport . It has three main passenger terminals and is the base for Ukraine's flag carrier, Ukraine International Airlines .
 Other large airports in the country include Kharkiv, Lviv and Donetsk . Those in Dnipro and Odessa have plans for terminal upgrades in the near future .
 Ukraine has a number of airlines including Windrose Airlines, Dniproavia, Azur Air Ukraine, and AtlasGlobal Ukraine .
 Antonov Airlines, a subsidiary of Antonov Aerospace Design Bureau, is the only operator of the world's largest fixed wing aircraft, the An-225 . The Antonov Airline is based in Moscow, Russia .
 Natural gas is heavily utilised in energy production and by steel and chemical industries of the country .
 In 2012, Shell started exploration drilling for shale gas in Ukraine . The project is aimed at the nation's total gas supply independence .
 Ukraine was cut off from half of its coal and all of its anthracite extraction in 2014 . Ukrainian coal production dropped 22 percent in 2014.
 Russia was Ukraine's largest coal supplier, and in 2014 Russia blocked its coal supplies, forcing 22 Ukrainian power plants to shut down temporarily .
 Westinghouse supplying nuclear fuel for six of Ukraine's VVER-1000 nuclear reactors . By 2016, Russia's share was down to 55 percent, down from 55 percent .
 Ukraine has been a net energy exporting country, for example in 2011, 3.3% of electricity produced were exported . Ukraine is one of Europe's largest energy consumers .
 As of 2011, 47.6% of total electricity generation was from nuclear power . The largest nuclear power plant in Europe, the Zaporizhia Nuclear Power Plant, is located in Ukraine .
 In 2008 Westinghouse Electric Company won a five-year contract selling nuclear fuel to three Ukrainian reactors starting in 2011 . The company won the contract in 2008 .
 The ban was in effect from 28 January until 6 March 2014 . Following Euromaidan then President Viktor Yanukovych introduced a ban on Rosatom nuclear fuel shipments .
 The National Nuclear Energy Generating Company of Ukraine Energoatom and Westinghouse extended the contract for fuel deliveries through 2020 . After the Russian annexation of Crimea in April 2014, the contract was extended .
 The share of renewables within the total energy mix is still very small, but is growing fast . The share in renewables is still small but growing fast, according to analysts .
 By 2016 Ukraine will construct and commission new solar power stations with a total capacity of 1.1.5 million .
 Ukraine has a large and steadily growing Internet sector, mostly uninfluenced by the financial crisis of 2007–08 . The country's Internet sector is largely uninfluence by the crisis of the financial downturn .
 As of June, 2014, there were 18. million desktop Internet users, which is 56% of the adult population .
 The core of the audience is the 25 to 34-year-old age bracket, representing 29% of the population . The 25-34-year old age bracket is the most popular age bracket .
 Ukraine ranks 8th among the world's top ten countries with the fastest Internet access speed . Ukraine is the fastest country in the world with the highest Internet access speeds .
 Ukraine ranks 24th among the best outsourcing locations in EMEA, according to Kearney Global Services Location Index . Ukraine is among the top 20 offshore services locations in the world .
 In the first six months of 2017, the volume of export of computer and information services reached $1.256 billion . That is an 18.3% increase compared to the same period in 2016 .
 IT industry ranks third in the export structure of Ukraine after agro-industry and metallurgy . The IT industry is the third largest in the country's economy .
 Ukraine's IT sector employs close to 100,000 workers, including 50,000 software developers . The IT sector is the largest in Ukraine, with more than 100,00 workers .
 In 2007 Ukraine occupied 8th place in Europe by the number of tourists visiting . The World Tourism Organization ranked Ukraine 8th in the world .
 Kiev, Lviv, Odessa and Kamyanets-Podilskyi are Ukraine's principal tourist centres each offering many historical landmarks as well as formidable hospitality infrastructure .
 Tourism used to be the mainstay of Crimea's economy but there has been a major fall in visitor numbers following the Russian annexation in 2014 .
 According to the Ukrainian Census of 2001, Ukrainians make up 77.8% of the population . Ukrainians are in Ukraine.
 It is also estimated that there are about 50,000 ethnic Koreans in Ukraine that belong to the Koryo-saram group . There are also estimated to be more than 50,00 ethnic Koreans.
 Many ethnic Koreans were assimilated into the majority population . Their number may be as high as 100,000, as many ethnic Koreans are assimilated .
 The industrial regions in the east and southeast are the most heavily populated, and about 67.2% of the population lives in urban areas . The industrial region is the most densely populated .
 Ukraine has one of the most equal income distribution as measured by Gini index and Palma ratio . Ukraine has the highest income distribution in the world, according to the index .
 The country's population has been declining since the 1990s because of a high emigration rate, coupled with high death rates and low birth rates . The population is declining due to a high death rate, high birth rates and high birth rate .
 The birth rate has recovered in recent years from a low level around 2000 . It is now comparable to the European average of the same age .
 It would need to increase by another 50% or so to stabilize the population and offset the high mortality rate . The population would need a 50% increase to stabilize.
 During the years 2008 to 2010, more than 1. million children were born in Ukraine, compared to fewer than 1 million during 1999–2001 .
 In 2008 Ukraine posted record-breaking birth rates since its 1991 independence . In 2008 Ukrainian birth rates were the highest since its independence .
 Infant mortality rates have also dropped from 10 deaths to 8. per 1,000 children under one year of age . Infant deaths are also down from 10 to 8 per 1-year-old .
 The government continues to increase child support payments . To help mitigate the declining population, the government is increasing child support .
 The demographic trend is showing signs of improvement, as the birth rate has been steadily growing since 2001 .
 Net population growth over the first nine months of 2007 was registered in five provinces of the country . population shrinkage was showing signs of stabilising nationwide .
 According to the constitution, the state language of Ukraine is Ukrainian . The state language is Ukrainian.
 According to the 2001 census, 67. percent of the population declared Ukrainian as their native language and 29. percent declared Russian .
 Russian was the de facto official language of the Soviet Union . In the schools of the Ukrainian SSR learning Ukrainian was mandatory . Both Russian and Ukrainian were official languages in the SovietUnion .
 A new law on regional languages entitles any local language spoken by at least a 10 percent minority to be declared official within that area . The law was effective in August 2012, and is expected to go into effect next year .
 Russian was declared as a regional language in several southern and eastern oblasts and cities . Russian was within weeks declared as the regional language.
 Russian can now be used in these cities/oblasts' administrative office work and documents . Russian can also be used for administrative work in cities such as Moscow .
 Ukrainian Parliament voted to repeal the law on regional languages on 23 February 2014 . The repeal was not signed by acting President Turchynov and current President Poroshenko .
 In February 2019, the law allowing for regional languages was found unconstitutional . The law was found in February 2019 .
 In central Ukraine, Ukrainian and Russian are both equally used in cities . Russian is more common in Kiev, while Ukrainian is the dominant language in rural communities .
 Russian is primarily used in cities, and Ukrainian is used in rural areas . In eastern and southern Ukraine, Russian is used primarily in cities .
 A small restating of a question switches responses of a significant group of people . These details result in a significant difference across different survey results .
 The number of Ukrainian speakers declined from generation to generation . By the mid-1980s, the usage of the Ukrainian language in public life had decreased significantly .
 Following independence, Ukraine began restoring the image and usage of Ukrainian language through a policy of Ukrainisation .
 Most foreign films and TV programs, including Russian ones, are subtitled or dubbed in Ukrainian . Today, most foreign films, including Russia, are subtitle or dubbed.
 Ukraine's 2017 education law bars primary education to all students in any language but Ukrainian . The law also bars all students from any language or language in Ukraine .
 The Unian reported that a ban on the use of cultural products, namely movies, books, songs, etc., in the Russian language in the public has been introduced .
 70% of Ukrainians declared themselves believers in any religion, while 10.1% were uncertain whether they believed or not . 7.2% were uninterested in beliefs, 6.3% were unbelievers, 2.7% were atheists, and a further 3.9% found
 Of the Ukrainian population, 81.9% were Christians, comprising a 65.4% who declared to be Orthodox, 7.1% simply Christians, 6.5% Greek Rite Catholics, and 1. 9% Protestants .
 Judaism and Hinduism were the religions of 0.2% of the population each . Judaism and Hindus were the only two religions in the world .
16.3% of the population did not identify in one of those listed hitherto . A further 16.3%. A further 15.3 per cent of that population didn't identify in a previous list .
 surveys conducted by Razumkov in the 2000s and early 2010s . Such numbers have remained relatively constant throughout the last decade .
 A further 2.7% were members of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church, which is not recognized by the Eastern Orthodox Church . The Kievan Patriarchate, like the Kieva Patriarchate.
 32.3% declared to be "simply Orthodox" without affiliation to any patriarchate . 3.1% declared they did not know which patriarchate or Orthodox church they belonged to .
 The second largest Christian group in Ukraine, Catholicism, is predominantly represented by the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. The Eastern Catholic Church is in communion with the Holy See of the Roman Catholic Church .
 It recognizes the primacy of the Pope as head of the Church while still maintaining a similar liturgical and spiritual tradition as Eastern Orthodoxy . The Pope is still in charge of the Catholic Church while the Church maintains a similar tradition.
 The church consists mainly of ethnic Poles and Hungarians, who live in the western regions of the country .
 The 1930s, followed by the devastation of World War II, created a demographic disaster . The famines of the 1930s and 1930s were followed by World War 2, and the Great Depression .
 Life expectancy at birth fell to a level as low as ten years for females and seven for males in 1933 and plateaued around 25 for females in the period 1941–44 .
 Significant migration took place in the first years of Ukrainian independence . Significant migration happened in the early years of the independence .
 More than one million people moved into Ukraine in 1991–92, mostly from the other former Soviet republics .
 Currently, immigrants constitute an estimated 14.7% of the total population, or 6. million people . This is the fourth largest figure in the world .
 In 2006, there were an estimated 1. million Canadians of Ukrainian ancestry . Canada's third-largest Ukrainian population is behind Ukraine itself and Russia .
 There are large Ukrainian immigrant communities in the United States, Poland, Australia, Brazil and Argentina . There are also large immigrant communities.
 The Ukrainian Red Cross Society was established in April 1918 in Kiev . It is an independent humanitarian society of the Ukrainian People's Republic . It was established as a humanitarian society in 1918 .
 Its immediate tasks were to help refugees and prisoners of war, care for handicapped people, fight famine and epidemics, support and organize sick quarters .
 society involves more than 6. million supporters and activists . At present, society involves over 6 million people .
 The organization takes part in more than 40 humanitarian programmes all over Ukraine . The organisation is mostly funded by public donation and corporate partnerships .
 The Society annually provides services to more than 105,000 lonely, elderly people . About 23,000 people disabled during the Second World War and about 25,000 war veterans, and more than 8,000 adults handicapped since childhood .
 A high mortality rate among working-age males from preventable causes such as alcohol poisoning and smoking . A factor contributing to the high death rate is a high mortality rates among working age males .
In 2008, the country's population was one of the fastest declining in the world at −5% growth . In 2008, it was the world's fastest declining population .
 The UN warned that Ukraine's population could fall by as much as 10 million by 2050 if trends did not improve .
Obesity, high blood pressure and the HIV endemic are all major challenges facing the Ukrainian healthcare system .
Ukrainian government is reforming the health care system by creating a national network of family doctors .
 In November 2009, former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko proposed introducing a public healthcare system based on health insurance in the spring of 2010 .
 Active reformation of Ukraine's healthcare system was initiated right after appointment of Ulana Suprun as head of the Ministry of Healthcare of Ukraine . Ulana's appointment was made right after the appointment of Suprun.
Assisted by deputy Pavlo Kovtoniuk, Suprun first changed the distribution of finances in healthcare . Suprun changed the Distribution of finances.
 Emergency medical service is considered to be fully funded by the state . Emergency medical services are considered to have been fully funded .
 Emergency Medicine Reform is also an important part of the healthcare reform . Emergency Medicine reform is also a key part of health reform .
 Patients who suffer from chronic diseases are provided with free or low price medicine . In addition, patients with chronic diseases, which cause a high toll of disability and mortality, are also provided withfree or low cost medicine .
 The Ukrainian higher education system comprises higher educational establishments, scientific and methodological facilities under national, municipal and self-governing bodies in charge of education .
 Ukraine produces the fourth largest number of post-secondary graduates in Europe . The country is ranked seventh in population .
For most students the government subsidy is not sufficient to cover their basic living expenses . For most students it is not enough to cover the basic living costs .
 It is common for libraries to supply required books for all registered students . Also, it is common to supply necessary books for students .
 Specialist degree was the only degree awarded by universities in the Soviet times . Historically, Specialist degree is still also granted .
 The Law of Ukraine On Higher Education came into force on 6 September 2014 . The law of Ukraine on Higher Education comes into force in September 2014.
 Opinion in Eastern Ukraine and Southern Ukraine tends to be the exact opposite of those in Western Ukraine . opinions in Central Ukraine on these topics tend to be less extreme . On the Russian language, on Soviet Union and Ukrainian nationalism, on Russian language.
 Similar historical cleavages remain evident at the level of individual social identification . Similar historical Cleavages also remain evident in individual social identity .
 All were united by an overarching Ukrainian identity based on shared economic difficulties . Other attitudes are determined more by culture and politics than by demographic differences .
 Ukrainian customs are heavily influenced by Orthodox Christianity . Orthodox Christianity is the dominant religion in the country .
 Gender roles also tend to be more traditional, and grandparents play a greater role in bringing up children than in the West .
 The culture of Ukraine has also been influenced by its eastern and western neighbours, reflected in its architecture, music, music and art .
 The Communist era had quite a strong effect on the art and writing of Ukraine . The communist era had a strong impact on the arts and writing.
 During the 1980s glasnost was introduced and Soviet artists and writers again became free to express themselves as they wanted .
Artisan textile arts play an important role in Ukrainian culture, especially in Ukrainian wedding traditions . Artisan textile Arts play a key role in the Ukrainian culture .
 Ukrainian embroidery, weaving and lace-making are used in traditional folk dress and in traditional celebrations .
 Ukrainian embroidery varies depending on the region of origin and the designs have a long history of motifs, compositions, colours and types of stitches .
 Embroidery motifs found in different parts of Ukraine are preserved in the Rushnyk Museum in Pereiaslav-Khmelnytskyi . The RushnyK Museum is located in theRushnyk museum in Ukraine . The museum is also in the
 These policies faced a steep decline in the 1930s, when prominent representatives were killed by NKVD as part of the Great Purge .
 These repressions were part of Stalin's implemented policy of socialist realism . The repression was part of a policy of Socialist realism .
 The doctrine did not necessarily repress the use of the Ukrainian language, but it required that writers follow a certain style in their works .
 Lina Kostenko, Dmytro Pavlychko, Borys Oliynyk, Ivan Drach, Oles Honchar, Vasyl Stus and Vasyl Symonenko were the most famous figures of Ukrainian post-war literature .
 Literary freedom grew in the late 1980s and early 1990s alongside the decline and collapse of the USSR and the reestablishment of Ukrainian independence in 1991 .
 Michael's Golden-Domed Cathedral in Kiev is foremost example of Cossack Baroque and one of Ukraine's most recognizable landmarks . The Golden- Domed Cathedral is the most famous cathedral in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian architecture includes the motifs and styles that are found in structures built in modern Ukraine .
 Since the Christianization of Kievan Rus' for several ages Ukrainian architecture was influenced by the Byzantine architecture . The Byzantine architecture was also influenced.
 After the 12th century, the distinct architectural history continued in the principalities of Galicia-Volhynia . After the 13th century.
 During the epoch of the Zaporozhian Cossacks, a new style was developed under the western influences of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth .
 Many structures in the larger eastern, Russian-ruled area were built in the styles of Russian architecture of that period . The western Galicia was developed under Austro-Hungarian architectural influences .
 Ukrainian national motifs would finally be used during the period of the Soviet Union and in modern independent Ukraine .
 The great churches of the Rus', built after the adoption of Christianity in 988, were the first examples of monumental architecture in the East Slavic lands .
 The architectural style of the Kievan state was strongly influenced by the Byzantine state . The Byzantine state was heavily influenced by its Byzantine style .
 Early Eastern Orthodox churches were mainly made of wood, with the simplest form of church becoming known as a cell church .
 Major cathedrals often featured scores of small domes, which led some art historians to take this as an indication of the appearance of pre-Christian pagan Slavic temples .
 Sophia of Kiev – the year 1017 is the earliest record of foundation laid . The Church of the Saviour at Berestove was built from 1113 to 1125 .
 Several buildings were reconstructed during the late-19th century . The Assumption Cathedral in Volodymyr-Volynskyi was built in 1160 and reconstructed in 1896–1900 . The Paraskevi church in Chernihiv, built in 1201, and the Golden
 The reconstruction was criticised by some art and architecture historians as a revivalist fantasy . The latter's reconstruction was also criticised by many art and architectural historians .
 Kievan Rus' architecture has survived. Unfortunately little secular or vernacular architecture of Kie van Rus' has survived .
 As Ukraine became increasingly integrated into the Russian Empire, Russian architects had the opportunity to realise their projects in the picturesque landscape .
 Andrew's Church of Kiev, built by Bartolomeo Rastrelli, is a notable example of Baroque architecture . Its location on top of the Kievan mountain made it a recognisable monument of Kiev .
 The Mariyinsky Palace was built to be a summer residence to Russian Empress Elizabeth . The palace was built in the 1930s to be the home of the Russian Empress .
 During the reign of the last Hetman of Ukraine, Kirill Razumovsky had grandiose projects built by Andrey Kvasov . Many of the Cossack towns such as Hlukhiv, Baturyn and Koselets were built by
 Russia eventually conquered the south of Ukraine and Crimea, and renamed them New Russia . Russia eventually captured Crimea and renamed it New Russia.
 New cities such as Nikolayev, Odessa, Kherson and Sevastopol were founded . New cities like Odessa were founded in the early years of the era .
 Such apartments were built throughout Ukraine during Soviet times and are found in every major city . Such apartments have been built throughout the country .
 Previously, the city was seen as only a regional centre, hence received little attention .
 The first examples of Stalinist architecture were already showing . A new city was to be built on top of the old one .
After the war, a new project for the reconstruction of central Kiev transformed Khreshchatyk avenue into a notable example of Stalinism in Architecture .
 By 1955, by 1955, the new politics of architecture once again stopped the project from fully being realised .
 The task for modern Ukrainian architecture is diverse application of modern aesthetics . The search for an architect's own artistic style and inclusion of the existing historico-cultural environment .
 An example of modern Ukrainian architecture is the reconstruction and renewal of the Maidan Nezalezhnosti in central Kiev .
Engineers were able to blend together the uneven landscape and use underground space for a new shopping centre . Despite the limit set by narrow space within the plaza, the engineers were able.
Ukrainian music sometimes presents a perplexing mix of exotic melismatic singing with chordal harmony .
 The most striking general characteristic of authentic ethnic Ukrainian folk music is the wide use of minor modes or keys which incorporate augmented 2nd intervals . The use of major modes and keys is the most striking feature of authentic Ukrainian folkMusic .
 Mykola Lysenko is widely considered to be the father of Ukrainian classical music . He is known for his work in the classical music.
 During the Baroque period, music was an important discipline for those that had received a higher education in Ukraine .
 The Kyiv-Mohyla Academy had a place of importance in the curriculum of the Kyiv. Academy . It had a considerable importance in its curriculum .
 Many Ukrainian Cossack leaders were accomplished players of the kobza, bandura or torban . Much of the nobility was well versed in music .
 The first dedicated musical academy was set up in Hlukhiv, Ukraine in 1738 . Students were taught to sing, play violin and bandura from manuscripts .
 Many of the earliest composers and performers within the Russian empire were ethnically Ukrainian . They were born or educated in Hlukhiv, or had been closely associated with this music school .
 Since the mid-1960s, Western-influenced pop music has been growing in popularity in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian pop and folk music arose with the international popularity of groups and performers like Vopli Vidoplyasova, Dakh Daughters, Dakha Brakha, Ivan Dorn and Okean Elzy .
 Modern musical culture of Ukraine is presented both with academic and entertainment music. Modern music is presented with academic, entertainment music .
 Ukraine has five conservatories, 6 opera houses, 5 houses of Chamber Music, Philharmony in all regional centers . Ukraine has six opera houses and five houses of chamber music, Philarmony .
 Ukraine hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 and the EuroVision Song Contest 2017 . The Eurovision song contest was held in Ukraine in 2005 .
Kira Muratova, Sergei Loznitsa, Myroslav Slaboshpytskyi, Larisa Shepitko, Sergei Bondarchuk, Leonid Bykov, Yuri Ilyenko, Ihor Podolchak with his Delirium and Maryna V
 Vera Kholodnaya, Bohdan Stupka, Milla Jovovich, Olga Kurylenko, Mila Kunis are among the six women who have been married for more than a decade .
Despite a history of important and successful productions, the industry has often been characterised by a debate about its identity and the level of European and Russian influence .
 Ukrainian producers are active in international co-productions and Ukrainian actors, directors and crew feature regularly in Russian films .
 The newspaper has particular emphasis on the politics of Ukraine . Published mainly in Ukrainian with selected articles published in or translated to Russian and English .
 Freedom of the press in Ukraine is considered to be among the freest of the post-Soviet states other than the Baltic states . Ukraine is one of the most free states in the world .
 Press freedom has significantly improved since the Orange Revolution of 2004 . Press freedom is significantly better since the 2004 Orange Revolution .
 National newspapers Den, Mirror Weekly, and tabloids, such as The Ukrainian Week and Focus, are largely based there . Lviv is also a significant national media centre .
 The National News Agency of Ukraine, Ukrinform was founded here in 1918 .
 The Ukraine publishing sector, including books, directories and databases, has a combined turnover . The Ukraine Publishing sector has a total turnover of more than 1 million people .
 Sanoma publishes Ukrainian editions of such magazines as Esquire, Harpers Bazaar and National Geographic Magazine . Sanoma also publishes National Geographic magazine .
 Many Ukrainians also played for the Soviet national football team . Most notably Ballon d'Or winners Ihor Belanov and Oleh Blokhin . Many Ukrainians played for Soviet national team .
 This award was only presented to one Ukrainian after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Andriy Shevchenko was only given the award after the breakup of the USSR .
 The national team made its debut in the 2006 FIFA World Cup . The team reached the quarterfinals of the tournament before losing to eventual champions, Italy .
 The Ukraine national basketball team finished 6th in EuroBasket 2013 and qualified to FIBA World Cup for the first time in its history . Two years later the Ukraine national team finished sixth in Eurobasket 2013 . The team also qualified for FIBA world Cup for first time.
 Euroleague participant Budivelnyk Kyiv is the strongest professional basketball club in Ukraine . The Ukrainian club is one of the strongest in the country .
 The traditional Ukrainian diet includes chicken, pork, beef, fish and mushrooms . The traditional Ukraine diet includes meat, vegetables, meat and fish .
 Ukrainians tend to eat a lot of potatoes, grains, fresh, boiled or pickled vegetables . Ukrainians also tend to consume potatoes and grains .
 Ukrainians drink stewed fruit, juices, buttermilk, mineral water, tea and coffee, beer, wine and horilka .
 This page is based on the Wikipedia article Ukraine . It is used under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.3. It is also based on a Wikipedia article about Ukraine .