 The Kremlin’s strategy of military aggression in Ukraine and Eastern Europe has backfired, spurring former Soviet and Warsaw Pact countries to become a de facto anti-Moscow military bloc . NATO rearms and reinforces its eastern flank.
 Eastern Europe has become the most rapidly militarizing region on earth . It is not to Moscow's advantage, but it is not the only region to be militarizing .
 In 2014, Moscow annexed Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula after a hybrid warfare invasion . Russia annexed Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula in 2014 .
 Russia subsequently launched a proxy war in eastern Ukraine, which has so far killed about 10,000 Ukrainians . The conflict is still ongoing and so far has killed about ten,000 people .
Russia has also ratcheted up military provocations against NATO forces across Eastern Europe . Since 2014, Russia has also been ratcheting up military provocation against NATO troops .
 Russian warplanes have made provocative flybys of NATO ships and aircraft . Russian war planes have been flying over NATO ships, aircraft .
 Moscow has deployed new military hardware to its Kaliningrad exclave . The territory is nestled between Baltic countries and Poland, which are all NATO members .
 Russia has also conducted cyber warfare attacks on the electoral processes of multiple NATO countries, including the U.S., Germany, and France . The attacks are not limited to Germany, France, and the Netherlands .
 Russia is trying to reassert influence over what it considers its “near abroad” Szeligowski said . By casting doubt as to “whether NATO is capable of defending its members in case of aggression’s aggression,’ he said .
 Former Soviet and Warsaw Pact countries have undertaken a crash course military buildup . Anticipating a potential war with Russia, former Soviet and Polish Pact countries are preparing for a possible war .
 Latvia and Lithuania have had the two fastest-growing military budgets in the world since 2014, according to IHS Jane’s . The Baltic countries of Latvia and Lithuanian have the fastest growing military budgets .
 Eastern European countries are not looking to freelance their own national security outside of NATO’s collective defense umbrella . Despite the military buildup, however, Eastern European nations are, for the most part, not looking for their own security .
 Russian aggression has increased NATO’s clout in Eastern Europe since 2014 . In fact, Russia has increased its clout in the region since 2014.
 Ukraine has also turned to NATO as a hedge against Russian aggression . Despite not being a NATO member, Ukraine has not enjoyed NATO's collective defense guarantee .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has ordered Ukraine’s military to adopt NATO standards by 2020 .
 Russian-separatist forces launched an artillery and rocket blitz on the eastern Ukrainian town of Avdiivka at the end of January . Poroshenko announced plans to hold a national referendum on NATO membership.
 NATO will not accept a Ukrainian bid for membership while the country is at war . Ukraine is currently at war with Ukraine .
 Poroshenko’s move highlights how invoking the possibility of NATO membership is a way to deter, or antagonize, Russia .
 Russian aggression has spurred NATO to rearm and adopt a more aggressive posture toward Moscow . Russia's aggressive behavior has prompted NATO to adopt more aggressive stance against Moscow .
 The Western military alliance has pledged to boost military spending while it follows through on plans to deploy its forces eastward toward Russia’s borders in ways unseen since the Cold War .
 The United States Defense Secretary James Mattis pressed for all NATO countries to meet the alliance’s minimum defense spending target of 2 percent of gross domestic product .
 Currently, only five countries meet the 2 percent mark . The U.S., Estonia, Greece, Poland, and the U.K. currently meet that mark .
 NATO has plans to send four 1,000-troop-strong battalions toward Russia’s borders . One for each of the three Baltic countries, and one for Poland .
 NATO's Very High Readiness Joint Task Force comprises about 5,000 troops . NATO’s Very High readiness Joint task force comprises about 4,500 troops .
 The United States has about 35,000 military personnel in Europe, including two Army infantry brigades . Overall, the U.S. has about 30,000 troops in Europe .
 The U.S. also has troops in Ukraine conducting a training mission for Ukraine’s armed forces .
 NATO's eastward deployments are still just a fraction of Ukraine's military buildup near Russia’s border . The overall military balance of power in Europe has shifted since 2014 due to Russian aggression .
 Ukraine now has about 60,000 combat troops, supported by heavy artillery and armor, forward deployed to the Donbas . The Donbas is Ukraine's embattled southeastern territory on the border with Russia .
 That's a force of 60,000 combat troops near Russia’s border that wasn’t there prior to 2014 . The force was there before 2014 .
 About 3,000 to 5,000 regular Russian troops remain in the Donbas, along with about 40,000 pro-Russian separatists . About 40,00 pro- Russian separatists remain in Donbas .
 In the months following Ukraine’s February 2014 revolution, Russia launched a hybrid invasion of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula, ultimately annexing the territory .
 Russia followed up the seizure of Crimea with a proxy war in the Donbas . Russia also followed up Crimea's seizure with a proxies war in Crimea .
 A combined force of pro-Russian separatists and Russian regulars was on the march in eastern Ukraine in 2014 . There were worries that Ukraine could be split in two, or that Russia might launch a large-scale invasion .
 A cease-fire called Minsk II has kept the war at bay since February 2015 . Minsk 2 has been in the conflict since January 2015 .
Today's conflict is static, mostly fought from fixed positions in trenches with long-range, indirect fire weapons, such as artillery and rockets . Today, the conflict is mostly fought in fixed positions, mostly from fixed locations .
 About 3,000 to 5,000 regular Russian troops remain in the Donbas, Ukrainian military estimates . About 40,000 pro-Russian separatists remain in Ukraine, according to military estimates.
 The war in eastern Ukraine has killed about 10,000 Ukrainians and displaced about 1. million people, humanitarian groups say . The war has also killed about 1,000 people, according to estimates .
 Ukrainian military had been gutted by corrupt government officials who pilfered weapons and supplies for sale to arms dealers .
In the past three years, Ukraine has rebuilt its military into the second largest in Europe . About a quarter-million active-duty troops and about 80,000 reservists, that's a jump of at least 25 percent from its pre-2014 manpower levels .
 Ukraine increased its military budget by 23 percent the year after the war began . The country also increased its budget by 22 percent .
 Ukrainian defense spending is scheduled to increase by 10 percent each year going forward, according to IHS Jane’s .
 In 2015, Ukraine was the world’s ninth-largest weapons exporting nation . Ukraine is the world's ninth- largest weapons export nation .
 Ukraine's arms exports contracts jumped by 25 percent from 2015 levels, totaling about $750 million . In 2016, Ukraine’s arms exports Contracts jumped by $750million .
 Ukraine's president has called for Ukraine to rank among the world’s top-five weapons exporting nations by 2020 . Poroshenko: Ukraine should rank among world's top five weapons exporting countries by 2020.
 Ukraine's military revival has been meteoric, and it would never have happened without Russia's takeover of Crimea, or its proxy war in the Donbas . Ukraine’s military revival is meteoric.
 Ukraine's strategic military doctrine now identifies Russia as the country's top security threat . Russia is the country’s top threat, according to the military doctrine .
Kyiv is rebuilding its military with the specific objective of defending against a Russian invasion . Resultantly, Kyiv is rebuilding its military.
 Ukraine's military center of gravity used to be in its western regions, a carryover from the Cold War . The Red Army massed its strength on the Soviet Union's western borders to oppose a NATO invasion from that direction .
 Ukraine’s military forces have moved eastward, digging in to defend against Russia . Today, Ukraine's military forces are digging in.
 Russia’s military aggression in Ukraine has also sparked a cultural backlash among the Ukrainian people . Russia's military aggression has also caused a cultural reaction among the Ukrainians .
 Ukrainians share a common language, religion, and cultural history with Russia . Ukrainians are also known for their language and culture .
 72 percent of Ukrainians have an unfavorable opinion about Russia, according to a recent poll . 77 percent consider Russia to be a threat to its neighbors, the poll says .
 That’s a sharp change from 2011, when 84 percent of Ukrainians had a favorable opinion about Russia . That's a sharp difference from 2011.
 Ukraine is, bit-by-bit, purging itself of all things Russian, and all reminders of the Soviet Union . Ukraine is a little bit of a Soviet Union, but it's a little more Russian than Russia .
 In 2015, Ukraine's parliament passed a series of “decommunization’s laws, including the hammer and sickle flag, and statues of Vladimir Lenin .
 The excised ‘petrovsk’ referred to communist leader Grigory Petrovsky, for whom the city was named in 1926 by Joseph Stalin .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania are now building up their militaries at a faster pace than any other countries on earth . They are all former Soviet states and current NATO members .
 The Baltic countries increased their collective spending on new military equipment from $210 million in 2014 to $390 million in 2016, according to IHS Jane’s report .
 By 2020, the region’s defense budget will be $2. billion, up from $930 million in 2005 . The region's defense budget is expected to be $1.2 billion .
 Poland has doubled its military spending since 2006, reaching $9. billion in 2016 . Poland, also a NATO member, is also a member of the European Union .
 Polish military spending has increased in eight of the past 10 years, with an 18 percent jump in 2015 . Poland's military spending is up 18 percent in 2015, according to the Polish military .
 Sweden and Finland have started to build up their militaries due to the Russian threat . The countries that stayed mostly neutral during the Cold War have built up their military forces .
 Finnish authorities have mulled blocking some foreigners from purchasing property near military sites .
 The move was a response to worries that Russians were acquiring land, which could be used to garrison troops or stage attacks during an invasion .
 The militarization of civilian populations across Eastern Europe offers a chilling barometer of how seriously those countries consider the possibility of a war with Russia .
 civilian paramilitary groups are training for a guerrilla war against Russia . They are a throwback to partisan units that fought against both the Nazis and the Red Army in World War II .
 In Lithuania, the government recently issued a guerrilla warfare manual for the country's 3 million citizens .
 Estonia’s standing army comprises about 6,000 troops out of an overall national population of 1. million . Estonia has a total of 1 million people in the country .
 The Defense League has 25,400 volunteers who train for war on the weekends . The group is a civilian paramilitary group .
 civilian paramilitary groups are credited with stopping the advance of combined Russian-separatist forces in 2014 . In the early days of the war, Ukraine's regular army was on its heels .
 Many analysts compare the current tensions between Russia and NATO as a new Cold War . Many analysts have compared the tensions between the two countries to the current Cold War.
NATO on one side, Russia and its proxies on the other. They see the conflict through a bipolar lens, says CNN.com .
 The current security environment in Eastern Europe is not so easily reducible to the Cold War paradigm . Yet, the current security situation in Eastern European countries is not as easy as it was in the past .
 The region is no longer a geopolitical no man’s land between East and West . The region has become more of a "no man's land"
 There is a lack of a consensus among NATO countries about the alliance’s top threat . There is, however, a shortage of consensus on the alliance's top threat.
 Some officials from Western European NATO countries believe terrorists infiltrating from the battlefields of Iraq and Syria are the alliance’s biggest menace .
Among the alliance's Eastern European members, Russia is without a doubt, the top security concern . Russia is among the alliance’s Eastern European member, but it is not considered a major concern .