 Russia’s President Vladimir Putin has branded the Ukrainian leadership a ‘party of war’ Putin said the Ukraine leadership would continue fueling conflicts while they stay in power . The recent Kerch Strait incident was an example, he said .
 This is a party of war and as long as they stay in power, all this war will go on, says author . "This is a Party of war," he says . "All such tragedies, all such tragedies," he adds .
 The Ukrainian government is not interested in a peaceful resolution of the conflict, Putin stated . That’s reason number one, he said .
You can always use war to justify your failures in economy, social policy. Second, you can always justify your failure in economic and social policy . You can also use war as a justification for your own failures .
 Ukrainian authorities deeply concerns Russia’s President . This approach to statecraft by Ukrainian authorities is deeply concerned .
 Tensions between Russia and Ukraine have been soaring after the incident in the Kerch Strait .
 Three Ukrainian Navy ships tried to break through the strait without the proper permission from Russia last weekend .
 The vessels were seized and their crews detained over their violation of the country’s border . The vessels had a tense stand-off and altercation with the border guard .
 Kiev declared a so-called “partial” martial law ahead of Ukraine’s presidential election . Russia believes the whole Kerch affair to be a deliberate “provocation’ed by Kiev . Kiev branded the incident an act of “aggression
 It appears President Putin has the measure of the Ukrainian Government and what they’re up to .
 We saw how they care, they invaded ukraine, killed 20,000 Ukrainians since 2014 . We saw what they were doing, how they cared, and how they did .
 President Putin cares about Ukraine as a neighbour but he knows that it is a failed state . President Putin knows that Ukraine is a failing state .
5200 Russian Army soldiers kiled in Donbass, 20,000 Ukrainians . The Russians invaded Donbass .
 The guy is a total loser who doesn’t know what he is talking about and will not accept the truth if it hit him in the mouth - which I hope it does . The guy doesn't know what his talk is about and won't accept it .
 Crimean economy is down, hardly light, gas….and drinking water . Crimea is down. Crimea is still in the middle of a recession .
 Our rulers cannot be too choosy in their choice of trolls. He’s probably not very well paid for this, but our rulers can't be too Choosy .
 He’s at least persistent and does provide some contrast, even if it is a deeper shade of shite . He's at least persistence, but does provide a contrast.
 The U.S. wants to install the ‘Gas Princess’ in Ukraine . The Ukraine government wants to replace the gas Princess .
 Ukrainians are no more stupid than the inhabitants of most western “democracies,’s ‘Democracies’ The Ukrainians, who vote in governments that make them pay for perpetual war, ris Armageddon and steadily replace the native population with those from Arica and Asia
 Most people are easily gulled when they are let down by a corrupt and degenerate elite and given no real choice .
 Even when they do vote for ‘change’ – as with Brexit and Trump – they are baulked . Even if they vote for 'change' - as withBrexit and Trump - they're baulking .
 Epstein can't drain the swamp because as a friend of Epstein he has to be a swamp creature himself . He can’t drain the Swamp because of Epstein's friendship with Epstein .
 And wait for a humanitarian crisis and then intervene to stop the killing, says CNN.com .
 If the U.S. didn't start the regime change in Iraq, Libya and Syria, there would not be so many Refugees seeking safety in Europe .
 All the evidence shows U.S. MEDDLING/regime change in other Nation's affairs, leaves only failed terrorist States in their place, and still doubles down on failed policies .
 Iran is the last target for U.S. regime change, following the 2001 United States WAR PLANS brought out within weeks of 9/11, to change the regimes of Iraq, Libya, Syria, and at THE END, Iran .
 Anyone who doesn’t know how to use the Caps Lock key must be deficient in brain function . The key is a key to a person's ability to control the brain .
 As long as the U.S. backs Ukraine, the danger of war will continue to exist .
 Europe is guilty by association…continuously imposing restrictions which end up hurting both sides. And Europe is Guilty by association .
 Petro Poroshenko thinks he is the reincarnation of Germany's Adolf Hitler during the 1930s and his rise to power .
 Hitler is doing the same thing he did when he invaded other countries at first . He is doing same thing as Hitler did in other countries .