 Ukraine informed the UNSD about it being impossible to provide statistical data on the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol as the result of annexation of those Ukrainian territories by Russian Federation .
 Ukraine has not sent any similar notice to the UNSD in relation to the territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions occupied by Russia . The UNSD has not issued any similar notices to Ukraine .
 Russia did not dare include these territories to its composition, the way it had done with the Crimea . Minsk agreements confirmed that the territories should go back to Ukraine's control .
 State Statistics Service of Ukraine continues to take into account the population of the occupied territories of the two eastern regions in its assessment of the Ukrainian population .
 The UNSD provides the UNSD with those figures and makes them public on its site and in its printed editions . The SSSU provides theUNSD with the figures .
 The SSSU provides information as of January 1 for each region as well as for each city of regional importance and each district .
 Since the border between the occupied territories and the territory under Ukraine's control is known, using those collections of the SSSU, official population on the territory can be counted . It may be studied how it changed in the period from January 1, 2014 to January 1.
 As of January 1, 2014 the population of Donetsk and Luhansk regions was 6,583 thousand persons, including 3,894 thousand people . The population is 59.15% of the overall number, in inhabited settlements which are now under occupation .
 Urban population of the two regions as of the above date made up 5,885 thousand people . 3,696 thousand people, or 62.8%, were in the territory which is under occupation now .
 Only 5.1% of residents in rural areas lived in rural regions .
 In this industrial area there are both residential areas, areas of mining and industrial enterprises and large areas of industrial waste polluting air and subsoil waters .
 From the economic point of view, this territory is depressive, from the economicpoint of view it is a total environmental disaster area . From the demographic point of views, it's a quick population extinction zone, says author .
 The total birth rate in Donetsk and Luhansk regions was respectively 9. and 9.1 . The general Ukrainian rate of 11.1 was significantly lower than that of the general Ukrainian .
 At the same time, the overall death rate in both regions made up 15.6%. The average Ukrainian death rate was 14.6.6 .
 There was a noticeable migration outflow of residents from both regions . Also, there was an increase in migration from both countries .
 The demographic crisis in Donetsk and Luhansk regions can be traced in the following comparison . The integral consequences of the demographic crisis can be seen in the comparison .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions the population was shrinking more than twice as fast as in other Ukrainian regions . It means that in Donetsk andLuhansk region the population is shrinking twice as quickly as other regions .
 Data refers to the whole territory of Donetsk and Luhansk regions . But the data refers to whole territory.
 After the Russian invasion, demographic trends in Donbas have been changing drastically . The demographic trends are changing drastically.
 Many people had grounds to be afraid for their lives since they had taken a clearly pro-Ukrainian standpoint . Many people in Ukraine had no reason to fear for their life .
 For young families the main motif was a wish not to put their children at risk . The main motif for young families was to not put their kids at risk.
 Many men wanted to avoid compulsory call-up to the occupation army . Also, many men wanted not to be called up to the army .
 Many state institutions were evacuated from the occupied Donetsk and Luhansk . Many of their staff members moved with them to Mariupol, Kramatorsk, Artemivsk, Severodonetsk .
 Higher educational establishments were evacuated and many students moved to their new places of studies . Also, many students were moved to new places.
 Among those who left the occupied territories there prevailed young people and middle-aged people . While the share of people of pre-pension and elderly age was comparatively low .
 A typical phenomenon was that adult children moved to the territory controlled by Ukraine . Parents-pensioners stayed there not to leave their apartment unattended .
 For this category of prospective students the procedure of enrolment was specifically simplified . passport, passport, certificate of complete general secondary education and certificate of external independent appraisal were not mandatory .
 All the above trends have generally resulted in a considerable distortion of the demographic structure of the population in the occupied territories .
 The share of pensioners in Ukraine has increased. Prior the war it had been characterized by a lower share of young generations than on average in Ukraine .
 It's clear that reduction of the share of young people results, in its turn, in the fall of the birth rate . It is clear that the drop in birth rate is a result of a drop in young people .
 The curfew makes life more complicated for those in love . Young families normally don't dare have children in the conditions of uncertain future .
Until the territories are under occupation, the share of young generations in the structure of the population that remains there will keep on shrinking . That is why until the territory is under occupation it will keep shrinking .
 The general death rate factor has increased in recent years . This will result in further increase of the general death Rate factor, according to experts .
 Russian occupation has pushed local residents into the demographic spiral of extinction and degeneracy . The population of Russian residents is now at the lowest level in Russia .
 The population in the territories of Donbas reduced by 45,000 persons over 2014, by 21 thousand persons over 2015, and only by 5 thousand persons in 2016 . In 2016, only 5,000 people were under occupation in Donbas .
 In the period between population censuses changes in the population in each inhabited settlement are calculated on the basis of the data provided by state bodies .
 Every month the estimated number is adjusted through adding the number of births and those who got registered and deducting those who were struck off the register . The number of deaths and deaths is adjusted every month through adding a new number of birth births .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions still functioned in the whole territory of Donetsk and Donetsk . Over almost the whole 2014 the respective authorities still functioning in the entire region .
Bodies stopped functioning in the towns and districts with the occupation regime . But gradually those bodies stopped functioning.
 In particular, territorial bodies of the SSSU – the Main Administrations of Statistics in Donetsk and Luhansk – moved to Artemivsk and Severodonetsk on December 1, 2014 .
 Ukrainian authorities replaced by self-proclaimed 'authorities' in recording births, deaths and residence without Ukraine's authorization to that . Ukrainian authorities were replaced with self- proclaimed 'authority'
 The SSSU neither gets reports from them nor takes into account the information they make public . The U.S. does not take into account information made public .
 The State Statistics Service is only the data coming from Ukrainian authorities in the territory under Ukraine's control .
 This could be the data about the change of permanent residence. In particular, this could be about the changes in permanent residence .
 The largest migration flow from occupied territories could be traced in the last months of 2014 and the first half of 2015 . The largest flow from the occupied territories is expected to be in 2014 and 2015 .
 State Statistics Service has developed information on migration from executive bodies of city, town, urban village, village councils and village heads .
 The migration outflow of residents from occupied territories could be traced to the occupied territories . Still, there could be some migration inflow there, though .
 Even a larger share of migration inflow was represented by citizens of the RF who came to the occupied territories .
 Viktor Muzhenko, the Head of the General Staff – Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, announced this figure in the Liga.net interview published August 8, 2017 .
 The General Staff stressed that 'in Donbas there are no illegal military groups, these are well-structured military organisms' The head of the General Staff said that in Donbas 'there are noillegal military groups'
 These are the 1st and 2nd Army Corps, bearing all the signs of regular troops . They are the First and Second Army Corps .
 Most important is the fact that they are managed from the centre which is located in Russia . The centre is in Russia.
 The commanding commissioned staff in both corps were regular Russian service men . The commanding staff in the Russian military were regular Russians .
 Muzhenko reminded that Ukrainian military had taken many Russian service men captive . He also noted that there were regular members of the RF's armed forces in Donbas .
 The Special Monitoring Mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe works in Ukraine .
 The problem of migration flow from the RF is topical, but in any case of importance is the question how many Ukrainian citizens remain in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
Official statistics of the SSSU include only a small portion of the changes the population of the occupied territories has undergone .
 As of January 1, 2017 in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions there resided 3,823 thousand people . The data is the latest collection 'The Current Size of Ukraine's Population'
 The State Statistics Service itself recognizes the inflated number . However, this number is obviously inflated .
 The occupation authorities have established activity of statistical bodies in Donetsk since February 2015 and in Luhansk since August 2015 . The occupation authority has established activity in Donetsk.
 The population size of the population in the U.S. is based on data from January 1, 2015 . They have published the data about the dynamics in the population size .
 As of August 1, 2017, there were 3,785 thousands of people in Donetsk and Luhansk regions . The occupation statistics show that 3,803 thousand people were living in the occupied territories of Donetsk.
 Ukrainian statistics say 38 thousands less than according to Ukrainian statistics . But even this figure is also obviously inflated. This is 38,000 less than the Ukrainian statistics, however .
 The SSSU takes into account only the events recorded by the Ukrainian bodies . The occupation statistics include only the activities recorded by occupation bodies .
 Comparison of Ukrainian and occupation statistics is provided in the table . Ukraine is one of the most populous countries in Ukraine .
 At that time in the territories of Donbas that are now under occupation there resided 3,894 thousand persons . The territories are under occupation.
 The SSSU estimated reduction of population in those territories as amounting to 71 thousand persons . Over three years the SSSu estimated reduction in population in that territories as well as 71 thousand people .
 occupation statistics for two years and seven months found population reduction in those territories by 86 thousand persons . The population reduction was in the territories of the U.S.
 The laws of logic suggest that the indices should just be added up . The indices are based on data received from absolutely different sources and events .
 Ukrainian population in occupied territories of Donbas may be considered top assessment of the real number of Ukrainian population . That figure may be top assessment.
 9,162 children were born in the occupied part of Donetsk region during 2016 – 11,771, during January-July 2017 – 6,852, according to occupation authorities .
 The general birth rate factor made up respectively 3. in 2015, 5. in 2016 and 5 in 2017 . In 2016, 5 in 2016, and again in 2017, 4 in 2017.
 The overall figure for the year will be five of newly born children per one thousand of current residents . It means that if by the end of 2017 the same birth rate is maintained as the one traced over the first seven months .
 occupation has caused birth rate to drop more than twice over the three years, according to the Donetsk region . In the occupied part of Donetsk region, birth rate has dropped 4.5 times over three years .
 The occupation authorities are interested in showing improvement in the demographic situation . One cannot doubt that the occupation authorities want to show improvement .
 Nobody normally wants to provide false overestimation of the birth rate, since that is a dangerous thing for all those involved in such a fraud .
 If the child is not shown, suspicions may arise of murder or at least some fraud . The child may have been in the care of a family member .
Everybody understands that the authorities may change, and therefore does not want to take the risk . Everybody understands that they may change .
 A whole hundred of children are born per each hundred of thousands of residents annually . The birth rate factor should be raised to 6.0, according to the author .
Birth rate figures do not contain any false data, according to experts . That does not mean that birth rate figures are absolutely reliable, they say .
 The factor published remains very low, systemic and large-scale falsifications in statistical reporting about the birth rate in occupied territories seem to be of low probability . But judging by the fact that the factor published is very low.
 At the same time, great doubts arise as to the fact that the occupation authorities record and take into account all the deceased .
 The average over the three years is 14.2, which is even below the pre-war level . The average is even lower than pre- war level .
 It is clear that the occupation authorities are interested in underestimating the death rate among residents . In particular, concealing the cases of murders of residents in the occupied territories .
 occupation authorities strive to conceal the number of occupationists who perished . Also, the occupation authorities try to conceal number of occupations who perished.
 The Decree of the President of the RF Putin as of November 30, 2015 includes data about the losses in the military staff to state secrets .
 Site gruz200.com.ua has published the list of 3,817 perished and missing Russian service men and mercenaries as of September 1, 2017 .
 Combat actions were most intensive starting with August 2014 up to February 2015 . Combat actions began in August 2014 and continued until February 2015. Combat actions started in February 2015, with most intensive beginning in August .
 The level of losses among occupationists remains rather high. But even after that, the level of loss remains higher than usual .
 occupation statistics provide an obviously underestimated death rate factor . The natural growth factor appears to be lower than anywhere else in Ukraine and the world as well .
 The occupation authorities don't provide any data on the birth rate and death rate in the occupied part of Luhansk .
 There is no data breakdown by the geographical directions of migration flows . The number of those coming and those leaving is not mentioned .
 The occupation statistics do not provide any information on the migration growth at all . As far as the occupied part of Luhansk region is concerned .
 In April 2017 the official spokesman of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Russia Maria Zakharova stated, referring to the data of the Federal Migration Service of the Russian Federation, as of March 16, 2017, that in the territory of the RF there are 2. m
 The FMS of the RF stated this data about a million of refugees also in summer 2015, but from all over Ukraine, and not only from Donbas .
 The study was conducted by the organizations which analyzed the increase of the load on educational institutions, maternity houses, etc. in the place of registration of displaced persons, as well as changes in the statistics of death rate .
 1,592,000 people displaced from Donbas and Crimea got registered . 20 thousands of them were Crimean residents .
Population in Donetsk and Luhansk regions under Ukraine's control over 2014–16 shrank by 73,000 persons . However, those figures run counter to the data provided by the State Statistics Service .
 If we take 3,894 thousand persons in the now-occupied territories of Donbas as of January 1, 2014, deduct 1,572 thousand persons displaced from Donbas . Only 1,322 thousand persons are left, which is an unrealistically small figure .
 Ukrainian residents in the occupied territories of Donbas may be the lowest assessment of the real number of Ukrainians in the region .
 Most probably, among those who have gone to Russia, a considerable part is made up by residents of the part of Donbas .
 For a more reliable assessment the mean of the above upper estimate and the lower estimate should be taken, that is 3,203 thousands, or the rounded figure of 3. mln. persons .
 Taking into account the above estimates, one may provide characteristics of the residents of the occupied territories of Donbas .
 Donetsk, Makiyivka, Horlivka in Donetsk region and Luhansk and Alchevsk in Luhansi region . Donetsk is the capital of Donetsk, Donetsk and Donetsk region . The Donetsk region is also known for its small towns and cities in the Donetsk and Lu
 Over 2014–17 in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk regions as the result of migration outflow of young people and families with children with children as well as the birth rate fall the share of children under 20 .
 It may be stated that it dropped to 10% or even less, which means that now it is more than twice smaller than in the peaceful regions of Ukraine .
 Russian occupation of east of Ukraine has posed new threats to health of local residents, according to experts . Russia has occupied eastern Ukraine since 2004 .
 They are gradually being strengthened and may have long-term negative consequences . They are slowly being strengthened. They may have a negative effect on them .
 One of the threats is rapid deterioration of the public health system. One of such threats is a rapid deterioration.
 Most doctors of both state, municipal and private health care institutions have left for the territory under Ukraine's control . Most doctors left for Ukraine's territory.
 Donetsk social media users inform that the city is left with few dentists . In particular, the city has been left with many dentists.
Doctors have to hand their businesses over to the representatives of the occupation authorities for a song and to leave their native city . Quite often doctors have to give their businesses to occupation authorities .
 Medical institutions provide service primarily or exclusively for the occupation army . Now medical institutions provide services primarily or only for the army .
 supplies of drugs and medicines for farmacies have deteriorated significantly . Drugs have become more expensive, and drugs are more expensive . Drugs and medicines have become much more expensive.
 Doctors who remain in the occupied territories have increased the cost of their services many times . In their turn, doctors who remain there have increased their services .
 There is almost no competition in health care since now there is no competition for health care . Local residents cannot do anything about that since now.
 The death rate in the occupied territories of Donbas may rise further due to such a state of affairs .
 This year, after the so-called nationalization of companies by occupation authorities, two more negative trends have appeared . This year has seen a rise in the number of companies being nationalized .
 The first is the fall in the overall standard of living due to closure of companies . The second is the drop in the average standard of life due to the closure of firms .
 More people are incapable of providing themselves with good nutrition . More people cannot provide themselves with the necessary medicines and medical services .
Environmental situation is becoming worse even before the war, says CNN's John Sutter . The environmental situation is being absolutely bad, he says .
Special threat posed by expected flooding of mine 'Yunkom' in Yenakiyevo town council . An underground explosion was arranged for the sake of reducing tension in the mountainous area .
 The risk of mine flooding became apparent in June 2017, and it may lead to radioactive contamination of underground waters .
 The Russian occupation of parts of Donetsk and Lugansk regions has led to a sharp deterioration of the demographic situation . The demographic situation in the territories has been deteriorating .
 Migration outflow of population took place on either side of the front line . Migration outflows of population take place on both sides of the line .
 People left their homes in occupied cities and regions because of the loss of work or business . But also because of a lack of good prospects for themselves, people left homes in the occupied cities .
 For more than two years, these problems, and not hostilities, have been the main reasons for migration outside the occupied territories .
 In 2017, after the 'nationalization' of enterprises owned by Ukrainian companies in the occupied territories, the migratory outflow from these territories increased .
 Ukrainian economy's inability to absorb a large quantity of new labor force is its only restrain now . In fact, the Ukrainian economy is struggling to absorb large quantities of new workers .
 Youth leaves occupied territories most actively, for young people . Youth leaves the occupied territories for the better prospects . Young people are normally highly mobile.
 The birth rate drop in the occupied part of Donetsk region is quite indicative of this trend . The birth rates in the Donetsk region have dropped in recent years .
 According to occupational statistics, the fertility rate in 2016 equated to 5. per 1,000 people .
Ukrainian State Statistics Service: 10. per 1,000 people. Meanwhile, the figure is as twice as high as 10 per 1.1 million people .
 Among the elderly, it is always much higher than among younger generations . These population age composition deformations inevitably result in mortality rise, since among the elderly .
Death rate in occupied territories rises due to terror conducted by occupation authorities, sharp healthcare deterioration, and lack of medicines .
 In 2017, it was accompanied by rapid living standards decline because of mass closure of enterprises . The same time, worsening environmental conditions caused by mines flooding, caused by flooding .
 The Yunkom mine flooding that began on June 30, 2017, is especially dangerous . The mine flooding began in June 2017 .
 In 1979, a nuclear device was set off in the mine near Enakievo to reduce tension within the bedrocks . The device was used to reduce tensions within the mine .
 The mine flooding can cause groundwater radioactive contamination, and it is fraught with peril for Enakievo and its vicinities .
 According to invaders' statistics, the occupied part of Donetsk Oblast mortality rate was 15 per 1,000 people in 2016 .
In 2016, the natural population growth ratio in Donetsk Oblast reached 10 per 1,000 inhabitants . In 2016, mortality rate in the occupied parts of the city was understated .
 According to UN statistics, there is no country on the globe with a ratio that bad . The ratio is not the worst in the world .
 The real mortality rate in the occupied territories may exceed 20 per 1.000 . The real death rate in occupied territories could exceed 20% .
 The natural population growth rate may be 15 per 1000 inhabitants or even higher .
Both Ukraine and Russia will have to consider the circumstances while designing Donbass future . Both Ukraine and Russian will be considering the circumstances of the future .
 The Kremlin is scarcely going to increase spending to maintain captured territories and locals . The Kremlin faces growing number of pensioners among them .
 ethnic Russians prefer settling along the subtropical Southern coast, neither northern mountains or steppe areas . But even in Crimea, ethnic Russians migrating from Russia prefer settling in the southern coast .
 The Kremlin has another way of solving demographic problems of the captured part of Donbass .
 Russia has a considerable 'demographic reserve' of Chechens, Ossetians, and other North Caucasian nations . Russia also has a significant 'demographics reserve'
 If the Kremlin dwells on the frozen conflict scenario, one can expect rapid increase in North Caucasian people presence in the occupied Donbass territories .
 Chechen and Ossetian militants took an active part in occupation of Donbas . It's not a secret that the militants took part in the occupation .
 Locals treated locals in a more aggressive manner and confronted co-invaders . They stood out among other groups of occupants by treating locals in more aggressive way .
 North Caucasian families have three to four children instead of one usual for locals during the last decade . In a couple generations the newcomers' descendants will be as numerous in the occupied territories as people of Slavonic ancestry .
 It would make sense, explaining the locals living under occupation prospects like this. It would be a good idea to explain the situation to locals .
 Most anti-Ukrainian part of the population leaves the region . It is necessary to develop its own plan of solving the Donbass's demographic problems before it is completely de-occupied .
 Ukrainian refugees who had moved to the territories controlled by Ukraine should be allowed to return to their homeland .
 The baby boom is necessary, in the Donbass as well as in the rest regions of Ukraine .
Economic growth and living standards growth might form appropriate mood in society . But the war end, an economic growth, and living Standards growth might be appropriate mood .
 Donbass needs projects attracting unemployed people from other regions, especially young people, both men and women . Don Bass needs projects to attract young people to other regions .
 Ukraine's Western partners have repeatedly promised multibillion-dollar aid to renovate Donbas infrastructure . Ukraine's West partners have promised multi-million dollar aid to Donbas .
 It is necessary to seek investors to create new enterprises. But meanwhile it is necessary for investors to find new enterprises, it is needed to create a new business .