 The Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 set off the worst crisis between Russia and the West since the 1980s .
 Germany has emerged as the key leader to engage Russia on behalf of the West . In the wake of this event, a reunified Germany has emerge as the top leader to talk to Russia .
 The Crimean episode shattered the 1975 Helsinki foundation for the peaceful inviolability of Europe’s existing borders . The Crimean episodes shattered the Helsinki foundation.
 The shock of the Russian intervention in Ukraine and the Crimean annexation destroyed the illusion of the German Ostpolitik since 1969 of perpetual entente with Moscow and challenged the European security order .
 This study examines historic German-Russian relations and Germany’s foreign policy . The study focuses on Germany's Russia Policy and post-1990 Ostpolitik .
 The evolution of policy from ‘change through rapprochement’ to “change through trade’ forms a special focus . The evolution from “ change through r Approchement to ‘ change through trade.’
 Germany has changed its Russian statecraft since the Crimean annexation . Germany has been caught between Realpolitik and value-based Moralpolitik .
 The thesis examines this German policy transformation and presents its implications for Germany’s foreign policy amidst a growing German geopolitical power in Europe .
 The Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 set off the worst crisis between Russia and the West since the 1980s . Russia's annexation of the Crimean peninsula set off a crisis between the West and Russia in 2014 .
 Gennany has changed its statecraft since the Crimean annexation . Caught between interest-led Realpolitik and value-based Moralpolitik .
National Security Affairs chief says he is honored and grateful for having had the opportunity to attend the master’s program in regional studies .
 The Bundeswehr has been in the U.S. for more than a decade . It has been an invaluable and rewarding experience, he says .
 I was only able to finish this project due to the continual support of various people on and off the campus . I was just able to complete this project because of the constant support of people around the campus.
 Professor Donald Abenheim and Professor Mikhail Tsypkin ensured the success of this thesis with a high degree of flexibility, patience and collegial guidance .
 "Their profound experience, knowledge, support, and suggestions in all phases of the thesis gave me valuable direction and guidance," says the author .
 I owe Professor Abenheim my gratitude for his editorial support despite his tight calendar . Additionally, I owe him my gratitude.
 As a non-native speaker, it is a challenge to write a thesis and fulfill the high standards of academic research and writing within the restrains of a shortened program .
 Professor Helen Anderson laid the foundations of research and writing in National Security Affairs during the first quarter . Anderson: "I explicitly like to thank Professor Anderson"
 Lt. James Hough, Major Stephanie Baugh and LtCol Michael Hanisch thank colleagues for their insights, assistance and valuable contributions .
 The most important support in order to succeed came from his beloved wife, Christiane, and his wonderful children .
 The community of fate shared by Germany and Russia reemerged in 2014 as a leading question of global security . In 2014, the community of Fate shared by the two countries reemerges as a key question of security .
 Peace and stability in Europe and the world rely on compliance of international law to enable cooperative relations with prosperous economies and peaceful settling of conflict in whatever form .
 The 1975 Final Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe was a major step out of the Cold War . It laid the foundation for Europe’s inviolability of existing borders in the post-1945 order of nation states .
 The world seemed shocked and surprised in 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea . Russia violated existing international law and, in a coup de main of irregular war, annexed Crimea, thus violently changing borders in Europe .
 The reunited Germany of the Berlin Republic especially has embraced its role as the bridge state between East and West in its geographically central position . The reunite Germany has embraced the role as a bridge state.
 The Federal Republic of Germany has been a strong mediator between the West, the United States, and Russia . It has been in the second decade of the new century .
 Gerhard Schroeder openly praised Otto von Bismarck as his example of statesmanship and guardian of a European order . In a 2015 interview with the German weekly magazine Der Spiegel, he said he had been a statesmanship.
 Angela Merkel does not have the same close relation to Russian President Vladimir Putin as her predecessor . She had still used the avenues of dialogue with Russia and its political elite .
 Chancellor Merkel had no choice but to rethink Germany’s foreign policy towards Russia in the years 2014-2015 . But having lost patience and with factual evidence at hand in the course of the Malaysian passenger jet being shot down over Ukraine in 2014, she decided to rethink her foreign policy .
 The study addresses the context and content of this shift in policy, which constitutes a diplomatic revolution for Gennan foreign and security policy .
 Gennan Foreign Policy is seen as too Russian-friendly, despite Germany’s strong ties and cultural foundations in the Euro-Atlantic hemisphere .
 Germany went from being the sundered cockpit of the Cold War conflict to its central geographical position in Europe . The fall of the inner German border and the collapse of the Soviet Union during 1989 to 1991 led to Germany's central position .
 This position had lately resembled a bridge towards Central and Eastern European nations and Russia . All that transpired between the two was interpreted as friendship, amity, and prosperity .
 The episodes of conflict from the eighteenth through the twentieth centuries gave the imperative for cooperation an added boost . The episodes from the 18th to 20th century gave the need for cooperation.
 Germany has a long tradition of friendly and hostile relations with Russia, respectively the Soviet Union, since 1918, if not since the time of Frederick the Great's Prussia .
 West Germany has promoted cooperation over confrontation since Willy Brandt’s Ostpolitik in the late 1960s . West Germany's foreign policy towards Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union began with the nadir of the Berlin crisis .
 With German reunification in 1990, Berlin had to take on the role of a bridge or mediator between east and west . Berlin did not manifest itself fully until the geopolitical changes of the new century .
 Gennany has always attempted to maintain close contact in its negotiations with Russia . In accordance with this role and in compliance with the 2+4 Treaty connected with unity, the nation finally freed the nation from the reserved rights of the victors of 1945 .
 Eine Einfuhrung: Germany’s foreign and security policy: An introduction, 2nd ed. An introduction to the foreign policy .
 Barbara Budrich, 57. 3 successful under Helmut Kohl in the late 1980s and 1990s . In 1998 it took on a new quality that granted the latter’s biography and the national interests of both nations .
 Russian and Putin critics in Gennan politics have been in the minds of critics since 2013 . In the wake of the Ukrainian crisis, such policy has led to strong discussions between so-called Russlandversteher or Russian apologists .
 The role of such figures in the domestic politics of Germany requires interpretation for a non-German-speaking readership . This study aspires to do, along with the explanation of foreign policy making in Gennany .
 A sudden and unexpected change in Germany’s foreign policy toward Russia, which supposedly happened in 2014, can be regarded as a diplomatic revolution for future policy-making decisions .
 As of spring 2015, this change has already worked its overall effects on foreign and security policy . It may in time conceivably alter the balance of power in Europe and Eurasia, which is in flux .
 Russia is Germany’s eleventh largest bilateral trade partner . Russia is also Germany's 11th largest bilateral partner .
German politicians reevaluate political tenets that had grown familiar and comfortable for their generalized good feeling and absence of bullets . This earthquake-like event, felt beyond Kiev, Odessa, and the Donbass, compelled German politicians to reevaluate their political tenets .
 Foreign policy is the major instrument to influence other states, in this context Russia . With the primacy of foreign policy over other fields in Germany, foreign policy is a major instrument .
 The thesis aims to contribute to the understanding of Germany’s policies on Russia . The thesis is based on a case study of the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 This thesis also aims to explain the extent of Germany’s “Russia Firsters,’ or Russlandversteher, Russian apologists in Germany .
 Germany has gained ever more strength on an international scale since the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 . The United States role in Europe has shrunk to a shadow of its fonner self, and other powers expect those who rule in Berlin to take over more political responsibility .
 Wolf-Dieter Eberwein and Karl Kaiser, 46. 5 junking of imperial fantasies of the old stripe .
 Putin used the ongoing and sharpening political crisis in Ukraine as his stage and illegitimately annexed Crimea with a small degree of violence . A rather bloodless Anschluss with concealed conflict on the old Soviet model.
 Russia has finally integrated the Crimea into its administration and regarded the Crimea as part of sovereign Russian territory . Initial international reactions of shock and calls for a wholly force-free, political solution have not led to a satisfactory result .
 Claudia Major and Jana Puglierin have stated that ‘the Ukraine crisis has substantially and perhaps permanently altered Europe’s security structure.’
 Study suggests that German foreign policy, closely connected to the institution and personality of German Minister of Foreign Affairs FrankWalter Steinmeier, changed fundamentally during the Ukraine crisis .
 German Democratic Republic past of 1970s and 1980s in respective backgrounds of acting personalities such as Angela Merkel and Vladimir Putin . Of further significance is the shared past of the 1970s, 1980s.
 Russia and Germany are of significant relevance, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Such elites’ misinterpretations of the Russian insistence of its spheres of influence, the “near abroad,’ and the respective forces of domestic pressures in the statecraft and external relations
 The strong presence of Russian apologists in Gennan politics and society adds to the complexity of foreign policy change and influences its durability, especially in this moment of crisis .
 The research design is the evaluation of historic literature on German-Russian relations . The Ukraine crisis is a single case study to detennine changing German foreign policy .
 A selection of German and English sources are used in Germany's history and foreign policy .
 The research primarily draws on secondary sources, including scholarly articles, political commentary, and think-ta nk reports . The German Institute for International and Security Affairs and the European Council on Foreign Affairs .
Primary sources are used to take into consideration the perspectives of Gennan and Russian top politicians . For example, speeches by the German chancellor or the Russian president are analyzed .
 The events are briefly recapitulated in chronological order to explain the conflict and the initial efforts undertaken in light of German foreign policy . The events peaked in the annexation of Crimea .
 The historical perspective of German-Russian relations is required to show the fundamental changes that have taken place in Germany’s foreign policy towards Russia .
 Chapter I discussed the relevance and current significance of the topic, the hypothesis for the research, and its methodology and design .
 The Chapter II provides background on the development of the GermanRussian relations since the seventeenth century . It takes into account the principles of German Ostpolitik, the Soviet-Union’s role in the reunification, and the current state of affairs .
 Chapter III focuses on the formation of Gennan Foreign Policy, explaining the structure of the federal German government . Chapter III ends with a discussion of Germany’s Russia policy .
 Chapter IV focuses on the formation of current Russian foreign policy and its parameters . The case study also discusses the current dominance of the siloviki in the Kremlin .
 Chapter IV discusses the evolution of events that peaked with the annexation of Crimea and subsequent Gennan and international reactions . In a second part, Chapter IV talks about the development of the Crimea annexation .
 Chapter IV ends with an evaluation of whether Putin’s decisions pay off . Chapter 4 ends with a review of Putin's decisions .
 Chapter V contains the analysis of a German foreign policy change and its root causes . Chapter V also examines whether the wider-spread understanding of “Russia Firsters’ has declined .
 Chapter V ends with a discussion of the consequences of such a policy change for German security and foreign policy . Chapter V also discusses the impact of the change for Germany's security and Foreign policy .
 Chapter VI summarizes findings, identifies implications for Gennany’s foreign and Russia policies . Chapter VI provides recommendations for future research .
 Germany and Russia share a longstanding and ambivalent common history . The Battle at Lake Peipus in 1242, where Alexander Nevsky defeated the Knights of the German Order, to the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 .
 The mutual influence on the development of both nations has had significant relevance . Both countries have had significant influence on each other's development .
 This story forms the basis of any understanding of contemporary German-Russian relations . This story is based on the story of German- Russian relations .
 The dualism of these contemporary figures fits into a pattern of personality and statecraft that has mesmerized Europe for centuries . Europe has been the pivot of war and peace.
 A Century’s of Conflict (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1990), 317. The book was published in 1990 . The book is based on the book, "A Century of Conflict"
 The story begins recently in modem history . The Teuton and the Slav are more recent than most ancient accounts of the Teuton .
 Peter the Great invited Germans at large to assist in developing Russia . Romanov elites perceived the West, especially Germany, as scientifically advanced .
Peter the Great adapted Russia according to the absolutist dynastic regimes in Europe . Peter the Great reacted to the developments in military affairs of the standing army and the post-1648 absolutsist order .
Russia: Continuity, Conflict and Change, eds. Kontinuitdt, Konflikt und Wandel, Russia: Continuous, Conflict, Change . Kont inuitdt: "Kontinuitsdt"
Prussian General Yorck von Wartenburg signed Tauroggen convention against his king’s initial will and declared neutrality in order to free Prussia from French occupation . Napoleon reached the height of his power in 1812.
 Tauroggen signifies the modern tradition of Prussian-Russian cooperation . It is a sign of cooperation .
 Russia was one of the five Great Powers 19 that detenned Europe’s future in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries .
 Austria and Prussia did not stand with the Tsar against the French and the British . The holy alliance that grew out of Mettemich’s diplomacy cemented the northern courts .
 In 1873, Germany and Russia became part of the Dreikaiserabkommen, and a revival of the northern courts pact . The pact was formed in 1873 .
 The Three Emperor’s League consisted of Germany, Russia, and Austria-Hungary . The League was renewed in 1883 and succeeded by Bismarck's Reinsurance Treaty with Russia .
Despite the alliance with the French and its path to the emergence of opposing alliance 18 Laquer, Russia and Germany, 26. Despite the alliance, the French are still in the midst of an anti-French alliance .
 Present-day trade between Germany and Russia has its roots in the nineteenth century . From 1858 to 1913 German imports to Russia rose from 28 percent of all Russian imports to 47 percent . Russian exports to Germany, mainly natural resources, rose from 16 percent to 29 percent .
 Russian defeat in Russo-Japanese War of 1905 had severe implications for Russia as it finally ignited the revolution in St. Petersburg . Russia's defeat in 1905 was the first Russian defeat since the war began .
 The war drove Russian aspirations back to Europe from expansion in Asia, back to the Balkans, and back into greater conflict with the powers with whom it had been allied in the past .
 The revolution called for a constitutional government with legislation and citizens’ equal rights before the law . The revolution was a revolution against the Old Regime .
War between Ottoman, Habsburg and Romanov led to enhanced anti-German attitudes in Russia . By 1910, the view in Germany and Russia that war between them was unavoidable .
 The Balkan crisis of 1913 was regarded as further defeat after the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 and the Bosnian annexation crisis in 1908 . Wilhehnine Germany extended its reach possibly to the Persian Gulf and to spheres of influence of the other imperial powers .
 Russia became convinced that it was necessary to stand up in order to retain its status as a Great Power in the shifting powers of 1913-1914 . Russia was convinced that the move was necessary for the country to stay in power .
 Germany gave AustriaHungary the carte blanche against Serbia, which inevitably meant involvement of Russia . The July crisis of 1914, after the assassination of Austrian-Hungarian Archduke Franz Ferdinand, quickly paved the way for the general war that became known as World War I .
 The German leader had become fatalistic about the rise of Russian power in the European system . He opted for earlier war to preclude being suffocated by the Russians later on .
 Gennany declared war on Russia on August 1, 1914 . The Germans tried to convince Russia not to mobilize in order to prevent a European war .
 The Gennans were soon faced with an unexpected advance by the Russian Army into East Prussia and Galicia . The victories of Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff at Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes in August and September 1914 enabled the German Army to occupy
 Most areas of Russian domestic politics or foreign policy were in part shaped by Germans . Gennan experts in supporting the state and administration in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries .
 Lenin returned to Russia after exile in Switzerland in April 1917 . It was German assistance that enabled the return of Lenin to Russia .
In 1914-1918, combatant powers used indirect and concealed means to wage war against each other with gusto . In 1914-18, the use of indirect and conceal means was used in the war .
 The objective was to strengthen the Russian revolution in order to set up a new provisional government . It would negotiate a truce and peace deal, as well as enter into new Gennan-Russian diplomatic relations .
 The treaty came at a disastrous cost for Russia as the Germans claimed a third of Russia’s population, half of its industry, and up to 90 percent of the coal-mining industry . BrestLitovsk has been perceived as the “first milestone in Soviet-
 The Russians were defenseless and saw the treaty with the Germans as one 28 Malia, Soviet Tragedy, 90 .
 The amendment to the treaty, signed in August 1918, supported the Bolshevik s’ claim to power among domestic turmoil in Russia . Germans were fully aware when they tried to secure sufficient reparations .
 Gennany indirectly set the stage for the rise of the Soviet Union, which would dominate Gennan-Russian relations for decades to come .
 With the abdication of William II and the signing of the armistice in November 1918, the Gennan Empire ceased to exist . The abdicated of William 2 and the signed of the armsistice.
 Germany signed the Treaty of Versailles on June 28, 1919, as part of the Paris suburban pacts with the Central Powers . The treaties with Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Turkey were signed in 1919 .
 The Treaty of Versailles became a symbol of humiliation, injustice and loss for those Germans unwilling to accept defeat in their numbers .
 The new European order was laden with smoldering conflicts in the East . The Gennan-Russian relationship was all the more fateful in the years 1919-1939 .
 Russia and Gennany were tied together by the fact that the Parisian victors excluded the defeated Central Powers and Red Russia from having a say in the fate of Europe and beyond .
 Both nations were eager to revise the terms of the Versailles Treaty and the Paris system of 1919 .
 The Gennan-Russian Treaty of Rapallo was directed against the western victors . In 1922, Russians and Germans were allowed only a passive role and engaged in bilateral negotiations .
 The international community in London, Paris, and Washington, DC, was shocked by the prospects of Gennan-Russian rapprochement . The international world was shocked.
 The Berlin Treaty of 1926 supplemented the Rapallo Treaty . It declared mutual neutrality in case of a third party’s aggression toward either Russia or Germany .
 The treaties of Rapallo and Berlin, used as symbols of cooperation, did not have such an exaggerated significance, but rather shaped the attitudes of Gennany's and Russia's neighbors in the Little Entente in Paris, Warsaw, Prague, and Belgrade .
Secret military cooperation initiated and organized with the Soviets by the leadership of the Reichswehr . Chief of staff Hans von Seeckt's open eastern orientation was no secret .
Military cooperation support began in 1922 and was beneficial to both nations and armies . This secret military cooperation support started in 1922 .
 The Gennan Army set up trainings camp for weapon systems that were forbidden under the Versailles Treaty in Germany . The Soviets enabled the creation of the modern armor branch Panzerwaffe, which would attack Russia in a Blitzkrieg only six years after the end of the bilateral
 Werner von Blomberg was one of leading Reichswehr officers blinded by the red star . He was susceptible to the Nazis when their time came in the 1930s .
 Von 1815, 150. 16 normalcy and detente with the western powers . Locarno and Gustav Stresemann's effort to lessen the diplomatic wreckage of the war .
 This period of stabilization was preceded by great uproar as the immediate post-war period came to a close . The period of stability was followed by a period of great uproar .
 By 1923, the Weimarer Republic was struggling to avoid economic collapse in the aftermath of the Ruhrkrise . French and Belgian forces occupied the West German area, and to re-stabilize domestic politics .
NSDAP sought an end to assimilation and tolerance for Jews that had been obtained in the second Reich . Baltic Germans also imported the vicious anti-Jewish ideas of Imperial Russia into the NSDAP, which sought to end assimilation .
With Hitler's seizure of power on January 30, 1933, it was expected that the Gennan-Russian relations would deteriorate . There was no initial break on either side because both nations were preoccupied with their domestic situations .
 Moscow re-examined Germany and its 40 Laquer, Russia and Germany, 146 . Hitler’s Gleichschaltung, persecution of Jews and suppression of other minorities, led to Moscow's reexamination .
 Russia's population had declined between 19 and 20 million people between the late 1920s and 1939 due to collectivization and the extennination of the Kulaks .
 Nazi Gennany's rhetoric became more and more aggressive with the antiComintern campaign and the Spanish Civil War in 1936 . Stalin became nervous and distrustful but tried to avoid further escalation in Gennan-Soviet relations .
 The Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939, instantly improving trade relations . Germany needed raw materials in order to support its heavy industry for war preparations .
 The Russians attacked Poland from the east on August 17, 1939 . After concluding a truce with Japan on August 15, 1939, they attacked Poland .
 Germany and the Soviet Union split Poland after its capitulation only weeks after the war had begun . The two countries shared a common border after their capitulation .
 The Gennan side decided on an offensive against the Soviet Union . They believed it was hopelessly weakened by ideology and inner contradictions . The Red Army was gutted by the Red Army through the purges .
 Hitler attacked the Soviet Union on June 22, 1941, which came as a shock to Stalin . Stalin's own assessment that a war between Germany and Soviet Union rather sooner than later was inevitable .
 Stalin assumed that he would have to fight all the capitalist powers in a later war . The task would be made easier once capitalist powers had weakened themselves .
 The Germans advanced deep into Russia and came to a halt only short of Moscow . After operational successes during the first months of war against the Soviet Union, the Germans advanceddeep into Russia .
 The offensive began again in 1942, but it reached a tipping point in Stalingrad . In early 1943, it marked the most serious reversal of German fortune at arms with the loss of Field Marshal von Paulus’ 6th anny.
 The German and Axis allies waged war without quarter in the USSR in 1941-1942 . The ideal of the Generalplan Ost was drafted by the SS, which foresaw the extennination of Slavic and Jewish populations in European Russia .
 All of these events influenced German-Russian relations throughout the decades of the Cold War and beyond with a monumental burden . The Cold War was a major burden for Germany-Russia relations .
New government under Grofiadmiral Karl Doenitz signed unconditional surrender on May 8, 1945 . Hitler had committed suicide, and the Russians had taken Berlin .
 The Third Reich ceased to exist in the division of Germany among the victors as a prelude to the Cold War . This left the Soviet Union and the other allies as victors .
 There have always been times of cooperation and confrontation in historic German-Russian relations until the end of World War II . Germany and Russia did not affect only Germany, but Europe as a whole .
 The Cold War system of German-Russian relations emerged from the failures among the victors to end the war with a durable European order of peace and security . In 1815 or even 1871, the Cold War was the first time the war had ended with peace in Europe .
 The peace of Europe lay in its division, which meant the division of Germany and Austria, as well as parts of Yugoslavia . The division included Germany, Austria, and Yugoslavia .
 This regime began to transform in the early 1960s and ended at the close of the 1980s . The common fate of Germany and Russia was always a leading theme .
 The former German 50 Stent, Russia and Germany Reborn, 9.9, is the first time a former German Stent has been named .
 Poland’s west border shared with the Soviet occupation zone in East Germany . Germany lost its territories east of the Oder-Neisse-line .
 Stalin's main objective for Stalin was to prevent any future German aggression . The Soviets feared neo-Nazi German revanchism for the territories lost .
 The delay in Polish free elections, as stated in the Yalta, and the manipulated results in early 1947 elections, led to suspicions among Western allies . The EastWest conflict escalated with the Western Allies prioritizing a democratic government in West Gennany .
When Stalin realized he had failed to reach the objective of a neutral and communist Germany, he insisted on its division . When Stalin realized that he had failed to reach his objective, he said he wanted a neutral Germany .
 The Soviet Union would not have agreed to any other status of Gennany . The decision was made in 1947 to govern the Soviet occupational zone separately from the West . In the West, it was perceived highly unlikely.
 The German Foreign Policy since 1945 has been in place since 1945 . Germany's foreign policy since 1945.
 Stalin feared a pro-western attitude within the Soviet satellite states and rejected the offer . Marshall proposed the Marshall plan in June 1947 for economic aid to the Soviets and Eastern European nations .
 For Western Europe, the Marshall Plan’s objective was to stabilize the social and economic situation on the capitalist or social market economy model .
 Stalin's objective was to destroy the Allies cohesion and to continue negotiating the Gennan question . With the Berlin Blockade from June 1948 to May 1949, Stalin’s aim was to stop a West Germany .
 The plan failed completely and achieved nearly the opposite because Germans in West Gennany and West Berlin united to outlive the crisis . West German’s public opinion of the Soviet Union plunged, and attitudes towards the U.S. soared .
 The Federal Republic of Germany was proclaimed on May 23, 1949, although not as a complete sovereign state . With the parliamentary council’s 61 acceptance of the Basic Law, the German Grundgesetz was proclaimed .
 The Allies retained control of Germany’s jurisprudence as “occupational law took precedence over Gennan law,” 63 56 Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 11 .
 Konrad Adenauer of the Christian Democratic Union became the first chancellor of West Gennany . He concentrated his ambitions on Westbindung rather than Ostpolitik .
 Adenauer’s idea of statecraft arose from his own Rhenish biography within Prussia of the Weimar Era . Prussia was the first Gennan republic .
 West Gennan state had to assure its security with the aid of what presently became its Atlantic allies . The Marshall plan was not enough, however, and the Marshall plan wasn't enough .
 A security pact was essential, a requirement made all the more urgent by the worsening of the Cold War in the years 1949-1950 . The Cold War was the worst year for the war's worsening in 1949- 1950 .
 NATO was founded 64 Stent, Russia and Gennany Reborn, 12; Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 17. In the words allegedly ascribed to the first NATO Secretary General, Lord ‘Pug’ Ismay, NATO was born in Russia .
 Von 1815, 253. 23 “to keep the Americans in, the Russians out, and the Germans down,” 66. 66 in order to deter Soviet expansionism, prevent the revival of nationalist militarism in Europe through a strong North American presence .
 The Soviet answer to NATO was the conclusion of the Warsaw Pact on May 14, 1955 . The eight Soviet satellite states were under the umbrella of mutual cooperation and defense .
 Both nuclear anned organizations dominated the East-West conflict until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 . The Soviet Union and the West were the pillar of deterrence and power projection in Europe .
 The first Soviet nuclear detonation in August 1949 reassured the Allies in their formation of NATO . It also underlined the new superpower status of the Soviet Union .
 The bloc formation, including the foundation of the Warsaw Pact in 1955, determined the two opposing sides of the Cold War . The Gennans meant the inevitable risk of a Gennan brother war, putting Germany in the center of a potential battlefield .
 The Soviet hegemony in Eastern Europe used the perceived West German danger as pretext for its legitimization and as raison d’etre for the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact used the Soviet hegemony as a pretext to legitimization of Eastern Europe .
 The Alliance’s New Roles in International Security, 67 Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 36, is the group's new chief executive .
 Adenauer worried about Germany's position, hoping to avoid a fate like Korea . North Korean forces overran South Korea after crossing the 38th parallel in June 1950, thus initiating the Korean War .
 The so-called European Defense Community was the ideal of western defense along with NATO until 1954 . The French abandoned the idea after strong opposition to Germany's rearmament .
 NATO allowed West Germany to establish its own new force in 1956 . The Bundeswehr (the federal armed forces) gained full control of its forces in 1956. The West German armed forces were called the Bundeswehir .
 It was led by a defense minister and fully integrated within NATO and the mechanism of the Western European Union as the heir to the failed European Army .
 West Germany’s armament and admission to NATO by the Paris Treaties was paralleled by the revision of the General Treaty with the Allies . The Germans much of their national sovereignty back from the most severe regime of occupation .
 West Germany became a full member of the Western Alliance ten years after the end of World War II . The new federal armed forces to counter the threat from the East.
 The Soviets reacted to discussions of West Gennany’s rearmament with an intensified policy towards the German question . The Soviets tried to pressure the GDR into campaigning with an all-German election, but failed .
 The Soviet Union decided to use military force to end the demonstrations and support the GDR in political and military means . The move was a shift in Soviet foreign policy.
 His regime put in hand a mini detente, which entertained ideas of pulling back on the Cold War front lines . The policy solutions that did finally emerge in 1989 emerged in 1989 .
 Adenauer accepted a surprise Soviet invitation to Moscow in 1955 to discuss the German question and the release of Gennan prisoners of war still held by the Soviet Union .
 The new GDR was only the Soviet Zone of Occupation, a bastard regime of Soviet vicegerents without legitimacy or any basis in constitutional heritage .
 The relationship between the two German states became increasingly competitive in terms of attractiveness for its population . Throughout the 1950s and the early 1960s, the two states became more competitive .
 West Gennany was experiencing an economic miracle with the help of the Allies and the Marshall Plan . The Allies and Marshall Plan were helping the country recover from the crisis .
 East Germans experienced arrests and purges in the wake of the 1953 uprising . East Germans enjoyed a lesser degree of freedom .
 The SED regime introduced a news series of socializing measures in 1958 . Nikita Kruschev called for the wrapping up of four-power rule in divided Berlin .
 West Germany enjoyed a freer society and an improved standard of living in the years 1958-1961 . About three million East Gennans fled to West Germany by 1961, posing a serious threat to East Germany .
 The construction of the wall in the summer of 1961 also constituted a diplomatic revolution in the Cold War . The confrontation reached its low point amid the prospect of thennonuclear war and the limits of the Adenauer regime .
 In the following weeks, the complete border between the ERG and GDR was closed with barbed wire, mine fields, and surveillance measures, thus sealing off East Germany and prompting horror, fear and helplessness on the West German side .
 Kh rushchev had threatened several times that a war over Berlin would turn nuclear . It became clear that the Western powers would not be willing to risk a nuclear war with Soviet Union .
 West Germany quickly grew weary of the burdens of its status as a frontline state . Adenauer continued to pursue the West integration .
 The Adenauer regime entered into its eclipse after 1961 . It was time to change Germany’s Ostpolitik .
 The Social Democrats took over the governmental responsibility in West Germany . It was the first time that the Social Democrats had taken over the government responsibility .
 In the meantime, Leonid Brezhnev had succeeded Kh rushchev in Moscow in 1964 . In 1964, Khrushchev had succeeded in Moscow .
 The first signs for detente with the West had appeared in 1959 . The first grain import from the U.S. in 1963 .
 Brezhnev continued the path of detente towards the West, but also oversaw the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 .
 Central European satellite states could be defected after the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 . With the division of Europe now secure, small revisions and a lessening of tension could resume .
 The Soviets achieved a feeling of flexibility in its Westpolitik without endangering Soviet hegemony in their sphere of influence . But on the grounds of the Brezhnev Doctrine, the Soviets achieve a feel of flexibility.
 Moscow could be more flexible on its stance on relations with the West . In other words, while the Soviet satellites in Central and Eastern Europe were firmly under control .
 Gennan chancellor Willy Brandt’s new Ostpolitik of being “willing to recognize the European status quo” fully initiated a new impetus for Soviet-West German detente in 1969 .
During Brandt’s tenure, relations with the Soviet Union improved significantly . His personal relationship with Leonid Brezhnev also fostered enhanced economic relations . In 1970, a first deal on Soviet export of natural gas was concluded, igniting energy relations that would gain substantial importance
Despite strong opposition to detente and Ostpolitik, the federal elections in 1972 showed sufficient support for Chancellor Brandt's policy .
 The factual recognition of the European geographical status quo by West Germany gave them new freedom to act and broadened their foreign policy options . West Germany's recognition of Europe's geographic status quo gave them more freedom.
 German exports to the Soviet Union rose between 1973 and 1976 by 61 percent . The Soviet Union continued to deliver natural resources .
Two separate but parallel developments took place in 1973 . On the issue of diplomatic relations between the East and West, the Warsaw Pact and NATO, respectively, respectively .
 The Soviet initiative of the CSCE started in Helsinki, 88 Stent, Russia and Germany Reborn, 21 .
 The CSCE Final Act was signed in 1975 by thirty-three European states, the United States, and Canada . It was signed on the renunciation of use of force, territorial integrity, inviolability of existing border, and peaceful mediation .
 Willy Brandt was forced to step down and Helmut Schmidt succeeded him . A Soviet spy had been uncovered in the direct vicinity of Brandt .
 The Final Act was a major success for Brezhnev. Despite the fact that the Soviets could not achieve all their objectives at Helsinki, the result was a big success .
 It de facto legitimated the Soviet hegemony in Eastern Europe for the time being and with little inkling of what lay ahead in the decade to come . The Soviet hegemony was de facto legitimized by the Soviet regime .
 Brezhnev became too ill after 1974 to advance the Soviet Union’s Germany policy any further .
 The U.S. became increasingly disillusioned with detente and Schmidt over questions of nuclear deterrence, as well as stagflation on the western economy .
Despite pressure to back off economically in the Gennan-Soviet relations, Brezhnev retained economic relations but committed himself to containing the Soviet military threat .
 West German-Soviet trade relations became a boost when, under the Schmidt administration in 1978, another cooperation agreement in the energy and natural resources sector was concluded . Despite pressure from the United States, the agreement was not halted or cancelled as a result of the Soviet Afghanistan invasion in 1979 .
 The Soviet-American conclusion of the Strategic Arms Limitations Talks I and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty in 1972 had from a continental-European perspective . It was a de facto agreement on the nonuse of strategic nuclear weapons above the intermediate-range level .
 In 1977 speech in London, Schmidt called for parity on all levels, not just on conventional systems, but to include nuclear weapons .
 Schmidt’s initial aim was not a demand for new weapons, but for enhanced engagement within the talks . The main objective was to retain the engagement of the United States in Europe .
 The Soviets favored Schmidt’s Ostpolitik, they were reluctant to discuss any reductions of their missile capabilities with the United States . The Soviets also favored Schmidt's OstPolitik .
 Only strong retrofit armament could ensure Western Europe’s, security, says Schmidt . Schmidt was convinced after a failed anns control mechanism on intermediate nuclear missiles .
 NATO's double-track decision in 1979 foresaw the deployment of modern Pershing-II systems and ground-based cruise missiles to Europe . U.S. commitment to European security and assuring all levels of deterrence .
 Despite Brezhnev’s warning about Nachriistung, Moscow could not prevent the decision .
 NATO double-track decision led to most controversial debates and manifestations . For Soviet-German relations, the decision posed a major setback, and fears of a renewed Cold War appeared .
On October 1, 1982, Helmut Kohl was elected by the Bundestag . He took over office of the chancellery until the federal elections in March 1983 .
 The situation was marked by the deployment of Soviet SS-12/22 to Central Europe and a propaganda effort aiming at pacifist and anti-American sentiment in the German public .
 Germany should not threaten the Soviet Union again, warns of revanchist attitudes . Von 1945, 205. 33 fears derived from German aggression against Soviet Union in two world wars .
 The Kohl government resisted the urge to go neutral and that increased Soviet pressure drove West Germany westwards and enhanced the American-West Gennan cohesion at the height of the Intermediate Nuclear Forces crisis in the years 1983-1985 .
 The Secretary General was driven by concerns for Soviet collapse due to the devastating state of the Soviet economy . His goal was to strengthen the Soviet Union economically and politically to develop its international competiveness .
 The Reykjavik proposal to abolish nuclear weapons on the grounds of Gorbachev’s disarmament proposals . The INF Treaty was concluded in December 1987 .
34 the technological backwardness was eroding . Von 1945, 216; Haftendorn, Coming of Age, 277. 34 the technology backwardness .
 The new thinking in foreign and security policy was closely connected to the domestic state of affairs . Gorbachev decided to cut military spending in favor of industrial modernization .
 Gorbachev announced such additional signals in 1987-1988 that were interpreted as cooperative, as with the withdrawal of forces from Afghanistan and further reforms in Eastern Europe .
 Gorbachev announced in 1968 that the Soviet Union would no longer interfere militarily to impose stability and order in any of its socialist Eastern European states . In 1968, he announced that the Soviets would not intervene militarily in any state . The Soviet Union ended the Brezhnev doctrine
 The first signs of change came from Poland, where the labor union Solidarnosc, founded in 1980, initiated severe general strikes . At the same time the nationalists in the Baltic States urged the Soviet Union to admit the details of the Hitler-Stalin Pact .
 The GDR’s anti-Perestroika regime under Erich Honecker was reluctant to refonn and implement measures of Glasnost . It feared the repetitions of 1953 and 1971 .
 Honecker still believed in true socialism in its original post-1949 model and resented Gorbachev’s new thinking .
 The developments in 1989 now eclipsed those of 1953, 1956, and 1968 . In a way that astonished all concerned, the developments now eclipses those in 1953 and 1956 .
 Gorbachev's long-planned visit to the FRG in June 1989 came during troubling times for the Soviet Union .
 Kohl’s inadvertent and indirect comparison of Gorbachev to Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels was based on the 1986 comparison . It was a visit with tremendous relevance because it not changed the mutual perception in West Gennany and the Soviet Union .
 The population received Gorbachev like a hero, and the two men developed a special and close relationship . The two men would show its historic significance in the critical months that lay ahead, which would be full of surprises .
 The latest crisis in NATO over the modernization of short-range nuclear weapons had just been solved with a strong West German effort at nuclear roll back . France, especially France, again raised concerns about a “Rapallo repeated” on the grounds of the Joint Declaration between the FRG
 The SED Politbuero under Honecker commemorated the fortieth anniversary of the GDR with great pomp on October 6 and 7 . The East Germans continued their manifestations on the East German streets in October 1989 .
 Heads of state and governments from various socialist countries attended the celebration . The celebration was held in London .
German-Russian relations began in June 22, 1941, and all the suffering in the decades since . This moment also changed GermanRussian relations in a fundamental manner, says the author .
 The use of the NVA was brought up by hardliners in Moscow and within the SED in early November 1989 . The decision-makers in Berlin and Moscow were literally overran by the situation .
 Kohl feared that the Soviet Union could oppose any further rapprochement between the two parts of Germany . Kohl felt he needed to hurry, fearing that the Soviets could oppose a further r Approaching .
 Kohl did this without consulting any of his allies, which led to widespread skepticism in London and Paris . The Soviets were outraged and felt betrayed, while the Soviets felt betrayed .
 The United States under President George Bush and Spain were the only Allies of West Germany that supported a reunified Germany from the very beginning . The U.S. under President Bush was the only ally that supported the reunification of Germany .
 None of the other key allies, the 1945 victors, retained their reserved rights for Germany as a whole in international law . France, Great Britain, or especially the Soviet Union were in favor of reunification .
 France and Great Britain relied on exactly that Soviet position, firmly opposing Germany’s reunification . Although Gorbachev knew it was inevitable, reunification was not foreseen .
 Bush administration adhered to statecraft of the last four decades against neutrality for Gennany . The Bush administration pushed for continuous NATO membership .
 The U.S. outlined these parameters to Kohl before the chancellor met with Gorbachev in Moscow in 1990 . The United States outlined the parameters before Kohl met with the chancellor .
 Kohl's visit to Moscow was a game changer, as Gorbachev generally accepted German reunification with three preconditions . Kohl’s visit to Russia was aGame changer.
 Laird says Gorbachev was critical to limit the Bundeswehr to 300,000 troops . Laird also said Gorb Mikhail was also critical to limiting the number of troops in the German army .
With the Soviets general acceptance of Germany’s self-determination, the way was free for intra-German negotiations on the internal tenns of reunification . With the Soviets' acceptance of the Soviets, it was free to negotiate with the Soviets .
 In the first democratic Volkskammer elections in March 1990, 49. percent of the East German population voted for the CDU and its conservative allies, thus legitimizing a fast path to reunification .
 The negotiations on reunification between the West and East German cabinets led to the Treaty of Unification August 31, 1990, as a precondition for a unified Germany . The four victorious powers depended then solely on the approval of the victorious powers .
 The Soviets asked for multi-billion credits, which the German government generally granted if the Soviets would regard the substantial German economic and financial support .
 The Soviets repeatedly changed their position in regards to alliance membership . The Soviets constantly changed their stance on alliance membership in the past .
 The 2+4 Treaty was signed in Moscow on September 12, 1990 . The four powers declared the termination of their rights and responsibilities effected by reunification .
 The flag of the Federal Republic of Germany was the only German flag hoisted in front of the Berlin Reichstagsgebaude . The current parliament of reunified Gennany is the current parliament.
 The fonnal reunification did not automatically mean that the nation was really “one people,” as declared during the Montagsdemonstrationen on the East German streets .
 The GDR never developed a real socialist identity, as propagated by the SED since 1949 and especially since 1961 . It turned out that East Germans had indeed acquired their own identity, influenced by Soviet occupation, political socialization and isolation from the West .
 The economic and financial conditions of the reunification process were felt by critics and proponents of an alternate path to unity to be imposed by West Gennany .
 Ossis and Wessis in the 1990s had different attitudes to each other . This different attitude was expressed by the two sides in the 90s .
 The perception of Gennany’s reunification differed widely depending on where one stood on October 2, 1990, and what occurred in the decade that followed .
 Critics in France, Great Britain, and Poland regarded the reunification with deep skepticism and fear for Gennan revanchism .
 The people in the Soviet Union, however, were split in their opinion of Germany’s reunification .
 The divided Germany was perceived as a war trophy, and it resembled the price that the Gennans had to pay . In the Soviet perspective, Germany was seen as the price of war .
 The people were divided on whether the Soviet Union had lost its war gains from the Second World War . The reunification should be perceived with satisfaction or anxiety .
 In Moscow, the old guard of government officials felt betrayed by the events . The conservative Germanisty had ensured that two Germanys did not threaten the Soviet Union .
 The most prominent opposition member was Yegor Legachev, who voiced critique and opposition of conservatives in Moscow . Legachev called for dealing with the threats of a united Germany . He argued that it would be a mistake and “unbelievably short-sided ...
 Soviet leadership was literally overrun by the events in East Germany . The fall of the Berlin Wall was a fait accompli, before Moscow even realized it .
Reunification took place under the influence of Soviet internal unrest . Reunification was under the control of Sovietinternal unrest .
 Gorbachev was preoccupied with the situation in the Soviet Union and tried to retain power in the Kremlin .
Although Gorbachev survived the coup, he could not survive politically because the Soviet Union had disintegrated .
 Gorbachev resigned on December 25 and handed the Kremlin over to Russian President Yeltsin . The Soviet Union ceased to exist in the wake of his resignation .
 Russia’s rebirth and the dissolution of the Soviet Union had a major impact on the European balance of power, especially its security . Russia's rebirth had a big impact on Europe's power balance .
 The United States accelerated its retreat from its fonner primacy in European security to the Middle East . The onset of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait in the months prior to Germany’s unity in the fall of 1990.
 West Germany’s tradition of multilateral approaches paid off during the reunification of the West Germany . The system was already being challenged by the crises in the Middle East and then on the Balkans .
 The fact that disunity and chaos would eventuate in Southeastern Europe and the Middle East could be ignored in Bonn because of this political culture of reticence .
 The end of the Cold War put Germany in the center of a Europe that more or less came to peace in the 1990s . Politically it became a bridging state between East and West .
 Germany’s interests in the Russian transfonnation was immense, as by January 1992 and until 1994 still more than 100,000 Russian troops were stationed in Germany .
 Germany was initially unaware of Yeltsin but quickly decided to support him in economic and political tenns . Kohl realized that good relations with Yelts in Russia were imperative for the transition in Russia .
 A united Germany and the new Russian Federation had similar challenges ahead of them . The two countries have similar challenges to each other .
 The foreign policy challenges shared similarities. Though economically and socially very different, the challenges shared similar similarities .
 Both countries were new to Europe in 1990 and 1991, in tenns of their borders of . Both countries needed to redefine their foreign policies, and both were preoccupied with domestic issues .
 Both countries faced uncertainties in their future roles while the global system advanced with new centers of gravity in the Middle East and Asia .
Gennany faced expectations from its allies to engage more in the questions of security in Europe . The crisis in the former Yugoslavia had led to civil war in 1991 .
 Germany had to balance its efforts to eliminate any doubts on its Westintegration and post-1990 Ostpolitik . Germany had a balance between its efforts and its WestIntegration and its post- 1990 OstPolitik .
 The diplomatic revolution of 1989-1991 had returned the fate of Zwischeneuropa to the fore . Central European nations look westward in hopes of statecraft . The change led to the need to adjust the Western European security structure .
 The Kohl cabinet was a desire to reconcile with Warsaw, modeled on reconciliation with Paris from three decades before . Paris was a French city in the 1970s .
 A major objective of Germany’s foreign policy was to diffuse any Russian concerns regarding the NATO and ELI enlargement . Germany also rethinking the use of military force in the face of rising conflict in the Middle East .
 German Minister of Defence Volker Riihe called not only for rapprochement but for integration of former Warsaw Pact states .
 Russia had continuously objected to any NATO enlargement process as early as 1994 . President Yeltsin warned about the possibility of a “Cold Peace’ in its West relations .
Bill Clinton, Helmut Kohl, and Boris Yeltsin adjudicated the enlargement of NATO through the year 1999 . The Alliance accepted the decision for enlargement in late 1995 . 2014 propaganda to the contrary.
 Russia opposed the NATO enlargement, provoking a crisis in Russia’s West relations . It was after the second round of enlargement in 2004 that Russia opposed it .
 Russia was less concerned with new policies in Central and Eastern Europe . Russia wanted to avoid any economical or territorial threat to Russia that would evolve from NATO membership .
 1994 adjustment to the Bundeswehr to include collective security under Article 24 of the Basic Law . The Federal Constitutional Court ruled that Article 87a of the mid 1950s was the strict Central European focus of the 1950s .
 A “modified continuity’ in foreign policy could be observed. Germany's new role in Europe could be seen in the coming years .
 A socialist-environmentalist government coalition between the SPD and Die Griinen took over the Gennan chancellery in 1998 . A change became apparent only after 1998, when a socialist-Environmentalist government coalition took over .
Gennany’s constitutional court permitted the deployment of the Bundeswehr in the UN-mandated framework of international organizations in 1994 . Germany was concerned about the situation in the Balkans .
 Germany’s foreign policy moved from “modified continuity’ to a matured self-conscious power, according to many scholars .
Gennan troops for combat operations against Serbia to demonstrate to Slobodan Milosevic that Germany would not allow a rift within NATO on that question .
 Fischer explained the decision to intervene with the imperative “Me wieder Auschwitz’s historic past and its ambiguous relation with military power in the face of seemingly unending atrocities in Bosnia and then in Kosvo . Fischer explained that the decision was to intervene.
 Russia strongly opposed any military operation against Serbia in 1998 at Ramboulliet . Russia regarded the unmandated operations as unlawful acts of aggression .
 U.S. General Wesley Clark nearly precipitated a military confrontation at the Pristina International Airport in Kosovo in 1999 . Russian paratroopers and NATO soldiers were involved in the 1999 confrontation .
 Boris Yeltsin's decline and rise of Russian nationalists gave the West reason to worry about Russia’s future . Western criticism of Russia on the Second Chechnyan War and the political division between Russia and the West complicated Russian-West and especially German-Russian relations decisively .
 The Russian opposition marked a partial resurgence of Russia after its weak performance in the wake of the Soviet Union’s disintegration . Russia's transfonnation from a communist system to a superpresidential system.
 The alliance enlarged to include Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary . The Russians did nothing concretely to oppose the NATO campaign in Kosovo against the dead-end Milosevic regime .
 Germany’s economy became increasingly dependent on exports. As the course of European unity advanced along with the rigors of globalization, the need to moderni z e the social market economy in trains became more important .
 Chancellor Schroeder turned to Russia, especially regarding energy security and commerce . It was no surprise.
 Schroeder and Putin developed a pragmatic and friendly relationship, which characterized the foreign policy between the two countries .
 Gennan-Russian trade has reasserted itself in the political economy of the Russian state . In the process of this bilateral relation, old east-west structures in a new personalized form reasserts themselves .
 German economy's Ostausschuss lobbied for enhanced Gennan-Russian relations . The two presidents created the Petersberger Dialogue in 2001 .
 Gennan-Russian relations developed well, especially in the energy sector, with Gennany becoming a major partner in energy trade .
 Germany started going the "German way" in tenns of national interests in the midst of a changing world and European order . The national effort at unity promised great payoffs in globalization and a new continental orientation .
 Chancellor Schroeder declared the “German Way’ in the context of the decision not to participate in the Iraqi invasion of 2002-2003 . This policy was a continuation of saying no to the old “out of area” dictum from 1955 onward .
 The anti-American election campaign was aimed at the electorate in the five new federal states .
 Schroeder made common cause with the French and Russians in an open conflict with the United States . The U.S. considered the Iraq invasion a matter of national interest .
 Merkel did not revert from the export-oriented policy demanded by globalization and the prospect of Eurasian markets .
 Based on her origin in East Gennany, she not only spoke Russian, but also reflected on the past experiences with the Soviets in East Germany .
 She was not a member of the Jungsozialisten nor a veteran of the politics of the FRG in the 1960s and 1970s . She had been central to Schroeder's statecraft in power .
 Merkel emerged from the Lutheran Bildungsbuergertum as a professor of physics in the GDR . The social class well positioned for power in 1990 .
 She was neither idealistic nor naive regarding Russia, as her predecessors had been . She was not idealistic or naive about Russia .
 Chancellor Merkel addressed such contentious topics as human rights abuses . She acted rather in a reserved way to maintain a close dialogue with Russia . The tone from Germany's Chancellery and Foreign Office remained widely noncommittal .
 The 2008 Georgian War came as a surprise to the West and has assumed special importance when seen from the perspective of 2014 and Crimea .
 Georgia had been a possible candidate for NATO membership . Gennany and France opposed such accession . Some progress could be observed in the transition of Georgia’s security structure .
 52 people were suspended from Bloomsbury Academic, including 28 from Schollgen .
 An independent commission came to the conclusion that Russia’s account of the origins of the outbreak of war were true . Relations then recommenced, notably due to German behind-the-scenes political promotion .
 The Caucasus was somehow far away and loom less central to the theme of European security, and the Georgian war slipped into forgetfulness soon after it happened .
 In 2007-2008, the West endured a huge setback to its post-1989 forward momentum in its relations with Russia and the world economic crisis . In 2008, Russia's relationship with the West was at its lowest level since 1989 .
 The West had the perception of an increasingly aggressive Russia under Putin at the end of his first two terms . Medvedev was seen as relief for a hopeful West when he became president in May 2008 .
 The new Russian president aimed at modernizing the economy, countering corruption, and acquiring investments and technology from the West .
 In Gennany, the presidential-prime-ministerial castling, as Putin became prime minister in 2008, resulted in a “Medvedev Effect,’ with the German public perception of Russia improving . In 2009, the US-Russian relations “reset�
 Medvedev was only the crown prince for Vladimir Putin, as the West, and especially Merkel, had to leam in 2012 .
 Merkel assumed power amid an erosion of democratic civil culture in Russia . Germany had hoped to work furthermore with Dimitry Medvedev rather than return to a Putin-Merkel relationship .
 Putin retook the Office of the Russian President for his third tenn . Medvedev faced a major financial and economic crisis in 2012 . Putin promised a recovery of the Russia economy in 2012, when he retook office .
 Putin relied on the cadres of siloviki and the poweroriented bureaucracy and security apparatus of government administration . The West began to manifest more of the old bad habits in Putin's first two terms .
 Critics in the West were dismayed by the drift to authoritarianism in Russia . They questioned the special relationship that Russia and Germany had enjoyed .
 The first signs of opposition in Russia were visible in 2012, when large demonstrations took place in Moscow against Putin and his allies .
 The Russian president enjoys an approval rating of 86 percent, as shown in recent polls . Currently, the president's approval rating is 86 percent .
 German Foreign Minister Guido Westerwelle argued in 2013 that despite commonalities, “there are also differences,’s also differences. “Many observers currently believe that what divides us is growing at a faster pace than what we have in common,” he said .
German-Russian relations are manifold on all levels of society and government . German-Russian Relations are manifold.
 Germany and Russia’s common history affects the way in which the people are perceived and how politicians make decisions .
 Soviet sacrifices made in two world wars continued to affect the Soviets until 1990 Russia today, which commemorates the seventieth anniversary of Soviet victory .
 The Cold War with Germany’s Ostpolitik and the Gennan reunification are also key events . In Russia, the domestic perception in Russia as defeat is especially imperative to note .
 Germany was in a more prominent position in regards to Russia, and enjoying a special relationship with the country .
 German-Russian relations have always been ambiguous and wavelike, misinterpreted often . But restrained by the fact that Germany and Russia are both part of continental Europe .
 “intimacy, however, may breed not only on friendship, but also contempt or open hostility. It should not be underestimated that “Intimacy’s” may breed on friendship and open hostility .
 Since Germany’s reunification in 1990 and the end of the Cold War, the global security environment has changed dramatically . With it has transformed the theory and practice of international relations .
 The execution of foreign policy has become much more complicated. With technological advances and the widespread effects of globalization, foreign policy is becoming more complicated .
 Since 1989, the international system of states has shifted profoundly, says John Sutter . Sutter says the shift of power and influence has been more than evident since 1989 .
 These shifts detennine the position of a nation state within the global system or its ability to assert its interests and sovereignty .
 Foreign policy execution is the nation state’s instrument to ensure its vital interests and values . It has been going on since 1648, if not before .
 For Germany, this instrument underwent a diplomatic revolution after reunification in 1990 . The instrument was used in Germany's diplomatic revolution in the 1990s .
 The reunited Germans had to learn to carry the burden of sovereignty, which comes along with enlarged responsibilities and growing expectations by allies .
 Germany’s leading role and ability to shape international politics in Europe and beyond has developed during more than two decades after reunification . Germany's leading role in shaping international politics has developed since reunification.
 Germany has slowly regained power, economically as well as politically, partially by deploying military force in a multilateral framework . The turmoil that began in the early 1990s began in Germany. Germany has since regained power economically and politically .
 Too many today forget Germany’s geopolitical situation of being a nation in between, a fact that has historically contributed to Germany's special path to nationhood . Germany's geopolitical situation has contributed to the country'sspecial path to nationalhood .
 Germany's western neighbors became national enemies with tragic results, including repeated attempts by Germany to dominate Europe by force of arms . This path has and has not diverged from that of Germany’s western neighbors .
 German foreign policy since unification is deeply conscious of these facts, which are too easily forgotten in the confusion of the twenty-first century .
 Germany's foreign policy became a reality, of the essential stakeholders, and of the domestic influences that shaped Germany’s policy, as directed by the Bundeskanzleramt and the Federal Foreign Office .
 Only with these essentials can one understand Germany’s relationship with Russia .
Foreign policy is influenced by public opinion with regards to domestic decisions, as well as by special interest groups . The Ostausschuss der Deutschen Wirtschaft strongly promotes Gennan-Russian relations .
 German foreign policy must be understood in the historical realms of the nation’s past, as well as in the context of its profound European interdependence . Chapter II provides a basic overview with focus on Germany and Russia .
 A theoretical approach on terms and ideas of foreign policy is inevitable, says David Frum . A purely theoretical explanation does not sufficiently explain German foreign policy formation, Frum says .
 This chapter provides a brief theoretical background on foreign policy formation, its stakeholders and powers, interests, and identity in the framework of international relations in order to understand foreign policy .
 These theoretical essentials elaborate on governmental decision-making in German foreign policy . They include the Bundeskanzleramt, Answaertiges Amt and Bundestag .
 The chapter closes with a discussion of the role of civil society in foreign policy . The chapter includes non-governmental stakeholders, such as media and think tanks in Gennany, as well as German-Russian interest groups .
 Foreign policy has been extensively researched and theoretically founded for more than a century, if not longer . FOREIGN POLICY is part of international relations or world politics .
 This section does not go into detail on the differentiation of theories of international relations . It aims to provide a theoretical background on foreign policy formation in general .
 Acknowledging that foreign policy formation does not take place in a vacuum leads to the assumption that, if the respective international relations environment changes, then so does the policy formation and, accordingly, its explanatory theory .
Foreign policy is generally understood as the entirety of state activity undertaken to realize the state’s interests concerning its power, economy, culture, and above all security vis-a-vis its international partners .
 Kissinger’s distinction also implies that domestic goals and international goals are separate . Today, due to increased globalization and its transnational relevance, the distinction between foreign policy goals and domestic policy goals is rapidly disappearing .
 German foreign policy has suffered from decades of under-investment in the peace dividend from 1989 . There has also been a significant change in the face of war and the nature of weapons .
 External factors are the stimuli that foreign nation’s actions generate on the system . Internal factors are societal preconditions, preferences, or specific decisions made in connection with domestic issues .
German foreign policy: Security, welfare, institutions, and norms . The German foreign policy is also known as "Sicherheit"
Change or adaption is a constant character of governmental foreign policy, it is necessary to understand the extent to which foreign policy change is undertaken . One nation's change in foreign policy will always have consequences for other countries, forcing them to adapt or change their foreign policy .
 The factors that determine and influence and influence foreign policy change are multidimensional . The factors aremultidimensional.
 Domestic significance of an issue also influences the likelihood of foreign policy change . The degree of institutionalization and the support of actors affect change .
 International Studies Quarterly 34, no. 5-6. When Governments Choose to Redirect Foreign Policy, it's no. 4 .
 This idea implies that the states also define the order of international politics through their interactions . This is the idea that states can also define their interactions with each other .
 The international system is the different actors that execute foreign policy . It is not the same system that executes foreign policy, but it is the same actors .
 In Waltz’s realist approach, nation states are units on the same level because they all face the same tasks . Each sovereign state varies widely in size, power, capabilities, wealth, and form .
 Gareis concludes that despite the rise of non-governmental organizations in international politics, the nation state remains the dominant actor in the international system . The nation state is the dominant player in the global system, he says .
Based on the Westphalian system in the epoch from 1648 until 1815, a European rational-bureaucratic state developed and, confined to its territory, became the authorized actor on the international stage .
 In the classical sense of the era from approximately 1740 until the 1880s, the tenn state encompassed, in addition to government, society, and national territory . In the Classical sense, the period was between 1740 and 1880s .
 In most democratic systems, Staatskunst is performed by what was formerly a small circle of government officials and cabinets .
 Grundlagen, Strukturen und Prozesse: Foreign policy: Basics, structures, and procedures . The book is based on the book "Foreign policy"
 The power to shape and decide foreign policy resides with but a few power centers within the executive branch .
Foreign policy is formed, decided, and executed by the head of state and government . The Bundeskanzlerin is the minister of foreign affairs and defense minister of defense .
 The governmental top-level executives act on behalf of the nation state . They represent the state as an actor in international politics .
Personal attitudes and characteristics of decision-makers are of importance. With the systemic relevance of governmental top-level executives in foreign policy, the personal attitudes and qualities of decision makers are of important importance .
 The actual level of power differs depending on the established political system with restraints in a democracy, such as coalition agreements or separation of powers .
 In the contemporary international system, states are not the only actors, although they remain the dominant players . In the modern system, countries are not only actors but they remain dominant players.
 The International Committee of the Red Cross or Doctors without Borders is a non-governmental organization . The Red Cross and Doctors Without Borders is also a group of non- governmental organizations .
Private actors, such as large transnational corporations, are exerting influence at the international level . In addition, private actors, like the co-founder of Microsoft, Bill Gates, or terrorist groups, are becoming more influential .
 states aspire to hegemony to be able to pursue their interests and dictate their nonns and values for the international system . It is possible only if the state is powerful enough to prevail.
 Any power projection automatically leads to countervailing power because states are in a constant struggle . However, any power projection automatic leads tocountervail power .
In order to survive in a realist understanding and to safeguard against any external aggression, power is the relevant factor, says John Sutter .
 Max Weber defined power as taking advantage of every chance to get one’s way in a social relation, even against resistance .
 power is expressed in the ability of one state to persuade another state to act in such a way that the state would not have acted otherwise, Weber says .
In the anarchic system of international relations, power is the ability to assert the state’s objectives and interests against competing interests .
 Hans Morgenthau is the father of modern U.S. realism theory . He argues that each state seeks maximum power according to his concept of interest .
 A state needs to define its interests, or at least its guiding principles, such as values and nonns . If foreign policy is generally understood as the entirety of state activity undertaken to realize the state’s interests, then a state must define it .
 National interest can also be influenced by ideology or history, as evidenced by the Federal Gennan case . Russia’s national interests with regards to retaining an alleged superpower status despite the collapse of the USSR in 1991 .
 Foreign policy is the manifestation of the state’s means-ends relation in order to pursue the objectives as defined in interests .
 The national identity of a state plays an important role in foreign policy . It defines the self-perception of a nation state and thus influences foreign policy formation and its underlying interests .
 National identity can force national interests and foreign policies to change when the national identity and proclaimed foreign policy interests collide . National identity is a matter of national interest and national interests can change when it is national identity .
 Germany's position has changed after the end of the Cold War . The situation of the European continent and the world order in turn has also changed .
 Germany's foreign policy was determined by the perception of the constant military threat in the East . The objectives of Germany’s foreign policy were the peaceful resolution of national division, the prevention of nuclear war, the perseverance of territorial integrity and the perpetuation of hard
 Federal Germany engaged in multilateral institutional approaches, such as within NATO and its integrated military command structures or the European Union .
 The defeat in two world wars, the weak Republic of 1919-1933, and national division had long-defined Germany’s semi-sovereignty until reunification in 1990 . The defeat was the defeat in both world wars.
 The integration into a sovereignty that limited the regimes of multilateral approaches was for West Germany, and then for a united Gennany . The modus operandi for its foreign policy during the Cold War.
 The best means of overcoming the legacy of defeat was the path not really taken by German statesmen either before 1914 or aside from Locarno in 1925 . It is, a firm grounding of Germany in collective security and collective defense as these institutions emerged through the 1960s .
 Germany’s Uncertain Power, 3. 67 their foreign policy behavior according to common norms and regulations, and to do so even if that meant following regulations and nonns not in-line with their objectives .
 Gennany’s apparently weak power in May 1949 and with the foundation of the FRG, a multilateral approach was the most promising way to regain international acceptance and influence, but also to show the world that West Germany could be trusted again .
 This policy assured the survival of the new FRG in the blast of the Cold War . It united the French and West Germans via the Saar, Ruhr and Lorraine industrial regions .
 The policy also assured prosperity, which, with NATO, allowed West Gennan democracy to consolidate in a way that had not been possible in the 1920s .
 The critical public thoroughly scrutinizes every foreign policy decision in Gennany, Germany .
 The FRG built up its military forces and discussed the use of nuclear weapons as part of NATO’s Strategic Concept MC 14/3 .
 The concept of civilian power is still valid today . However, the concept of multilateral engagement is still relevant today . The political culture is still alive and alive .
After reunification in 1990, Germany’s foreign policy followed a path of continuity, says Maull and Risse . Maull, Risse, among others, argue that the overall concept of civilian power remained in place and is the basis of Germany‘
 One looks in vain for an account of the policies and instruments required for a coherent implementation that is rooted in accepted societal and political preferences . One look in vain.
 The soon-tobe revised Weifibuch on security policy and the future of the Bundeswehr from the year 2006 . The Ministry of Defense is the responsibility of the ministry of Defense .
 The work is especially significant, even if it receives far less attention than it deserves . In contrast with somewhat similar documents in the UK or the United States, this work is particularly significant .
 Germany’s foreign policy is rooted in these decentralized and federal structures of the political system, including its society . Germany's foreign policy has been rooted in the decentralized, federal structures.
 knowledge about the role of the German government helps one understand the formation of German foreign policy and its limits .
 Such knowledge is often suffocated in partisan political debates, and extreme political positions arise from the age of total war . Such knowledge, however, is sometimes suffocated by partisan political positions, such as in domestic politics .
 The Federal Chancellery, the Federal Foreign Office, and the Federal Ministry of Defense are the main actors in Gennany . The federal government is the largest agency in the United States .
Their interactions and the fonnation of policy are guided by several principles . Their interactions and their interactions and fonning of policy were guided by many principles .
 The dominant role of the Chancellor is supplemented with the principle of ministerial authority . Each Minister shall conduct the affairs of his department independently and on his own responsibility .
 Most of the decisions are not being prepared in the cabinet but in consultative political sub-bodies . Only those who have an interest in the topic are involved .
 The practice of these principles, based on the Basic Law, gives the executive branch a strong position, which has been confirmed by the Federal Constitutional Court multiple times . The practice is based on Basic Law .
 Gennany has always had coalition governments of the leading parties from left center to right center since the first Adenauer cabinet from September 20, 1949, until present . Two exceptions in 1960 and in 1982 have been made .
 This fact affects the decision-making process within the federal government significantly . This is the first time a decision has been made by a federal government .
 The coalition principle affects all other principles like an overarching superstructure . Federal government policy decisions need to take into account diverging interests and positions of more than one political party .
 The Bundeskanzleramt supports the chancellor in performing constitutional duties . It is an import steering and coordinating body interlining the principles of chancellor, ministerial, and cabinet authority .
 The chancellery needs to have oversight and expertise knowledge of all relevant ministerial and governmental plans and actions in order to educate the chancellor at any given time .
 The directorate-general is manned mainly by experts, diplomats, and officers from the Foreign Office and the Ministry of Defense . The head of the 2nd directorategeneral is the chancellor's foreign policy advisor .
 The Bundesssicherheitsrat is located within the 2nd directorate-general, also one of the cabinet’s political sub-bodies .
 The Federal Security Council meets secretly and consists of the chancellor, and the ministers of foreign affairs, defense, interior, finance, justice, and development aid . The chief of defense and the government spokesperson have advisory seats .
 The Federal Security Council deals mainly with arms exports, while important foreign-policy decisions are made in smaller, more infonnal circles .
 The Federal Foreign Office and Primacy of Foreign Affairs are still the dominant actors in Germany’s foreign policy fonnation . The number of other specialized ministries engaged in international, bilateral, or multilateral relations in favor of German interests has grown significantly in light of globalization, trans-
 Foreign relations are nurtured not only on the federal level, but also on the state level . Federal structure at the heart of government is at the center of government .
 The State of Bavaria maintains a network of international representative offices in twenty-three countries across the globe . German aerospace, as well as Audi and BMW, have a significant world presence .
Foreign policy is a challenge to the Federal Foreign Office and the traditional primacy in foreign affairs . Foreign relations have changed from the time of Mettemich and Bismarck until the present .
 The difference between foreign relations and foreign policy is important, says David Frum . It is ideally the coherent implementation of defined national goals and interests, he says .
 This ministry has developed into a cross-section body that shares expertise and interacts with other specialized ministries . This ministry shares expertise with other special ministries .
 More than 25 percent of personnel at Germany’s embassies and consulates are not diplomats from the Foreign Service . Officials from other federal ministries are from other ministries .
 In 2001, Andreae and Kaiser stated that the primacy of foreign policy still rests with the Foreign Office . Oppermann and Hoese believed in 2007 that only in the realms of peaceand security policy, policy in the UN, and policy concerning Germany’s engagement in the
 Foreign Office's foreign affairs role hinges on the primacy of foreign affairs for the Foreign Office . The position of the foreign minister is a key role in foreign affairs .
Without this primacy in the cabinet, no unified German position can be put in hand . Without thisPrimacy, there is no unified position in the German cabinet .
 The Federal Foreign Office can decide to participate in any negotiations . All negotiations with other countries may be conducted only with the approval of the Foreign Office .
 He has not only expertise in foreign policy but also rich experience of a particular kind in view of the present crisis and its background .
 The executive branch of the government has a strong position in foreign policy decision-making . The parliamentary provisional rights are a key part of the German government .
 Usually the government and parliamentary majority stem from the same party and are part of a coalition . Approval for foreign-policy decisions can proceed without friction .
 A two-third parliamentary majority is required for all aspects where further transfer of sovereignty to the EU is foreseen .
 The Bundestag and its members of parliament have no right of initiative in the remits of foreign policy . They can accept or reject only laws that are presented for parliamentary decision .
 The Bundesrat does not equal governmental majority representation in the Bundesrat . The opposition can exert participatory control of the government's actions .
 The Bundestag has multiple non-legislative instruments of parliamentary control . It is especially useful for opposition in the parliament .
 The instruments include the possibility to cite members of the executive to testify before the Bundestag or its subcommittees to explain government policy . 25 percent of the members of parliament agree to do so if 25 percent agree to.
 The Federal Constitutional Court ruled on July 12, 1994, that a parliamentary decision needed to be taken on request by the government to engage militarily in the framework of multilateral institutions . The court ruled that the Bundeswehr's mission should be defined by Article 87a and Article 24 of
 The Bundestag can only accept or deny the military deployment, which necessitates that government cooperate and inform members of parliament, which also goes along the parliamentary groups .
 In Germany, members of parliament usually focus on specific fields of expertise . They normally remain in that domain throughout their political career .
 A foreign policy expertise is confined to certain members of the legislative who specialize in this field .
 Germany’s New Foreign Policy: Decision-Making in an Interdependent World, eds.
 The government needs to coordinate with the parliament to pursue its foreign policy objectives . This implies that when the government wants to pursue a foreign policy objective successfully, it needs to co-ordinate with the parliamentary committee .
 SPD party leader Sigmar Gabriel is also vice chancellor . Frank-Walter Steinmeier once again took over the Federal Foreign Office .
Out of the twenty-three committees of the current legislative period, several are of significant relevance concerning foreign policy towards Russia . The Committees on Affairs of the European Union, Budget, and Foreign Affairs.
 The Bundestag has five political parties according to their relative representation in the Bundestags . These committees focus on their specialized area of policy .
 The German Bundestag entertains a variety of parliamentarian groups engaged in international relations between the respective parliaments . The German-Russian Parliamentary Friendship Group is currently chaired by the CDU Member of Parliament Bernhard Raster .
 The strong position of the executive versus the legislative branch in the realms of foreign policy has been confirmed multiple times by the Federal Constitutional Court . The position has also been confirmed by the court multiple times .
 The Bundestag and the Bundesrat are important actors in foreign affairs if it comes to governmental accountability, legitimization, and broad public support and understanding .
 A diffuse, unpredictable, and increasingly unstable security environment, which affects Germany’s interests and parameters for foreign policy, has replaced the fonner bipolarity of the Cold War .
In the past couple of years, the parameters of the 1990s have changed severely in the wake of the U.S. war on terror, the global economic crisis, and mounting security crises around and in Europe . The shift of global power to Asia and away from the Euro-Atlantic
 German foreign policy is rooted in the normative foundation of the Basic Law of 1949 . The Basic Law has stood the test of time in a remarkable way .
 Article 26 of the Basic Law obliges the federal government to ensure the maintenance of international peace at all costs and limits arms export . It makes any infringement an unconstitutional and thus criminal offense .
 Gennan national interests have changed since unity in 1990 in the face of domestic and international forces . Statecraft has well advanced national interests, which itself has changed since 1990 .
 Germany’s primary interest is a status quo of a stable and secure environment of western-oriented values and institutions . This means a strong Europe and a liberal, rule-based international order with free and open states.
 In a realist paradigm, the interests and power materialized in economic strength assure Germany’s survival in an anarchic and competitive world . Germany defines its national interests in terms of power, not in the form of military capabilities, but in economic power .
 Gennany’s has become increasingly self-confident in Europe and in the World, while the world order itself shows significant signs of disintegration or a violent and inevitable reordering . In this fashion, the so-called long lines of his traditional foreign policy characteristics are still
 Schroeder opposed the U.S. plans for invading Iraq and the fact that Germany allied with Russia and France caused the most significant and deep rupture in USGerman relations since 1945 .
 Schroeder declared that Germany would not participate even if there would be a UN Security Council resolution . But the German ‘special way’ was also a renunciation of the traditional multilateral approach .
 The possibility that the U.S. National Security Agency targeted German citizens, as well as a revulsion against such United States firms as Google and Facebook have gathered since 2008 . The WikiLeaks scandal, the revelations of Edward Snowden about United States.
 Germany’s Westbindung has been weakened by selective decisions . The onceprominent commitment to multilateralism transitioned from ‘reflexive’ to “selective” multilateralistism in the first decade .
 Gennany will always opt for a multilateral approach where it deems necessary but will act bilaterally when it does not . The country will always choose to opt for multilateral approaches .
Despite Gennany’s economic power, it is increasingly less capable of acting unilaterally .
 The advent of the crisis in Ukraine in 2014 poses a test of such policy that allows few of the luxuries of choice that might have been said to exist to opt out .
 Germany’s foreign policy after reunification has been dominated more by continuity than by significant change from the alliance cohesion of an earlier epoch . But change occurred mainly in the employment of instruments, such as military force, which probably signifies the most relevant change .
 The chancellor uses Germany’s new self-confidence and powers to mediate between Russia and the West, primarily the US . Gennany also acknowledges the bridging function in Europe .
German statecraft must master a problem of singular difficulty for which old formulas of general peace and entente are unworkable . Whether intended or not, the crisis in Ukraine and the advent of Russian irredentism by force of arms, German statecraft has to master
 Merkel’s foreign policy aims to strengthen European integration amid domestic and international sources of violent disintegration . She argues that a more cohesive European policy, especially defense and security policy, will be key to an enhanced transatlantic partnership .
 Foreign Office introduced tenn Gestaltungsmacht (a power that shapes the international order) in 2012 . It was intended to strengthen Gennany’s economy and prospects for export as inner-European demand declined in the wake of Euro crises .
 Germany's center and beyond will to widen the zone of stability and economic growth around Germany’s center . This aspiration to ride the upward tide of globalization characterizes the will to widening the zone.
 Germany’s foreign policy finds itself caught between export-driven Realpolitik and value-based Moralpolitik .
 Steinmeier promised to address these trials of policy in what are uncharted waters . Steinmeier promises to address the trials of Policy in the uncharted water .
 Germany’s Russia Policy is an important part of Gennan foreign policy . It has an important impact on the nations power leverage itself as a civilian power with the additional aspiration to be a shaping power .
 Germany and Russia are fated to share close, interdependent relations . Germany’s Russia Policy Germany is a key part of the country's policy .
 Helmut Kohl prioritized Germany’s Russia policy in order to ensure the complete withdrawal of Russian troops from Gennany . Kohl enjoyed a close relation with Mikhail Gorbachev.
After 1998 and under the Gerhard Schroeder cabinet, Russia policy became a high-prioritized policy area . The socialist chancellor had been declared a Chefsache, meaning detennination through the chancellery, or the chancellor himself .
 Putin and Schroeder shared a barely bridled affection for the trappings of showy wealth and the good life . Both politicians' families were from the poor, working social class, both had degrees in law .
 Schroeder’s decision to declare a Sonderweg (a special German way) in 2002-2003 was a controversial decision . The decision was made to oppose the U.S. invasion of Iraq .
 Schroeder's pronounced personalization of Germany’s Russia policy was intensified . The clear prioritization of a ‘Russia first’ approach during the tenure of Kohl and Schroeder was intensified by Schroeder .
 Schroeder’s statecraft was even more pointedly of an eastern orientation than that of Willy Brandt in the epoch 1969-1974 .
Social democrat Gerhard Schroeder employed a Ostpolitik revived during his term as chancellor . The SPDs thought enhanced economic relations would automatically lead to political and societal change in Russia .
 Kundnani calls Ostpolitik revised an illusion, as the reference to Brandt’s OstPolitik, even a modified OstpolitIK, neglects the fact that while change through rapprochement did not aim at ideological change, change through trade did exactly that .
 Wandel durch Handel is usable for any continuation of trade in any political situation in order to justify commercialism .
 The slogan Wandel durch Handel only paid off in economic terms for those firms positioned to profit most .
 Steimneier was one of the architects of Schroeder’s Russia policy . He continued in Merkel's first cabinet as foreign minister, pursuing a path tenned “modernization through interdependence.”
 CRS Report for Congress, January 17, 2006, 11.3, 2006 .
 He proclaimed a German-Russian modernization partnership with a European dimension . Russia would become more open, transparent, and guided by rule of law, he said .
 Such policy would create more opportunities for German-Russian exchanges, such as those in Russia . Such policy could create more opportunity for Germans to exchange with Russia .
 Georgian War in August 2008, a caesura happened with the sudden Georgian War .
With the world economic crisis and the apogee of U.S. power, a change of climate had taken place that few expected . People close to policy makers ignored how the advocates of power and empire were assuming new power in the Kremlin .
 She was a leading woman, and at the same time, she was a person who revived traditions of statecraft from former times . She was also a woman who revived statecraft.
 Merkel’s experience with the dominant Soviet security and military presence in the GDR until 1989 . Most significant, however, was Merkel's experience with Soviet security .
 Moltke is ascribed to the ideal, to be more than you appear .
 Merkel repeatedly addressed the lack of democratic reform in Russia . She also called for guaranteeing human rights and rule of law .
 A special relationship with Russia was maintained during the first Merkel cabinet . A sober tone replaced the comfortable and friendly tone that had been characterizing Germany’s hopeful Russia policy under Kohl and Schroeder .
 Merkel avoided meeting Russian Prime Minister Putin and sought to support his successor Dmitri Medvedev . Putin was regarded as the embodiment of the “New Russia’s” a Russia that would moderni z e and engage in democratic reform .
 The chancellery, and partially the Bundestag, exerted more influence in this regard, according to the German government .
 Gennan policy towards Russia had not been a top priority for the chancellor during the Christian-Liberal coalition from 2009 to 2013 . The emphasis of policy shifted to the Euro crisis .
 Germany and Russia conferred about the same topic but had diverging interests and priorities, Meister said . Meister concluded that the two countries had increased bilateral misunderstandings .
 The lack of reciprocity on the Russian side was one of the core foundations of the German approach . It casts a shadow on the state of Germany’s relations with Russia .
 In 2012, Germany’s Russia policy under Merkel suffered another major setback when Putin became, for the third time, Russian president and swiftly and without hesitation destroyed all hopes of reform in Medvedev .
 The former Russian Prime Minster was seen pliantly receiving orders from the boss . He was a perfect castling for Putin .
 This sudden and unexpected move for the West augured no good for anyone. This sudden move for West augures no good to anyone, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Merkel questioned the value of partnership with Russia after return of President Putin . In the beginning of 2012, Russia was faced with rising protests among the population in Moscow .
 German businesses committed to eastern markets put pressure on the government to avoid harsh criticism of Russian politics . Many representatives of non-governmental organizations and media criticized the chancellery for taking a too-soft approach and not supporting Russian society sufficiently .
 diplomacy has shifted the balance to economic interest groups with an eastern orientation . Such stresses and strains are perfectly normal in diplomacy, but given the imperative for trade in statecraft, such policy has shifted to the east .
 Frank-Walter Steinmeier is Germany’s minister of foreign affairs in Merkel's third cabinet . With the 2013 federal elections, a new grand coalition between the SPD and CDU/CSU was formed .
 Germany’s Russia policy, guided by an Ostpolitik revised, needs to make pressing decisions in light of a moral dilemma .
 Egon Bahr’s heroic story with Willy Brandt is appropriate in what is plainly a new era . The violence of which is more toxic and aggressive than might be said to have existed in the thermonuclear-dominated stability of the high Cold War .
 The return of Machtpolitik under Putin heralded itself in 2008, and became dominant in 2014 . It has meant a rupture in Germany's existing statecraft .
 West was leading role in German national interest in 1989 . Since 9/11, it has unfortunately lost meaning for many Germans . This fact gave the West, especially the United States, important roles in integration .
Until reunification, Germany's foreign policy towards Westbindung and Brandt’s Ostpolitik aimed at overcoming the European division with a repeat of what had been a peaceful diplomatic revolution .
Foreign and domestic policy in Germany was deeply interconnected because of foreign policy, especially towards the Soviet Union and East Gennany, directly affected lives of all Germans .
 Exemplary are the unpopular, but equally necessary, foundations of the Bundeswehr in 1955 and the NATO-double track decision in 1979 . Both faced strong civil opposition in both East and West Germany .
Civil society in Germany remains highly skeptical of the use of military force as an instrument of foreign policy . Despite the deployment of military forces outside of Central Europe in 1994, civil society still remains skeptical .
 The public has only indirect influence on foreign policy formation via the electoral vote . The public's opinion is an important scale for the measurement of governmental politics .
 In Germany, civil society is still affected by the burdens of the Cold War and national division . West Germans were influenced by a democratic political system with a free market, while East Germans were socialized under a communist political system .
 68 percent of the populace were strongly interested in foreign policy in Germany in spring 2014 . In spring 2014, there was a world order of growing violence and economic turmoil in Germany .
 German Civil Society after Reunification Germany’s identification as a civilian power can be seen as a Leitmotif of public opinion . Since reunification, since the founding of West Germany in 1949, has been identified as a 'Leit Motif'
 In the GDR, the people and their identity were influenced by Soviet domination and political socialization . West Germans who newly discovered the society of the former GDR in 1990 had great trouble fully understanding what they found there .
Two former citizens of the GDR are prominent former citizens. The irony of this is that the nation is being led by two former citizens . The GDR is led by former members of the U.S.
 49 percent of the German population foresees a median position for Gennany between Russia and the West . 45 percent foresee a GennANY embedded solely in the West, according to a poll conducted in April 2014 .
 The desire for a third path is a corollary of the old notion of a German special path . The idea is adapted to the present and is now being used in Germany .
 It is not an especially new phenomenon because it was present in the Weimar Republic, in the Third Reich, and in the Cold War in various iterations . It was not a new phenomenon, but it is not a particularly new phenomenon .
 The idea operates in civil society in various forms, especially among those critical of a western orientation, or a western European orientation .
Only 44 percent of the respondents are in favor of stronger relations with the United States than with Russia . In the West, 61 percent of respondents favor strong relations with U.S. rather than Russia .
 This phenomenon plays a role today in the Ukraine crisis since 2014 as to the fate of Ukraine . A significant percentage of the German population is willing to embrace and argue for Russian apologia .
 Opinion polls show that the younger generation is more willing to engage internationally in order to protect human rights . That's not necessarily with military force, but with human rights.
 90 percent in favor of reducing the Bundeswehr deployments. In this context, older generation beyond 60 years is especially wary of military operations abroad .
 62 percent of Germans regard the US as a reliable ally, and 57 percent favor stronger ties with the US . 60 percent want Germany to engage in the Ukraine conflict in close relation with the United States and Western partners .
German civil society has had a difficult relationship with its military since 1949 . German civil society, due to its legacy, has been in a difficult position since 1949.
Fears arose that the Germans would distance themselves even more from the Bundeswehr . It would lead to diverging development between society and military .
With Bundeswehr operations in Afghanistan and an increased number of civilian and German casualties, the Germans’ difficult relations with foreign policy hard power became more strained .
 The Routledge Handbook of Civil-Military’s Relations, eds. Policy, Strategy and Institutions in Germany is published in Germany .
 Twenty-five years after reunification, the German public seemed to have transfonned ‘Never again Auschwitz’ to a modified “Never again War’ theme . A self-perception of being a peaceful, post-heroic society.
 51 percent of Germans thi nk that the Ukraine crisis affects each German citizen's life . Only 30 percent dismiss any influence of the current crisis on their life, which remains to be seen .
Foreign-policy decision-making takes place in small, elite circles in Berlin that are fitted into the mass of opinion in a process of debate and democratic give-and-take . Think Tanks and Mainstream Media on Foreign Affairs.
 Germany's foreign policy expertise in Russia has declined significantly since 1990 . The country's well-known and respected weekly newspapers, such as Die Zeit, no longer maintain their own correspondents in Moscow .
 This trend arises specifically from changes in priorities since 1989, as well as the decline of excellent journalism, generally, as a consequence of the media phenomena of the twenty-first century .
With the availability of the whole Internet reaching beyond national borders, journalistic objectivity is in decline . Polemics of the most primitive sort have made an astonishing comeback, as it was with the worst of yellow journalism of the late nineteenth century .
 In foreign affairs, where people cannot personally witness evolving events like war and peace, the media plays a very central role in shapin public opinion .
 The Internet is becoming increasingly common in the current Ukraine crisis . This effect can be exploited by those wholly unconcerned by democracy and checks and balances .
 The Ukraine crisis occurred a hundred years after the outbreak of war in Europe in 1914, and with it revived the most vicious and calumny-laden practices from a century ago . All of which are ideally suited to flourish in the digital free-for-all .
Pro-Russian protesters accuse West German-based media of failing to analyze postcommunist Gennany conectly .
 Critics also rebuke analyses of contemporary Russia, partially based on individual socialization under the communist system in East Germany .
 Russian state-backed TV station RT (fonnerly Russia Today) is also available in Germany and Great Britain . In this regard, it is a thin line for the average German citizen to differentiate between objective news coverage.
 The small circles, where foreign policy is discussed on a professional level, are located in Berlin, close to the decision-makers .
German expertise looms less prominent in public life than in European security . European institutions have been overshadowed by the last quarter century of more or less European unity .
 The major political parties represented in the Bundestag support political foundations, which are interlinked with the parties, but also with parliament itself . The main political parties are represented in Germany's parliament .
 The foundations, with their own research and policy branches, are further linked to the chancellery and federal ministries . They engage significantly in international policy analysis and act in concert with foreign policy .
 Germany's New Foreign Policy: Decision-Making in an Interdependent World, eds. Linking the Worlds of Foreign Policy and Transnationalism .
 The Konrad Adenauer Stiftung is the political foundation of the CDU, named after the first German post-war chancellor . The political foundations have created outreach programs in most countries across the globe .
 The KAS has maintained its Moscow office since 1990 but is facing increasing pressure by the Putin government . The priority in the former Soviet region is in Russia .
 KAS-sponsored EU-Russian dialogue project leader denied entry to Russia . Travel ban into Russia until 2020 without any given reason .
 State Duma adopted law that defined nearly all foreign non-governmental organizations as illegal foreign agents . In addition, the SPD-affiliated Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, as well as the KAS, have been searched and computers seized .
 Allegations against the German political foundations were dropped after the intervention of the German Federal Foreign Office . Police raids caused a feeling of insecurity among Russian civil society and German political foundation .
 The annual security conference has grown into the German key forum in addressing international security challenges . The conference is usually with a high number of representatives from the highest level of decision-making .
 This event in the Bavarian winter offered the mise en scene for the shift in German-Russian relations in presentations by Vladimir Putin that at first garnered little notice .
 The event finds a medial echo in the German press and resembles an opportunity for strategic discussion amongst the experts, but also for possible political statements aimed at the public .
 Germany's President Joachim Gauck, Defense Minster Ursula von der Leyen and Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier used the Munich Security Conference to collectively call for a stronger role in international politics .
 German-Russian Interests Groups and Their Influence exert a significant influence on Germany’s Russia policy .
 Based on customs, trade and politics are engaged in inside lobbying to influence the political decision-making process . The public opinion is shaping the public opinion, especially by supporting German businesses that invest in Russia .
 The Ostausschuss was founded in 1952 . It includes the Federation of German Industries, the Association of German Banks and the German Insurance Association .
 The ranks are further composed of over two hundred companies from the German Mittelstand to stock list major corporations . Daimler, Volkswagen, the Deutsche Bank, or Lufthansa.
 The German government's Russia liaison, Gernot Erler, announced that the dialogue would be continued . In 2014, the annual conference was postponed, and it has been put on hold since then in light of the Ukraine crisis .
 The Ostausschuss remains the most significant interest and lobby group concerning Germany’s Russia policy . Meanwhile, the OstaUSSchuss is the mostsignificant interest and lobbying group concerning the country's Russia policy.
 The success of lobbying depends on privileged access to the highest level of political decision-making . The Ostausschuss unites the elite leadership of the German economy .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin addressed the Federal Assembly on March 18, 2014 . He made clear that Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia .
 Putin's blow to the statecraft of Germany has been Putin’s blow to Germany . Most troubling regarding the fate of peace in Europe, however, has been Russia's role in Europe .
 The 2014 Ukraine crisis and annexation of Crimea has constituted an event of singular importance unseen since 1989 or even 1945 . With the record of Gennan-Russian relations in mind, it's not been seen as a major event since 1989 .
 One cannot refute its consequences for the region, and for Europe as a whole, as well as for the rest of the world . One can't refute the consequences for Europe and for the world, says author .
 The system of international power on the metalevel in Europe seems shaken and in a daze . The June 2015 Russian statecraft attempts to return to a friendly normalcy amid the ongoing war in eastern Ukraine .
 The German-Russian relations are personalized in the respective regimes of Chancellor Merkel and President Putin . This generalization is especially applicable in terms of the German- Russian relations .
Public opinion in Germany has shown a clearer attitude as the crisis matured . Some critics have branded Russlandversteher guilty of a knee-jerk apologia .
 By spring 2015, 85 percent of Russians regarded the annexation of Crimea as irreversible . The annexation was one year after Crimea was annexed .
 Crimean Tartars raided Moscow in 1571, and continued raids until 1783 . The annexation of Crimea in 1783 ended the raids on Russians in southern territories .
 Russian rule over Crimea following Catherine II’s reign enabled the establishment of the Black Sea Fleet and opened possible Russian access to the Mediterranean via the Dardanelles and the Bosporus Strait . The long-time Russian strategic goal was a long-term Russian goal .
 Crimean War of 1853-1856 ended in humiliating Russian defeat . This southern thrust into Ottoman Europe and into conflict with western powers also led to Crimean War .
 Ukraine would not align under Moscow's future control . Only the most fanciful Ukrainian nationalist might have imagined Ukraine would be independent one day .
Infrastructural and economic factors, such as the missing land connection to the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, led to the decision . Khrushchev's decision was not on his mind .
 Crimea had always been an integral part of Russia. During the Cold War, Crimea had become a well-known holiday destination . It was the setting of several novels in Russian literature and the 1823 poem by Alexander Pushkin .
 The general Russian perception of Ukraine as "Little Russia" is widespread among Russian nationalists . Those who have revived Pan Slavic, romanticist dreams of the nineteenth century.
 Ukrainians have addressed ‘Russification’ as a threat to their national identity . Nevertheless, this perception is contested by Ukrainians .
 By 1989, 73 percent of people living in Ukraine were ethnically Ukrainian . 22 percent are ethnically Russian and dominated the eastern and southeastern parts of Ukraine .
 Such a mixture of nationalities was typical in Tsarist Russia because the same was true in all the multinational empires of Eastern Europe .
 “47.5% of schoolchildren studied in Ukrainian language schools, . . . 47% in their SovietRussian counterparts .
 The Soviet KGB ensured that half of the political prisoners in the Soviet Union came from Ukraine . This sentiment was especially prevalent in the dissident movements of the 1960s and 1970s .
 The former chainnan of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet, Leonid Kravchuk, was executed August 24, 1991 . He was executed after the attempted coup in Moscow .
 This signifies why it is difficult “east of Kiev and west of the Volga’ to identify who is a Ukrainian and who is Russian’ after multiple centuries of interaction . This signifies how difficult it is to identify a Ukrainian or Russian.
 Crimea has a major strategic relevance for Russia, especially for the Russian Navy . Whether Crimea belongs to Russia by dint of international law, the peninsula has a big strategic relevance .
 The Black Sea Fleet has been in Sevastopol since the first annexation of Catherine II in the eighteenth century . It has been the hallmark of world power and the capacity of Russia to exert its influence in the international system of states against the old empires .
 The RussianUkrainian agreement for the lease of Sevastopol and other military bases in Crimea was supposed to end in 2017 . It had been on the diplomatic agenda between Moscow and Kiev for quite a while .
 Ukraine's military bases have been used in Ukraine for 20 years . A new lease agreement signed in April 2010 prolonged the usage of the bases for another twenty-five years . It narrowed Ukraine’s NATO membership probabilities .
 The future of the Black Sea Fleet has been secured with the Russian 2014 annexation . Former Ukrainian limitations on the fleet size are not applicable anymore . The fleet size has been reduced .
 Massive allegations of electoral fraud initiated large-scale protests in Kiev . More than five hundred thousand people protested the outcome of the elections peacefully .
 The Ukrainian Supreme Court condemned the elections and ruled that a third round of elections would be held on December 26, 2004 . Under pressure from the public, the court condemned the election .
 Yulia Tymoschenko was Ukraine’s first female prime minster . But accusations of corruption created severe divisions among the parties of the Orange Revolution .
Ukrainian political establishment became preoccupied with internal affairs of power and influence instead of addressing the economic and financial crisis in 2008. Consequently, the Ukrainian political establishment was preoccupied.
 Ukrainians voted for Victor Yanukovych in 2010 because they were tired of scandal-ridden internal political affairs . The nation’s stagnation in the rigors of the free market, and the debris in eastern Europe after the world economic crisis.
 The U.S. acknowledged the elections in Ukraine as free and fair, thus signaling Moscow to accept the electoral outcome . For the Kremlin, the 2010 change of government in Ukraine was a chance for rapprochement.
 Moscow has openly supported status quo candidates in Georgia and Ukraine . Moscow had openly supported Status quo candidates. Moscow had publicly supported Georgia, Ukraine.
 The so-called “color revolutions’ in Georgia and Ukraine came as a shock to the Kremlin .
 President Putin personally promoted Yanukovych’s first presidential bid in 2004 . These shocks automatically defined the Russian position as opposition to the new governments .
 Russian troops intervened in the Georgian province of South Ossetia in 2008 . Russian troops claimed to protect Russian citizens, which had their residences in the region . The Russo-Georgian War sparked the Russian-Russian War .
 Russia’s decisive action in Georgia caught the West by surprise . It did not lead to a change of foreign policy towards Russia . Most nations, including Germany, went back to business as usual .
 In Crimea, the number of Russians had been growing over the years . Between 1994 and 2004, Russia had given citizenship to Ukrainians in Crimea .
 In 2008 after the Russo-Georgian War, Allison wrote that the Russian modulation of postSoviet borders in the Caucasus had a threatening connotation for political leaders .
 The following chapter IV outlines major actors and the parameters of Russian foreign policy . It also focuses on the relevance of the near abroad, as well as relations to Ukraine .
 Russians were longing for an authoritarian president like him to bring order, stability, and international recognition back to Russia and its society . Russia was longing for a leader like him like him.
 The president started his redefinition of the center-periphery relations in times when the Russian economy recovered and began to prosper due to increasing oil prices, which affected Russia's approach to international affairs .
 Russian foreign policy can be seen only in the context of the Soviet Union’s disintegration since 1989 . The Soviet Union's earlier legacy as a European and Eurasian great power, starting from the medieval times of Kievan Rus .
 The rump of Russia as heir to the USSR faced severe domestic tunnoil in post-Soviet times . From 1945 until 1989 the world was characterized by the bipolarity of the two super powers .
 This turmoil led to the perception that Russia was internationally weak, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia was not a superpower, but it nurtured the aim to become so again, a fact obscured prior to 2008 . Russia is now the world's most powerful country .
 Gennan foreign and security policy has long-assumed that no such post-imperial ambitions might operate from Moscow . This decision constitutes a diplomatic revolution that puts the post-1989 European order into question .
 Putin learned his own lessons from the Yeltsin legacy, and in order to act with the support of the Russian legislation . Putin engaged in aligning the Federal Assembly to his ends in a kind of presidential authoritarianism .
 Putin succeeded in dominating the main parliamentary party of the Duma . He re-introduced the functions of bureaucratization, as well as the career function of the party .
 United Russia became an instrument of Putin’s power structure, especially because most members of the inner circle closest to the president are not part of the party . The party affiliation is supposed to signal loyalty to the authorities .
 Putin keeps a stable majority with 53 percent for United Russia until 2017 as a result of the latest parliamentary election . The majorities in the Duma were changing with the subsequent Duma elections .
 One of the first reforms Putin engaged in when he came to power was a reform of the Upper House . Two representatives from each federal region were elected .
 The Kremlin proposed to appoint members of the Federation Council as opposed to electoral representation or personal representation by the elected regional governor . However, the Constitution did not define the selection process .
 The prime minister is head of the government, but also heads the Federal Migration Service . He is also head of a number of federal agencies, like the federal Migration Service.
 All securityand intelligencerelated agencies, such as the Federal Intelligence Agency, report directly to the president .
 The prime minister, currently the former president, Medvedev, is also appointed by the president and confirmed by the State Duma .
 The prime minister's role in foreign policy is not as strong as the president's . He oversees the actual implementation of domestic and foreign policy, as well as financial and monetary policy, and is responsible for the rule of law and ensuring human rights .
 These elite circles have been increasingly dominated by the appointments of siloviki . Those at odds with a western orientation and with no love for the ideal of checks and balances .
 Putin relied heavily on keeping like-minded people around him, the so-called siloviki, the men of the security branches, the intelligence services, and the military . Since 2000, the military have done their best to restore their power since 1991 .
 The strong relations between newly generated wealth and the power circle around the Russian president were set up by the oligarchs under Yeltsin’s administration in the 1990s . The siloviki, made them the new and powerful elite in Moscow, was taken over
 Under Putin, the siloviki representation among the Russian political elite has risen constantly . After 2008, it reached 67 percent within the ranks of the national leadership and 32 percent across the executive and legislative branches .
 The Duma Committee of International Affairs does not play a significant role in actual foreign policy-making in Russia . It supports the views and the implementation of the Russian president .
 The last player in foreign policy in Moscow is the Federal Security Council . Nikolai Patrushev has reemerged under the current chairman, fonner director of the FSB .
 The Federal Security Council is responsible for drafting policy to defend “the vital interests of individuals, society and the state against internal or external threats. As part of the presidential administration, the council is responsible.
 The dominant role of the Kremlin and the elite circles of siloviki remain uncontested, if not ameliorated, among rising nationalism in regards to Ukraine crisis and the annexation of Crimea .
 Russia and the Soviet Union were part of the five great European powers, which then became the bipolar order of the Cold War . The Soviet Union was one of the most powerful powers in the world .
 Russia played an important part as a global power during the Cold War . Russia was able to shape international order through its participation, power, and energetic defiance of the United States .
 The historic subsequence of enormous influence and power, followed by total defeat or collapse in 1989-1991, is perceived by observers of Moscow as one reason for the inherent fear of Russia's political elite for Russia’s survival .
 After the end of the Soviet Union in 1991, new independent nations evolved around Russia . New independent nations depend substantially on Russia, especially in tenns of trade and energy .
 Ethnic-Russians also live in these countries . These nations also contain a large number of ethnic Russians living in these nations .
 The classic Eastern European multinational empires expired in 1918-1919 with a catastrophic legacy in the years 1919-1989 . This issue mirrors the multinational character of Tsarist Russia and later the Soviet Union .
 Russia's foreign policy has not always been as violent or as truculent as is has grown to be in the last couple years . In retrospect, Russia’s foreign policy is not always as violent as it has been .
 The siloviki called for a prioritization of dominance in the post-Soviet region over multilateral approaches in international relations with countries outside the former Soviet Union .
 Russia's privileged interests could be interpreted as a message to the West not to interfere in what had been a Europe between the great powers .
 The declared Ukrainian will to aspire to NATO membership, especially in the midst of the domestic turbulence that led to the Maidan protests in 2013-2014, was perceived as threatening in a new quality of urgency .
 Russia was basically compensated by the West for the first round of NATO enlargement in 1999 . The second round in 2004 ignited heavy opposition among the Russian elite . The Baltic States were a core part of the former Soviet Union .
 Yeltsin declared that the accession of the Baltic States into NATO would overstep a red line . This fact led Yeltsins to declare that the accession of the Baltic states into NATO would overstep the red line.
 Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov warned that Russia would not easily accept pennanent deploying of missile defense infrastructure . Russia is angry about NATO's enlargement .
 Russian general allegedly threatened Poland indirectly with the possibility of nuclear retaliation . Poland announced the bilateral agreement between Warsaw and Washington to host an interceptor system for missile defense and Patriot air defense units .
Ma nk off argued that by ignoring Russian objections about NATO enlargement eastwards, the second round of NATO ascension prepared the path to the Russo-Georgian conflict in 2008 . Ma nkoff argued that, by ignoring Russia's objections, it prepared the way
 A similar perception can be observed in Russia concerning the European Union . A similar view can be seen in Russia about the EU .
 In 2003, the EU introduced the European Neighborhood Policy . It was supposed to replace the bilateral approach to a unified strategy for eastern and southern neighbors .
 Russia would be able to modernize Russia’s economy as competitive on a global scale and employ the instruments of soft and hard power . At the same time, Russia could modernize its economy as a global economy .
 Russian media was developing according to Western editorial standards of independence . Yeltsin was under Yeltsina, but it was under the control of Russian media .
 The Putin administration began interfering in the editorial work, according to the Kremlin's guidance . But the Putin administration also used coercion to change media coverage, it says .
 The government secured full control of all three major TV channels in Russia by the end of 20 04. 2004 .
 The development of a Russian middle class led to the desire for more liberalization and critique of Putin’s increasingly authoritarian reign, but also for a higher standard of living .
 After the 2011 presidential elections, large protests against the government erupted in Moscow and other major cities as allegations of election fraud arose .
 A major domestic factor, if not the major factor, is the Russian economy . Russia's economy is a key factor in the country's growth .
 After the Russian gross domestic product fell 50 percent from 1990 to 1995, inflation spiked and unemployment rose .
 Russia acquired enormous debt, the recovery of the economy coincided with Putin’s rise to president .
 The economic recovery and decline in Russia’s debt enabled a more assertive foreign policy and opened up opportunities for enhanced military refonn that had been underway since 2008 . Russia's debt has enabled more assertives foreign policy.
 The military reform is supposed to ensure the provision of adequate tools for hard-power foreign policy . The reform is a “direct reflection of what the government has made Russia’s national interests,’ he says .
 The reforms call for the military to modernize, specialize and professionalize . The reforms are called for the army to become more professional .
 Putin needs to be portrayed and perceived as the strong man in Russia in order to not be contested . Putin's foreign policy uses the paradigm of nationalism and xenophobia to get the masses mobilized for a common Russian cause .
 80 percent of Russians believe that the standard of living will decline and the economy deteriorate . 80 percent believe the economy will deteriorate and the standard will decline .
 45 percent attribute the problems to the rise in the price of oil, 33 percent hold the sanctions of the West responsible . Only 23 percent name Russian foreign policy regarding Crimea and Ukraine .
 83 percent of Russians think favorably of President Putin and trust in his foreign policy decisions . Despite increasing challenges to Russia and especially to its economy in the wake of the Crimea annexation, 83 percent think of Putin .
When Leonid Kravchuk declared Ukraine's independence in 1991, nationalists in Russia were questioning the legal grounds of Khr ushchev’s 1954 transfer of Crimea to Ukraine . In 1992, an unsuccessful initiative in the Duma to declare the transfer illegal led to
 A new initiative to denounce the legality of Kh rushchev’s decision is being prepared in the Federal Council, in which Putin enjoys comfortable support . Currently, a new initiative has been launched to denounce Khrushchev's decision .
 In the fall of 2013, just short of the EU summit in Lithuania, the Ukrainian economy was in distress . The Ukrainian economy is in distress.
 The economy had been in recession since 2012 with a declining GDP, leading to an average 0 percent GDP change in 2013 . External debt rose from 76. percent in 2012 to 81 percent in 2013, due to weak demand and limited access to European capital markets .
 Yanukovych’s decision to halt the EU association agreement ignited spontaneous protests of pro-Euro and pro-West factions within the Ukrainian population in the center of Kiev on November 21, 2013 .
 The decision was received with disappointment, anger, and confusion, but encouraged democratic opposition to the decision . The European Council stated in the joint declaration that “the participants of the Vilnius Summit take note of the decision by the Ukrainian Government to suspend temporarily the process of
 The West’s hopes gained traction as the protests centered around the Maidan in Kiev did not lose momentum, but strengthened . The protests turned into violent clashes with riot police .
 The Foreign Ministers of France, Germany, and Poland took the lead in mediating an acceptable solution . The Weimarer Triangle is the name of the triangle between the two countries .
 The beginning of the Olympic Games in Sochi, Russia, on February 9 were paralleled by a calmer situation in Kiev until February 18, when violence again erupted . In the morning of February 20, snipers engaged protesters and eighty-eight people were killed within forty-eight
 The outburst of violence started when Yanukovych tried to push a set of laws through the Ukrainian parliament . The laws would criminalize public demonstrations .
Security and police forces began to withdraw from inner Kiev after parliament adopted a resolution in the wake of the bloody Euromaidan Thursday . The resolution calls for all forces of the Interior Ministry to return to their barracks .
 Yanukovych's forces withdrew completely by surprise . The order was not given by the president .
Proposed government of unity in Ukraine was never set up and constitutional reform would not have been possible in light of early elections . These decisions automatically overturned the truce signed on February21 .
 The Verkhovna Rada voted to appoint fonner parliamentary Speaker Olexander Turchynov as Ukraine’s interim president . Moscow denied the new government any recognition, arguing Victor Yanukovych would be the only legitimate president of Russia .
 The large Russian military exercises virtually covered the back of the emerging opposition movement in eastern and southeastern Ukraine . The exercises gave a clear message to the Ukrainians, whether it was intended or not .
 Crimean regional parliament voted in a closed parliamentary session in the presence of intimidating pro-Russian gunmen . Sergey Aksyonov was appointed as the new Crimean prime minister .
Unidentified armed soldiers blocked the Crimean airports of Simferopol and Sevastopol on February 28 . They seized the main administration buildings on the peninsula .
 The rapidly evolving events in Crimea were paralleled on February 28 by proposals in the Duma to adopt a bill that would facilitate the accession of foreign territories to the Russian Federation after a popular referendum .
Pro-Russian self-defense militias took charge of the whole of Crimea . All over Crimea, anned groups of “Little Green Men’s’.
 NATO, G7 leaders and EU call upon Russia to adhere to UN Charter and 1997 Black Sea basing agreement . Russia is interfering in Crimea on a large scale, NATO and the EU call on Russia to abide by UN Charter .
 On March 6, the EU discussed a sanction regime towards Russia in the context of its involvement in Ukraine . The EU discussed the possibility of a sanctions regime against Russia .
 Crimean government decided to bring forward referendum on Crimea’s status from May 25 to March 16 . The referendum will parallel the Ukrainian presidential elections .
 The failure of German-led mediation between Russia and the West on March 5 at the foreign ministerial level sped up the EU process to agree on sanctions . The new timing for the illegitimate referendum, and the new timing of the referendum, sped up.
 Gennany gave a policy statement to the deputies of the Bundestag on March 13 . She stressed several important key points concerning the situation in Crimea .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine undoubtedly represent a violation of fundamental principles of international law . Russia's actions in the Ukraine undoubtedly represents a violation. of fundamental Principles of International law .
 Crimean population was asked whether they sought an accession to Russia . The Crimean parliament had already endorsed on March 11 . Crimea’s 1992 constitution of autonomy within Ukraine was approved .
 96 percent of the people voted for accession to the Russian Federation, although the results were later called into doubt . More than fifteen thousand Russian soldiers, armed pro-Russian self-defense forces, and armed Cossacks have surrounded all Ukrainian military troops in Crimea .
 Putin addresses accusations of violations of international law in his speech on March 18 . He says Western interventions in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Libya have violated international law .
International law is 'better late than never' while continuing to deny any breach of international law .
 Russia mastered the formal annexation of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol in an Anschluss -like operation . With that, Russia mastered a formal annexation.
 In the first week of April 2014, armed pro-Russian protesters seized government buildings in the Eastern parts of Ukraine . The first week in April 2014 has sparked new fears for separatist threats to Ukraine’s stability after the loss of Crimea .
 Putin made clear how detenned the Russian president was regarding the operation to take over Crimea .
 The West hoped to have calmed the situation in a highly divided Ukraine .
After pro-Russian protests turned violent in eastern and southeastern Ukraine, an initial international paralysis could be observed, even if only briefly .
 Ukraine and Russian leadership deny having an active role in the events in Ukraine . Efforts for consultations and mediation were widely used in an approach to find a solution with Ukraine and Russia .
 The EU and U.S. sanctions were imposed on Russia after the annexation of Crimea . Twenty-one Russian and Ukrainian officials were involved in the violation of Ukraine’s territorial integrity . The United States also acted against high-level Russian politicians .
 The United States and Canada imposed additional sanctions aimed at Russia’s economic leaders . Canada halted any military cooperation with Russia .
 The G7 leaders announced on March 24 that Russian membership would be suspended . The upcoming G8 summit in Sochi, Russia, was called off . The United States added more individuals and companies to the sanction list .
 Joe Kaeser, the chief executive officer of Siemens, met with President Putin on March 26 . He referred to the crisis in Ukraine, the annexation of Crimea, as “short-term turbulences,” to which he would not pay much attention . Kaes
 Only 38 percent of Germans favored economic sanctions, 19 percent favored the suspension of Russia’s G8 membership . Only 40 percent foresaw a stronger role for Germany in addressing Russia .
 Among the dead were one hundred and ninety-six Dutch passengers, given that flight MH17 originated in Amsterdam .
Popular attitude, especially in the Netherlands and Germany, changed dramatically, and calls for tougher sanctions against Russia were voiced .
 Only 40 percent favored a stronger role for Germany after the annexation of Crimea in March . 80 percent of the Germans blamed Russia for the increased violence .
 The exact crash site was within the combat zone between Ukrainian forces and pro-Russian separatists . Recovery operations were severely hampered by the crash site .
 Russia denied any involvement in the incident and explained that Ukrainian fighter jets shot down the airliner . Russia denies any involvement.
 Russia’s obstructing behavior in trying to bring the responsible persons for the slaughter of the passengers to justice and its denial tactics led to additional rounds of sanctions on July 25 and 30 with nations like Australia, Japan, Norway, and Switzerland joining the sanctions against Russia .
Several sanctions were added to the list over the course of 2014, with intensive fighting in eastern Ukraine . They were supposed to remain in place for at least a year before they would be put on the table for reevaluation .
 So far, sanctions have been considered tough; and along with the political blame and continuous demands at the Kremlin’s address to exert its influence towards lasting peace in Ukraine, they show an impact on Russia. So far.
 In Germany, the sanctions are paralleled by the cancellation of Russian-German consultations and the silent support of opposition from the Ostausschuss after the tragedy of MH17 . The sanctions are similar to that of Russia after the MH17 tragedy .
 In 2015, bilateral trade declined by 35 per cent compared with the previous year, according to the Federal Foreign Office .
 A military option was never on the table in the United States or Europe . Gennany ruled out any military engagement early on during the crisis . For a small part to an OSCE mission, which in the end was not executed .
 Putin’s forceful change of borders required an answer by the democracies of the West . Only various possibilities of sanctioning Moscow were available .
 The initial sanctions on Russia were interpreted as “smart’s sanctions, instead of the whole of Russia . The sanctions targeted selected individuals that bore responsibility for the Ukraine crisis and the annexation of Crimea .
This has severe impacts on the economic stability and flow of foreign investments . This has severe impact on the economy. This has serious impact on foreign investments, according to the government .
 German foreign policy caught between interest-led Realpolitik and Russia in terms of economic interdependency . The evolution of sanctions against Russia were well considered by those in power .
 Merkel and Steinmeier had used the same language in public appearances before MH17 disaster . Critics were heard regarding the penalizing approach to Russia .
 Critics of the grand coalition’s approach were found in the party Die Linke and in the ‘Russian-Firster’ sections of the SPD . Matthias Platzeck called for Germany to endorse the annexation as a means of appeasing the Kremlin .
 Reactions from the international community and Germany emerged piece by piece . Reactions could only be reactive to the events as they happened .
 Putin has to decide which course to take to pursue his foreign policy objectives . Russia has enormous currency reserves, despite Russia's huge currency reserves .
 Moscow’s current strategy of power politics is costly for the country, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's current strategy is implemented at the cost of Russia's economic development and international standing, he says .
With their assets frozen, the elites will become more dependent on the Kremlin . With their assets abroad frozen, they will become less dependent on Kremlin .
 The Crimean operations are sufficient proof of the enhanced abilities since 2008 . The massive military exercises in 2014 and the Crimean operations in 2014 are enough proof of their enhanced abilities .
 The high approval rates for Putin show that the annexation of Crimea and the subsequent Russian course of action in eastern Ukraine have led to broad support for Putin’s regime .
 Berlin has long been Russia’s strongest asset in Europe when it came to mediating of diverging interests between the West and Russia . Berlin has been Russia's strongest asset.
Most Western heads of state and government did not take part in the 70th commemoration of the German capitulation (the end of the European part of World War II) Merkel did go to Moscow but denied Putin her attendance at the biggest Russian military parade since 1945 .
 Putin’s power play definitely paid off in the domestic sphere, according to the author . The international sphere has been contaminated by foul rhetoric and, from a Western perspective, broken promises from which Putin cannot back off without losing support .
 In light of the sanctions and the implications for Russia’s economy, short-term and long-tenn consequences loom dark on the horizon . In the light of Russia's economy, Russia's economic woes loomdark on the Horizon .
 The sanctions are “shared pain’s” and because the Western or German economy is also feeling the pain of deteriorating trade relations, it might be a gamble for Putin to count on the Russian tenacity to overcome the sanctions or to wait out .
 After 1949, the Federal Republic of Germany emerged as a nation that oriented itself and lived by the rules and norms of the UN Charter . It integrated itself into the Western European and Atlantic system .
 The FRG included a very large population of displaced Gennans from Central and Eastern Europe . Such fears were prevalent in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The proof of this fact came with the advent of Brandt’s Ostpolitik in the early 1970s and unification in 1990s .
 The significance of taking a rule-based approach for post-reunification in Germany derives from the forty years of national division and the Cold War . Germany's national division is based on the 40-year-old Cold War era .
 Germany was rebuilt in the center of a possible thenno-nuclear battlefield . The reunification was a peaceful reunification, unlike during 1864-1871 .
 Helmut Kohl recognized the Oder-Neisse-border once more to assure Poland . Germany is deeply rooted in the rule of international law .
 Brandt's and Bahr's Ostpolitik reached its goals of reunification in 1990 . Brandt’s and the Bahr’'s OstPolitik was founded in the 1970s .
 Bahr’s account is invoked constantly, and often out of context, which does little good for him or for the present political situation . One would not know it in 2015, though, as Bahr's account was invoked constantly .
 Germany's influence on Russia's domestic development as a power in Europe has been questioned . Germany aspires to partake in identical values as a nation that aspires in similar values . Germany is one of Europe's most powerful countries .
 Gennany felt responsible for supporting this Russian that optimists hoped would cleave to the western orientation of Germany from its Sonderweg after 1945 .
 Russia retained its special status for Germany . Most of the Eastern European states were engaged within the frameworks of NATO and the ENP .
 Russia's approach to Russia was two-fold, as “with the Ostpolitik, the modernization partnership is based on the concept of modernization through interdependence. The approach toRussia was twofold, according to Russia's president .
Germany has evolved as the key leader in approaching Russia in the wake of Germany’s post-2008 emergence as the power at the center . This shock exists for two main reasons, and it is no surprise that Germany has evolved to be a key leader .
 Washington once again realizes that Germany is a key partner in all areas of European policy . This policy comes as Washington realizes it will be a key player in Europe on dealing with Russia .
 Germany’s new role in leadership is a fact in the year 2014-2015 and an uncomfortable and unfamiliar fact for many . Germany has a world of disorder that defies easy rules or a relaxed diplomacy .
 Putin admitted that the military forces in Crimea were directly under Russian control . He overstepped the red line of statecraft in Berlin in March .
 Germany's government under Angela Merkel then reached a point of no return . Germany’s government under Merkel then hit a point.
 Putin’s aggression accompanied by a coordinated mass-persuasion campaign in Russia would have done the years 1915 or 1936 proud, the regime says .
 Moscow did not recognize the new Ukrainian government and argued that the ousting of president Yanukovych was illegal . Also argued that it was dealing with an alleged Nazi junta in Kiev to which they are not bound by any treaty .
 The boldness and speed of events in 2014 caught a West by surprise . The West was surprised by Islamic terrorism and world economic depression .
 Berlin is caught between interest-led Realpolitik and value-base Moralpolitik . With Germany’s current Ostpolitik in disrepair, Berlin is catching up with the current political crisis .
 The crisis in Ukraine shows the strained limitations of this choice between interests and morality in diplomacy . The crisis shows the strain between interests, morality and diplomacy in Ukraine .
 The conflict pushed the limits of these ideals to their world historical edge . The Zeitgeist shifts from peace to conflict to conflict and ultimately crisis .
 The imposed sanctions on Moscow by the western powers are not something that is taken lightly . The pain of the sanctions on Russia is shared by Europeans, foremost by those Germans whose cars are no longer sold to Russians .
 At least three hundred thousand jobs depend on Russian export in a nation where export of high quality goods is the highest national purpose in the face of globalization .
Germany imported mainly gas and oil, 36 percent and 35 percent, respectively, from Russia in 2013 . Germany imported mainly oil and gas, 36% and 35% from Russia .
 Germany has emerged as the key player in negotiating with Putin and has imposed sanctions . Merkel has come to a point where enough is enough, according to the German Chancellor .
 This quiet figure has taken on the mantle of statecraft from earlier times . Gennan national existence of security, peace, and prosperity in a united Europe in a time of peace .
 The Kremlin seems convinced that the confrontational course towards the West is better for ensuring Putin’s dominant position in domestic Russia . Russia's international image as a great and strong power is enhanced by Putin's leadership .
 Wandel durch Annaehrung seems to have fallen from grace . The prospects for a return to the status quo ante bellum are dim in June 2015 .
 The makers of European and Gennan policy are required to try new approaches to Russia . Germany's idealistic Russia policy is not compatible with Putin’s realpolitik, according to the author .
As discussed in Chapter III on the essentials of foreign policy, change can occur on four different levels . Change can occur in four levels.
 Germany under Merkel has changed its approach towards Russia in the wake of the annexation of Crimea and the continuing violence in Crimea .
Post-Georgian War reaction after 2008 returned rather fast to normalcy. Such an explanation could be attributed to the post-Georgians War reaction .
 The current change is more a program change ignited by external shock of a fundamental kind, says the author . The current changes are more a programme change than an external shock, he says .
 It is an earthquake to rattle the already shaken edifice of Europe since the world economic crisis . It's an earthquake. It's not the first to shake Europe's edifice since the financial crisis .
 Program change is inherently a qualitative change involving new instruments, says Herman . Herman says sanctions to pursue an objective are necessary to pursue objective .
 The so-called MH17 tragedy acted as a catalyst for the negative perception of the Ukraine crisis, says Stent, Pond .
 A plane full of Dutch holiday-seekers brutally blasted from the sky in a war zone in Sarajevo in the early 1990s .
 German public support of a tough stance towards Russia rises to 61 percent in support of tough stance . The subsequent public outrage in Europe and the German debate on how to deal with the crisis transformed the perception of the German public .
 Putin showed everyone that Russia is back as a great power on the international stage . The hybrid or irregular warfare annexation of Crimea sent a clear message to the Russian population .
 Germany is once again caught in between the West and Russia, both politically and morally . Germany's most powerful country has existed in a long time, and this time, it's the most powerful .
 Germany is embedded in its western integration, which is being put to an unexpected and bloody test . In a more realistic approach, Germany's western integration is being tested .
 The Russlandversteher has voiced critique over the approach to Russia . Matthias Platzeck has even called for acceptance of the annexation of Crimea in order to appease Moscow and return to normalization .
 The percentage of Germans who are openly anti-American has probably grown since 9/11 . Edward Snowden aspired to be a kind of digital Martin Luther, who will free Germany and all others .
 Gennany has more to lose if relations with Russia are in chaos, he says . One must differentiate between the domestic politics of a German approach to Russia, far from being simply a Russia Firster approach .
 This helps to make sense of the publicly voiced praise of Russia in light of the NSA scandal in the public . This is a sign of the growing significance of the ever-growing significance of NSA scandal .
 Russia Firster approach needs to take into account the high proportion of trade interdependency between Germany and Russia, as compared to the United States, where hardly any real trade relations exist .
 sanctions have tougher consequences for Germany and its economy with the focus on exports amid globalization and a growing Eurasian focus .
 The public opinion towards Russia plunged severely after the MH17 disaster in July 2014 . The public perception of Russia has also experienced significant change, especially after the disaster .
 In August 2014, only 15 percent of Gennans saw in Russia a trustworthy partner, having decreased steadily from nearly 40 percent in December 20 1 0.1 0. 1 . Only 15 percent saw in August 2014.
Russlandversteher and promoters of a Russia First will be less stentorian as long as Russia is reluctant to cooperate with the West within the rule of international law .
 German foreign policy has been successful in pursuing Brandt’s Ostpolitik from 1969 until 1990 .
 The policy has assured the nation's security based on a balanced approach between Westbindung and Eastern Europe . The aim had been the reunification of the Soviet Union .
 Germany exerted its Ostpolitik as a geo-economic power focusing on interests, while hoping that the values would come along as the interests are pursued . Such policy changed in the post-Cold War OstPolitik after Germany had regained its full sovereignty and power in economic terms .
 Germany is intertwined with a political and economic interdependent global system . Germany has well understood that maintaining its strength requires first to help itself by fostering its own interests .
 Germany builds a power base from which it can shape the international order according to German values . Further, Germany can shape its own power base according to its values .
 A constant balancing of interests versus values might require weighing political implications against decisions that potentially cause negative impacts on its power base .
 As the world has become more violent and political culture eschews violence, such policies encounter a growing headwind . As it is called ‘civil values’ such policies face a growing headswind .
 The post-Cold War order that emerged in Europe has been shaped significantly by a united, peaceful, and secure Germany . Germany developed an increasingly considerable weight in foreign policy on its path to nonnalcy in a globalizing world economy and world society .
 With normalization comes responsibility for power, peace, and security, not simply prosperity in the balance of trade . However, with normalization, there is responsibility for peace, peace and security .
 Gennany's politicians have called for Europe to shoulder its burdens at the Munich Security Conference in 2014 . Germany’s defense minister referred to leaderhip from the centre, a phrase that means more in German than it does in English .
German foreign policy is considered a source of domestic political pain for all that must touch such weapons . Armed forces in the classical manner are the last resort, and in Germany, such weapons are a last resort .
 For the last seventy years, Gennany reluctantly armed itself within the Atlantic alliance . The decisive weapons lay in the United States hands .
 Germany has slowly and haltingly participated in military operations of any kind since 1994 . Germany has not participated in any kind of military operations since 1994.
Active military options are not on the table concerning the Ukraine crisis in the narrow sense . Germany needs to take into account the geopolitical and alliance cohesion consequences of Russia’s actions .
 Putin has worked a miracle as concerns classic NATO security goals under Article 3 of mutual aid and self-help . The Russian leader has worked the miracle as well as a miracle .
 The West has to agree on new ways to approach Russia in view of the crisis . Despite the recent change of policy in Gennany, with a surprisingly tough tone and direct language, the West has not been able to reach out to Russia .
 Merkel has retained the unifying momentum for her grand coalition, but also for the European Union . The European Union is on shaky grounds regarding the Greek financial crisis .
 The Gennan Ostausschuss will make sure that the Merkel administration is well aware of the economic costs for Gennany . At the same time the SPD with Sigmar Gabriel tries to distinguish itself from the CDU, and the NSA scandal is increasingly becoming a domestic problem
 Germany in an election campaign mood might discuss any additional changes to the Ukraine crisis in a different way than it has so far . Foreign policy has an internal and an external factor, and the internal factor needs to be monitored .
 Germany’s answer is a new tone in foreign policy, use of tougher instruments, and the fact that Germany stands united in confronting Russia . Gennany, united within the grand coalition and the public will, he says .
 Putin miscalculated if he thought that Germany under Merkel would collapse quickly and would not endure standing up to the Kremlin . However, Germany and the West wrongly assumed that Putin would bend quickly before the sanctions .
 Merkel did not only stand up to Putin's actions in Ukraine, but also re-prioritized strategic objectives of the European security order .
 For Germany, this means that the new strategic security environment with a new political map of Europe requires a new German power . Germany is willing and able to safeguard the European security order .
 Russia feared losing Ukraine from its sphere of influence, something Putin was not ready to accept . Putin was wary of the status-quo.
 The idea of cooperation through trade ran aground, especially because losing a tight grip on society would negatively affect the Kremlin's authoritarian grip to rule the country .
 Putin challenged the post-Cold War security order, and in this regard, Gennan foreign policy is not all about Ukraine .
 The root causes are foremost about the validity of the European security order based on the principles of rule of law and the notion of Westphalian peace . The inviolability of national borders and sovereignty are the root causes of the problem .
 The international perception of Gennan foreign policy as a Russian Firster approach falls short of recognizing the overall context in which Germany conducts its Russia policy .
 Germany had to balance between East and West in order to achieve its objective of peaceful reunification . Later, economic interrelations were the main drivers of post-1990 engagement with Russia and former Soviet republics .
 German foreign policy is not about Russia Firsters but all about the peaceful and prosperous European security order, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: The decision to change the program, as undertaken by Angela Merkel and Frank-Walter Steinmeier, clearly showed that German foreign policies are not about
 The fundamental change of Germany’s approach to Russia is inevitable if German foreign policy is to remain credible and reliable in the eyes of partners .
 Berlin is trying to find the right balance in its approach to Moscow . But it is also inevitable that it will re-engage with Russia in the future .
 Trenin: “a radical, values-first strategy is emotionally satisfying and politically useful in the short tenn, but otherwise it is usually fruitless.’
 A wholly unprincipled value-less approach leads to the moral abyss. By contrast, a wholly un Principledvalue-less Approach leads to a moral abyss, says author .
 Multiple scholars argue that insufficient research capabilities and expertise threaten to constitute a structural change, which could negatively influence future German administrations .
For Gennany, relevance of Russia and the post-Soviet region is of utmost importance in understanding Russia . For GennANY, the relevance of the Russia and post- Soviet region is important .
Germany's Ostpolitik does not allow any of the luxuries of choice that might have been said to exist to opt out or shift burdens . The Westphalian system was in the period from 1990 to 2011 . The annexation of Crimea in 2014 poses a test of Germany's foreign policy
 Germany cannot outsource these security policy decisions because it needs to take a clear stance towards Russia . Germany needs to be clear about its stance on Russia .
 The Baltic States and Poland will expect at least a clear sign of reassurance from Germany . The Baltic states and Poland are expected to expect a good sign from Germany.
 With Russia testing the limits of contemporary European order or challenging them by repetitive action, it must be assumed that other regions might follow .
 The Moldovian region of Transnistria was among the regions named in this regard . For example, the Moldovians region of Moldova was named as one of the regions .
 Expectations regarding Gennany are high because not only do the Eastern neighbors look to Berlin .
 Crimea is still Russian and eastern Ukraine is still a pro-Russian rebel area backed by Russia . The sanctions regime helped significantly to reduce violence, for the moment .
 If the Western sanctions regime towards Russia will hold and Russia's economic decline will continue, then the fear of Russia turning east to China becomes a real alternative from the Russian side .
 Greece and Cyprus are reluctant to impose new sanctions or renew existing sanctions . Another risk is the current crisis in Europe, with Greece being reluctant to imposing new sanctions .
 Germany is obliged to take a leading role in shaping Europe’s future and ensuring continuity in solidarity . Germany has reframe the approach to Russia .
 Currently, Russia shows no sign of backing off from its chosen path, so the sanctions will remain an instrument in the Western approach to Russia . The redefinition of Europe’s and Germany's approach to the Russia is necessary .
 The current Gennan approach, in which Merkel takes a tougher stance towards Russia, is seen as a continuous evolution of traditional Ostpolitik . The current approach is a tougher approach to Russia that is hurting German business interests .
 Berlin accepts responsibility in international affairs, says Berlin . It changed its policy over the annexation of Crimea and continuous violence in eastern Ukraine .
 The Ukraine crisis of 2014 has altered the European security order, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's takeover of Crimea has altered Europe's security order.
 The risk for accidental war has not been higher since 1983, when perceptions arose that the Soviet Union mistook the NATO exercise Able Archer as preparations for a real nuclear war .
 Germany is obliged to use its unique position, not only to avoid accidental war, but to resolve the crisis between Russia and the West .
 In 2016, Germany will become the chair of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe . It could use that position to re-engage with Moscow and foster re-establishment of a European security order .
 Gennany’s Ostpolitik will continue, however, the fundamental program change will ensure that Germany can take over the responsibility, as it is rightly expected to do .
 German Institute for International and Security Affairs and German Marshall Fund of the U.S.
 Ostausschus der Deutschen Wirtschaft is a German-Russian Chamber of Commerce . It is also a committee on Eastern European Economic Relations .