 The four foreign ministers held their first meeting since early last year to revitalise a long ignored truce agreement . Despite high tensions between Western powers and President Vladimir Putin’s Russia.
 Russia and Ukraine had again formally committed to the key tenets of the 2015 Minsk agreement, he said . Germany and France had also agreed to the 2015 deal, he added .
 Lavrov said both sides had discussed a ‘road map’ for a prisoner exchange of people being held by Kyiv and Moscow .
 Paris and Berlin have offered to assist in demining operations . French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian also saw “a positive dynamic for what I hope will be a peaceful solution’
 Moscow favours blue-helmet troops only along the frontline . Kyiv would want them to also police the Ukraine-Russian border to prevent soldiers and weapons from crossing .
 Poland’s president on Thursday asked the UN Security Council to deploy a UN peacekeeping force to Ukraine . Western powers accuse Russia of fomenting the conflict in Ukraine .
 The Ukraine conflict has been half-forgotten by the West amid other crises and divisions . France, Germany and Russia have all been caught up in their own elections over the past year .
 The UN Security Council last week condemned “continuous violations of the ceasefire’s ceasefire” and “the tragic humanitarian situation’ on the frontline .
 UN Security Council condemned ‘continuous violations of the ceasefire’ in Ukraine’s east and called for an immediate withdrawal of heavy weapons .
 Putin and Ukraine's Petro Poroshenko discussed an “exchange of people being held’ by both sides . In a rare phone call Saturday to prepare for the meeting, Putin and Poroshenko discuss an ‘exchange’ of people .
 Hopes of diplomatic breakthrough were always low. But given the deepening distrust between the West and Russia, hopes of a diplomatic breakthrough are always low .
 The conflict began when a popular Ukrainian uprising ousted a Kremlin-backed president in Kyiv . Russia moved to annex the Crimea peninsula, backing insurgents in the former Soviet state .
 Brussels responded to the territorial grab with stinging economic sanctions, with Moscow retaliating in kind . Moscow retaliated in kind, with Brussels responding with sanctions .
 East-West tensions have spiralled to a new post-Cold War low . Since then, east-west tensions have been low .
 The U.S. and European powers have accused Moscow of using hackers and propaganda to sow discord, meddle in elections and back eurosceptics and right-wing populists . Russia has ramped up military posturing to threaten eastern European states .
 Putin was re-elected to a fourth term in March . He has denied all the charges and argued that hostile NATO powers are seeking to demonise and weaken Russia .
 Ukraine's secret service staged the murder of Russian journalist Arkady Babchenko last month . It claimed it did so to foil a Russian plot on his life . Moscow also accused Kyiv of spreading 'bizarre' fake news .
 Russia’s main goal is the lifting of damaging economic sanctions, a push aided by the rise of sympathetic populist parties in the EU, most recently in Italy .
 France and Germany agree that any sanctions relief for Russia must be conditional on advances in the Ukraine peace process . The two countries agree that sanctions relief must be contingent on progress in the peace process.
 Ukraine produces nuclear weapons that had in 1992, and then rise 5 milions of soldiers and liberate Donbass and Crimea . Only solution for Ukraine is that Ukraine produces nuke weapons .