 Russia's annexation of Crimea in February 2014 took Belarus’s president, Alexander Lukashenko, by surprise . The annexation was a surprise for Belarus's president .
 He hesitated between implicit recognition of Russia’s actions and a desire not to damage his relationship with Ukraine, his country's third-largest trading partner .
 A stance of ambiguous neutrality towards the parties to the conflict. And ultimately decided on a stance of neutrality towards the conflict .
 Belarus voted against a UN resolution that made a similar charge, though it stopped short of any sanctions against Russia . But in the same month Belarus vote against a similar resolution that makes a similar charges .
 Lukashenko was a vocal critic of the Maidan protests in Kiev . He attended the inauguration of his successor, Petro Poroshenko in June 2014 .
 Belarus helped Ukraine by granting it credit to buy fuel for its land forces and military support aircraft . Belarus's behaviour at odds with its image as Russia’s strategic ally was criticised .
 Kazakhstan’s president, Nursultan Nazarbayev, has also worked hard to ease the tensions between Russia and Ukraine .
 Kazakhstan depends on Russia for a third of its imports . Kazakhstan would welcome the lifting of western sanctions against its neighbour .
 Russia’s counter-sanctions on the West, imposed without consulting the other members of the Eurasian Economic Union, have also hurt the Kazakh economy . Russia's counter- Sanctions on West have hurt the Kazakhstan economy .
 Ukraine has to send goods to Kazakhstan via Belarus, rather than directly through the Russian Caucasus, since January 2016 . The obligation on Ukraine has been particularly troublesome .
 Kazakhs have responded to Russia’s unilateralism by strengthening their cooperation with Ukraine . The Kazakhs responded to the Russian unilateralism.
 In October 2015 Poroshenko visited Astana to sign an economic agreement . Both countries agreed to reassert their commitment to respecting sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 The Syrian conflict has enabled Nazarbayev to attract attention to his country, which rarely features in the news . The conflict has allowed him to focus on his country.
 In May, Astana played host for the third time since January to peace talks intended to consolidate the ceasefire between rebel forces and the Assad government .
 The presence at the table of delegates from Turkey and Russia was due to Nazarbayev's peacemaking efforts with Turkey’s President Erdoğan and Vladimir Putin, following the rift caused by Turkey's shooting down of a Russian bomber on the Turkish-Syrian border.
 Nazarbayev was the first head of state to visit his ‘brother Erdoğan’ after the attempted coup in Turkey in July 2016 . He was first to visit the Kazakhs, a reference to the fact they are a Turkic people .
 He made the visit in spite of the instruction he received to close 33 Kazakho-Turkish high schools . The schools are part of Fethullah Gülen’s Hizmet movement, accused of responsibility for the failed coup .
 On 5 December 1994, Russia, the United States and the UK undertook to guarantee Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 Ukraine agreed to honour the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and to transfer the arsenal it inherited following the break-up of USSR to Russia .