 Vyshinsky appealed to President Putin to grant him legal protection and take measures regarding his release . He was released from prison on Sunday .
 Chief of the Russian RIA Novosti's Kyiv office Kirill Vyshinsky had been detained May 15 on high treason charges . He announced renunciation of Ukrainian citizenship during court hearing of his case .
 I declare my withdrawal from Ukrainian citizenship, and from this moment I consider myself a citizen of the Russian Federation only .
 "I appeal to President Putin to grant me legal protection and take measures," Vyshinsky said . Hromadske reported from the Court of Appeal in Kherson .
 The SBU operatives had conducted raids in the office of RIA Novosti Ukraine in Kyiv, the press secretary of the Ukrainian SBU Security Service's chief, Olena Gitlianska said .
 Vyshinsky was detained on high treason charges. Later came the reports that he had been detained on treason charges .
 The SBU and prosecutors had uncovered the illegal activity of the Russian-controlled media network in Ukraine . The SBu and prosecutors found the illegal activities .
 RIA Novosti's Kyiv office indicted on charges of treason . Vyshinsky produced anti-Ukrainian materials and received medal from Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Vyshinsky and several other journalists started actively supporting terrorist organizations in Donbas, the ""DPR" and the ""LPR" after his return from Crimea in 2014 .
 Vyshinsky has been paid EUR 53,000 every month for discrediting the Armed Forces of Ukraine . The deputy head of the SBU Security Service of Ukraine said he was paid £53,000 a month .
"According to our data, the financing exceeds EUR 100,000 per month," Kononenko said . "Our data, our data," he said .
 Vyshinsky's lawyer said on May 16 his client had been transferred by Ukrainian law enforcers from Kyiv to Kherson for hearings on a preventive measure . Sushchenko's lawyer says his client was transferred by Ukraine law en for hearings.
 The Kherson City Court in Ukraine's south ruled on May 17 that Vyshinsky be arrested until July 13 pending investigation of the charges against him . The court also ruled that he will be arrested on July 13 .