 This, of course, has been met with derision by Russia and heaping helpings of it . This, however, has not been met by Russia .
 The S-125/SA-3 Goa missile being repurposed as an Anti-Ship Missile is a significant leap in capability for Ukraine .
On April 18, 1988, during Operation Praying Mantis, the frigate USS Simpson fired four RIM-66 Standard missiles at Joshan, an Iranian Kaman-class missile boat . The cruiser USS Wainwright fired two R IM-67 Standard missiles and the cruiser USS
 The attacks destroyed the Iranian ship’s superstructure but did not sink it . Iranian ship's superstructure was destroyed.
 An obliterated superstructure not sinking sounds like a solid hole in the water to me . An obliteration of a superstructure is not sinking. It's not sinking, it's just a hole in water .
 Russia produces a tirade of nonsense, invective, and indulges in repeat saber-rattling and Wunderwaffe propaganda . Russia produces the tirade.
 The ‘firehose’ barrage against Ukraine continues, now expanded by claims Ukraine is preparing to attack the Russian puppet states in Donbas . The “Firehose barrage’s” barrage continues.
 Gen Muzhenko briefs Reuters on Russian buildup in Ukraine . He says ‘In front of us is an aggressor who has no legal, moral or any other limits’
 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and other NATO foreign ministers accused Russia of not being in compliance with the Cold War-era intermediate-range nuclear missile treaty .
 The United States will stop adhering to a decades-old nuclear treaty in 60 days unless Russia returns to compliance with the agreement . The U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced Tuesday that Russia will not comply with the treaty .
 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced Tuesday that the United States is prepared to withdraw from a crucial weapons treaty signed by the world’s two greatest nuclear powers .
 NATO foreign ministers have met in Brussels for the first time .
 Tension between Russia and Ukraine was high on their agenda following Russia’s seizure of three Ukrainian naval vessels and the detention of their crew last month .
 The future of an important arms control treaty has limited the deployment of nuclear missiles in Europe . Also on the agenda was the future of a major weapons control treaty .
 U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo says the United States will withdraw from a milestone Cold War-era nuclear treaty unless Russia returns to compliance .
 Pompeo said the United States will abandon treaties and multilateral institutions that are not bolstering U.S. national security and sovereign interests . Pompeo: The United States won't abandon treaties, multilateral organizations .
 VOA’s Diplomatic Correspondent Cindy Saine reports from the State Department .
In Reykjavik, Iceland, they agreed on the parameters of future treaties on the elimination of intermediate-range nuclear forces, or INF, and the reduction of strategic nuclear arms .
 In 1987, the first of these treaties was signed in Washington . A year after that, in 1987, they were signed . The treaties were signed in 1987 .
 The elimination of the entire class of nuclear missiles opened the way to a process of real nuclear disarmament . The end of the nuclear weapons is the first step in the process of a real disarmament.
 The INF Treaty and subsequent treaties reducing strategic nuclear arms established an innovative system of verification, inspections, data exchange and mutual consultations to ensure that each side is faithfully adhering to the treaty limits .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry is denying U.S. and NATO allegations that Russia is violating a landmark nuclear ban . The nuclear ban banned an entire class of weapons .
 NATO foreign ministers agreed with Washington’s assertion that a new Russian missile system violates the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty signed by President Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev .
 Russia has repeatedly denied the U.S. claims, insisting the SSC8 missile system at the core of the allegations does not exceed ranges stipulated by the treaty . Russia has denied the United States claims .
 The U.S. ultimatum on the INF treaty is part and parcel of what Washington throws at Russia, former diplomat Jim Jatras says . It is not constructive, he says . The United States is also trying to meddle in elections, he adds .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has warned that Moscow will follow suit if Washington pulls out of the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty .
 Putin spoke on December 5, a day after U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said that Washington would abandon the INF Treaty unless Moscow returns to compliance with the accord within 60 days .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says Russia would be forced to respond if the U.S. exits the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces arms control treaty .
 Vladimir Putin’s official spokesman says U.S. pulls out of a key nuclear deal . EUROPE is in the crosshairs of Russian missiles in a grim re-run of the Seventies arms race .
 VLADIMIR Putin has a hypersonic missile system that “cannot be intercepted at his disposal’s disposal, a Russian general has warned .
 Russia will target countries hosting U.S. missiles if Washington goes ahead with plans to pull out of a landmark Cold War arms treaty . General Staff chief Valery Gerasimov says Russia is targeting countries hosting United States missiles .
 Kiev is deploying major offensive components to Donbass, Russian Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova has stated . Reports about preparations by Ukrainian Armed Forces for military actions emerging .
 The Russian President Vladimir Putin explained why he did not answer the calls of the President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko .
 The Russian Navy has deployed its newest large patrol ship Dmitry Rogachev to Sevastopol in annexed Crimea . The ship is the Russian Navy's newest large Patrol ship .
 Dmitry Rogachev has made its first-ever visit to Sevastopol for state trials . The new patrol ship is the newest patrol ship in the Russian Federation .
 Dmitry Rogachev will sail to Novorossiysk to perform further stages of trials . He will also perform further trials at the same time .
 crew had successfully trained first artillery fire drills in zone of Black Sea Fleet . Earlier the crew had trained first fire drills.
 It trained navigation at the maximum angles of rotation and ascent by simulators of marine, coastal and air targets . It also trained navigation by simulates of marine and coastal targets .
 The ship Dmitry Rogachevare primarily intended for duties such as patrol, monitoring and protection in open and closed seas .
 Russia’s Black Sea Fleet has fully renewed its submarines and coastal defense missile systems . New Bal and Bastion complexes are protecting the entire Black Sea area .
 The Black Sea Fleet has received three frigates, small missile and other ships that are performing their missions in the Black and Mediterranean Seas . Also, the Black Sea fleet has received two frigates and a small missile .
New aircraft are arriving for naval aviation, for example, Sukhoi Su-30SM fighter jets . New aircraft are being brought in from Russia .
 Slovakia expelled a Russian diplomat after information from military intelligence showed he engaged in espionage activities in the NATO and European Union member country, Prime Minister Peter Pellegrini said .
 Russia attacked and seized three Ukrainian gunboats and their crew while they were attempting to transit into the Sea of Azov through the Kerch Strait . On November 25, Russia seized the Ukrainian gunboat and crew .
 Ukraine claims it signalled renewed Russian aggression and pleaded with NATO to confront Russia . The move caused a wave of international condemnation .
 The Maidan revolution sparked back in 2014 . It is just the latest iteration of the Russian-Ukrainian military and political confrontation .
 In March that year, Russia occupied the Crimean Peninsula and used hybrid forces to start a civil conflict in Eastern Ukraine .
 The Kerch Strait separates Russia proper from Russian-controlled Crimea . It connects the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov .
 In the aftermath of the annexation, Russia built a bridge across the strait, which Ukraine never agreed to . Russia built the bridge after the annexation .
 The Sea of Azov is regulated by a treaty signed in 2003 between Ukraine and Russia . The treaty gives free access to vessels from both countries .
 Russia has been impeding traffic of commercial vessels bound for the Ukrainian port of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov . It has virtually imposed a blockade on it after last week's incident .
 Ukraine and Russia have been accused of corruption in the past . It is important to make a number of points clear after the exchange of accusations .
 Russian Ministry of Defense has prevented sale of new Bal-E coastal missile systems to Azerbaijan, reports say .
 Russia will not sell the Bal-E coastal missile system to Azerbaijan . The risks it may present to the ships of the Caspian flotilla located in Russian territorial waters .
 The Russian Ministry of Defense says supply in the department was considered inexpedient . The newspaper, referring to its own sources, explains that the reason for the disruption of supply lies with the position of the ministry .
 The Republic of Azerbaijan has expressed its intention to procure “Bal-E coastal missile system from Russia. As also previously reported, Azerbaijan has also expressed its plans to procure the system .
 Azerbaijan has been eyeing this missile system for a long time because of its need to protect its coastal zone of the Caspian Sea .
 Bal-E is the export version of the BAL missile complex in service with the coastal missile unit of the Russian Navy Caspian Flotilla . The BAL-E missile complex is a Russian missile unit .
 The system is used to guard straits and territorial waters, to protect offshore sea lines, naval bases, coastal infrastructure, and coastal infrastructure . It is also used to defend the coast at amphibious landing threats within the missile launch range .
 The United States and European Union can extend sanctions against Russia due to the seizure of Ukrainian sailors and ships . The U.S. and EU can extend the sanctions.
 U.S. Special Envoy to Ukraine made such statement as Interfax reported . Kurt Volker, the United States Special En envoy to Ukraine, made the statement .
 He urges Russia to release captured Ukrainians sailors and ships as a gesture of goodwill before the holidays . He also urged Russia to released captured Ukrainians and ships .
 Russia should resort to de-escalation and return sailors, he claimed .
 There is no consensus within the European Union about the introduction of new sanctions against the Russian Federation over the seizure of three Ukrainian boats and capture of 24 Ukrainian navy sailors in the Kerch Strait on November 25 .
 EU continues to discuss new sanctions in connection with illegal “elections’ held in Russian-occupied Donbas on November 11 .
 Ukraine's first Deputy Speaker of the Ukrainian Parliament and Ukraine's envoy to the Trilateral Contact Group’s humanitarian subgroup . George Kent and Iryna Gerashchenko have discussed the issue of freeing prisoners of war and political prisoners in Russia .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg says the organization recognizes Ukraine’s aspirations to become member of the Alliance .
 The International Court will consider the attack on Ukrainian sailors as the episode of the aggressive war that Russia wages against Ukraine – not the separate case .
 Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko added that the Ukrainian law enforcement agencies already prepared a presentation of collected evidence . The evidence confirms the fact of military aggression of the Russian Navy against the Ukrainian ships .
 Dmitry Peskov, the Russian President made such statement answering the question on the location of the Ukrainian artillery boats “Berdyansk” and “Nikopol” in occupied Kerch as UNIAN reported .
 It is, rather, the prerogative of the investigative bodies, which hold the investigation and charge . You need to appeal to them to get to know it .
 "As far as we know, these boats are the physical evidence and they are relevant to the investigated case," Peskov said .
 Three Ukrainian ships were on their way from Odesa to Mariupol to join the newly created Ukrainian naval base in the Sea of Azov .
 Russian naval vessels and aviation opened fire and wounded three Ukrainian servicemen . Three Ukrainian servicmen were wounded .
 Currently, 24 Ukrainian sailors face charges with ‘illegal border crossing’ as they stay in detention centers in Moscow .
 Angela Merkel's intention to step down from the position of leader of Germany’s Christian Democratic Union party . The move threatens to cause trouble for Russia .
 Merkel’s most likely successor as head of the ruling CDU, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, has criticized Russia for exacerbating the conflict with Ukraine . He has identified the Nord Stream 2 project as a possible target of response measures .
 Berlin may reduce the planned amount of gas transit through the pipeline, Kramp-Karrenbauer says . Refusing to support the project at all would be “too radical,’ he says . The project would be "too radical"
 Germany must react to growing political fears surrounding Nord Stream 2 . Gazprom’s third attempt to build a pipe that bypasses Ukraine . Kramp-Karrenbauer is leading in the battle for CDU leadership .
 Russia has taken a stricter stance with respect to Russia’s actions, including its annexation of Crimea and support of the rebels in eastern Ukraine .
 Kramp-Karrenbauer proposed another package of radical measures in response to Moscow’s refusal to release the detained Ukrainian sailors .
 Europe and Germany in particular will “take on great responsibility’ in matters of security and foreign policy, she said . Germany and Europe will ‘take ongreat responsibility,’ she emphasized .
 The EU is considering the possibility of imposing sanctions on Russia for the Kerch incident . The EU has not yet decided on whether to impose sanctions .
 The sides discussed the situation in Ukraine, first of all, and the latest events in the Kerch area strait .
 For her part, Tymoshenko thanked the United States for the help and support . For herPart, Tyloshenko thanked her for her part .
 She called for tougher sanctions against the aggressor country and assistance to Ukraine’s Naval Forces .
 He stressed that the U.S. will continue to support the open door policy of NATO for the Ukrainian state .
 NATO is beefing up its troop deployments across eastern Europe amid fears Russia’s “destabilising’ behaviour in the Black Sea could spark open conflict with Ukraine .
 Soviet-born oligarch Len Blavatnik is in business with two Russians under U.S. sanctions .
 Facebook was down or unreachable for vast numbers of users on Tuesday, Dec 5 .
 Vladimir Putin is perfectly prepared to go to war to ensure that Ukrainian Orthodoxy does not gain autocephaly . Once its status is recognized by others, the Kremlin leader's imperial pretensions will suffer a defeat .
 Ukraine cannot be independent of Russia in any fundamental way. That is because for Putin and those who support him, Ukraine can't be independent. That's because of Putin and his supporters .
 For Putinists, Ukraine is not a state, Ukrainians are not a nation, and Russia must dominate and include them all . For Putinist, Ukraine isn't a state. Ukraine is a nation. Russia must dominated and include all of them .
 The Kremlin leader and his propagandists have regularly insisted on those false propositions .
 The other cause is the problematic geographic position of Crimea, which Putin seized and annexed in 2014 .
 Crimea will remain a constant source of tensions which will give rise to ever new conflict situations, says the Kremlin leader . But the annexation of Crimea will still remain a source of tension .
 He has shown himself prepared to ignore all the existing rules of the game . He must continue to do so, even if the consequences become more serious .
 It is not something that is achieved once and for all, but rather something that requires ever more aggression and ever more violation of international norms and laws, commentator says .
 Skobov suggests that many leaders in the West have not yet been willing to face up to. That has consequences for many leaders, he says .
 Politeness and appeals are not going to be enough to prompt Putin to change, says Putin .
 Nothing short of that will prevent Putin from behaving worse and worse and thus threatening the world more and more . Putin's actions will not stop him from acting more and worse .
 Ukraine seeks international backing for its Black Sea standoff with Russia . Members of the alliance avoid taking military steps that will further escalate tension in the region .
 It is possible to draw a number of strategic conclusions based on this growing list of cooperative initiatives . It is also possible to find out more about cooperative initiatives in the future .
 Ukrainian military-technical cooperation may help speed up the transformation of the Ukrainian Armed Forces . It could help bring them closer to NATO standards.
 Turkey is drawing on Ukraine’s own intellectual and technical resources, including tank engine and aircraft design and construction . Turkey has also drawn on Ukraine's own intellectual, technical resources .
 Kyiv has its own practical reasons to want to work with Ukraine than it is for Kyiv to collaborate with many Western partners . It is easier forKyiv to cooperate with a partner that has a practical reason to do so .
 Turkey and Ukraine’s close cooperation is driven by a national security interest to counterbalance Russia in the Black Sea region . Turkey's close cooperation has been driven by national security interests in the region .
 Russia's latest provocative actions regarding the Sea of Azov are likely to further spur Turkey and Ukraine’s developing military strategic partnership . Turkey and the Ukraine are developing military partnership .
 It of course remains to be seen how far either side will push this cooperation .
 Russia's development in the military, political and economic spheres could contribute to preventing further Russian expansion and effectively deter it . But its further development in military and political spheres could also contribute to prevent further expansion and deter it.
 The West is in the West’s collective interest to see this strategic military partnership between Kyiv and Ankara expand and flourish .
 Western and Ukrainian responses to these events have often revealed confusion about the legal status of the Azov Sea and Kerch Strait . Western and Ukraine responses to the events have also revealed confusion over the status of these events .
 The U.S. and Russia have a high degree of probability of nuclear war, a foreign policy specialist says . The warning is intended to keep the United States from responding to Russian aggression, he says .
 At the beginning of the Cold War, the two leaderships engaged in several “tests of strength,” Arbatov says . After the Caribbean missile crisis in 1962, they became “much more careful and began to respect one another as worthy opponents,’
 The military leaders of the two countries now “do not respect each other,’ despite the obvious reasons to do so .
 The U.S. military says such a conflict would have completely unacceptable consequences . Instead, they calmly talk “about the possibility of war and even of nuclear war,” despite the certainty .
 World War II generation passed from the scene, so too has the one that was at the center of the Cold War . Not only has the World War 2 generation passed out, so has the ones that did .
 Arbatov: "It sometimes seems that the present-day leaders of the great powers and their advisors consider themselves to be the first people on this earth as if no one lived before them"
 People around are focused on all kinds of things other than the threat of a new war . There is less pressure on them to learn quickly because people around are focus on all sorts of things .
 At one level, Arbatov’s argument is compelling, but at another, there is a problem, he says . At another, he argues.
 Putin and his entourage in the Kremlin constantly talk about a conflagration . His words are far more likely to be accepted by political elites in the West which do not want war .
Arbatov: West should not stand up to Putin's aggression because that could lead to a nuclear war . He says that is very effective in the West but one that does nothing to prevent the Kremlin leader from continuing his assault on the international order .
 General Viktor Muzhenko gestured to a series of satellite images which he said showed the presence of Russian T-62 M tanks stationed 18 km from the Ukrainian border .
 Kyiv’s leadership fears may be a precursor to a full-scale invasion . He believes this is evidence of a concerted build-up of Russian forces .
 Russia has no legal, moral or any other limits, the Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine said . Russia has been accused of having no legal or moral limits .
 It is very difficult to predict when it will occur to him to begin active combat actions against Ukraine, Muzhenko said .
 Ukraine was also expecting help from allies, mostly the U.S. for equipment including air and naval reconnaissance, boats and weapons for ground troops . Ukraine is also expecting assistance from allies including the United States, he said .
 Ukraine expects to complete the building of a military base on the Azov Sea by next year . The building had been planned before the navy clash .
 Russia has been ramping up its forces near the border with Ukraine since August . It now poses the greatest military threat since 2014, the commander of Ukraine’s armed forces says .
 Ukraine is concerned about the dangerous escalation near in the Azov and Black Sea and along the border with Russia . Ukraine is also concerned about a possible escalation near the Black Sea .
 Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Viktor Muzhenko said at the TV program on the ICTV channel that Russia increases the number of soldiers and military equipment near the border with Ukraine .
 Viktor Muzhenko: "We consider not just one direction – Luhansk and Donetsk regions – but the northeastern, eastern and southern borders of Ukraine as well"
 He spoke about the creation of the Russian division consisting of two tanks and two motorized rifled regiments . He also spoke about creation of a Russian division of two tankers and motorized regiments.
 The division is being created not for defensive actions, but for attacking, the Head of the General Staff noted .
 The 8th combined-arms army deployed in Novocherkassk. According to him, this division is part of the 8th Combined-army army .
 The Russian Federation has “almost doubled the number of its ships in the Sea of Azov’s waters . He also said that the Russian Federation had ‘almost doubled’ the number in the sea .
 Russian border ships committed the acts of aggression against three Ukrainian ships heading from the port of Odesa to Mariupol . As reported, on November 25, Russian border vessels committed the act of aggression.
 The Russian special forces fired and seized three Ukrainian ships in the Kerch Strait . 24 sailors were aboard the Ukrainian ships .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted a law approving the decree of the President of Ukraine on the imposition of the martial law for 30 days in 10 regions of Ukraine in connection with the aggression of Russia .
 General Viktor Muzhenko gestured to a series of satellite images which he said showed the presence of Russian T-62 M tanks stationed 18 kilometers from the Ukrainian border .
 Russia fired on and captured three Ukrainian vessels at the Kerch Strait . Muzhenko says this is evidence of a concerted build-up of Russian forces in the run-up to Nov.
 Kremlin spokesman dismissed notion that Russia wanted to forcibly take over Ukrainian ports . Kremlin spokesman on Monday dismissed notion as "absurd"
 Petro Poroshenko met with Ivano-Frankivsk students on Tuesday to discuss anti-Ukrainian propaganda campaign . Russia uses methods similar to those of Nazi propaganda mastermind Joseph Goebbels .
 President Petro Poroshenko emphasizes that Ukraine, as well as the whole world, is facing mass propaganda and distribution of fake information . Russia has been exploiting in its hybrid war against Ukraine, he says .
 Everyone talks about Russia’s interference in the United States elections .
 Everyone talks about Russia’s interference in the referendum in the Netherlands .
 The president's press service says Russia's interference in the UK is a problem . He also says Russia is trying to influence the U.S. government in the EU .
To Russia, any systems based on western values are like a bur in the throat . To Russia, all systems are based on Western values are similar .
 We are now united to confront a unique misinformation policy. That is why we are nowunited to confront the misinformation policy .
 When democratic standards are used to ruin democracy, the president says .
 Ukraine’s security agency said it has thwarted a massive cyberattack . It blamed Russia for the attempted attack that targeted the country's court system . The cyberattack was thwarted by Ukraine's security agency .
Security service of Ukraine successfully blocked an attempt by Russian intelligence to carry out a large-scale cyberattack on information and telecommunication systems .
 Compromised e-mails, infected with malware, had been sent to computers in various bodies of the country’s judiciary system .
Head of the Ukrainian Border Guard Service Petro Tsygykal has asked border agencies of neighboring countries in the west to beef up security .
 Tsygykal stressed that citizens of Russia or other countries who work for Russian special services may come from European countries . TsyGYkal said citizens of Russian special service workers may be from Europe .
 Voting for this document is a domestic procedure required to cease the treaty . Vasyl Bondar, Deputy Foreign Minister, stated that voting for the document is an international procedure .
 As all of these court procedures required so that the international court can consider our lawsuit are completed, it does not have any value as earlier, Bondar said . "As all of this court procedures needed, it doesn't have anyvalue as earlier," he said .
 Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko intends to send letters to the President of Ukraine and National Security and Defense Council with a proposal to introduce sanctions against certain legal entities and individuals of the Russian Federation for armed aggression against the Ukrainian Navy and Armed Forces .
 The NSDC is freezing assets on the territory of Ukraine . Lutsenko says it is necessary for the NSDC to consider this issue .
 freezing of assets should continue till the de-occupation of Ukrainian territories, says Prosecutor General .
 Ukraine informed the Russian port of its intention to transfer three ships through the Kerch Strait . The move is required by the Agreement on the joint use of the Azov Sea and Kerch strait .
 Russian ships carried out acts of provocation against Ukrainian vessels . Russian ships even ramming into the Yany Kapu tugboat .
 The Ukrainian ships decided to return to Odessa, but they were chased and attacked by the Russian military . The ships were returned to the Ukrainian coast .
 The Berdiansk and Nikopol boats were hit, and two crew members were wounded . Two crew members are wounded .
 Kremlin-controlled court of Simferopol placed Ukrainian sailors under 2 months of arrest – until January 25, 2019 . On November 28, the court placed the Ukrainian sailors in custody .
 Ukrainian side plans to serve notice of suspicion to more than 10 Russian servicemen involved in aggression against the Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine .
 17 volumes of evidence of the Russian Federation’s aggression against the Naval Forces of the Ukrainian Armed Forces were collected .
 Shipments from the Azov Sea have resumed after Russia decided to partially unblock two critical Ukrainian ports . The procedural management in criminal proceedings is carried out by the Military Prosecutor's Office of the Southern Region of Ukraine .
Tensions remain high between the two countries . Experts worry about the upcoming elections in Ukraine .
 Russia is mastering the forms and techniques of hybrid warfare at sea in the region of the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov .
 Ukraine Navy Commander Vice Admiral Ihor Voronchenko says Russia has resettled over 105,000 Russian citizens to Crimea since the Russian occupation of the peninsula in March 2014 .
 Ukrainian official insists Russian President Vladimir Putin's ultimate goal is to create a military base in Crimea . The Ukrainian official says that Putin’s ultimate goal was to create the base .
 Families living in two villages along the Ukraine-Russia border have been separated by a barbed-wire fence .
 Ukraine’s representative in the TCG Yevhen Marchuk said this&nbsp;live&nsp;live &nbsp. TV channel, an Ukrinform correspondent reported . The channel is a Ukrainian TV channel .
 Both the balaclava and maskirovka serve a definitive military purpose in Eastern Europe . Both the Balaclava, masks and masks are used in the Eastern Europe.
 Russia has spent decades perfecting this doctrine and is arguably the world’s most proficient actor of military deception . Russia is the world's most proficient player of deception .
 For Myhalych, wearing a ski mask is just as essential as wearing combat boots and keeping his weapon clean . For MyHalych.
 The National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine has announced that it successfully tested a land-based cruise missile and upgraded S-125 missile system on 5 December .
 The tests of Ukrainian missiles proved that Ukraine is capable of defending its borders in the Black and Azov Seas .
 The tests were completed at the military proving ground in the Odesa region . This was stated by Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council .
 A successful flight test of Ukrainian cruise missiles was carried out . The coast defense system was worked out with the help of the modernized S-125 missile system .
 Mr Turchynov reported that aviation was involved in checking the results of hitting long-range targets and that a special point on the Snake Island was equipped .
 S-125 missile systems had undergone a deep modernization at the enterprises of the Ukrainian defense industry . Mr Turchynov said that to strengthen coastal defense, the accuracy and reliability of hitting the conditional opponent’s watercraft was checked .
Modernized systems are capable of providing reliable protection against aggression from the air and from the sea . This is a very good result, says Mr Turchynov .
 NSDC Secretary held a meeting with leading developers of missile equipment and military leadership to determine the priority areas for strengthening defense of the Black Sea-Azov region .
 The meeting took place in a new command-and-staff mobile special telecommunication complex . The complex was involved in coordinating missile firing .
 The check on the range and accuracy of defeating the surface targets of Ukrainian cruise missiles from the new coastal anti-ship complex Neptune .
 Turchynov said that in order to check the results of hitting targets at a long range, aviation was involved . A special unit on Snake Island was equipped with a special unit .
 Neptune, the new anti-ship missile, was successfully tested in Odesa region, southern Ukraine .
 The defense minister stated this after the field probes held on Wednesday, December 5 .
 At this particular stage, the tasks were completed, Poltorak said . There’s even an opportunity to boost the current combat capacity ‘’.
 The military tested an upgraded version of the S-125, the surface-to-air missile system .
 The missile fired from it can hit sea-based targets, too . The missile can be fired from the sea, too.
 The firing test of Ukrainian missiles proved that Ukraine is capable of defending its borders in the Black and Azov Seas . The test showed that Ukraine can defend its borders.
Odesa region-based military proving ground. This was said by Secretary of the National Security and Defense Council of Ukraine .
 Ukraine-made cruise missiles successfully passed flight test while the coast defense was ensured by the upgraded S-125 missile system .
 Turchynov reported that aviation was involved in checking the results of a missile strike on remote targets . A special observation point was constructed on Zmiinyi Island, Russia .
 Turchynov said that in order to strengthen coastal defense, the accuracy and reliability of the S-125 missile system was checked during a strike on a conditional hostile watercraft .
Eight launches were made and eight surface targets were destroyed . A total of eight launches were launched . Eight surface targets are destroyed .
 The upgraded systems are capable of providing reliable protection against aggression from the air and from the sea, says Turchynov . This is an outstanding result, he says .
 The NSDC Secretary held a meeting with the leading missile developers and the military leadership to determine priorities in strengthening the defense of the Black Sea and Azov Sea regions .
 The meeting took place in a new command-and-control center . It was involved in adjusting missile fire .
 Tests of Ukrainian missiles have proved that Ukraine is capable of defending its borders in the Black and Azov Seas . The tests have proved Ukraine can defend its borders.
 The minister insists that the protection of minority rights is inseparable from security issues .
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin says Kyiv will firmly defend its interests in the row with Hungary . He said Kyiv is doing everything to help the Hungarian community in Ukraine .
 Klimkin will hold a meeting with his Hungarian counterpart Peter Szijjarto at the OSCE ministerial summit in Milan . The meeting will take place in the city of Milan .
 Tamara Tarnavska opened the first animal shelter of its kind in Ukraine in 1997 . The shelter was the first in Ukraine to open its own animal shelter .