Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has ordered the creation of a body to prepare a lawsuit against Russia for damages caused by separatists . Moscow supports in the Donbass region and for its illegal annexation of Crimea Peninsula .
 The fighting in eastern Ukraine has destroyed much of the region's infrastrucure. The fighting has destroyed many of the country's infrastructure .
 Poroshenko said he asked his cabinet to take steps for the "speedy creation" of an interagency coordinating body based on the law of reintegration adopted by Kiev in January .
 Moscow's takeover of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula and its military, political, and economic support for separatists in eastern Ukraine prompted the United States, the European Union, and others to impose sanctions on Russia .
 More than 11,000 people have been killed since April 2014 in the conflict between Ukrainian forces and the Russia-backed separatists in the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Ukraine and the European Union condemned Russia’s seizure of Crimea and its backing of separatists . At a summit earlier this month, the EU and Ukraine agreed on the need for reforms in Kiev .
 On July 31, the EU expanded its sanctions against Moscow to include companies that helped build a bridge from Russia to Crimea . The EU expanded the sanctions on July 31 to include firms that help build the bridge .
 It is not known how effective such a suit against Russia would be or whether Moscow would even acknowledge it .
 Kiev in the past has filed cases against Moscow with various international bodies with little success . Kiev has been accused of trying to silence the Russian capital of Moscow .
 Ukraine filed a case against Russia with the Court of Justice, the highest United Nations court . In January 2017, Ukraine filed the case with the court.
 Poroshenko is trying to show the public how he is fighting for Ukraine, before the elections . He hasn't done anything, but he's trying to prove that he has done anything .
 Germany threw Putin a lifeline regarding gas and oil . In the end, Russia is ts own worst enemy, Germany says .