 NATO is holding its second summit since the Ukraine-Russia crisis . On July 8-9th 2016, NATO will meet in Moscow for the first time since the crisis .
 In September 2014 a ‘crisis summit’ took place a few months after Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the invasion of Ukraine . The summit took place in Newport, Wales in September 2014 .
 NATO was given breathing space to re-energise and formulate new strategies to counter Russian revanchism . In my opinion, NATO was giving breathing space for new strategies .
 Ukrainian soldiers, volunteers, civil society activists and ‘ultra’ football fans helped defeat Russian President Putin’s ‘New Russia’ project in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 NATO would have to cope with a far more expansionist and victorious Russia if Ukraine had disintegrated with large areas of the country being annexed or becoming satellite enclaves of Russia .
Donald Trump has derided NATO and talked of the United States withdrawing . Hillary Clinton is a committed supporter of NATO, but Trump has talked of withdrawing .
 Only five of NATO’s 28 members spent the proposed two or more per cent of GDP on defence . Thirdly, until 2015, only five of the 28 members of NATO's 28 members spend the proposed 2 or more% of GDP .
 Ukraine spends five per cent of its GDP, more than any NATO member . This is from a smaller GDP and with losses from high levels of corruption tolerated by the authorities .
 The Wales and Warsaw summits will seek to deter and contain Russia . Russia is widely viewed to be revanchist .
 First, although critical of Putin’s policies in eastern Ukraine, Russian democrats support his annexation of Crimea . First, however, they are critical of his policies in east Ukraine .
 Second, democrats have no possibilities of coming to power in the near future in Russia . Second, Democrats have no possibility of coming into power in near future.
 Four battalions with 1,000 soldiers in each have been created for Poland and the three Baltic states . A fifth battalion possibly for Romania could be transformed into permanent forward bases .
 A new Black Sea Defence cluster will be composed of Romania, Bulgaria and Turkey and NATO partner countries Ukraine and Georgia . A new cluster of countries will be made up of Romania and Bulgaria .
 Russia has returned as a threat to NATO, but today’s world is different than that of the Cold War . Russia's return as athreat to NATO has been compared to that of Cold War.
 Information warfare is an important element of hybrid war in which Russia spends a lot . Russia is a master of cyber-warfare and has hacked the email accounts of German and United States political leaders .
 Similar threats against Ukraine and Georgia are long-standing . Witness Russia’s invasion of the latter in August 2008 .
 Russia has increased support for NATO membership in Ukraine, Finland and Sweden . Support in the latter growing from 17 per cent in 2002 to 37 per cent today .
 President Petro Poroshenko has not used the high popularity for NATO to lobby for Ukrainian membership . But, unlike Georgian leaders, President Poroshenko hasn't used the popularity of the country to lobby.
 Ukraine could have been a member of NATO deterring Russia from attacking Ukraine . If President Viktor Yushchenko had supported an orange coalition then U.S. President George W Bush would have visited Kyiv .
 Ukraine’s militia have become a police force and its Ministry of Internal Troops, a National Guard .
 Ukraine’s generals rarely visit the front line and soldiers in the conflict zone have little respect for officers in Kyiv .
 NATO remains concerned about Russian penetration of the Security Service of Ukraine . transformation of the still neo-Soviet and over-manned SBU and border troops is urgent .
 Poland is an extremely important supporter of NATO maintaining an open door policy for new members . The third step is to recognise that Poland is a very important support for NATO .
 Ukraine should offer its experience in fighting Russia’s hybrid war in analytical methodology, concepts, doctrines and lessons learned . The first is Ukraine should be offered its experience.
 Ukraine would provide education and training and supply experts on hybrid war and urban warfare . Ukraine would also provide training and training for experts on hybrids war andUrban warfare .
 Ukraine could offer its experience of fighting Russia’s hybrid war in analytical methodology, concepts, doctrines and lessons learned . Ukraine could also learn from Russia's hybrid war.
 Kyiv can offer the use of strategic airlift, the world’s biggest transportation planes for transporting NATO troops and equipment during exercises and crises . The second is Kyiv.
 The Lithuanian-Polish-Ukrainian brigade could be replicated with a new Romanian-Bulgarian-Ukraine brigade . The third is the success of the successful Lithuanians-Polishes-Ukranian brigade .
Ukraine lobbies hard for NATO to recognise its vital contribution to regional security as a stepping stone to future membership . Warsaw Summit should also be the occasion when Ukraine lobbies for NATO's eastern flank against Russia .
 Democratization, Corruption and the New Russian Imperialism is a modern political history of Ukraine from 1953 to the present .