 Yulia Tymoshenko, the head of the Batkivshchina political party, repeated the main points of the Kremlin’s propaganda . Many Ukrainians felt outraged when some time ago Yulia tymoshenko was interviewed .
 Even those who openly do not support the present President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko noted that the fact that Tymoshenko was not recognising the war with Russia was scandalous . Such a stance should not be maintained by any Ukrainian politician .
 Many political opponents of Tymoshenko accuse her of collaboration with Russia and Putin . Many political Opponents of theoshenko say she is working with Putin .
 The suspicions of cooperation between Tymoshenko and the Kremlin are occurring regularly . The suspicions are occurring between the two sides .
 Pieces of information leak from numbers of different, independent sources .
 There is no specially organised PR-campaign against the head of Batkivshchina . It proves that there is no special PR- campaign against BatkvshChina .
 Russian news agency TASS informed that the Security Service of Ukraine forbade the political advisor Alexei Sitnikov, who advised Tymoshenko, to enter Ukraine . In June 2018, TASS told TASS that the security service forbade Sitnikov from entering Ukraine .
 Critics of Tymoshenko state that in four years she has never visited the front in Donbas . She has never met with soldiers or inhabitants of the regions near the front .
 Nadiya Savchenko's role in one of the greatest provocations of the Russian secret services during the war with Russia is also not clear .
 Tymoshenko placed her at the first position of the electoral candidate list for the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine . She was supporting her political career after the release from the Russian prison .
 Tymoshenko has always been connected with Russia – both in business and politics . She has also been connected to Russia in business, politics.
 In the mid-nineties, she was reselling the Russian gas in cooperation with the then chairman of Gazprom Rem Viakhirev . She was also the former chairman of the then Gazprom.
Viakhirev insisted that Tymoshenko should enter the government of Viktor Yushchenko in 1999 . Even the then president Leonid Kuchma was not able to resist such a strong pressure .
With the presidency of Vladimir Putin in Russia, Viakhirev lost his political influences . The president of Russia has lost his influence in Russia .
 Tymoshenko had to do many important favours for Putin, both political and economic, to establish good relations with the new Russian leader .
 In 2008 Tymoshenko made every effort to prevent Ukraine from receiving a NATO Membership Action Plan . She provoked a conflict with the then president of Ukraine Viktor Yushchenko .
 Ukraine is not consistent in the case of receiving the NATO Membership Action Plan . It made the politicians from the West think that the government of Ukraine was not consistent .
 In August 2008 Tymoshenko refused to condemn the attack of the Russian Federation on Georgia .
 Ukraine PM prevented Ukrainian warships from blocking Russian ships in the Bay of Sevastopol in Crimea . Then, as a PM of Ukraine, she prevented the Ukrainian warships.
 Georgian armies were being shot from the sea by the Russian Black Sea Fleet squadron which came from Sevastopol . As a result, Georgian armies are being shot by the Russians .
 A gas contract with Putin concluded by Tymoshenko in 2009 turned out to be very unfavourable for Ukraine . A gas deal with Putin in 2009 was not very favourable for Ukraine.
 Tymoshenko helped to supersede a competitive company from the Russian gas market . She supported Igor Sechin, her Russian gas business partner .
 Vnesheconombank bought the oldest Ukrainian bank - Prominvestbank . In last months of her term Russians bought the Industrial Union of Donbas, one of Ukraine's greatest companies .
 If Tymoshenko wins the presidential elections, he hopes for the position of prime minister . If he wins the election, he wants to be the prime minister.
 Tymoshenko introduced Pavel Lebedev, a Russian spy, to the Ukrainian politics . He later became the Minister of Defence of Ukraine and made every effort to destroy the Ukrainian army .
 In 2006 he became a member of the Verkhovna Rada from the BYuT political party . In 2012, he was head of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence . He was also head of Ukraine's Defence Ministry .
 Putin defended Tymoshenko when she was serving her sentence in Kharkiv prison . Putin defended her publicly several times.
 The cooperation of the former Ukrainian PM with the Kremlin was lasting probably after the Revolution of Dignity as well . The former Ukrainian Prime Minister's cooperation with the Moscow Kremlin was likely to last for years .
 Hanna Herman, a former advisor to Viktor Yanukovych, says Tymoshenko will serve as a good President of Ukraine . Herman says that the statement can be proven by the statement .
 Tymoshenko insisted on allowing the annexation of Crimea by Russia . It is worth underlying that on February 28, 2014, during the most important meeting.
 In 2018, during negotiations on the deployment of the UN Peacekeeping Troops in Donbas, she supported the option proposed by Putin . The option provided for the troops on the demarcation line, which is on the Ukrainian territory, instead of the Ukrainian-Russian border advocated by Ukraine
 The political campaign ahead of the presidential elections in Ukraine which are scheduled to 2019 goes on . The election is scheduled to take place in Ukraine in 2019 .
 Yulia Tymoshenko has hired the American political technologists from “Avenue Strategies Global LLC” to lead her campaign . The Ukrainian media says the American technologists have been hired to lead the campaign .