 The common understanding is that since Russia refuses to hand back Crimea to its rightful owner, which is Ukraine, there is no real sense in talking about it .
 The issue has been known in diplomatic parlance as 'parked' and we should instead focus on getting a solution in Donbass, in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia refuses to even acknowledge that it is party to the conflict in Donbass . It is very hard to get any talks together with Russia .
 In Crimea, Russia is definitely acknowledging everything it has done – although it claims it was rightful – so Russia is at the table and we can start talking . Russia is certainly acknowledging everything its has done .
 If we get a deal on Crimea, that could be a back door into getting a deal. And that in turn could get a backdoor into solving the problems of security order in Europe as a whole .
 The structure of a deal in Crimea would be easier than the structure of an deal in Donbass . Crimea is more of an isolated problem than Crimea, he says .
 It would have to have several steps to make sure sovereignty is safe . The first step would obviously concern sovereignty . It would also have to be a matter of sovereignty .
 A bargaining strategy could be formulated that creates maximum confusion by throwing in Kosovo, the Turkish invasion in Cyprus, South Ossetia, go back to Helsinki Final Act .
 If you throw as many cards as possible on the table, it generates a situation where you can bargain . If you threw as many as possible, you can get a bargain .
I can make it look, to my home audience, like I got away with the win. And I can make the win look, and I can do it, to our home audience . I can also make it looks, to your home audience.
 The Baltic States were annexed by the Soviet Union, but the West never recognised that formally . We should also remember that the Baltic states were annexed.
 Moscow was possible to do business there and to deal with Moscow, but there was a fundamental disagreement . Still, it was possible, but it was not clear whether it would be possible to deal.
 The second step would need to be the recognition that there is a win-win, and to convince the Russians that there's a win. The Russian president should be able to convince them that there will be a win .
 If we lift sanctions from anybody who comes even close to Crimea, which is the case now, it would take a big load off the Russian Federal Budget, which would be very helpful . If we allow foreign investment and foreign business with Crimea both from outside and from Ukraine, then that would
 There are a lot of foreign businesses that would love to go into Crimea . There are resort areas and offshore drilling prospects .
 The third step would need to be the recognition that Russia does have legitimate security interests in its naval bases in Sevastopol .
Before the Yanukovych government collapsed, there was general recognition that Ukraine was non-aligned, and should remainNon-aligned .
 Russia has the naval base in Sevastopol for a long time into the future. Go back to guarantees that Russia will have the base for long time in the future .
 Ukraine would not shut down water and electricity supply to the bases in times of crisis, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: If we could add some security guarantees, we could lift sanctions from anyone who wants to build a bridge across the Kerch Strait .
 The Russians should be acceptable for the West given the wins we could get out of it, says David Cameron . So a deal comprising these components, he believes, would be acceptable.
 The problem is, there is no ‘or else’ because we have taken all force options off the table . Russia knows it will get away with blue murder, and sanctions aren’t working .
 If we don't do anything to unlock negotiations that will get Russia back to the table, then the alternative is simply frightening. And its essential mainly because if we don’t do anything, it will be frightening .
 The war in Donbass is probably going to start again very soon, we’re going to have a ‘Minsk 3’, a new peace agreement that nobody believes in, and meanwhile Ukraine is collapsing .
 It’s high time now to start thinking about something that people have already said is unthinkable. It's high time to start think about something people have said was unthinkable .
 Crimea, Crimea, and the Donbass are key points for Russia to get back on track on cooperative security in Europe . Russia and Russia are trying to get Russia back to the international bargaining table for a solution .
 The internationally recognised Ukraine territory of Crimea was annexed by Russia in March 2014 . The internationally recognised Ukraine territory was annexed in March 2013 .
 The Ukraine armed forces were evicted from their bases on 19 March by Crimean protesters and Russian troops . The Ukraine military was evicted by protesters and Russia troops .
 The military intervention and annexation took place in the aftermath of wide unrest across southern and eastern Ukraine .