 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko offered to help teach NATO members how to fight Russia . Poroshenko said Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea was a military occupation .
 The article was reprinted in Rus.delfi.ee, a Russian-language version of Estonia's leading Internet portal .
 Russia claims that the armed conflict in Donbass began in spring 2014 . Ukrainian authorities attempted to use force to suppress popular anti-Kyiv uprisings in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The Kremlin also denies the existence of evidence proving Russian involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine . The 2014 referendum on Crimea's political status and Russia’s annexation of Crimea were legal .
 There is considerable evidence that Russia has supplied military equipment to anti-Kyiv fighters . Bellingcat’s reports can be found here, here and here .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin admitted the presence of Russian troops in Ukraine at his annual press conference on 17 December 2015 . Putin himself admitted that Russian troops were in Ukraine .
 Voting took place under conditions of illegal armed occupation, with no freedom of expression or media access for the opposition, and without credible international monitoring . Voting was held under conditions. Voting was not allowed to take place without international monitoring, according to reports .
 The Kremlin can easily disseminate propaganda in Western media even if it is false . Western principles of journalism require articles to be balanced and present all points of view .
 The Lenta.ru article also uses terms or metaphors that support the Kremlin’s narrative .
Russian sovereignty over Crimea is a “natural’s reunification with Russia,’ it creates the impression that Russian sovereignty over the Crimea is not a natural condition .
 The Menace of Unreality: How the Kremlin Weaponizes Information, Culture and Money . Using Western media’s principles to spread disinformation is a noteworthy Russian disinformation technique .
 Study shows how Russia exploits the Western concept of a marketplace of ideas and the principles of journalistic balance to inject disinformation into society .
 The goal is not to persuade or earn credibility, but to sow confusion through conspiracy theories and the proliferation of lies . The goal of the goal is to persuade and earn credibility .
 The West has difficulty devising a response because restricting the flow of information violates Western journalistic values . The West is trying to find a way to respond to the issue .
 Ben Nimmo points out three key criteria to consider when looking for disinformation . Balance in reporting and credibility of sources chosen.
 Russian disinformation was spread not because of a lack of balance, but because of the effort to achieve it, it was spread . Russian disinformation is spread because of an effort to spread it.
 A lack of balance can be used to spread disinformation, says Nimmo . It would harm the core values of Western journalism, he says .
 Western media must continue to present both sides, but should also give readers all the background facts. In short, Western media should continue topresent both sides .
 Lenta.ru is one of the most popular Russian-language online resources, with more than 600,000 visitors daily . The site is also a popular Russian language website .
 Moscow oligarch Alexander Mamut fired 39 of Lenta’s 84 employees in 2014 . The editor-in-chief, Galina Timchenko, and Director-General Yuliya Minder were also fired .
Delfi is a major Internet portal that provides daily news to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania . Delfi is the largest Internet portal in the world .
 It operates in the Baltic states under the domain names delfi.ee, delf.lv and delffi.lv.lv . It operates under the name delfi.lv, delfi., delfis, delfsi.lt.lv,.
Russian-language portal offers Russian-language versions of its portal in all three countries . Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian and Estonian languages are available in the company's portal .
 It sometimes publishes articles originating in pro-Russian publications without sufficient criticism and fact-checking . Even if it cannot be labeled pro- Russian, it often publishes articles.