 The feeble protests from the concerned part of the Western European and North American community have been in vain . "Frail protests" from the West European community are in vain.
 Lionel Messi has appeared in promotional videos for the tournament . Pele, Pele and Maradona have also appeared in the videos .
 2018 Russian World Cup and Berlin Olympics in 1936 drew clear parallels between the two events . People do not care about the fact that mindful people draw clear parallels.
 The current tournament is intended to underline the international power of Putin's empire . The current Russian football team is patently useless .
 Putin has been waging war in the Donbas for over four years . He seized the Crimea from Ukraine after the 2014 Olympics in Sochi . He has now been waging a war against Ukraine since then .
 Flight MH17 shot down near Donetsk and the terrible footage from Aleppo in Syria did not make an impression on European humanists and selective human rights activists either .
 A country of 18 million prior to the hostilities has been turned to ruins . The country has been turning to ruins for years .
 In the 1980s, the reaction to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan was the boycott of the Moscow Olympics . The United States, Canada, Turkey, Korea, Japan, Malaysia and the Federal Republic of Germany were among those boycotting .
 In the run-up to the upcoming World Cup, a boycott was only seriously spoken about once . The World Cup will be held in Brazil in the summer .
 The poisoning of Russian spy Skripal and his daughter in Salisbury, England was almost a turning point .
 British Prime Minister Teresa May sent 23 Russian diplomats out of the United Kingdom . Failing to receive an adequate explanation from the Kremlin, the British PM sent 23 diplomats out.
 The British Government considered the possibility of seizing some Russian assets and closing certain bilateral relations . In addition, the British Government also considered the prospect of seizing Russian assets .
 One of the next options looked at for sanctions was a boycott of the World Cup . The World Cup was also considered as a possible punishment .
 Initially, this referred to a snub by diplomats and then the possibility of the English national team withdrawing was mentioned .
 British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson compared Putin to Hitler . Johnson said Britain could reconsider its participation in the tournament if the role of the Kremlin in the Skripal poisoning was confirmed .
 The British rhetoric was not supported by any of the other 30 participating countries . Not least because the British rhetoric wasn't supported by other countries .
 The U.S. national team had qualified for the World Cup in Brazil . The picture would look different if they had qualified .
 The Americans were dramatically pipped by Panama and did not make it to Russia . However, the U.S. did not get to Russia.
 Therefore, they could not be the initiators of a boycott by definition . They were not initiators. They could not have been the initiator of a boycotts .
 The Russian tournament will be ignored by officials from the UK, Sweden, Iceland, Japan, Poland, Poland and Denmark . The tournament is being held in Russia.
There are no representatives of Arab countries in this list, which ostensibly should have supported Syria . There are no representative countries in the list, but no representatives from Arab countries .
 FIFA prohibited Russian artists who have disgraced themselves with performances in the occupied Donbas from being involved in official events . FIFA also prohibited artists from performing in the Donbas .
 No notable representatives of the football elite are planning to boycott the world championship . It is noteworthy that no notable members of the Football elite are planned to boycott .
 Gary Linker was the once famous English football player and now TV presenter . He was the mouthpiece of this wide community and now presenter .
 Lineker's official fee alone just for presenting the World Cup draw ceremony was €22,000 .
 No expense was spared on preparations for the World Cup by Putin and his cronies . Almost $8 million was spent on preparations to prepare for the tournament .
 $51 billion spent 4 years ago on the Sochi Olympics, which was four times more than the Koreans shelled out for the 2018 Winter Games in Pyeongchang . It was the same with the $51billion that was spent on the 2014 Sochi Olympics .
In theory, for such money, all of the infrastructure should be immaculate . In theory, all the infrastructure in the U.S. should beImmaculate.
 Russians remain true to themselves when it comes to the details of Sochi, Sochi . The experience of Sochi shows that the Russians remaintrue to themselves .
 Construction materials remained scattered around the Olympic Village . The roads were covered in mud and mud .
 Johnny Quinn, an American bobsledder, became a social media darling with a photo of a smashed door . Quinn's photo of the smashed door went viral on Twitter .
 The athlete had no choice but to break through the chipboard door . The lock in the hotel bathroom would not open .
Football players will be lodged in five-star apartments with all mod cons . Football players are not bobsledders or ice skaters .
 More fans will come to Russia over the month to watch football matches than attended the Sochi Olympics . However, a lot more fans are expected to attend this month's games .
Unpretentious people who want to stay abroad for as long as possible while spending as little as possible . They are mostly unpretentious. They want to spend as much as possible in the world as possible.
 Saransk, Yekaterinburg, Rostov and Mordovia will become familiar with the authentic charms of Saransk . They will certainly become familiar.
Six years ago when Ukraine hosted Euro 2012, foreigners talked about us as a hospitable and very cheap country . Six years ago, Ukraine hosted the Euro 2012 in Ukraine .
 Beer priced at €1 flowed in streams in Kyiv, Lviv, Kharkiv, and Donetsk .
Locals realised at the time that they were selling themselves short, they had been selling out .
Hotels, food and alcohol prices set up for the Champions League final . They set up astronomical prices for hotels, food, alcohol and hotels .
 Ukrainian fans are forced to look for housing on the outskirts of Kyiv, putting them in the shoes of foreign fans who visit Spain and England .
Foreign guests at the Russian tournament can expect the same treatment as foreign guests .
 Russian national team supporters will have to stay on Russian territory for two weeks if they want to see even all the matches in the group phase . The only difference is that we had one match at the end of May, while we have one match in May. The only
 The British press does not talk about the Russians in the same way it does the Ukrainians . The Ukrainians have recently dubbed the Dynamo Kyiv ultras .
 Fans should expect trouble without additional recommendations from the media . Fans make up a tight-knit community and they know where and from whom to expect trouble .
 The Ukrainian team play in Volgograd, Nizhny Novgorod and Kaliningrad . The English know that compared to Russian skinheads, the Ukrainian ""thugs"" look like heavenly angels .
 The Marseilles fight at Euro 2016 is still fresh in the memory. Especially considering that the Marseille fight at the Euro 2016 was held at the same time .
 There is no guarantee that there will not be any "controlled lack of control" again, like in the port of Marseilles . However, there is no guarantees that there won't be any controlled lack of control again .
 Russia will do everything in its power to impress the average foreigner with the scale of the tournament . Russia will be trying to impress its average foreigner.
 Western press reported on total racism in our country before the European Championships and Champions League final in Ukraine . But have not said a single word about similar phenomena in our neighbouring country prior to the Russian World Cup .
 The incidents of racist abuse occur regularly at Russian stadiums, especially during international matches .
 FIFA and UEFA remain completely loyal to them, in contrast to their reaction to red and black flags in Ukrainian stadiums .
 The Ukrainian Week art director Andriy Yermolenko was silenced on Facebook . It is also telling how quickly the Ukrainian week art director was silenced .
 Andriy was banned from the social network. Initially, his posters drew the anger of Russian propaganda media outlets .
 Russia is worried about its image ahead of the World Cup opening ceremony . Russia is concerned about the image of its country ahead of its World Cup opener .
 Putin's squad would not hurt Putin's level of satisfaction, he says . Of course, a strong squad wouldn't hurt the Russian president's satisfaction .
 It would strengthen the wave of propaganda heralding the greatness of Mother Russia . It would be the first time Russia has been seen as a nation in history .
 Russia's rivals are Uruguay, Egypt and Saudi Arabia . It is doubtful whether the team led by Stanislav Cherchesov will even make it out of the obviously fabricated group .
 During the Sochi Olympics, Russia went into a state of "victory fever" thanks to falsified doping test results . The results ultimately made it a laughing stock in the eyes of fans .
 Russia only avoids genuine sanctions thanks to its petrodollars . The country only avoids real sanctions due to the country's petrodolars .
 Grigory Rodchenkov fled Russia and agreed to act as a whistle-blower for the World Anti-Doping Agency . 33 top Russian footballers, among others, suspected of using banned drugs .
 FIFA did not treat these accusations seriously and continued to dig in its heels, leaving Russia untouched . However, due to a lack of sufficient evidence, FIFA didn't treat the accusations seriously .
 There is no doubt that even with doping the Russian team is not capable of doing anything significant . However, there is no doubts that even if they are doping, they will not be able to do anything significant.
 It is not running or swimming, where endurance or raw physical strength can play a decisive role . It's not running, it's not swimming or running, where Endurance or raw strength can be decisive .
 The times when status in international sport was acquired through victories alone have passed . However, the times when it is acquired through wins alone have not passed .
 Russia's representatives do very successfully. Their absence can be compensated by big money, which they do very well .
 heads of world football governing bodies are delighted to meet them halfway . The heads of football's governing bodies have been in contact with each other for the first time .
 Former FIFA president Sepp Blatter was suspended from his position due to corruption charges . Blatter achieved notoriety for allowing World Cup host countries to be chosen 12 years in advance for no obvious reason .
 Qatar were awarded the right to host the 2018 World Cup in 2018 . The 2022 tournament was given to the completely non-footballing nation of Qatar . Russia was awarded the tournament in 2014 .
 Italian Gianni Infantino promised an investigation, but it did not produce any results . He replaced the ousted Blatter, who replaced him, but the investigation was not successful .
 Football has fenced itself off from everything else and continues to live on its own planet . It is as if the world of sports, especially football, is fenced off from all other sports and continues.
Political elites are trying to dampen aggressive Russian appetites with economic levers of influence, sport, on the contrary, says Peter Bergen .
 Ukraine, taking only third place in its qualifying group, did not qualify for the Russian championship . Ukraine was only third in the qualifying group . The Russian championship is held in Russia .
 Rumours even spread in Russia that our team lost their final match to the Croats on purpose to avoid unnecessary trouble .
Ukrainian national team is not part of the Ukrainian World Cup squad . It is important that even without the participation of the team, passions around the World Cup continue to rage .
 Ukrainian fans visit the aggressor country and whether it is appropriate to broadcast matches from Russia . The two most controversial issues are visits by Ukrainian fans to Russia .
 About 5,000 Ukrainians have purchased tickets for World Cup 2018 matches, official figures say .
 Some live in the occupied territories, but use their Ukrainian passport when purchasing tickets . papers claiming to be documents of various "People's Republics" are not legitimate .
 There are a lot of people interested in attending matches that live in cities controlled by our country, especially Kyiv and Kharkiv . However, judging by the available information, there are a few people interested.
Football in the heart of the aggressor country during the fifth year of war . It is unfortunate not because we pity the people who are going to watch football in Ukraine . In the future those for whom "sport and politics don't mix" risk ending up in Russian prison by chance
 The attitude of Ukrainian ultras towards the World Cup is clearly hostile to Russia . The attitude is also clearly hostile .
 Ukrainian law enforcement officers had databases of fans that fell into the hands of the enemy with the onset of the Russian-Ukrainian confrontation . Even if Ukrainian national team were there, a trip to a hostile territory would still be out of the question .
Supporters perceive anything linked to Russia as hostile and condemn those who are going to the World Cup . In the end, even if these lists did not exist, supporters perceive any of them to be hostile .
 ticket holders for the tournament try to keep a low profile . There is good reason why ticket holders try to stay low profile for tournament .
 Journalists who found such people were only able to publish their material under the condition that they would not use real names . Journalists were only allowed to publish such people under the conditions they wouldn't use real name .
 Interviewees are afraid of condemnation even from their own relatives . The interviewees are scared of condemnation from their relatives .
First, which owns the rights due to the fact that they were acquired when Yanukovych was at the helm, has clearly stated that matches will not be broadcast from Russia .
 The only football channel in our country, Football, is owned by Rinat Akhmetov . The channel also refused to buy out the rights of Football .
 The Russians will play three matches in the group and maybe get through to the knockout phase, where they will play at most one game . Some might say that the Russians will be playing at least one game in each group .
 Any broadcast is not just the 90 minutes of the match that only shows the players and coaches . Bear in mind that any broadcast is only the 90 minute of the game .
 It also includes promotional material, advertising, title sequences and "important" shots of "important people" It also has promotional material and advertising material .
 The tournament is always surrounded by a huge amount of accompanying information, and in the case of the Russians, propaganda . The tournament has always been surrounded by huge amounts of information .
 The Kremlin bigwigs will turn up for the opening match and final . All the Kremlin big wigs will surely turn up.
 The channel is owned by Firtash and Liovochkin. What is foreign to a reasonable Ukrainian is the most acceptable thing in the world for a Ukrainian channel .
 TV channel Inter has the right to broadcast the World Cup in Brazil . It is not even important that the TV channel is able to do so .
 Understanding who would get their hands into these broadcasts and in which spirit the information would be presented is key to understanding who would be present .
 National Public Broadcasting Company chairman Zurab Alasania and his subordinates to take personal responsibility .
 It is unwise, to let broadcasts of an event that will be watched by millions of Ukrainians fall into the clutches of hostile forces . It's unwise to put it mildly.
 Especially during a war in which the presentation of information plays such a key role. Especially during the war, information is important during the conflict .
 Inter does not have its own sports team, after buying the rights for the rights . The channel's management began to look for pundits to work live on air during games at the World Cup .
 Dmytro Dzhulai refused to work on Akhmetov's TV channel and now commentates on the international Setanta Sport Eurasia . Inter reacted to the call from Inter with ironic laughter .
 Kyiv TV journalist Ruslan Svirin also refused to cooperate with the channel where he initially made a name for himself . Current Kyiv journalistRuslan S virin also refuses to cooperate.
 There are too many unemployed sports journalists in Ukraine. Even more so as there are too much unemployed journalists in the country .
 Oleksandr Tynhayev, Yuriy Kyrychenko, and Inter employee Roman Kademin obviously do not care that their country is in the fifth year of a war . It is obviously not very ethical to indulge those who promote the propaganda of the aggressor country .
 A week before the start of the World Cup, the parliamentary Committee on Freedom of Speech supported a draft resolution that prohibits the broadcasting of the 2018 World Cup from Russia .
 Among those who supported the decision was president of the Football Federation of Ukraine Andriy Pavelko . The decision was made by the Ukrainian Football Federation .
 The FFU refused to accredit Ukrainian journalists for the event . This was not such a surprise, because even previously the FFU had refused to Accredit journalists .
 It is not yet clear whether this decision will actually lead to a ban . However, it is still unclear whether this will actually be a ban.