 A paper submitted to the Faculty of the Joint Advanced Warfighting School in partial satisfaction of the requirements of a Master of Science Degree in Joint Campaign Planning and Strategy . The paper was submitted by the United States Air Force .
 The contents of this paper reflect my own personal views and are not necessarily endorsed by the Joint Forces Staff College or the Department of Defense . The content of the paper reflects my personal views .
 Russia's increased aggression towards its neighbors has raised concerns over the stability of the European continent . Sigr Intentionally left blank ABSTRACT over the last decade .
 Cyber denial attacks on Estonia, war against Georgia, annexation of Crimean peninsula, and support to rebels in Ukraine's Donbass region have all come during Vladimir Putin's watch .
 Contemporary reactions to Russian aggression advance the notion that the U.S. and its NATO allies should diplomatically and economically isolate Russia while increasing the alliances’ hard power projection to contain and deter further aggression .
 U.S. approach to ‘Reset’ relations with Russia by engaging diplomatically while reducing military strength . This strategic approach represents an extreme pendulum swing that is a polar opposite of the U.K.’s 2009 approach to 'Reset' Relations with Russia
 Russian strategic culture and national interests, says U.S. analysis of Russia's strategic culture . The thesis offers that instead of replacing engagement and disarmament with isolation and containment, a blended solution would achieve better results .
 This work is dedicated to my family who patiently endured months of my focus on a singular subject that did not involve sports, Legos, or home improvement .
11 Putin’s International Objectives. PUTIN’S RISE and CONSOLIDATION of POWER .
 During this time, Russia has conducted cyber-warfare in a 2007 dispute involving ethnic Russians in Estonia .
 Georgia has engaged in cyber and conventional war against Georgia in 2008 . It continues to occupy disputed territories inside that sovereign nation .
 Russia occupied and annexed Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula in 2014 . Russia is suspected of continuing to support a rebellion in Ukraine's Donbass region in the east .
 Most recently, Russia has deployed troops and aircraft into Syria to prop up a failing ally . Russia has also deployed troops, aircraft and troops into Syria .
 Many of Russia’s aggressive actions are at odds with the U.S., its NATO allies, and their common interests .
 All of these actions have occurred while Vladimir Putin has been the President or Prime Minister of Russia . All of the actions have been taken while Putin is President or PM .
 Putin is leveraging Russian Nationalism to help achieve his strategic goals, which may include designs for a new Russian Empire . President Putin is trying to build a new Russia Empire .
 He is also using the tensions with NATO as an excuse to consolidate his domestic power and extend his personal reign as Russia's leader .
 The most recent showdowns with the West over Ukraine and Syria have enabled him to sustain his approval rating at greater than 80% since January of 2014 .
Russian President Vladimir Putin may still remain in control of Russia indefinitely by taking the role of Prime Minister in between Presidential terms .
 Ultimately, it is likely that the U.S. will be dealing with Putin as the leader of Russia.
 He has eliminated much of his political opposition, and has the support of an ever thinning elite class . What makes him a most dangerous opponent is that he has slowly eliminated some of his opponents .
 Putin has consolidated power within what was hoped to be a budding democracy . He has slowly steered it closer towards a more traditional Russian autocracy .
 Putin has gained a wider latitude to take these aggressive actions, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin has achieved both his personal desire for power and the restoration of Russian international prestige, Sutter says .
 This strategic approach represents an extreme pendulum swing that is a polar opposite of the U.S. administration’s 2009 approach to ‘Reset’ relations between the United States and Russia by engaging diplomatically and reducing military strength .
 Thesis Russian President Vladimir Putin is seeking to revise the international status quo and challenge the United States’ dominant international position .
 Putin seeks recognition of Russia as a great power in a multi-polar world no longer dominated by the U.S. and western international organizations . To do this, Putin wants Russia to be recognized by the West .
 He also desires an increase in Russian power and prestige by re-establishing Russian dominance over former Soviet states and historical spheres of influence . He also wants to re- establish Russian dominance.
 Russia is vigorously engaging nations and international organizations where the U.S. and its allies are weak to achieve gains in national power . Russia is also engaging nations where the United States and its ally is weak .
 The gains continue to be at the expense of western interests, the NATO Alliance, and stability in Europe . The gains are at the cost of Western interests, NATO Alliance and stability.
 The U.S. must change its strategic approach to Russia and show its strength as a deterrent, says the United States . The United States must also reassure Russia that it can still achieve its strategic goals that positively contribute to the international environment .
 The Rise of Russia's New Imperialism was published in 2014 prior to the Russian incursions in Ukraine . The author correctly predicts the continuation of Russia’s antagonistic actions on its periphery, beyond the 2008 War with Georgia .
Van Herpen uncannily foresees a scenario that the 3 Kremlin could provoke riots in Eastern Ukraine or the Crimea .
This thesis will seek similar insights by defining Russia’s strategic culture and the importance it plays in reaching a better understanding of our adversary . This thesis will look at Russia's strategic culture.
 It will explore the Russian history that has helped shape this common identity and form the interests of the Russian people . It will also explore the history of Russian history .
 The work will review the history of Putin’s rise to power inside of this culture and the methods he has used to maintain his position of leadership .
 The Strategic Appraisal will explore Russia’s current military doctrine and national security documents in an effort to define their national interests and security strategy . With this framework in place, the paper will leverage Harry Yarger's The StrategicAppraisal .
 Graham Allison's three conceptual frameworks for analyzing foreign policy to question the Russian Federation’s recent actions in Syria . Allison will then apply the three conceptual framework for analyzing Foreign policy .
 The paper will seek to identify friction points where Russian strategy could lead to future conflicts with the U.S. and/or its allies . It will also consider Russia's national interests and strategy in place .
 The thesis will then weigh a theory of deterrence, as defined by Thomas Christiansen in The Contemporary Security Dilemma . It will dissect two deterrent efforts, the Korean War and the Cuba missile crisis .
Analysis of strategic culture is compared with a nation’s strategic documents . It could further help indicate if a nation's desired ends are enduring .
Autocracy and Expansionism. ‘If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles.’
 Implications for Nuclear Option (Santa Monica,CA: RAND Corporation, 1977), 8.8.9.
 These differences trace back to the disparate security environments in which these two nations were fonned . The two nations have different security environments .
 The United States has enjoyed a relatively secure environment through its short history . The U.S. has enjoyed an extremely secure environment since its inception .
 Moments of war in the homeland merely punctuated the perpetual peace and security that two vast oceans and minimally threatening border nations provided .
 Russia has endured numerous foreign invasions throughout the centuries . On the other hand, Russia has suffered numerous foreigninvasions .
 The threats have come from every side, including Teutonic Knights, Muslim Arabs from the south, or Mongol Hordes .
 Russians suffered extraordinary casualties during the last world war, with estimates of over 25 million military and civilians killed .
 An environment of relentless war and casualty, punctuated by periodic peace, provides an explanation for Russia’s perpetual focus on security .
 Russians are accustomed to giving up many more of their liberties for the greater good of the state . Because of this insecurity, Russia is accustomed to give up more liberties .
 This greater sacrifice of freedoms ensured a strong state that was capable of providing greater security against attacks of foreign invaders . This greater Sacrifice of freedoms ensures the state is able to provide greater security.
 Russian autocratic rulers have often tapped into this cultural insecurity, while using Russian nationalism, Pan-Slavism, and Christian Orthodoxy as pretexts for further territorial expansion .
 Pan Slavism is described as a tribal nationalism that always insisted its own people were surrounded by a world of enemies and they are one against all .
 The Soviet regime also tapped into this cultural norm, briefly adding the spread of communist ideals as a fourth pretext . The Soviets also tapped in to this cultural norms, briefly add to the cultural norm .
 At this point, Russia became the only Orthodox country left in the world . At this time, Russia had become the only Russian country left.
Russian Tsars slowly incorporated Orthodoxy more and more into their regimes . By the 18 th and 19 th centuries, Russian Tsars were slowly incorporated into their regime .
 The Tsars began to see themselves as the defender of the faith, using Orthodoxy as a basis for legitimation of their rule . Orthodoxy is an integral part of the state control mechanism .
 Nicholas I’s deputy minister of public education, Sergey Uvarov, “coined opportunity.’ It was at this time that Nicholas I's deputy Minister of Public Education was in charge of education .
 Russian Pan Slavist Nikolay Danilevsky complained that Europe doesn't recognize the Russians as equals . This is again expressed in the modern age by the Pan Slavs in his 2010 complaint .
 Priests were paid by the state and a clerical head of church position was established at the right hand of the Tsar . The state paid the Priests and paid them for their services .
 The unification of the Orthodox faith became the banner call for Russia’s southern expansion into the Ottoman Empire .
 In this territory, Greeks, Bulgarians, Romanians, and Serbs all shared the Orthodox faith . But were ruled by the weakening Islamic Ottoman Empire .
 Russia once again found itself facing some familiar western nations that had concerns over the growing power of Russia in that region . It is during this campaign against the Ottomans.
 France, and eventually Britain, joined the Ottomans in a campaign against Russia by laying siege to Sevastopol and the Crimean Peninsula .
 The important role Orthodoxy played in historical Russia’s association with security, rule legitimation, and expansionism remains pertinent today . Orthodoxy was a key part of Russia's relationship with Russia's history .
 Originally a liberal democratic movement, Pan Slavists quickly embraced autocratic rule for two reasons . Now a liberal democracy movement, it is a more democratic movement .
 The first was that there simply was “not enough support in Russian society for liberal-democratic 12 Van Herpen, Putin’s Wars, 34 . The second was that “there simply was not enough support’ for the liberal- democratic 12 Van Shepen .
 The task of unifying all Slavs was considered more important than democratic reforms . 9 ideas... and that the task ofUnifying all Slovans was considered most important .
 It reached intense levels by 1891 under Alexander III. It continued to develop during the reign of Nicholas II as it morphed into ethnic Russian nationalism .
 In aggregate, Russia’s strategic cultural exhibits realism in its external and internal behaviors . National interests, sovereignty, independence, self-reliance, and force play major roles .
 Putin's rise into Russia's strategic culture is easier to explain than his rise into this realm . The themes of security, expansionism, autocracy, and nationalism help define Russia’s strategic culture .
 Putin was a low-level KGB agent operating in Eastern Gennany when the Soviet Union collapsed .
 As member of Soviet apparatus, at some level he believed the nation was successful, powerful, and wealthy .
 It had profound problems, but these could be solved by such a great nation, says the author .
 Petersburg's Mayor Anatoly Sobchak's 1989 administration was an assistant to the mayor . The city was a transformational place for the mayor's administration .
 Corruption was rampant as the former state controlled economy entered privatization and ended up in the hands of a few .
 Putin's experiences in this environment shaped his view on the demise of the Soviet Union and failure of liberal democracy . Putin’s experiences in the Soviet Soviet Union shaped his views on liberal democracy.
 In 1996, Sobchak lost his mayoral election and the new regime accused him of corruption . The new regime later accused the former mayor of corruption.
 Putin refused to work for the incoming mayor and allegedly helped Sobchak flee to France to avoid charges . Putin refused work for incoming mayor.
 1 Judah. His loyalty and capability quickly caught the attention of the Yeltsin administration . He had just won national re-election in 1996, 1 Judah .
 The country continued on its economic downward spiral until it eventually reached bottom in April 1998 . Russia defaulted on its IMF loan in April, 1998, and Russia reached bottom.
 At this point, disorder characterized the Russian democracy . It helped usher in a more authoritarian rule that was palatable to the populace .
 In 1998, President Yeltin had his fifth heart attack . He continued to appear even more intoxicated and out of control at his international and national appearances .
 This is preconditioned by the inseparable characteristics of its geopolitical, economic, and cultural existence . This is prelude to its geopolitical and economic characteristics .
 Boris Berezovsky made his fortune in Russia in the 1990s as the country went through privatization . He made his money in Russia.
 He became part of the Boris Yeltsin inner circle as a billionaire owner of the country's main television station, Channel One .
 In his interview he describes the consolidation of former state assets into the hands of a few super elites as political favor in exchange for loyalty to Yeltsin and assistance in assuring his re-election .
 Berezovsky claims to have chosen Putin as Yeltsin's successor . But later became an open critic of Putin's policies as Putin steered Russia towards authoritarianism .
Berezivsky resigned from the Duma in the spring of 2000 . This culminated in Berezivski’s resignation from theDuma .
Berezovsky fled to Britain after his media channel criticized Putin’s handling of the submarine Kursk accident .
 He became vocal opponent of Putin, accusing him of committing war crimes in Chechnya . He also staged the 1999 Moscow apartment bombings as a terror attack .
 He was later found dead, hanging in his home in Britain 8 months after the interview .
 Russian economy on the heels of the default. Prime Minister's first year as prime minister ushered in 10% growth rate for the Russian economy .
 His timing was impeccable as his first two presidential tenns saw an upswell in the state coffers . The state coffers benefited from the huge rise in oil and gas prices .
 Putin’s reign also saw a reemergence of nationalism amid the nostalgia for the lost great empire that once was .
 The archives of the KGB, which had been temporarily opened, were closed again . The archives were temporarily closed again.
 The great autocratic and imperialist tsars were rehabilitated and reestablished in their full glory . Peter the great, Catherine the Great, Nicholas I, and Alexander III, were reestablished .
 In September 2000 Tsar Nicholas II was canonized and became an official Orthodox saint .
 Putin began to consolidate his gains in order to realize the strong state power that he believed it must have . Once in power, Putin started to consolidate the gains he believed he had .
 Putin took advantage of the chaos left from Russia’s period of liberal democracy to subvert the weakening of central control that had characterized the first decade of democracy .
 The Rise of Russia’s New Imperialism (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2014), 53, is the latest in a series of Russian Imperialism .
Under Yeltsin, the leading Russian oil company Gazprom “seemed to be investing in everything apart from its own pipelines and reserves’s own pipelines, the company says .
 Dmitriy Medvedev is head of his electoral campaign, and first deputy head of the Presidential Administration . He is also head of Russia's presidential administration .
 Medvedev remained chairman until he was elected in 2008 to succeed Putin as Russia’s president . He was elected as president in 2008.
 Over the last decade in control, Putin has consolidated the wealth of the nation and control over many of the country's key industries and corporations .
 Putin is now in firm control of Russia, with these mechanisms in place . With these mechanisms, Putin has now been in firm Control of Russia .
 The nation’s strategy is his strategy, and will be for the foreseeable future, he says . His objectives are the nation's objectives, and the nation�'s strategy will be his strategy .
 Managed Democracy is alleged to be coined by Yeltsin’s Chief of Staff Alexander Voloshin .
 democracies are similar to liberal democracies, but with much more centralized control and power at the executive . Meaning a democracy in name with similar institutions of the western inspired liberal democracies .
There is a multiple party system but they support the same central leader . There is a single party system. There is also a multiple Party system but there is no single leader .
 The state owns much more of the essential industries in the economy, natural resources, and media control . The state own much more than any other state .
 There remains a suspicion in Russia that the U.S. dominates existing international organizations and that those in turn serve western interests .
 Putin has preferred to build his own international organizations . Because of this, Putin has chosen to build himself own international groups .
 The SCO started out as a border settlement charter, but has now expanded into joint military exercises, cooperation on counter-terrorism and counter-narcotics . It is also an exchange for cultural cooperation .
 Pakistan, India, and Iran were later invited for observer status . The United States has asked to observe, but has been denied . Pakistan,India, Iran and the U.S. have also been invited to observe .
 Russia, Belarus, Belarus and Kazakhstan were joined by Kyrgystan, Tajikistan, and Armenia as original signatories . Kyrgyst, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan and Armenia were also signed by Russia and Belarus .
 Afghanistan and Serbia were granted observer status in 2013 . In 2013, both were granted observers status . Both countries were given observer status .
 Putin announced the Eurasian Economic Union as a rival to the European Union in 2011 . Belarus, Belarus, Russia, and Kazakhstan were the founding members .
 Putin has attempted to play up the BRICS organization as another body that he hopes to leverage for international prestige and power . The BRICS is a body that Putin hopes to use to leverage his influence in the world .
 Putin hopes the BRICS development bank would challenge the western dominated IMF and World Bank . Putin hopes that the development bank will challenge the Western dominated IMF.
 Putin’s foreign policy strategy is to engage any and every nation possible in any alliance or partnership that could challenge U.S. and European dominated international organizations . Russia is bringing international leadership prestige home to Russia .
 The 2014 Olympic games, 2016 Hockey World Championship, and 2018 soccer World Cup are all part of re-establishing Russia’s great power status . The hosting of the 2014 Olympic Games, 2016 hockey World Championship and 2018 World Cup will be part of Russia's great
 This paper defines strategy as a framework with which to achieve a nation’s desired political ends .
 The strategic framework also encompasses the ways in which the means are applied to achieve the desired ends . The strategicframework also includes the ways to achieve a desired end .
 The strategic framework has levels; Grand Strategy, which is associated with the synergy of all instruments of power, and Strategy . Grand Strategy is the framework for each individual instrument .
 Both Grand Stategy and Strategy rely on national policy to define the desired ends to achieve and provide boundaries for the ways and means .
 How the ends, ways, and means are applied, focused, and/or constrained are in line with enduring national interests and the nation’s strategic culture . How the end, way, and ways are applied and focused are applied.
 National interests and national strategic culture are considered semi-malleable over time . But represent the most enduring qualities, concerns, and objectives of the nation that focus and shape how a nation crafts policy .
 Russian President Dimitriy Medvedev approved the National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation until 2020 . In May 2009 President Medvedeva approved the national security strategy until 2020.
 The strategy highlighted Russia’s perception of the world and its own security situation, and defined its national interests and strategic priorities .
 Russia intends to continue to rely on nuclear deterrence and nuclear parity vis-a-vis the U.S. Of primary importance is the confirmation that Russia will continue to use nuclear deterrence .
 The NSS also demonstrates that Russia perceives there is a failure in the current global and regional security architecture which it believes favors U.S. and NATO interests .
 The document strongly voices opposition to further eastward enlargement of NATO or expansion of NATO’s military infrastructure into nations on Russia's borders . The document also strongly opposes expansion of the NATO's military infrastructure.
 The NSS also opposes the expanded use of NATO’s forces outside of its regional boundaries . The NATO forces are also opposed to the expansion of their forces outside the region .
 At the time, there was a significant and enduring NATO presence in Afghanistan on Russia’s exposed southern front .
 Russia perceived as its sphere of influence. This force relied on a logistics train through and the fostering of relationships with the central Asian states .
 Russian influence over Eastern Europe and Caucus in favor NATO influence is a grave concern to Russia’s interests .
 It specifically calls out unilateral development of a global missile defense system and militarization of space as perceived threats . It does for policies directed at the counterproliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological threats .
 Russia is willing to build a strategic partnership with the U.S. on shared interests, but emphasizes it as an equal partnership . It also states that Russia is willingness to build strategic partnerships with the United States .
 The U.S. seeks new agreements with the United States in disarmament and arms control . It also wants new agreements in the regulation of regional conflicts .
 Russian sovereignty, independence, and territorial integrity are key national interests of the country . The strategy is based on the protection of Russian sovereignty and its territorial integrity .
 Russia's military is expected to remain strong enough to prevent military aggression against both Russia and its allies . Its military expected to stay strong enough.
 The document establishes a belief in the country’s position as a great power and aspires for it to become one of the more influential power centers in a multipolar world .
 There are also numerous declarations through the document that affirm Russia’s commitment to the adherence of international law .
 The 3 President of the Russian Federation, National Security Strategy of the Russia Federation to 2020 . The statements are strictly about international law’s protection of a nation's sovereignty .
 The Russian NSS is similar to that of the U.S. in that it ties economic prosperity and independence as a mechanism to achieve the desired level of national security . The NSS has a similar approach to the United States.
 Russia recognizes its GDP dependency on the export of raw materials . It is concerned by its dependency on foreign investments and trade for its economy, especially in agriculture .
 A key Russian goal is to become one of the five biggest world economies by 2020 . Russia is one of five biggest economies in the world by 2020.
 Russia associates energy and natural resource exports and reserves as a source of strength and influence on the international stage . Pragmatically, Russia associates its energy andnatural resource exports to its energy reserves and reserves .
 The strategy acknowledges that international policy will be focused on access to energy reserves to include the Barents Sea, Artie, Middle East, Caspian Sea and Central Asia .
 The NSS says it cannot exclude the possibility that the competitive struggle for dwindling resources may be solved with the use of military force .
World food and water supply reaches critical levels vis-a-vis world population growth . This could be a reference to competing Artie claims, as well as Russian concerns that nations either covet or will covet its underutilized territory .
 The 2014 Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation focuses more narrowly on the military priorities required to ensure its nation's security .
 This analysis will focus on specific areas and aspects where the Military Doctrine is unique or provides either width or depth to areas covered by the Russian National Security Strategy . The analysis will look at specific areas of the Russian military doctrine .
 In the Doctrine, 5 President of the Russian Federation, National Security Strategy of the Russia Federation to 2020 . In the doctrine, 5 president of the Russians will be the president of Russia's national security strategy .
 The document expands on the nations and regions it views as critical to its national interests . The document also specifies the varying degree of engagement the military is to have .
 Analysis of Russia’s military engagements will aide the examination of future sources of friction in a later chapter .
 The document describes its concern regarding the show of military force or exercises within nations or territories contiguous to Russia or its allies . The document also describes the mobilization of military command and control elements.
 NATO exercises, rotational deployments, and the accompanying command and control standup that occurs during these events. This is a fairly straight forward concern over the frequency, character, and location of NATO’s exercises and rotations .
 Russia will place itself on a higher military alert during these occurrences . NATO’s increased mobility posture could also indicate a prelude to intervention in Russia or its allies .
 Russia's leadership fears of invasion. This is a common theme throughout the document indicating the fears the leadership has of invasion .
 It believes the U.S. has historically demonstrated the capability and intent to intervene in a sovereign nation that does not comply with United States values or interests .
 The Russian Military Doctrine voices concerns over actions taken by ‘foreign powers’ that have exacerbated military and/or political situations .
 This appears contradictive to Russian actions in Ukraine, but 6 President of the Russian Federation, Military’ Doctrine of Russian Federation . This appears to be a contradiction to Russia's actions in the Ukraine .
 The Military Doctrine illuminates the inherent fear and suspicion of a nation that is obsessed with its own security . The Doctrine is the embodiment of a key element of Russian strategic culture .
 There is an underlying concern that ‘Color Revolutions’ or Arab Spring scenarios could play out within Russia . There is also a concern that 'color Revolutions' or 'Arab Spring scenarios' could be played out in Russia .
 Russia fears the establishment and training of anned force elements inside of Russia or its allies . Russia fears that these entities could try to forcibly change its constitutional system and destabilize the internal political situation .
 The Doctrine speculates that military power is not necessarily the primary method for achieving these types of aims . It says military power isn't the primary way to achieve these goals .
 The document voices concern over possible information warfare on the population, especially the youth, for the purpose of undennining the historical, spiritual, and patriotic traditions of the nation . Instead, the document voices concerns over possible Information Warfare on the youth .
 The Military Doctrine expands on modem warfare to include the foreign financing of political and public movements and the wide use of public protest from the population . Later, the Military Doctrine expanded on those concerns by characterizing modem warfare .
 The document directs anned forces to be prepared to execute martial law upon direction of the President . To ensure internal security against this disruption, the document says .
 The Russian Doctrine continues to emphasize political and military cooperation first and foremost with Belarus, and secondly with the Russian recognized 'Republics' of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 It directs military engagement and 9 President of the Russian Federation, Military Doctrine of Russian Federation . Also directs military engagements and military engagement .
 Russia, Nicaragua, Venezuela, and the pacific island of Nauru. 22 commitments to the Collective Security Treaty Organization and Shanghai Cooperation Organization .
 The Military doctrine also adds that one of the armed forces’ many main missions includes supporting Russian interests in the Arctic .
 The Doctrine lays out additional areas of military concern that could be used as areas of mutual interest with the U.S. It also lays out other areas of Military concern that can be used in mutual interest .
 Russia expresses concern about the militarization of space to include conventional direct strike weapons . Russia expresses concerns about the militaryisation of space .
 It sets an objective to conclude an international treaty on the prohibition of various types of weapons in space . The treaty is aimed at ending the use of various kinds of weapons.
 The document explores the threat and spread of international terrorism, transnational crime, and threats to freedom of navigation by piracy . The document also explores the threats to free navigation by pirates .
 The document also describes Russia’s willingness to militarily support operations sanctioned by the U.N. Security Council or other entities empowered by international law .
 The document highlights a mission for the armed forces to protect and defend Russian Federation citizens living outside of the Federation against armed attack .
 The statement on the surface appears no different than the U.S. intent to protect its citizens at home or abroad . This statement appears no more than the United States intent on protecting its citizens.
 There are large communities of millions of ethnic Russians living in nations adjacent to Russia . However, as subsequent chapters will describe, there are many other communities of Russian ethnic Russians .
 As we 12 President of the Russian Federation, Military Doctrine of the Russia Federation, we discuss Russia's military doctrine . The Russian Federation is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Nikolai Patrushev conducted an interview with the Russian newspaper Rossiysjaya Gazeta . He highlighted the changes for the updated document .
 Many of the changes were previously explored in the 2014 Military Doctrine . Many of these changes reiterate areas previously explored by the military .
 NATO's perceived global offensive posturing. This includes an emphasis on the threat that continued NATO expansion poses, the destabilizing effects that would accompany the creation of a global missile defense system .
 The Secretary also labels new threats and explains the intent behind some of Russia's more recent international and domestic activities .
 Secretary describes changes to Russia's domestic security environment that are very internally focused .
 The drop in oil prices, coupled with economic sanctions by the west, is affecting government revenue . The nation’s economic dependency on raw material export is affecting the government revenue.
 Russia has shown resilience throughout the imposed economic sanctions, says Russia's new strategy will seek to avoid domestic instability through economic growth and diversification of the economy .
Russian strategy has internal focal areas that are meant to be bulwarks against outside influence and intervention . The strategy includes emphasis on traditional spiritual and moral Russian values .
 The strategy places a value on the spiritual over the material, family, service to motherland, and historical unity .
 Many of these themes are areas where Russian leadership perceives western culture and values are capable of corrupting the populace . Many of the themes are where Russian leaders perceive western culture is capable of corruption .
 The Secretary also references the interventions in the Middle East and North Africa as resulting in the strengthening of international terrorist organizations .
 This has produced long-term instability in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and Syria that need solutions . This has led to long- term instability in Iraq, Iraq and Libya .
 The new strategy emphasizes the importance of partnerships with the U.S. and Europe on the basis of common interests . But again insists on equal partnerships .
 Russia realizes that overt confrontation with the U.S. will harm both its national security and internal stability . However, Russia realizes it will harm the country's security .
 The Secretary acknowledges that Russia needs to avoid restarting an arms race .
 Russia's inability to sustain such a pursuit and reliance on nuclear parity to achieve the desired balance of power. This assertion is indicative of both Russia and Russia’s inability to sustained such an pursuit .
 The U.S. believes the law of force has replaced international law . It believes the United States is willing to threaten Russian sovereignty .
 It bases this assertion on their view that the U.S. and its allies have violated national sovereignty on numerous occasions . The United States and allies have been involved in invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq, and most recently in Syria .
 The U.S. invoked different sources of legitimization from international law to intervene . In each of these cases the United States invoked the UN’s Responsibility to Protect in Serbia .
 Russia's perspective is that when they invoked similar reasons for Russia’s interventions that they met unreasonable unneccesary resistance from the U.S. and west, Russia's view is that it is similar to that of the United States .
 This perceived double standard futher stimulates Russia’s view that many of these international institutions have simply become tools to serve western interests . Russia's view that these institutions have just become tools for Western interests .
 Russia views great power status as being derived from territory first and foremost . Russia views the power status of the country as being based on territory first .
 Russia is the largest country in the world by landmass . This is logical as Russia is Russia's largest country by land mass .
 It approaches the world with a thousand year history as not only a European, but also Asian power, with a little chip on its shoulder .
 The fundamental rule of Westphalian sovereignty is to refrain from intervening in the internal affairs of other states . Each state has the right to determine its own domestic authority structures .
 The principle of non-intervention is traditionally associated with the Peace of Westphalia of 1648, a treaty between the Prussian states . Krasner advocates this wasn’t explicitly articulated until a century later by a Swiss Jurist publication.
 There is a widely held belief that throughout history Russia has never been quite accepted as a European nation or treated on equal terms with other European nations .
 Russia has maintained its autocratic, centralized, and vertically controlled ruling structure long after the rest of Europe developed into more democratic systems . Russia's autocratic and centralized ruling structure has been maintained for decades .
 Russia sees a threat to its future prosperity, from its projected population decline and its inability to effectively exploit its own territory and resources . Russia sees its ability to remain a great power, from the projected population declines .
 Russia faces challenges from its over-dependence on energy exports and from rampant corruption . Russia also faces challenges on economic growth and state revenues .
 The Russian government has been unable or unwilling to reform the country’s energy-dependent economy . Current low prices of oil and gas now limit the nations abilities to further moderni z e its military .
 Russia experienced the power and respect from Europe and the world that they always thought they deserved, and they want to reclaim that standing . As the Soviet Union, Russia experienced that power andrespect from Europe .
For Russia and Putin, the 1990’s attempt at western liberal democracy is seen as a failure and there is no going back . For Russia and Vladimir Putin, there are no plans to return to the West .
 Russians believe that they were embarrassed and exploited from within and by the west .
 Russia also seeks to expand the reach of its new international organizations that claim to focus on mutual national interests shared with potential partners . At their heart, the organizations target the inclusion of nations or regions where Russia wants to gain or maintain its influence .
 These international organizations also court nations, regions, or affiliations that have been or that they perceive to have been marginalized or excluded by the western dominated organizations .
 Greece has imposed austerity measures during the Greece bailout woes of mid 20 1 5.5 years . An example of this included the invitiation to Greece to take a loan from the BRICS development bank as an alternative to the EU loan .
 Russia abandoned path towards integration with greater Europe and the west . In second presidential tenn of Vladimir Putin, Russia began to pursue goals that would put it at odds with the rest of Europe .
 Putin laid out objectives for Russia to maintain its preeminence over former Soviet states . Russia wants to retain influence over the states on its borders .
 Many of Russia’s external actions have also been attempts at consolidating power and promoting internal security . Russia's external actions are also attempts to consolidate power and promote internal security.
 Interventions in the Ukraine and Syria promote a rally around the flag effect that reduces criticism of government polices during wartime and increases popular backing for the leadership .
 This level of support and acceptance of the repression of freedoms is unsustainable unless concrete economic improvements are forthcoming . There is a guarantee of security for the populace.
 This drives the regime’s perception of its vulnerability and fear of foreign influence over its internal political affairs, foreign cultural and informational influence on the populace . The regime's dependence on raw materials and on western economic models and trade to sustain its economic growth .
 A study of Russian strategy through a review of its strategic documents serves as a foundation for further analysis of its recent foreign policy actions .
 This section leverages Graham Allison’s three conceptual frameworks for analyzing foreign policy, as a way to validate the ‘why’ behind Russia's actions . This section is part of Allison's three conceptual framework for analyzed foreign policy .
 Allison's three models look at international decision making through different perspectives . Allison’s three models are based on different perspectives on international decisions .
 Model II, Model III focuses on how these actions affect or are affected by internal government politics . Model II views actions through the lens of critical organizations of the state .
 27 President of Russian Federation, National Security Strategy of the Russian Federation to 2020 will be closer to the truth . 29 ultimately will be the truth.
 Analysis will reveal if any hidden agendas exist or if Russia is simply pursuing its strategy as defined in its strategic documents . Through this comparison the analysis will show if anyhidden agendas exist .
 This section will examine Russia’s recent actions in Syria, and how these align with the interests of Putin as the leader of Russia . The section will also examine Russia's recent action in Syria .
 Putin clearly demonstrates that he is firmly in charge of steering his nation's foreign policy . The previous chapter on the rise of Putin clearly shows that he's in charge.
 Russian strategic documents clearly describe the importance and value of preserving old allies and fostering new allies .
 Russian strategy describes Russia's concern with the preservation of a nation’s sovereignty and the negative influence that regime changes have had on the stability of nations .
 The toppling of Gadhafi and subsequent mutilation of his body following the uprising in Libya deeply affected Putin's psyche .
 Putin could not allow his Ukrainian ally and its fonner leader, Viktor Yanukovych, to be taken by that nation’s coup d’etat . He could also not allow Russia's long-term ally, Assad, to take either .
 The supply of weapons and eventual insertion of Russian forces into Syria served to prop up and protect a failing ally in an important region of the globe . Russia has few allies in the region where Russia has many allies .
 Putin is willing to expend the time and resources on this endeavor because it also serves multiple facets of Russia’s national interests . Putin is also willing to spend more time on this effort than any other endeavor .
 Russia's involvement in Syria reflects its national interests in the global environment at large . Russia’s involvement in the Syria also reflects its interest in the world's environment .
 Putin’s strategic documents declare his intent to be a leader in global affairs .
 Russia's commitment in Syria guarantees it an important voice with regards to an area and issue of global concern . Russia’s commitment to Syria is a key part of its efforts to help Syria .
 Russia’s involvement also serves as a venue to highlight their resolute support of national sovereignty and assertion that meddling in another nation's affairs breeds nothing but instability .
Russian naval base at Tartus is the only Russian naval base on the Mediterranean coast . This force insertion also serves to secure their key military installation .
 Russia shares the global concern over the spread of Islamic extremist terrorism . Russia also shares the world's concern over Islamic extremism .
 Russia felt threatened by the unconstrained operation within Syria and rise to power of many of its old Chechen War adversaries . Russia feels threatened by an unprovoked operation in Syria .
 It does not wish to see them return, nor does it want extremism to take hold in other, predominately Muslim, areas .
 The timing of Russian involvement reflects a perceived opening to achieve many of these goals . Russian involvement is seen as an opening for the country to achieve these goals.
 The continued failure of U.S. policy and its actions to support moderate rebels in the Syrian conflict created the opportunity for Russia to enter the region, says the United States .
 European and world opinion may have swung more in favor of achieving a guarantee of stability and the removal of ISIS . The removal of Assad’s regime and creation of a democracy may be less concerned now .
 The decision to insert Russian forces at this time could help stabilize a regime friendly to Russia, create prestige for Russia and Putin alike, and preserve Russian access to the Mediterranean port . The decision was made as world opinion changes.
 Russia has created new opportunities for Russia to advance its relationship with Iran, Shi'ite Iraq, and the Shi’ite community at large . All entities that have strained relations with the United States.
 There are a number of Russian national interests in play as they relate to key government entities in Russia .
 The military and the oil oligarchy are two of these very important organizations which have a vested interest in Russia’s involvement in Syria . Russia's military has been involved in Syria since 2011 .
 The military is a fraction of the size that it once was at the height of the Soviet Union . But it still owns some of the world's most advanced military hardware, to include nuclear weapons .
 In 2014 Military Doctrine it was charged with advancing Russia’s national security strategy . It was charged to maintain world-wide access commensurate with a great power .
 The seizure and subsequent annexation of the Crimean peninsula, which includes Sevastopol, the primary wann water port of the Russian fleet, furthers the notion that the Russian military values the access to the Mediterranean Sea that both SevASTopol and the port of Tartus provide .
 Russia sees wann water port access to and through the Mediterranean as essential to achieving its national security strategy . In the past, Russia has overtures in the past with Cyprus for port access .
 Russian military has also leveraged this presence in Syria to establish an air base in Latakia, their first in the region . At present, the Russian military is also in Syria.
 Oil and gas accounts are the largest single source that the Russian state relies on for up to 50% of its revenue . Russia relies on its oil and gas revenue for more than 50% .
 Many of the Russian elite and state power brokers have wealth tied to the state oil companies . Many of them are wealthy enough to own oil companies.
Oil is at a decade low and revenues are much more constrained than in the past . At present, oil is at the lowest point in the history of oil production .
 Russian access or influence in the Middle East oil rich region may advance the oil oligarchs’ bottom line directly or indirectly .
 Russian companies may gain greater access to develop and exploit regional oil . If Russia is able to bolster its presence in the region, Russia may gain more access to the region .
 Russia may be able to leverage an easing of the economic sanctions against it . Russia may also be successful in aiding the EU to achieve its two primary objectives, stopping ISIS and stopping the refugee flow .
 instability in and around the Middle East has more often than not translated into increases in oil prices . At the core, instability in the region has often translated into increased oil prices.
 With Russia's economic growth and dependence on oil and gas revenue, higher prices in oil translates into greater Russian wealth and power, no matter the cause .
 The final look at Russia’s intervention in Syria is through the lens of internal politics . Russia's intervention in the country has been seen as a result of its internal politics.
 This was on full display in 2012, when protests broke out over his return to the presidency . This was at the time when protests over his presidency broke out .
 The Ukraine conflict created a rally around the flag effect promoting nationalist fervor . Since then, the Ukraine conflict has caused a rally.
 Putin needed a new and possibly more successful campaign in Syria to revive popular support, secure his power, and suppress opposition . Putin needs a new campaign to revivepopular support, and secure the power, he says .
 A look at Russian intervention in Syria from the three vantage points illuminates Russian strategy and national interests in application . A look into Russian intervention from the 3 vantage points of the Syrian conflict .
 The intervention appears entirely consistent with the Russian National Security Strategy and its associated international objectives . The intervention seems to be consistent with Russia's objectives .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine or Georgia would most likely yield similar results . A comparable look at Russia’s actions in the Ukraine and Georgia would be similar .
 Russia's actions in Syria are consistent with Russia’s strategic culture and enduring national interests . Russia many have additional clandestine agendas at work that are not apparent in their strategic documents, according to documents .
 The next chapter will look to build on this knowledge base in order to discuss Russia’s strategic culture, enduring national interests . Security documents point to likely friction areas with the United States and its allies in the future .
 Russia’s prevailing world-view regarding power is one that sees a U.S. dominated unipolar world as unacceptable .
 A return to the balanced bipolar world of the Cold War is unachievable. It also realizes that a return to a balancedipolar world is unchievable . The Cold War was a bipolar world.
 Russia is detennined that the world should be multipolar, and that it will be one of the great power centers . Thus, Russia will be a great power center .
 This overarching worldview informs Russia’s actions on the world stage . This overarching view informs Russia's actions on world stage, says CNN .
 Russia may be at the precipice of a shift in its strategic approach . Russia has often relied on its military as its primary means to achieve its goals . Russia's military has often used its military to achieve goals .
 Russia realizes that economic power may actually be the best means to achieve its security . In an analysis of their strategic documents there are indications that Russia realizes economic power is the best.
 If this was the case, this shift would represent a potential opportunity for re-engagement . If this case, it would represent an opportunity for a new generation of people .
 The Russian people are traditionally more tolerant of authoritarian regimes, but only to a certain limit . Russia's strategic culture is described in the analysis of Russian strategic culture .
 This limit is predicated on the nation providing the people with the level of security they require, and the feeling of prestige they want for their state .
 When these needs are not met, the people’s sacrifice of freedoms becomes less tolerable . The people's sacrifice of free speech is not met .
 Riddled throughout the strategic documents are indications that Putin’s regime fears internal unrest . Putin is especially paranoid that the west will finance or flame this unrest .
 Russia values sovereignty over all else, and any criticism of a foreign government or entity in the Russian government's internal affairs will become an immediate source of friction .
 Ethnic Russian Populations President Medvedev’s five principles describe the right of Russia to intervene militarily under the pretext of the protection of Russians . The 2014 Military Doctrine is published by the Russian President .
 Russian actions in Estonia in 2007, Georgia in 2008, and Crimea and Donbass in 2014, have established right as credible threat to future stability . Russia has declared right in Estonia, Georgia and Crimea in 2014 as a credible threat.
 The nations bordering with Russia have the most ethnic Russian populations . Ukraine has the largest population, Kazakhstan has the second largest, Uzbekistan, Moldova, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania .
 Over 3. million Ethnic Russians live in the United States . It is the third largest Russian diaspora in the U.S., making it the third biggest .
 Russians make up roughly 25% of Estonian and 27% of Latvian populations . Russians are in Estonia, Latvia, Estonia and Latvia .
 The greatest concentrations of Ethnic Russians are in Crimea and the Donbass region, followed by the eastern sliver of Estonia along the Russian border . The greatest concentration of ethnic Russians is in the Crimea and Donbass .
 Large concentrations of passport holding Russians in Transnistria and southern Moldova . There are also large concentrations of passports holding Russians .
 Large populations in Kazakhstan are relatively secure since that nation is fully wedded to Russian sponsored organizations . In the geo-strategic environment, large populations are relatively safe .
Unrest or perceived threats to any of these diaspora communities would represent the most likely risk of future conflict with Russia . The three nations specified would represent most likely risks of future conflicts .
 The Russian National Security Strategy until 2020 and the 2014 Military Doctrine describe the importance of the fonner Soviet states and buffer nations along Russia’s border . Former Soviet Spheres of Influence the Russian National security strategy until 2020 .
 Putin has attempted to invite many of the same nations into the various international organizations and collective security treaties Russia has created . Putin has tried to invite some of these same countries into the international organizations .
 Nations within this sphere and belonging to these organizations are critical allies for Russia . Any change to that status would be cause for Russian concern, says Russian official .
 Belarus is now the number one priority ally for Russia, with Kazakhstan close behind . Of these, Belarus is the most important ally to Russia .
 Any attempts by European nations to court Belarus into any association, or into the European Union would provoke a stark reaction from Russia .
 Any outreach to Kazakhstan would be met with a similar reaction by Russia . Russia has a similar response to Kazakhstan .
The frozen conflicts of Abkhazia and South Ossetia are also non-negotiable for Russia . The frozen conflicts are alsonon-negotiable for Russia.
 Russia has demonstrated a willingness to undertake militarily hostilities in Georgia . Russia had fostered U.S. relations with Georgia in the past .
 Russia has included these ‘republics’ in its strategic plans, defense commitments, and has invited them into its international organizations . Russia has also invited them to its international Organizations .
 Georgia has effectively blocked Georgia's ability to join NATO or the EU, since unresolved conflicts prevent membership acceptance . Georgia has also blocked Georgia’s ability to joined NATO or EU .
 A number of states do not belong to the CSTO or EEU, but the Russian NSS has openly described their desired inclusion .
 Moldova is the most concerning of the CIS nations for the NATO alliance . Moldova has been the most concerned of the countries for NATO .
 As a member of the CIS, the EEU extended an invitation to Moldova . Moldova has chosen instead to pursue an association with the European Union .
 Competing International Blocs Russia has indicated its desire to challenge western dominated institutions . The Russian government has said it wants to challenge Western dominated institutions.
 Russia perceives that the U.S. and Europe dominate most of the international organization power centers in the globe .
 It lists the United States and E.U. as economic rivals, NATO as a military rival, and UN agencies of the World Bank, IMF, and dollar based world economic system as barriers .
 These organizations play a dual role of both providing international prestige and power to Russia, as well as challenging western based organizations for power .
 Russia will continue to try to expand the EEU as a counterbalance to ELI expansion . The EEU will also continue to attempt to expand its own EEU in the future .
 The pull between these two organizations and the former Ukraine president Yanukovych to stop EU membership is one of the root causes behind the 2014 Ukrainian revolution and the greater Ukraine crisis . The pull is the ultimate choice by former president Yanukovych.
 How nations align with these two economic unions may be a source of friction in the future .
 The U.S. and NATO should have similar concerns about Russia’s creation of the CSTO as a Warsaw Pact revival .
 This organization is a reaction to Russia’s perceived threat from further NATO expansion . It is attempting to court non-aligned nations .
 Afghanistan and Serbia have been invited as observers, and indications are that Iran may follow . Afghanistan, Serbia and Afghanistan have also been invited .
 This organization could also serve as a bulwark against the rise of China and its influence in central Asia . However, this organization may also be a bulwart against China's influence in the region .
 Russia moved one step closer to consolidating its hold over one of the last vestiges of unclaimed territory left in the world . Russia submitted its 2002 Arctic claim submission to the UN .
 Russia's vast, yet unclaimed natural resources. This area is of utmost importance to Russia’s sense of great power status, which is derived from its territory .
 The U.S. estimates that the Arctic could contain 15% of the earth’s oil, 30% of natural gas, and 20% of its liquefied natural gas . The United States currently estimates that it could contain 10% of Arctic oil .
 Russia intends to open 16 ports along Arctic coastline, as well as 13 airfields and 10 air defense radar stations in the region . Russia also plans to open 13 airfield and 10 radar stations .
Five nations, including the United States, are laying claim to this region . How this competition plays out could lead to a future conflict between the U.S. and Russia . The United States is one of the five nations in the region .
 The U.S. will need a strong response from the United States to deter Russia’s pursuit of its interests that are counter to its interests . The United States will need to shape Russian efforts to instead focus their energy on interests that also benefit the U. S.
Thomas Christensen in The Contemporary Security Dilemma asserts that assurance must accompany deterrence . Christensen says assurance must be accompanied by deterrence .
 The Soviet Union was 1 Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War. The nuance of this point is that the United States threat to these core interests were credible and that the U.S. threat was credible .
 An example of the failure of deterrence and reassurance can be found in the Korean War . The Korean War is an example of a failure in deterrence.
 The U.S. forces in the area and South Korean forces on the peninsula did not represent a credible enough threat to deter North Korea and its Russian and Chinese sponsors from invading the south .
 The U.S. was “insufficiently reassuring’ to China that it would stop at the Yalu and not attack it . Later in the war, the United States.
 This lack of assurance led to China’s perception that attack into China was inevitable, and led to the ensuing escalation of the Korean War and Chinese invasion . China's perception of attack was inevitable led to escalation of Korean War.
 The U.S. must also reassure Russia that its core interests will be protected . The United States looks to deter modern Russia from further aggression .
 In October of 1962 the Soviet Union and the United States came close to nuclear war over the Soviet insertion of nuclear missiles into Cuba .
 The United States responded with a naval blockade, the visible threat of 200,000 invasion troops in Florida . The U.S. responded to the threat of air strikes or invasion .
 Krushchev announced the withdrawl to the communist Presidium by the 28 th of October .
 There is much speculation and analysis over the decisions that were made and why they were made .
 Some of this has been aided by the release of records in the United States and Russia . The Russian records were 4 Christensen, “The Contemporary Security Dilemma,” 8. 42 later closed .
There are important takeaways from this incident that still apply today . There are important takesaways from the incident that are still relevant today .
 Kh rushchev thought he could get away with placing missiles in Cuba and that Kennedy would not stand up to him . First, it is widely believed that Khrushchev thought that he would be able to get away.
 Russian leader's calculus changed after a strong military response and threat of an invasion changed the Russian leader’s calculus .
 Kennedy and Krushchev letters confirm that the missiles were removed because a compromise had been struck that reassured both nations’ core national interests .
 Krushchev promised to remove the missiles, if his more important national interest, was guaranteed by a U.S. pledge of non-invasion .
 There is also an indication that the United States agreed to the eventual removal of nuclear missiles in Turkey that similarly threatened Russia’s security .
 The U.S. effectively applied a strong military deterrent to roll back Russian aggression . The United States also assuring Russian core interests of sovereignty and security .
 There are two competing international relations worldviews that dominate much of the discussion over the modern U.S. strategic approach to Russia .
 Many misunderstandings between the two nations are at the heart of many of the misunderstandings .
 The first worldview is Realism, which in short believes that states will first and foremost act in their own national interests .
In doing so they will act predictably in the international environment as they engage in actions that increase their power . In doing so, they will be more likely to do so in doing so.
 Liberalism is founded in the conviction that international institutions foster a greater interdependence between nations and can thus lessen the likelihood of war .
 Gregory Miller. Gregory Miller, lecture Introduction to International Relations Theory, 25 Aug 2015 . Gregory Miller is the author of the book "International Relations Theory"
 The Liberalist worldview is that the U.S. should engage diplomatically with Russia, increase Russia’s involvement in international organizations with the United States . The recommendations from the Liberalist view are that the United State should increase Russia's involvement with international organizations .
 Russia, the U.S., and its European allies all see themselves and approach international relations . The problem is that these opposing solutions do not account for the distinctive ways that Russia and its allies see themselves .
Three stakeholders have unique strategic cultures and different worldviews that require a blended solution to ensure stability for the region . These three stakeholders have different cultures anddifferent worldviews .
 Historically, the U.S. projects a Liberalist worldview throughout its founding documents and National Security Strategy .
 The U.S. champions democracy for all, and then espouses the benefits of international cooperation through organizations and treaties . In these documents the United States champions democracy.
 In practice, much of the world sees the United States acting just as often in its own national interests . But in practice, the U.S. displays a more Realist worldview, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The U.S. only joins in treaties or organizations that are in its national interests . This perspective holds that the United States is interested in maintaining its primacy and power in diplomacy .
 The U.S., EU, and NATO have increased their power, it has come at the expense of Russian power . It perceives power as relative and believes that as the United States, EU and NATO are increasing their power .
 If Russia is to regain power, it would be at the expense of these same entities. Likewise, if Russia's power is restored, it could be at expense of the same entities .
 Russia identifies the U.S., EU, and NATO as the targets for any rebalancing of power . Russia also feels that its security is threatened by these specific entities .
 Fueling Russia’s insecurity is its perception that the U.S. says one thing, but does another, says Russia .
 The United States does not trust the United States and does not believe the U.S. will respect its national sovereignty .
 The Russian's believe they have tried the “western way’ of liberal democracy, but were not fully supported or accepted by the west . They fell into the chaos and decay that accompanied a rise in crime across the nation .
 It is this perceived betrayal and lack of trust that underpins Russia/ United States and Russia/westem European relationships. It is the perceived betrayal of Russia/United States, Russia/Westem European relations .
 U.S. and Europe must now accept that Russia is not going to become a liberal democracy anytime soon . The United States and Europe have now accepted that Russia will not become a democracy soon .
 They are not going to join the European Union and help create a post-modem era for that region . They are also not going on to join European Union .
 Russia has historically approached the international environment with a Realist worldview . That will not change. Russia has traditionally approached the world with a realist worldview.
 Centuries of conflict among European nations appear to have been quelled by European unification and integration . European Union and European unity appears to be the cause of the conflict .
 The EU’s shared beliefs of multilateralism, non-military solutions to conflict, and democratic and humanitarian values, all define their Liberalist worldview .
 The U.S. will need to find a way to blend its own competing worldview with that of Russia and the EU to create a balanced solution for regional stability .
 The U.S. must understand that there are three paths that can be taken . The United States must understand there are 3 paths to take .
 The Liberalist path the U.S. has been on is one that has allowed Russian aggression and expansionism to go unchecked .
 The opposite Realist path will most likely lead to a new cold war . Regional tensions, conflict over the arctic, conventional military build-up, increased espionage and cyber conflict, and even proxy wars .
 Russia does not have the resources to create the kind of conventional capability that it would need to confront the U.S. the way the Soviet Union once did .
 A conventional build up from the West would further push Russia into behaving much like the West did to counter the build up 7 Igumnova, ‘Russia’s Starategic Culture Between American and European Worldviews.
 Many of the U.S. and European approaches to Russia have served only to push Russia towards seeking a stronger relationship with countries in the East . The fact is that over the last decade, many of the United States and European approach to Russia has served to push the
 For the U.S. power has long come from its hard sources; a strong military and economic engine . For the United States, power has come from hard sources, including the military .
 The U.S. has been a key source of power and influence in the world for decades . U. S. has a strong international appeal and universal support of prosperity and freedom for all;e. Its soft power has been its international appeal .
 Teddy Roosevelt’s corollary was about the nation peacefully engaging and negotiating with adversaries . But not holding the stick over their heads .
 The reality is that the U.S. is not going anywhere and continues to grow more powerful . The United States is no longer going anywhere. The U.N. is growing more powerful.
 The real message that the U.S. should emphasize is that power is absolute and not relative, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the real message is that growth does not come at the expense of others .
 Other nations can grow stronger without affecting U.S. perception of their own strength and power . Other nations are able to grow stronger.
 The U.S. strategic approach to Russian revanchism should include demonstrating a credible deterrent strength, but with an assurance of sovereignty and security for all of the region, to include Russia .
 The contemporary approach of U.S. deterrence seeks only to provide assurances of security to its allies . It neglects the nuance of Christensen’s theory of deterrence, as described in the previous chapter .
 Russia will not fear being deprived of its core national interests if it complies with U.S. and NATO's demands . Reassurances, to Russia, must be built into deterrent threats, so that Russia can't be deprived of national interests .
 The U.S. can deter future Russian aggression first and foremost by recognizing Russia’s core national interests . The United States also possesses a credible threat to these interests to ensure compliance .
 The United States can respect Russian sovereignty and assure Russian security by continuing the defensive posture of NATO as a guarantee for European peace . U.S. DIME efforts should focus on reassuring Russia about these core interests .
 This statement questions the credibility of U.S. threats and undennines a key requirement of deterrence theory . This statement is the first time this has been made by the United States .
 The United States lost some credibility when it confirmed that Assad crossed the red line and used chemical weapons on his citizens . The U.S. did nothing about it .
 The United States is seen as having violated the sovereignty of several nations over the years, despite the legal basis used by the United States for these interventions . The U.S. has similarly diminished its credibility from a Russian perspective, as the U. S. has also diminished its
 The important diplomatic actions needed include calming real Russian fears that they will be the next nation invaded, either overtly or covertly,e.e. An assurance of Russian sovereignty .
 The U.S., in conjunction with NATO, should assuage Russian security fears through a cessation of NATO expansion, according to the U.N. The United States is working to persuade Russia that the nature of their aggression is what is driving nations to pursue NATO membership .
 Diplomatic steps can focus on areas of mutual interest, as described in the review of Russia’s NSS and Military Doctrine . Anti-terrorism, transnational crime, humanitarian assistance, etc.
 These proposals to isolate Russia internationally would be counterproductive at this juncture, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 It is counterproductive for the U.S. to avoid its leadership role in the ongoing multilateral discussions seeking to solve the conflict in Ukraine . It is also counterproductive to avoid the United States leadership role.
 The U.S. should remain an active leader in finding long term solutions for Syria . The United States should remain a leader in the fight against the Syrian regime .
 The U.S. should leverage Russian involvement in Syrian talks to start a dialog on Ukrainian solutions . The two critical issues are important national interests for both nations involved .
 Informational Russia perceives a direct threat to its national sovereignty . Informational Russian perceives the threat to the nation's sovereignty .
 The expansion of NATO to its borders, rhetoric against Putin's regime, and the regime’s perception that westerns are meddling in Russian internal affairs are cause for their gravest concerns .
 Russia believes NATO’s defensive reactions to the Crimea annexation could be a prelude to a NATO invasion of Russia . Russia believes the increased military posturing and increased exercise regime could lead to a military invasion .
 The U.S. strategic messaging should emphasize the importance of borders and sovereignty of all nations in Europe . Moldova, 14 Carafano and others, “United States Comprehensive Strategy Toward Russia’s” 51 the Baltics, Poland, and Russia.
 The United States should also reopen and explore Russia’s UN proposals for cyber norms . The U.S. should also explore Russia's UN proposals.
 This is a topic that could futher cooperation between the nations and should be explored through additional research . The topic should be discussed through further research, says author .
 The U.S. needs to show a credible strength in Russia's interests . The United States also needs to display a crediblestrength, says the author .
 The U.S. needs to reverse the perceived power vacuum created in Europe following the United States re-balance to the Pacific strategy .
 NATO Wales Summit agreement allows nations up to ten years to get there . It is not immediate enough for nations to meet their 2% military spending obligation .
 The balance of power void, real or perceived, requires an immediate shift to cover the gap . The Balance of Power void requires a shift in power to cover it .
 The recent stop gap announcements by the U.S. to inject greater military power into Europe are a good first step, but falls short . The U.N. has announced a plan to boost military power in Europe .
 The U.S. military presence in Europe has drawn down from its 300,000 personnel high during the Cold War to 35,000 troops .
 The increase of equipment and rotational presence, that is being suggested for 2016, is merely a band aid fix compared to the steps needed to provide a long term deterent solution .
 The U.S. should consider renewing the expansion of the European missile defense system, and an increased naval presence and the creation of strategic basing closer to the Arctic .
 The type of equipment and capability that should be re-introduced into Europe is a topic that could be further explored . The type and capability of equipment should be returned to Europe.
 The exploration would be wise to consider the destabilizing effect that purely offensive capability would have on the region .
 Russia is already fearful for its security and the introduction of too much offensive capability could lead to a security dilemma . An anns race could further destabilize the region .
 The military power must focus on building NATO partner capacity and U.S. military to Russian military exchange . The United States must build its own military capacity and partner capacity .
 The exchanges and dialog should focus on common interests and concerns, such as international terrorism, transnational crime, and WMD proliferation .
 Russian military to observe humanitarian assistance and counter-terrorism exercises as a first step . These actions should include an invitation for the Russian military. The Russian military should also be invited to observe the exercises .
 As exchanges and dialog grow, the United States could eventually seek to invite Russia to observe NATO defensive exercises and gain a United States or NATO invitation to observe the Shanghai Cooperation Organization exercises .
 Both Russia and China seek an alternative vision of global governance and development, especially western backed economic institutions like the International Monetary Fund and World Bank .
 Economic sanctions against Russia are pushing 53 further towards that model and integration with the east instead of the west . Russia's economic sanctions are pushing them further towards the east .
 Europe used to get 30 percent of its natural gas from Russia . The pain from the economic sanctions as felt in certain European countries is loosening the resolve .
 The sanctions will not be able to last much longer, and the U.S. and Europe will lose their leverage . Europe is highly reliant on Russia for energy and fairly well integrated with Russia’s economy prior to the conflict .
 Progress in Syria with the promise of reengagement on Ukraine could be the right carrot and stick approach to tie the loosening of sanctions to Ukraine .
Over the last decade, Russia's increased aggression towards its neighbors has raised fears for the continued stability of the European continent . Russia’s increased aggression has raised concerns for the stability of Europe .
 Cyber attacks in Estonia, war against Georgia, the annexation of the Crimean peninsula, and the support to Ukraine’s eastern rebellion are all consistent with Russia's undeterred pursuit of its national interests .
 aggressive expansionism has often gone hand in hand with the rise of strong autocratic Russian leaders . Russian history and strategic culture revealed .
 Russian leaders have often leveraged certain unifying identities, such as Christian Orthodoxy, Pan-Slavism, and Russian nationalism . They seek to rally the Russian people’s support in pursuit of security for the nation .
 President Putin's rise to power only serves as a confirmation that Europeans have held false hopes for Russia to quickly become a liberal democracy and to integrate into the greater European Union .
 Putin does not want Russia to become yet another European Union or NATO nation, or a pawn to western dominated institutions, or worse, a lone outlier .
 He seeks to expand Russian influence over its former Soviet spheres through alternate international organizations and economic and military alliances . He also wants to expand Russia's influence over the former Soviet sphere .
 Instead of integrating Russia into western institutions, the growth of these institutions towards Russia’s borders has caused Russia to act out of fear .
 This fear is a primal instinct rooted deeply in Russian strategic culture and in its quest for security from its perceived enemies .
 This quest often puts Russia at odds with the U.S., 55 NATO, and the European Union .
 Russia’s continued pursuits could lead it into additional conflicts with the U.S. and Europe over key issues like ethnic Russian populations throughout Eastern Europe .
 Christensen illuminated examples where Russia has been successfully deterred from pursuing its objectives that were at odds with the U.S. His theory proposed that deterrence is effective only if a credible threat is accompanied by a credible assurance .
 This thesis elucidates that sovereignty and security are two of Russia's core national interests . Assuring these interests is what Russia values the most .
 The U.S. must be capable of both putting these interests at risk and assuring their protection . The United States must be able to deter Russia from pursuing objectives that are counter to the United States.
 A pure application of military power, without proper diplomatic outlets and assurances, could lead to an undesired escalation of conflict . But deterrence theory postulates, and history shows, that a pure application, without the proper diplomatic outlet and assurances in place, could be dangerous .
 The U.S. is pursuing a strategic approach to Russia that blends deterent strength, that a Realist nation understands . The United States and its European allies could achieve greater stability and security for Europe .
 Carafano, James Jay, Ted Bromund, Dean Cheng, Luke Coffey, Lisa Curtis, Helle Dale, Michaela Dodge, David Inserra, Daniel Kochis, Ryan Olson, James Phillips, Ana Quintana, Bryan Riley, Brian Slattery and William Wilson
 Principles of the State Policy of the Russian Federation in the Arctic Until 2020 . The Russian Federation will be in charge of the Arctic until 2020 .
Yeltsin and Putin Legacies, Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2007. Lost in Translation: Yeltsin.
 He was selected for Joint Undergraduate Navigator training Pensacola, Florida and F-15E Weapons Systems Officer training at Seymour Johnson AFB, North Carolina, graduating in 2000 .
 He has completed numerous F-15E operational and training assignments at Mountain Home AFB, Idaho and Seymour Johnson AFB . He has also completed a Joint Staff assignment at Yongsan, South Korea .
 He has completed two flying deployments in support of operations in southwest Asia . He has been awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and Air Medal .
 LtCol Nieman just completed Command of Air Combat Command’s Training Support Squadron, Langley AFB, Virginia .
 He is married to former Jennifer “Gigi’ Jordan of Garland Texas . They have four sons, Calvin, Isaac, Nicholas and Daniel; ages 13 to 7 .