 The European Union is still the world's first economic and trade power . European nations have been hard hit by the recent recession while other countries have experienced rapid growth .
 The EU's internal problems have made us concentrate our efforts on the EU’s internal problems, with the consequent loss of clout in international affairs . However, these years of economic crisis have made our efforts to focus on the European problems .
 The European Union’s external actions convey its way of understanding the world, freedom, personal rights, and its idea of justice .
 The CFSP is also important at the internal level, as it facilitates cooperation among member states and creates more opportunities for inter-member consensus and compromise .
 European foreign policy cannot continue to be a mere declaration of intent, says the European Union . European countries are unwilling to relinquish one iota of their sovereignty, says EU official .
 We must decide where we want to go, what role we need to play in international affairs, and how to achieve those goals . We need to decide where to go and what role they want to play, and what to do .
 European foreign policy from both the institutional and operational perspectives . The current moment and the forecast for the future will be considered in the future .
 Many of today’s security risks, such as cybercrime or transnational terrorism, are global and cannot be dealt with fully or effectively from a position of national sovereignty .
 The scenario has changed substantially since the early days of the European Union . The situation has changed significantly since the start of the EU.
 Many countries already surpass the EU states in population, size, and economic growth . Many countries that have emerged in recent years already surpass EU states .
 All of them want to participate in global decision-making processes and influence the course of world events . All of the world's leaders want to be involved in the process of making decisions .
 The EU must act in unison and speak with one voice, says the EU . In this new context, European countries have to understand that, in order to be an international actor, they must act together .
 If each member state acts individually, Europe will find itself relegated to the role of mere spectator in the arena of major world events . Neither the capacity nor the power to influence their outcome will be able to influence the outcome .
 The task of materializing European foreign policy has proved to be quite complicated. Unfortunately, the task of Materializing European Foreign policy has been quite complicated .
 The EU member states have very different historical backgrounds, and consequently their understanding of foreign policy varies widely .
 Geographical location is undoubtedly a key factor in defining the interests and agenda of each country, as are cultural and linguistic ties . Geographical locations are crucial to defining interests and agendas in each country .
 Some European states are permanent members of the U.N. Security Council . Others are more interested in handling their border problems .
 Getting so many different voices to sing the same tune is a task that requires a great deal of finesse as well as a strong commitment .
 The channels and structures for developing European foreign policy have evolved since the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty, and the process is still underway .
 The High Representative and the European Exterior Action Service are charged with representing the EU abroad . They have already made great strides, especially since signing of the Treaty of Lisbon .
 Nevertheless, we must continue working to achieve greater integration and a clearer sense of direction . We must continue to achieve better integration and better direction, says the author .
 At this point in time, international issues largely dominate the European political scene . At this time, European issues largely dominated the European politics .
 Many of the world's most volatile and troubled regions lie just across Europe’s borders . This proximity increases our responsibility to design and implement solutions .
 A conflict broke out a little over one year ago that has substantially complicated relations with Russia . The conflict has revived dynamics we assumed had been extinguished at the end of the Cold War .
 The EU has maintained relations with Ukraine since it became an independent state in 1991 . The EU maintains relations with the Ukraine since the country became anindependent state.
In 2007, the EU and Ukraine began negotiations on the Association Agreement, a free trade treaty with a few political ramifications . Later, in 2007, they began talks on a free-trade treaty with some political ramifications. In 2007, it was the first time the two countries had begun negotiations
 The case of former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko led to a diplomatic dispute . ratification of the agreement was postponed after the case of the former PM .
 Russian counteroffer to buy 11 billion euros’ worth of Ukrainian bonds and substantially lower the price of gas exports to Ukraine . Instead, he accepted the Russian counter offer to buy eleven billion euros' worth of Ukraine bonds .
 From that moment on, protests by citizens and the pro-European opposition against the Yanukovych government grew more frequent and intense .
 The diplomatic and economic crisis led to an escalation of violence and tension between pro-Russian and pro-European factions, with notorious consequences in Crimea and eastern regions of Ukraine .
 President Putin signed a treaty confirming the peninsula's annexation to the Russian Federation . Crimea had always been a part of Russia .
 Donetsk and Luhansk proclaimed themselves independent republics . A few months later, the provinces of Donetsk andLuhansk declared themselves independent. The decision had to be respected .
 The Russian government’s actions during these events amounted to a violation of international law . European Union and others have responded with sanctions .
Since 1991, since 1991, Russia has acknowledged the country's territorial integrity in several international treaties . We cannot overlook the fact that, when Ukraine declared its independence from the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
 Moscow’s decision to challenge Ukrainian sovereignty over the Crimean Peninsula and the eastern region of Donbas represented a breach of the security order established by consensus in the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe planted the seed of the organization . The participating states committed to respect the inviolability of frontiers, the territorial integrity of states .
 The EU has always desired to maintain good relations with Ukraine, though ideally without straining EU-Russian relations . For its part, the European Union has always wanted to maintain a good relationship .
 Russia's failure to honour commitments made when it signed these agreements must be analysed in the context of a specific juncture in Moscow’s history . Russia has been accused of failing to honour the commitments made by Russia .
 The Kremlin has been overt in its attempts to maintain very close ties to former Soviet bloc countries . The Kremlin is trying to draw the USSR's former members closer to themselves .
 Since the second NATO expansion into Eastern Europe, rapprochement between certain countries and the European Union has been interpreted as a threat to Moscow’s spheres of influence . The potential to lessen its influence in the international arena.
 Russia has proved, as it already did in Georgia in 2008, that it is prepared to use force and ignore its contractual obligations . Russia has shown that it's prepared to ignore its obligations .
 In February 2015, Germany, France, Ukraine, and Russia signed the Minsk II Agreement . The agreement was signed after nearly a year of fighting .
 From a military standpoint, the agreement basically entails a ceasefire and the withdrawal of heavy weapons . The agreement basically includes a ceasefire.
 Politically, it calls for a constitutional reform to give the provinces of eastern Ukraine greater autonomy .
 At the end of the process, the central government in Kiev will once again have full control over the Ukrainian-Russian border, currently in the hands of rebels .
 For months, a ceasefire has been in effect in the conflict zone, albeit with frequent accusations of truce violations on both sides .
 Moscow, currently plagued by serious economic troubles, has no intention of resuming military action . It is not yet clear whether it is willing to negotiate .
 Ukraine's local elections in Ukraine have been held. We will have to wait and see how events unfold in the coming months, once the elections are held .
 The elections are scheduled to take place across the country except in the eastern territories controlled by pro-Russian separatists . The separatists have called their own independent elections in violation of the Minsk II terms .
 The dispute with Russia needs to be a priority on the European agenda, says David Cameron . Russia has been involved in a dispute with the European Union for years .
 It is worrying that countries which are neighbours of both the EU and Russia believe they must choose between strengthening ties with Europe and being loyal to Moscow .
 The EU is set to review the sanctions regime against Russia in January 2016 . The measures will almost certainly be renewed unless Moscow's position changes substantially .
 Europe is affected, to a large extent, by political instability in North Africa and the Middle East given their geographical proximity .
 The U.S. has had the self-appointed mission of ensuring security in the Middle East for many years . America’s declining fuel dependency and the shift in its foreign policy towards Asia has altered the nature of United States involvement in the region .
 Europe’s heavy reliance on fuel imports and the security risks posed by instability make EU involvement an inevitable necessity .
 The spread of war and violence across the region is creating a major humanitarian crisis . The spread is creating an humanitarian crisis in the region .
 At present, there are more than four million refugees from Syria alone, according to data supplied by the UN Refugee Agency .
 Most seek asylum in neighbouring countries and remain in the region . Every day many of them risk their lives to reach Europe .
 We must be quick in our humanitarian response and honour our legal obligation to give asylum to those fleeing from persecution . We must also honour the legal obligation of giving asylum to people fleeing persecution .
 This dire emergency should also spur us to step up our involvement in the search for solutions to the conflicts that have forced so many to seek refuge in Europe . This dire crisis should also Spur us to stepped up our role in the hunt for solutions .
 The uprisings are a product of social tensions caused by the difficult economic situation and the people’s frustration with the socio-political scenario in their countries . In some cases, they have actually degenerated into terrible conflicts .
 In Libya, the nation has been in a state of chaotic upheaval since Gaddafi’s death . The nation has also been in the state of chaos since Gaddafi's death .
 The country is assailed by myriad internal and external challenges . The growing division of the country culminated in the creation of two governments .
 The repercussions of the Libyan conflict for migratory pressure and the possibility that it may spread to the rest of this already debilitated region pose real threats.
 In the early days after the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak, in 2011, it looked like Egypt was on the verge of a transition to democracy .
 The Muslim Brotherhood led by Mohamed Morsi was voted into power in the 2012 presidential elections . In the 2012 elections, the Muslim Brotherhood was led by Morsi .
Egypt's new president is trying to incorporate the precepts of Islamic law into the Egyptian legal system . The country had to face the serious economic troubles that had plagued it for years .
 The greatest trigger of social unrest was the attempt to legislate an expansion of the government’s executive powers . Ultimately, the greatest trigger was the attempted expansion of executive powers.
 The Egyptian army staged a coup and the head of the Armed Forces, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, became president . On 3 July 2013, after days of mass demonstrations demanding Morsi's resignation.
Since then, the country has been governed by a military dictatorship . Since then, violence has diminished, but violence has been diminished .
 A group of Egyptian demonstrators in Cairo express their support to the Syrian Revolution . The Syrian Revolution has been called the Syrian revolution .
 In Yemen, the instability ushered in by the January 2011 protests was compounded by the uprising of the Houthis . The Houthis, an insurgent Shiite group, managed to seize control of the nation’s capital .
 This clash has once again evidenced the rift between Shiite and Sunni Muslims . The role of Iran and Saudi Arabia as the respective leaders of these factions is a determining factor of many other conflicts .
 Iran, with a Shiite majority, and Saudi Arabia, where the majority are Sunni Muslims, have been vying for supremacy in the region for years . Iran is the most populous country in the world .
 Of the total Syrian population at the start of the conflict, over half has been displaced . This means that, of the total Syria population, at the beginning of the war, more than half have been displaced.
 Many of the people forced to flee from their homes by the threat of persecution and lack of protection take refuge in neighbouring countries such as Turkey, Lebanon, or Jordan, which are suffering a massive refugee influx .
 The radicalization of the rebels opposed to Al-Assad, the involvement of so many foreign powers in the conflict in one way or another, and the rise of extremist terrorism all represent enormous obstacles on the road to peace .
 Al-Assad’s regime has been backed by Russia and Iran from the outset . The Sunni opposition has garnered the support of Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Qatar .
 The rest of the international community has been hesitant and reluctant to get involved, influenced by the memory of past experiences in Afghanistan and Iran .
 Since the chemical weapons disarmament deal between the U.S. and Russia, there have been several attempts to open a new dialogue .
 In the interim, the Syrian opposition has splintered and the more radical factions have gained considerable ground . The more radical groups have gained significant ground .
 The rise of terrorist groups, namely the Islamic State and al-Qaeda factions, has made the situation even more dramatic for civilians . A solution to the conflict would also be critical for resolving many other regional conflicts .
 Tunisia is a successful political transition after deposing the dictator Ben Ali . Today the country is a democracy . Tunisia is now a democracy.
 The situation is fragile and the threat of terrorism is also present, as confirmed by the tragic events that took place several months ago . However, the situation is still fragile, according to the situation .
 The Syrian civil war was where it grew and flourished . The organization was established in Iraq in 2003 and played an important role in Iraq War .
 In 2014 the group severed its ties to Al-Qaeda and is steadily gaining ground in Syria and Iraq . It already controls a significant part of the territory in Iraq and Syria .
 ISIS has global ambitions that have already been made apparent to us . Despite being a local organization, ISIS has a global ambitions .
 To date, it has recruited over 25,000 members from more than one hundred different countries . The organization's field of action and dangerousness has increased .
 The roots of fundamentalism are not limited to the region where this and other like-minded terrorist groups were spawned . There are numerous individuals in many other parts of the world who seem to share their intentions .
 Europe must consider other challenges of a global nature, according to the European Union .
Today we live in a global world where borders are increasingly permeable, and many of the security threats we now face are global as well .
 Security issues such as the proliferation of nuclear weapons, organized crime, arms and human trafficking, and pandemics, affect us all .
 Information and communication technologies have become a fundamental part of daily life for the majority of the world’s population . Technology is a cornerstone of innovation and economic growth .
 The information they contain or convey can be accessed and used for criminal purposes . These technologies have enormous benefits, but they also entail substantial risks .
 The number, magnitude, and impact of cyberattacks are on the rise, and so is the level of concern about the high vulnerability of the internet . Almost every economic activity relies in this day and age, according to experts .
 The internet was designed as an essentially open platform, because its creators did not anticipate that it would be used to offer a wide range of critical services requiring tighter security .
 The difficulty with cyberattacks is that they take place in a setting, which is characterized by its broad accessibility . By definition, cyberattacks make it less secure .
 The difficulty of tracing attacks and the fast pace of technological change makes it very hard to come up with a response capable of dissuading hackers .
 IT security mechanisms cannot be designed for just one jurisdiction, because there are no political borders in cyberspace .
 The same is true of climate change, which threatens to destroy our environment and means of subsistence, especially for future generations .
 The European Union is responsible for a significant part of past and current CO2 emissions . It must play a leading role in the efforts to mitigate climate change and help other countries to do the same .
 This has been the most important summit of recent years, and it is imperative that all participating countries reach a consensus and set ambitious goals for the future . The summit is held in New York City, New York .
 European states have a duty to take the lead, set a good example, show strong political will and use their diplomatic experience and power to facilitate an effective agreement .
 Other countries are claiming their rightful place in the international political arena . Other countries have now come to the fore, propelled by strong economic growth, and are claiming the rightful place .
European countries should draw two important conclusions from this new scenario . European countries should also draw two key conclusions from the new scenario.
 We need to focus our attention on the evolution of emerging powers like China, India, and Brazil . We must focus on emerging powers such as India, India and Brazil.
 The balance of world power is shifting towards them, forcing us to alter our perspective . We must make it an urgent priority to study and thoroughly comprehend their reality, the authors say .
 It is vital that the European Union revise its strategic interests and the framework of its relations with China and other Asian countries .
 The Asia-Pacific region has recently acquired great strategic importance in international relations . The region has also acquired great Strategic importance in the region .
 We have already witnessed the reorientation of U.S. interests in Asia, negotiating and signing the TPPA and establishing trade ties with these countries .
 The region is marked by numerous territorial and border disputes, nationalist movements, and a considerable level of distrust among countries . The region has been marked by many territorial disputes and nationalist movements .
Security issues are often overshadowed by economic growth. Security issues often overshadow economic growth in the world .
 There are enough elements in place for important security challenges to emerge, and the EU should monitor them closely . The EU should be monitoring them closely, but there are many other issues to be addressed .
 China, Indonesia, Malaysia, Vietnam, the Philippines, Philippines, Brunei, and Taiwan are all Asian countries .
 All of them have claimed sovereignty over these waters on more than one occasion . All of the countries have done so so far . All have claimed control of these waters .
 Some offer historical justifications, while others base their claims on the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea .
 The South China Sea is a vital intersection of maritime traffic for all seven countries . It is the most important intersection of the sea in the world . The sea is also a vital location for the United States, Canada, Australia and China .
 The Strait of Malacca is the shortest route between Asian oil consumers and their suppliers in Africa and the Persian Gulf .
 In 2013, 27% of all oil carried by sea and over half of all liquefied natural gas passed through this channel . The channel is the largest channel in the world of natural gas .
 disputes over the waters of this sea have been fairly low-key. Thus far, disputes over waters of the sea have not been very high-key .
 China’s growing economic and military power in the region could break the status quo and lead to full-blown conflict . However, China's growing economic power could also lead to conflict .
 Tensions between these countries mark the South China Sea as a new centre of interest for global security and, more generally, for international relations . Tensions are growing between China and China .
 Europe may seem far removed from Europe and its interests, but problems here could have devastating consequences for the global economy .
 The second conclusion is that, given the influence they have acquired of late, the emerging economies must be included in global governance structures .
 Recently we have seen how China is taking steps to create global governance organizations . We have also seen how the Chinese government is creating a global governance organization .
 China's large foreign exchange reserves have made it the world's biggest provider of finance to developing countries . The China Development Bank now grants more loans than the World Bank .
 China created the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank in October 2014 . It has already been joined by several European countries, including France, Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom .
 The AIIB has created a forty-billion-dollar fund to develop the ‘New Silk Road’ The fund will affect Europe directly, according to the A IIB .
 The project includes an overland economic belt that will begin in Xi’an and run westward to Venice . The belt will pass through Central Asia, Turkey, Russia, and Germany .
 The route will include stops at Singapore, Calcutta, Colombo, Mombasa, Athens and other ports . It will also incorporate a maritime route stretching from China’s east coast to Venice .
 The project’s investments will affect approximately 60 countries . One of the principal ports of call will be that of Piraeus, in Greece .
 China will consolidate China as the EU's number-one trade partner . The Chinese government is determined to prioritize Euro-Asian relations .
 In this new scenario, it is crucial that the EU continue to strengthen in­ternational and trade ties with the Asian continent .
 Vietnam signed a free trade agreement with Vietnam in August 2015 . It is the first time a deal has been signed in this area. Vietnam has signed a deal with Vietnam since 2007 .
 Asia is often analysed primarily from a ­economic standpoint . However, there are other aspects of Euro-Asian relations worth noting .
 The EU can offer the benefit of its extensive experience in regional integration, according to the European Union . For example, in an Asian continent that has achieved economic but not political integration, the EU can help promote long-term stability .
 ASEAN Regional Forum would be the only security dialogue forum in the Asia-Pacific in which the EU has its own seat . The EU has a greater degree of EU involvement in Asia's existing regional integration structures .
 The EU must offer an appropriate response to the magnitude of the challenges it faces and what is expected of it in the world . The EU has to offer a response to what it faces in the future .
 The EU's High Representative for Foreign Affairs, Federica Mogherini, has been mandated to prepare a new global strategy on foreign policy . The new strategy is needed to promote external action and increase its effectiveness .
 Approval of this policy, slated for June 2016, will be a major step forward for the EU . The policy will address the most pressing needs in this area .
 One of the ways in which the EU can implement its foreign policy quite successfully is through diplomacy, says the EU .
 The EU is regarded by many as an experienced mediator in settling numerous conflicts . It is precisely in the role of negotiator that it achieves many of its goals .
 The nuclear deal with Iran, signed this past July, is a good example of what the EU can accomplish thanks to its diplomatic skills .
 It was the EU who initiated negotiations with Iran in 2003 . At the time we were the only ones involved in the talks .
 The EU joined forces with the permanent members of the UN Security Council and Germany to form a group called the E3/EU+3. Later on, the EU joined members of UN Security council and Germany.
 The agreement recently signed with Iran regarding its nuclear programme has opened a window of opportunity for greater stability to the Middle East .
 Teheran’s ties with the Iraqi government, the Al-Assad regime in Syria, the Houthis in Yemen, and Hezbollah in Lebanon make it a key player in regional politics .
 Russia is trying to recover mutual trust that has been lacking since the beginning of the Ukraine dispute . It is very important that we attempt to strengthen ties and recover the mutual trust .
 The EU must firmly insist on the observance of international law. This has to be our red line, says the European Union .
 The harmonious coexistence of Europe and Russia in the Euro-Asia region is undoubtedly a very positive thing for both countries . The harmoniously coexistence in the region is a very good thing for the two countries .
 It will take some time for tensions created by this conflict to die down so that we can rebuild a climate of mutual trust . But, it will undeniably take time for the tensions to die.
 Another of the EU’s objectives must be to promote stability and democracy in Eastern Europe and the Balkans .
 It would be advisable for the EU to pay special attention to voices outside government channels .
 Civil society demands, with growing insistence, better governance and more respect for civil rights . Civil society needs more respect and better governance .
 In the Middle East, the EU can become a key facilitator in orchestrating regional agreements . The EU cannot be expected to solve the conflicts, but it can use diplomacy to help the region .
Bringing Sunni and Shiite Muslims together is the key to peace in the Middle East . promoting this should be the goal of all other actors with an interest in ensuring the region's stability .
 Peace cannot be achieved with a solution imposed by outsiders, says the author . This would only plant the seed of a new and perhaps even deadlier conflict in an area whose population has already been devastated by too many years of war .
 It is essential that the EU maintains a constant dialogue with regional powers like Iran and Turkey .
 Members of the Eurocorps service hold the European flag in front of the Parliament . The flag is held by members of the European Parliament .
 Helping to build more capable and effective government bodies is the best way to wrest power away from terrorist groups and organized crime .
 In fact, in the countries of the Sahel this seems to be the only viable way of achieving the stability that is so necessary for their inhabitants and security . The Sahel is one of the countries in the region.
 The EU does, in fact, have one sphere of action that takes precedence above all others . Relations with neighbouring countries must be handled with special care .
 grouping many different countries together under the concept of southern or eastern neighbourhood has proved inefficient . Each neighbouring state evolves at a different pace, according to experts .
 Other countries, such as Turkey, are key pieces for addressing many current problems . Turkey, though not really neighbours in a technical sense, is key to addressing many problems .
 It is a mistake to believe that we can apply a single policy, almost automatically, to very different countries . It is the first time we have been able to apply one policy to a single country .
 Having a separate policy for each nation may be more complicated, but it is far more efficient . It is more efficient for each country to have a different policy .
 EU external action needs to be more flexible to increase the effectiveness of all its measures . EU foreign policy needs to increase its effectiveness of its measures.
 Adopting an approach to other countries that is more political, via diplomatic channels, and less bureaucratic and regimented is a more effective way of increasing the EU’s commitment to improving living conditions, democratization, and economic and social progress .
 The European Union has a responsibility to create the necessary conditions for averting war . The EU has the responsibility to make sure the conflict is averted .
 We cannot hope to combat the many threats to European and global security unless we work to perfect a common security policy . We need to work together to combat many threats.
In terms of military might, the individual relevance of European countries is waning, and conflicts on our borders underscore the need to be prepared for any contingency .
Over the past several years, the economic recession in Europe has caused governments to be less concerned with international security issues .
 The problems facing Europe have multiplied, and they are too great for any one country to solve on its own . Europe's problems are too big for any nation to solve, says David Cameron .
 In this global, multi-polar world, no nation can guarantee its own safety without assistance . In fact, in this global world, there is no nation to guarantee its safety without help .
 The EU's security and defence policy is one of the most difficult tools to implement in the context of the European project . The EU’s security and defense policy is a difficult tool to implement .
 differences between the domestic interests of member states have been more pronounced than in foreign policy . In matters of defence, differences between domestic interests and foreign policy are even more pronounced .
 The countries of Central and Eastern Europe are more concerned about the insecurity that Russian policies might create . Southern members tend to prioritize risks derived from conflicts in the Middle East and the challenge of mass migration in the Mediterranean .
 The European Security Strategy, which includes the common security and defence policy, was approved in 2003 .
 The world has changed substantially since then, and European strategy must take into account the current scenario . Europe's strategy must be taken into account.
 The European Council is aware of the need to reconsider European security and defence strategies in light of new threats . The CSDP was placed at the centre of the debate in December 2013 .
Several security policies have been adopted on specific issues to serve as a guideline for the actions of member states . Since then, several security policies are adopted on certain issues .
 The security strategy is being revised, and we must take the opportunity to move decisively towards greater integration, says the author .
 The effectiveness of the EU’s security strategy, which must go hand-in-hand with its foreign policy strategy, depends on cooperation and real commitment of its member states .
 Defence budgets need to be increased, but above all they must be used more wisely, minimizing inefficiency . Defence budgets must be increased.
 Better coordination among members will increase our global presence and capabilities, not by spending more, but by optimizing resources . Better coordination will increase the global presence of members .
 We must push for integration on security matters at the European level, with a strong emphasis on R&D+i, while reinforcing the role of the European Defence Agency .
 Another fundamental task is to ensure that the defence industry market works properly, making it more open and transparent to promote the beneficial exchange of technology and greater synergy .
 The EU needs to take the lead in designing global cybersecurity strategies, according to the European Union .
 There is no consensus on what the guiding principles of global cyber security should be . However, it is not clear what the principles should be.
 The EU must actively participate in the process of drafting a basic regulatory framework, similar to that which the international community has adopted on matters of global health or weapons proliferation . The European Union must also take part in drafting abasic regulatory framework .
 We need to contribute to the debate and shape the agreements that are eventually reached . We cannot afford to fall behind in the area where all of the world’s economic activities are concentrated today .
 Two-thirds of the global population will be connected to the internet by 2020 . By the year 2020, two-thirds will be in contact with the internet .
 A political union like the EU cannot allow its member states to face the challenges on their respective borders alone . The European Union cannot allow members of the EU to face their own challenges alone .
In order to forge a foreign policy that is truly common to all members, we must work together to identify the risks we face . The EU's potential role in implementing them.
 The best contribution that the EU can make to world peace is to stay united and prevent new conflicts in Europe .
 The EU, like every other global actor, has a great responsibility to act in the face of current problems and conflicts . There are many important ways to contribute to the design of conflict resolution mechanisms and multilateral institutions .
 The European Union has made great efforts to reconcile their diverse individual identities and seek common interests . It goes without saying that the countries which make up the European Union have made great effort to reconcile .
 They have created institutions and mechanisms for integration which, though imperfect, have proved to be successful . They have also created institutions that have also been successful .
 The multi-polar world we live in needs multilateral institutions to address global threats . Threats that can never be neutralized if each nation acts independently can beneutralized .
 Today’s problems will be solved, not by confrontation and brute force, but through dialogue and consensus .
 The EU is a necessary tool that allows the EU to defend European interests, says the European Union .
 We cannot remain on the sidelines as mere spectators in such a rapidly changing world, we must act . We must act, because those changes also affect us, says the author . We cannot be just spectators, says author .
 If we can agree on what the EU’s stance should be towards the rest of the world, our responses will be swifter and work towards achieving a common goal .