 Russian foreign policy has been increasingly active since the Soviet Union's collapse in 1991 . But observers note that the principles guiding it have been largely consistent since the collapse .
 The eastward expansion of NATO and the EU has led to a "serious crisis in relations" between Russia and the West .
 A second principle is to establish Russia as one of a handful of dominant poles in global politics . Russia is capable in particular of competing with the United States .
 debates exist on a number of related issues. Beyond these fundamentals, debates are also on a variety of issues .
 The Russian government is primarily implementing a strategic vision or reacting to circumstances and the actions of others . The extent to which the Russian leadership takes actions abroad to strengthen its domestic position. Such issues include whether strong responses by outside powers can deter Russian aggression .
Current members of these organizations mostly have joined voluntarily, if not always enthusiastically . Current members of this group have joined voluntary, but not always enthusiastic .
 The aims could include the facilitation of trade and investment, as well as protection against a variety of external threats . Also may include a desire to appease Russia, ensure opportunities for labor migration, promote intergovernmental subsidies, and bolster regime security .
 It has around 75% of the EEU's total population, approximately 85% of EEU members' total GDP, and more than 95% of CSTO members' military expenditures . The EEU has about 75%.
 Russia maintains active bilateral economic, security, and political relations with CSTO and EEU member states . Observers consider these bilateral ties to be of greater significance than Russia's multilateral relations within these two institutions .
 Russia's main military facilities in CSTO member states consist of bases in Tajikistan, Armenia, and Kyrgyzstan and radar stations in Belarus and Kazakhstan . The CSTO's main facilities in the region include bases in Armenia, Armenia and Belarus .
 Russia's partners also have cultivated strong ties with other countries . Russia's partner countries have also cultivated strong relations with other nations .
 Kazakhstan has developed strong relations with China and the West, particularly in the energy sector . Kazakhstan, in particular, has developed a strong relationship with the West .
 Armenia and Belarus have close bilateral relations with Russia in the security and economic spheres . They also have established economic ties to Europe .
 Armenia is a troop contributor to the NATO-led Kosovo Force and Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan . Both Armenia and Kazakhstan have established institutional partnerships with NATO .
 For more than 13 years, Kyrgyzstan hosted a major military base and transit center for coalition troops fighting in Afghanistan . The base is located in KyrgyZstan's capital city .
 These three states opt to pursue independent foreign policies and do not seek membership in Russian-led or other security and economic blocs . The three states are not seeking membership in Russia or other countries .
 Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan are significant energy producers . They partner with Russia but also have developed major alternative transit routes for oil and natural gas .
 Russia has cultivated a partnership with Uzbekistan, although the latter has competed with Kazakhstan for regional leadership in Central Asia . Russia has long-standing disputes with Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan .
 Russia's relations with Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine have been the most difficult . Russia's relationship with Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova has been difficult .
 Georgia has consistently pursued NATO membership and served as one of NATO's closest non-allied partners in Iraq and Afghanistan . Georgia has also served as a NATO partner in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 All three states have concluded association agreements with the EU that include the establishment of free-trade areas and encourage harmonization with EU laws and regulations .
 Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine also have territorial conflicts with Russia . Georgia and Moldova have territorial disputes with Russia, which stations military forces on the states' territory without consent .
 Russia went to war with Georgia in August 2008 to prevent Georgia from reestablishing control over South Ossetia . Georgia's relations with Georgia have been worsening since 2008 .
 The war resulted in the expulsion of Georgian residents and the destruction of their villages, as well as Russian recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 Russia has periodically imposed embargoes on key imports from Georgia and Moldova . Both states have managed to partially normalize relations with Russia .
 Many observers consider that of all the post-Soviet states, Ukraine has been the most difficult for Russia to accept as fully independent . Russia has been a major obstacle to Russia being fully independent.
 The Russian-Ukrainian relationship suffered some turbulence before 2014 . disputes over Ukraine's ties to NATO and the EU, the status of Russia's Crimea-based Black Sea Fleet and the transit of Russian natural gas via Ukraine to Europe .
 Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia by the end of 2013 . He postponed Ukraine's association agreement with the EU and agreed to substantial financial assistance from Moscow .
 The decision to postpone Ukraine's agreement with the EU led to the so-called Euromaidan protests . It led to a government crackdown on demonstrations, and violent clashes between protestors and government forces .
 Ukraine's armed conflict with Russia emerged soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014 . The conflict began soon after the former Ukrainian president fled to the country .
 In late August 2014, Russia began stepping up its support to separatists in reaction to a new Ukrainian offensive . Russia has been supporting separatists in response to the Ukraine offensive .
 The protocol failed to end fighting or begin a process of achieving political resolution to the crisis .
 The parties met again in February 2015 and reached a more detailed, twelve-point cease-fire agreement . Minsk-2 is known as Minsk.
 The agreement mandates a total cease-fire, the withdrawal of heavy weapons and foreign troops and fighters, and full Ukrainian control over its border with Russia . The agreement also mandates full Ukraine control over the border.
 The agreement calls for prisoner exchanges, the provision of humanitarian aid to residents of the Donbas . It also calls for the establishment of an international monitoring regime .
 The agreement also requires the Ukrainian government to adopt constitutional reforms . It also requires a special "decentralized" status for the separatist regions .
 The Ukraine conflict has heightened long-standing tensions between NATO and Russia .
Post-Cold War efforts to build a cooperative NATO-Russian partnership had at best mixed results . Even before the Ukraine conflict, post- Cold War efforts had a mixed results.
 Allies sought to assure a suspicious and skeptical Russia that NATO did not pose a security threat or seek to exclude Russia from Europe .
 The NATO-Russia Council was established in May 2002, five years after the 1997 NATO- Russia Founding Act provided the formal basis for bilateral cooperation . The principal institutional mechanism for NATO-Russian relations is the NATO- Russian Council .
 Russian and NATO leaders structured the NRC as a ""consensus"" forum of equals . Goals included political dialogue on security issues, the determination of common approaches, and the conduct of joint operations .
Formal meetings of the NRC were suspended in April 2014, but meetings reconvened in 2016 .
 disagreements within the alliance and between NATO and Russia persisted on some core issues . Nonetheless, disagreements within NATO and between Russia remain .
 A 2010 agreement to pursue cooperation on missile defense was seen as a significant breakthrough . The 2010 agreement was marked by disagreement and increasingly vocal Russian opposition to NATO plans .
 The United States has been a key architect of and contributor to NATO's reassurance and collective defense initiatives . The U.S. has sought to adjust United States force posture in Europe in response to Russian actions .
 The enhanced U.S. military presence in Eastern Europe has primarily consisted of increased rotational deployments of air, ground, and naval assets . The enhanced United States military presence has been increased in recent years .
 Congress has appropriated around $2. billion since 2015 for a new European Reassurance Initiative in the Defense's Overseas Contingency Operations account .
 Russian fighter aircraft intercepted U.S. and Swedish reconnaissance aircraft in 2014 . On four separate occasions during 2014, Russian aircraft intercepted United States and Sweden .
 In June 2014, Russian aircraft approached Danish island of Bornholm in what appeared to be a simulated attack . Russian aircraft appeared to have approached the island in June 2014 .
 Russian aircraft over the Labrador Sea practiced cruise-missile attacks against the U.S. mainland and Russian aircraft violated Swedish airspace while conducting a mock bombing run .
 In September 2014, Russian officials detained a Lithuanian shipping vessel operating in international waters in the Barents Sea . The vessel was towed to Murmansk, Lithuania .
 A "massive outburst" of Russian air activity occurred along NATO's borders in October 2014 in conjunction with a large Russian military aviation exercise .
 In October 2015, U.S. fighter aircraft intercepted two TU-142 reconnaissance/antisubmarine aircraft that reportedly came within one nautical mile of the aircraft carrier USS Ronald Reagan .
 In January 2016, SU-27 reportedly came within 5 meters of a United States RC-135 over the Black Sea .
 Russian SU-24 bombers made several low-altitude passes of the USS Donald Cook in the Baltic Sea in April 2016 .
 In September 2016, an SU-27 fighter aircraft intercepted a United States Navy P-8 conducting routine operations in international airspace over the Black Sea . The aircraft reportedly came within 3 meters of a collision at one point .
 Another two SU-24 aircraft and an IL-38 maritime patrol aircraft also flew near the destroyer . The aircraft were also flying near a destroyer .
 The EU has had to reconsider its relationship with Russia and the implications for European security and stability . Like NATO, the EU has been reconsidering its relations with Russia .
 Crafting common EU policies has been challenging, given various EU member states' different national histories and economic relations with Russia .
 Many in the EU have long advocated for a pragmatic "strategic partnership" with Russia based largely on commercial and energy ties .
 Poland and the Baltic states have tended to view Russia more as a potential threat to themselves and their neighbors . Countries such as Poland and Baltic states, by contrast, have seen Russia as a threat to them .
 The sharpness of such divisions within the EU appeared to diminish before 2014 . But Russia's annexation of Crimea caused a distinct shift in perceptions across the board .
 Traditional advocates of pragmatism moved more into alignment with those who have tended to view Russia with greater wariness . Those who have seen Russia as a nation with more wariness.
 Many in Europe have expressed concern about Russia's efforts to expand its influence on the Continent by other than military means . Many have also expressed concern over Russia's attempts to expand their influence on Europe .
 The Russian government is seeking to influence European politics, elections, and policymaking with an array of tools . Media reports and outside experts contend that the Russian government wants to influence Europe .
 Many European leaders worry about the possibility of Russian interference, including through cyberattacks on government or political party computer systems ahead of elections in France, Germany, and elsewhere in Europe in 2017 .
 Moscow began a gradual buildup of Russian personnel, combat aircraft, and military equipment inside Syria in the summer of 2015 .
 Russia began airstrikes in September,80 initially focusing on Syrian opposition targets . Some groups reportedly backed by the United States, including some backed by Russia .
 In 2016, Russia expanded its targeting to include Islamic State forces, although it continues to target U.S.-backed rebel groups occasionally .
 Russian officials have stated that they are merely fulfilling existing bilateral contracts . In addition, Russia continues to resupply Syrian military forces .
 Russia may continue operations against Syrian rebel groups . Russia may be weakening any credible or capable opposition to the Asad government .
 Russia could extend its operations in Islamic State-held areas of central and eastern Syria . In the short term, Russia could expand its operations.
 U.S.-assisted Syrian Democratic Forces move toward the Islamic State's declared capital at Raqqah . They eventually may be operating in proximity to Russian and/or Turkish forces .
 Russia may seek to retain influence with the Syrian government over the long term . Russia may advise and assist the Syrian military over the next few years .
 Russia has negotiated agreements to maintain a long-term presence at both the Tartus naval facility and the Hmeimim airbase . It could still gradually reduce its military footprint in the country to focus on other regional or international priorities .
 Analysts have offered a variety of motivations for Russia's intervention in Syria . Russia has been involved in the conflict in Syria since March 2013 .
 Russia's decision to enter the conflict when it did may have contributed to Russia's involvement . In general, the series of losses suffered by Syrian government forces in 2015, concerns about U.S. and other third-party security assistance .
 The prospect of Asad's defeat could have had several negative implications for Russia . Moscow believed such an outcome was possible, but it was not possible .
 Russia was seeking to expand influence to help establish itself as a global power and peer competitor to the U.S. It could have meant the loss of a key ally in the Middle East .
 Moscow has increasingly opposed as a dangerous example to Russia's neighbors and Russia itself . It could have set another major precedent for violent regime change in the Middle East .
 Russian authorities have insisted that the final beneficiary of the Asad regime's collapse would be the Islamic State . The Islamic State and other extremists would be likely victors in the ensuing contest for national power .
 Extremist success in Syria could promote the spread of Islamist extremism to other countries, including Central Asia and Russia itself .
 Russian authorities claim up to a few thousand Russian citizens have fought with the Islamic State and other extremist movements in Syria and Iraq .
 commanders once affiliated with the Al Qaeda-aligned Islamic Emirate of the Caucasus, established in 2007, reportedly have pledged allegiance to the Islamic State . They formed a local affiliate, the Wilayah Kawkaz, according to reports .
 Russia's leadership may have believed that intervention could help avoid certain negative outcomes . Russia's leaders may have thought that intervention may have been risky, although potentially risky .
 The leadership may have believed that intervention could achieve additional objectives if, as expected, it shored up the Asad regime, bolstered Russian influence in Syria, and staved off a takeover by Islamist extremists .
 Analysts suggest international criticism and sanctions related to Russia's actions in Ukraine encouraged Russian government to seek ways to reassert its global influence .
 Moscow could demonstrate its ability to project military power past its immediate neighborhood . It could test existing and new capabilities, and make Russia an unavoidable diplomatic player .
 Russia's foreign policy priorities traditionally have focused primarily on the post-Soviet region and the West . With the exception of its Syria intervention, Russia's Foreign policy priorities have been focused on the West.
 Russia is one of five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council . It plays a significant role in the U.N. Security Council's role .
Until 2014, Russia was a member of the Group of Eight, together with the West's seven leading economies .83 It is also aMember of BRICS, an alternative group of states with large economies that also includes Brazil, India, China, and South Africa .
 Russia has engaged on global issues such as nonproliferation, counterterrorism, counterpiracy, and global health . In these and other international fora, Russia has been involved in the fight against terrorism and counterpiracy .
 Russia has constructed nuclear power plants in Europe, Iran, India, and China, with more under construction or planned .
 Russia has cultivated a variety of bilateral partnerships around the globe . In addition, Russia is cultivating bilateral partnerships with other countries .
 Russia has concerns about China's inexorable rise. In Asia, Russia's main partner is China, with which it has close security, economic, and political relations .
 It has developed good relations with India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Vietnam, and across Southeast Asia . It also has developed relations with Pakistan, Pakistan and Afghanistan, and Vietnam .
 Russia's Syria intervention reflects a long-standing policy of fruitful relations with regional governments including Algeria, Egypt, Iraq, Libya, and Sudan . In the Middle East, Russia's intervention is exceptional in scope, but reflects a longstanding relationship with the region .
 Russia has sought to reengage with Soviet-era partners Cuba and Nicaragua, as well as Venezuela, Brazil, and others . In Latin America, Russia is seeking to reunite with Cuba, Nicaragua, Brazil and others.
 In sub-Saharan Africa, Russia has not developed similarly strong relations with Africa . Russia has also not developed similar strong relations in Africa .
 Russia's armed forces surprised most U.S. and European observers with their actions in Ukraine starting in March 2014 and in Syria starting in September 2015 . Russia's military action in Ukraine, Syria and Ukraine surprised most observers .
 Since the end of the Cold War, conventional wisdom about the Russian military has tended to indicate a force in relative decline . With aging Soviet-era equipment and with technology, the military is lagging well behind that of the United States and many NATO allies .
 Analysts noted the shortcomings of Russia's military appeared to be confirmed by its relatively lackluster performance in the 2008 conflict with Georgia .
 Russian special forces, elite airborne troops, and naval infantry effected a swift and bloodless seizure of Crimea in March 2014 .
 The subsequent Russian involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine highlighted the practice of "hybrid warfare," centered on the use of irregular "separatist" forces . The information and propaganda campaign orchestrated to create misdirection and spread an alternate international narrative .
 The campaign in Syria has allowed Russia to test and display how various components of its military work together in an expeditionary setting . The campaign has served a number of broader Russian interests and diplomatic objectives .
 Russia has been upgrading or constructing new facilities in the Arctic . The Arctic fell into disuse with the end of the Cold War .
 In December 2014, Russia launched a new Arctic Joint Strategic Command . The new command is based in the Arctic region .
 Russia has been forming two new brigades specializing in Arctic warfare . In addition, Russia has also formed two new Arctic warfare brigades .
 The reform program has focused largely on streamlining command structures and increasing professionalization, increasing unit combat readiness and personnel training, and reequipping forces .
 Russia's reform efforts have faced myriad challenges, partial reversals, and other setbacks . Some of the efforts appear to have been at least partly successful in achieving their objectives and yielding improved capabilities .
 The plan calls for upgrading 11% of military equipment each year . The final goal is to increase the share of modern weaponry to 70% of total inventory by 2020 .
 For 2015, President Putin related the expected share of "modern weapons" was 32% in the Army, 33% in Air Force, 40% in airborne units, and over 50% in Navy and aerospace defense forces .
 Some analysts have questioned the definition of modern in this context . In some cases, the term appears to include newer versions of older designs .
 The SAP has achieved some significant results, but has faced considerable challenges and encountered delays . The process has also faced some significant challenges .
 Russian economy has been negatively affected by falling oil prices and international sanctions . Since 2014, Russia has been affected by severe currency depreciation, high inflation, and increased capital flight .
 The downturn has strained public finances and complicated long-term budgetary and planning efforts . The downturn is blamed for a downturn in public finances .
 The approval of a new 30-trillion ruble SAP for the period 2016-2025 was postponed until 2018 due to the instability of economic conditions . Defense spending has declined in 2016, with an overall decline in defense spending .
 Russia's Western Military District stretches from its border with Finland in the north to the border with Ukraine . It includes Kaliningrad, a Russian territorial exclave wedged between Poland and Lithuania .
 The Western Military District includes the 6th Army, 20th Guards Army, and 1st Guards Tank Army . The 6th Air Force and Air Defense Army, as well as Airborne Troops, the Baltic Fleet, and naval infantry, and coastal defense forces .
 In May 2016, Russia announced plans to put two new divisions in the Western Military District and another in the Southern Military District . The new divisions will total approximately 30,000 new troops .
 Russia has stationed military forces in the breakaway regions of Georgia and Moldova without these states' consent . Russia also has stationed forces in Georgia, Moldova and Georgia .
 Russia's military bases in Abkhazia and South Ossetia have housed some 3,500-4,000 personnel each . Since Russia's 2008 war with Georgia, its military bases have housed more than 4,000 people .
 In Moldova, Russia continues to deploy 1,500-2,000 troops in Transnistria .96 in 2016, Russia finalized an agreement with the de facto authorities of Abkhazia .
 Russia has significantly increased the frequency of large-scale strategic exercises and short-notice "snap drills" Since 2009, Russia has increased the number of such exercises . Russia has gained experience in the rapid redeployment of large numbers of personnel.
 In 2009, Russia alarmed many U.S. and European observers with exercises rehearsing an attack on Poland and the Baltic countries . The exercises culminated in a simulated nuclear strike on Warsaw in 2009 .
 The Russian Air Force reportedly conducted a mock nuclear strike against Sweden in March 2013 .
 150,000 troops took part in the exercise in February and March 2014 . The operation helped to mask the seizure of Crimea and help to mask it .
 At the tactical level, smaller-scale unit exercises and live-fire exercises reportedly also have increased in frequency .
 NATO officials assert that Russia has staged about a dozen unannounced, large-scale, snap military drills in 2015-2016 . The drills include in the run-up to the July 2016 NATO summit in Warsaw .
 The exercises are presumed to be a signal to NATO through the display of forces and weaponry . They include testing units' readiness for battle, mobilization procedures, equipment, and command systems .
 NATO countries such as Poland, Romania and the Baltics are concerned about a repeat of tactics used during the takeover of Crimea .
 For more than 25 years, the U.S.-Russian relationship has gone through positive and negative periods . The relationship has also gone through negative periods.
 The spirit of U.S.-Russian "strategic partnership" forged by Presidents Bill Clinton and Boris Yeltsin in the early 1990s was gradually overtaken by increasing tension and mutual recrimination . In large part as a consequence of disagreements over Russian efforts to reestablish a sphere of
 Presidents George W Bush and Vladimir Putin believed they could restore U.S.-Russian relations, particularly in the aftermath of September 11, 2001 .
 The two countries reshaped their relationship on the basis of cooperation against terrorism and the economic integration of Russia with the West . Russia and the West are working together against terrorism .
Tensions arose again around the Iraq War, the so-called color revolutions in Ukraine, Georgia, and Kyrgyzstan . The Iraq War and the color revolutions were among the issues that arose again .
 The August 2008 Russian-Georgian conflict caused bilateral ties to deteriorate to their lowest point since the Cold War . The removal of chemical weapons from Syria was the first time chemical weapons have been removed .
 The Russian government also moved to dismantle a number of other links between Russia and the U.S.
 The day after the act was introduced, President Putin signed Russia's "foreign agent" law . The law requires foreign-funded organizations to register and identify as foreign agents .
 Russia requested that the United States close down foreign assistance under the U.S. Agency for International Development . In September 2012, Russia requested to close down international assistance .
 Russia was removed from the G8, and the United States, EU, and other allies introduced sanctions on Russia for its actions . Russia also was removed by the U.S. and the EU . The United States and EU also introduced sanctions for Russia's actions .
 Former President Barack Obama issued decisions to curtail economic relations with Russia . Obama declared Russia's activities in Ukraine as threatening the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, and sovereignty of Russia's neighbor .
 To date, designations are based on authority established in the executive orders . To date.
 President Obama identified individuals and entities subject to economic restrictions for having undermined the stability of Ukraine . President Obama issued executive orders on Friday .
 Any individual or entity designated pursuant to these orders is subject to the blocking of assets under U.S. jurisdiction .
 The Department of the Treasury has continued to designate individuals and entities . The initial findings of 2014 were made by the Treasury . The Treasury has been designated as individuals, entities .
 Department of the Treasury has restricted transactions related to investment or debt holding in key financial, energy, and defense companies . In addition, the department has restricted selected transactions relating to the development of deepwater, Arctic offshore or shale oil projects .
 Ukraine Freedom Support Act mandates sanctions against state-run arms exporter Rosoboronexport . Russian entities that transfer weapons to Syria, Ukraine, Georgia, or Moldova . Gazprom, if found to withhold natural gas from NATO member states, could also be hit .
 Russia has not reversed its occupation and annexation of Crimea, nor has it dropped support for the Donbas separatists . Russia hasn't reversed its annexation and annexed Crimea, but has not dropped support.
 Russia has signed two agreements that recognize all of the Donbas as a part of Ukraine and rebel military operations have been limited to areas along the perimeter of the current conflict zone . Since sanctions were introduced, Russian-backed military operations are limited to certain areas .
 On January 6, 2017, the Office of the Director of National Intelligence released a declassified report on Russian activities and intentions related to the 2016 U.S. presidential election .
 In the United States, targets allegedly included state-level officials and campaigns . Former NATO Supreme Allied Commander Phillip Breedlove and former Secretary of State Colin Powell were targets .
 The Obama Administration identified nine individuals and entities, including Russia's two leading intelligence agencies, as subject to sanctions for election-related malicious cyber activity . On December 29, 2016, President Obama imposed sanctions.
 Designees are subject to blocking of assets under United States jurisdiction, prohibitions on transactions with United States persons, and denial of entry into the U.S. Designees can also be denied entry to the United States .
 Congress has begun to investigate Russian interference in U.S. elections . Congress has been investigating Russian interference.
 In January 2017, the House and Senate Select Committees on Intelligence announced inquiries into Russian cyber activities and "active measures" surrounding the U.S. election .
 The Senate Armed Services, Foreign Relations, and Judiciary Committees have launched or announced related investigations . The Judiciary Committees are also looking into related matters .
 The 2017 Intelligence Authorization Act proposes the establishment of an executive interagency committee for countering active measures by Russia to exert covert influence .
 During the Cold War, arms control negotiations and treaties played a key role in the relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Arms control negotiations were often one of the few channels for formal communication . Arms control talks were often a few channels to discuss the issue .
 The talks provided the United States and the Soviet Union with a forum to air their security concerns and raise questions about plans and programs . The U.S. and Soviet Union discussed plans and plans for the U.N.
 During the 1990s, arms control no longer played a central role in fostering cooperation between the U.S. and Russia .
 The New START Treaty and the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty are the two fundamental nuclear arms control agreements between the U.S. and Russia . The 1987 treaty was signed by the United States and Russia.
 The New START Treaty expires in 2021, though it may be extended for five years . The two countries must meet the treaty's limits on strategic arms by February 2018 .
 The treaty also limits each side to no more than 1,550 deployed warheads . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and the United States .
 The treaty requires extensive monitoring and inspection activity . In addition, it requires extensive inspection and inspection activities .
 The United States and Russia also are party to other arms control treaties and agreements . The U.S. and Russia are also party to arms control treaty treaties and other agreements .
 Some of the agreements mandate strategic exercise and missile launch notifications . Some of these agreements mandate Strategic Exercise and missile launches .
 The United States signed a "hotline" agreement with the Soviet Union in 1963 . This agreement was updated in 2008 .
 The United States and Russia still use the system . President Obama used it to communicate with President Putin about the hacking and interference with the U.S. elections .
 The two countries also established Nuclear Risk Reduction Centers in 1987 . The two nations also established nuclear risk reduction centers .
 These centers have served as a mechanism for the parties to provide notifications and transmit data mandated by bilateral arms control agreements and the 1988 Ballistic Missile Launch Notification Agreement .
 The NRRCs remain significant for the implementation of other agreements .
 The United States has spent more than $10 billion to help Russia dismantle nuclear weapons . Since 1992, the U.S. has spent $10billion to ensure the security of nuclear weapons, weapons-grade nuclear material, other weapons of mass destruction .
 This funding supported the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, along with nonproliferation programs managed by the Departments of Energy and State .
 These programs helped to transport, store, and eliminate weapons in Russia . These programs also helped to reduce weapons in the country .
 They funded improvements in security at storage areas for nuclear weapons and materials . They also funded improvements at storage area for weapons and material .
 Over time, the U.S. allocated a growing proportion of its funding to projects that focused on securing and eliminating chemical and biological weapons .
 The memorandum of understanding that governed implementation of U.S.-Russian cooperation in threat reduction and nonproliferation expired in June 2013 . The memorandum was signed by the U.N. Security Council .
 The U.S. and Russia signed a new bilateral protocol to a 2008 Multilateral Nuclear Environmental Program in Russia Framework Agreement . The agreement is under which countries aid Russia with Soviet-era weapons cleanup work .
 Under new framework, two countries agreed to cooperate on some areas of nuclear security . But nuclear weapons dismantlement and chemical weapons destruction projects ceased .
 The United States and Russia continued to cooperate on nuclear nonproliferation objectives in other countries . The U.S. and Russia also continued to work together on nuclear Nonprol proliferation objectives .
 Joint nonproliferation efforts declined further after Russia's actions in Ukraine . Russia's action in Ukraine has been blamed for its actions .
 The U.S. Department of Energy put certain joint research projects and meetings on hold in April 2014 .
 The most prominent remaining bilateral nuclear security projects in Russia ceased in 2016 . The most significant remaining nuclear security Projects in Russia stopped in 2016.
 Many members of Congress have expressed their sense that the U.S. should adhere to core international commitments .
 Introduced January 6, 2017; referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs . Introduced January 5, 2017 .
 The Committee on Foreign Affairs was introduced January 13, 2017 . It is referred to the Committees on the Judiciary and Financial Services .
 Introduced February 2, 2017, referred to the Committee on Ways and Means . Introduced February 1, 2017 .
 The Russian Federation is subject to sanctions against the U.S. for alleged violations of Russian sanctions . The Russian government has been accused of violating the Russian constitution .
 To require certain actions regarding Russian Federation noncompliance with the INF Treaty, and for other purposes. To require some actions regarding Russia's non compliance with the Treaty, or for other reasons .
 Congress should expend the resources necessary to investigate the extent of Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election, he says . Congress should investigate whether there was collusion between persons associated with the Russian government and people associated with Donald J Trump's presidential campaign .
 Establishing a Joint Committee on Russian Interference in the 2016 Election and the Presidential Transition . The Joint Committee will be a joint committee for the 2016 election and the Transition .
Raoul Wallenberg's fate is still unknown after her death in 2010 . Wallenberg was elected to the House of Representatives in 2008 .
 The Russian Federation has called on the Russian Federation to stop the violence in Ukraine .
 Introduced February 3, 2017, referred to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Introduced February 2, 2017 .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization member countries to meet or exceed the two percent gross domestic product commitment to spending on defense . Urging North Atlantic treaty Organization members to meet two percent of their defense spending .
 A bill to establish an independent commission to examine and report on the extent of Russian official and unofficial cyber operations and other attempts to interfere in the 2016 U.S. national election .
 Introduced January 4, 2017, referred to the Committee on Rules and Administration .
 Introduced January 11, 2017, referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations. Introduced January 12, 2017 .
 The Select Committee on Intelligence reported on January 20, 2017 . The committee's report was released on January 12, 2017.
 Introduced January 12, 2017; referred to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs .
 A bill would provide for congressional oversight of actions to waive, suspend, reduce, provide relief from, or otherwise limit the application of sanctions . The bill would also provide relief for other purposes .
 Introduced February 8, 2017, referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations . Introduced February 9, 2017 .
 A bill would provide for compliance enforcement regarding Russian violations of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty . The bill would also provide for enforcement of the treaty .
 A resolution expresses the unwavering commitment of the U.S. to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The resolution expresses a commitment to the Organization .