 The angry comments made by Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko at a rally in Kyiv refer to the far-right National Corps party .
 National Corps activists have been following the president across the country . They have been disrupting his public events with corruption accusations .
 The country has found itself on the eve of major elections. This shift tells us a lot about the unusual conjuncture in which the country is in the midst of major election elections .
 Russia, and specifically Vladimir Putin, is the main antagonist in the discourse of Ukraine’s incumbent president, who is desperately trying to get reelected .
 The country’s economic situation seems to have improved after the freefall of 2014, but this is little comfort for people whose incomes are meager enough to provoke a massive wave of labour emigration over the last few years .
 Those who stay behind have to deal with enormous hikes of home heating costs, crumbling physical infrastructure, and protracted military conflict . Poroshenko famously promised to end in two weeks during his first election campaign five years ago .
 All these issues have become easy targets for Poroshenko’s opponents, which are real enough to seriously jeopardise his chances of re-election . Poroshenko's opponents have becomeeasy targets for his opponents .
 It is unclear whether Poroshenko will clear the first round of voting on 31 March . He won the 2014 presidential elections in a landslide .
 Facebook campaign of forced optimism is hardly convincing beyond the usual circles of middle-class Facebook users . But while these ‘zradophiles’ can sometimes be overdramatic, this campaign offorced optimism is not convincing .
 The last element of this national conservative triad is exemplified in the recent secession of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church from the Russian patriarchate . The last part of the national conservative Triad is the recent split of the Russian Orthodox Church .
 This split, widely known as the Tomos, has been widely popularised across the whole country . It has been popularised as Poroshenko’s personal achievement .
 Poroshenko's liberal supporters previously valued him as a defender of gender and cultural diversity . This goes along with moves towards the general strengthening of the conservative agenda .
 The President is anxious to gain the support of a more significant share of voters . He recently joined other high-ranking officials at a ‘National Family Forum’ in Kyiv .
 The annual gathering of crusaders against the Istanbul Convention and women’s reproductive rights seen this year . Also included presidential candidate Yulia Tymoshenko .
 Poroshenko has decisively abandoned his rhetoric of ‘civic nationalism’ from 2014 . It is symbolised by the ubiquitous slogan “One country” written in Ukrainian and Russian .
Ukrainian president has returned to the traditional strategy of ethno-linguistic polarisation . He has been in the political campaigns of the 1990s .
 In February 2014, an attempt to repeal a Yanukovych-era law protecting the Russian language was one of the first steps of the Maidan coalition . It contributed to unfolding protests against the new government in Russian-speaking regions .
 Ukrainian parliament is discussing draft legislation that will expand the mandatory use of Ukrainian language at the expense of other languages . The legislation is supported by President Poroshenko, who wants to expand the use of the language .
 Crimea and conflict in Donbas has tipped the balance, says CNN . The annexation of Crimea has tipped a balance between Crimea and Donbas .
Without these regions, the “pro-Ukrainian’s nationalist voting base became numerically larger than the carriers of “Russophone identity.” Without these regions.
 Even in regions that stayed under Ukrainian government control, the “pro-Russian’s version of nationalism has been silenced . In many instances, they are considered a fifth column rather than a legitimate part of Ukrainian society .
Without a noticeable liberal opposition, this is bad news for the prospects of democracy consolidation in Ukraine . Without a noticeableliberal opposition, it is bad for the prospect of democracy consolidating in Ukraine.
 The “army part of the slogan is a natural choice for a leader of a country at war. Finally, the ‘army’ part is anatural choice for the president .
 Poroshenko is presented as the only politician possessing enough expertise and experience to ensure victory – or at least to prevent military defeat . Poroshenko has been presented as only politician with enough expertise to ensure defeat .
 Ukraine’s armed forces were weakened and almost completely destroyed by the preceding governments, says the author .
 Poroshenko's campaign present him as literally the sole alternative to Putin, discounting all other contenders as willing or unwilling puppets of the Russian leader .
 Poroshenko's strategy suffered a severe blow when a team of investigative journalists published a major leak implicating his friends and partners in corruption schemes in Ukraine’s defense sector .
 Allegedly, these men bought old military equipment in Russia, smuggled it across the border and sold it to the Ukrainian state for much more than it was worth .
 The notorious National Corps then crystallised public rage in the form of street protests .
 The far-right activists harassed Poroshenko in the town of Cherkasy, where they almost chased him away from the stage .
 Poroshenko is on a presidential tour in Ukraine . He has been attacking the police and demonstratively using force . They now continue to follow his presidential tour .
 National Corps’ paramilitary wing, National Militias, will be present at polling stations as observers . They have already promised to use force when needed .
 SBU has close ties to another far-right group, C14, which gained notoriety by initiating a series of Roma pogroms last year . C14 gained notoriety last year by initiating the series.
 Zelensky quickly became the leader of the race, especially among youth voters . Being a much desired “new face’s” was a much needed ‘new face'
 His weaknesses include a less mobilised base and a lack of experienced lawyers and street fighters to match the resources of his competitors . He also has a less mobilized base and lacks experienced lawyers .
 Zelensky has worked at Kolomoisky's media holding, and the comedian's jokes have usually been consistent with his patron’s political agenda .
 Kolomoisky has been, at least historically, close to Yulia Tymoshenko . It is also true that Kolomoiski has been at least close to theoshenko .
 The billionaire lionised for his support of the new regime in 2014 . He was among the greatest winners of the Maidan revolution until he became one of its greatest losers .
 He has a lot of issues to settle with the current government, and these elections are crucial for his fate . He has been in power for more than a decade .
 Another oligarch has fared much better under Poroshenko’s rule .
 Rinat Akhmetov seems to benefit from an informal agreement with the incumbent president, according to an investigation by Ukrainian media Novoye Vremya .
 Opposition Bloc political party nominated Oleksandr Vilkul, a former CEO at Akhmetov’s metallurgical enterprises, for the presidency .
 Another candidate appealing to the “pro-Russian’s voters, Yuri Boiko, is relying on the resources of yet another oligarch, Dmytro Firtash . Another candidate appeals to the "pro- Russian" voters .
 There are no realistic expectations of victory for candidates like Boiko and Vilkul . Poroshenko could lose everything after the election, including everything after.
 The stakes are high for Yulia Tymoshenko – this is her third and perhaps final effort to reach the top position in the state . This is also her third attempt to reach top position.
 Her alleged partner Kolomoisky risks losing his empire if he fails to ensure the victory of a candidate loyal to him .
 The chances of an “unconventional’s outcome at the elections are considerable. Given the high tolerance for the use of violence, extremely low levels of public trust towards the political elite, and the ongoing war.
An attempt to cancel the election by introducing martial law following an incident in the Azov sea was tried in November . One scenario – an attempt to cancelling the election – was tried by the government in November.
 Ukraine’s dependence on the West is sufficiently high to eliminate the possibility of a similar disruption in the coming weeks,g.g. Ukraine .
 Even if Ukraine emerges out of the presidential elections unharmed, the period of trials will not be over . Ukraine's presidential elections are expected to be orderly .
 Parliamentary elections are scheduled for October, and the country will almost immediately plunge into the new electoral campaign .
 In Ukraine’s semi-presidential system, control over the parliamentary coalition is no less important than the position of president .
 Whoever wins the spring race will need to repeat the result in the autumn . The spring race is held in the spring.
 The parliamentary elections are likely to be even more chaotic and prone to violence than the presidential campaign . The parliamentary election will be more chaotic than presidential elections .
 There will be separate campaigns in majoritarian districts .
 This will be the arena where traditional oligarchic electoral machines will clash or cooperate with local political-criminal groups and patronage networks . The arena will also be the venue for ambitious projects such as Zelensky or the likes of National Corps .