Carl Schreck is an award-winning investigative journalist . He serves as RFE/RL\u0027s enterprise editor . He is also a blogger for Russia, Russia, Ukraine, and Ukraine .
 He has covered Russia and the former Soviet Union for more than 20 years . He has been in Moscow for a decade .
 He has led investigations into corruption, cronyism, and disinformation campaigns in Russia and Central Asia . He has also been involved in assassinations of Iranian exiles in the West .
 "Crimea Is A \u0026#39;Sacred\u00 26#39;" "Sacred" "For Whom?""Crimea is A. But for Whom?"
 "Crimea Is A \u0026#39," "Sacred" "For Whom?""Crimea is A. But for Whom??" "CrimeA Is A. A. Crimea is a crime, a crime and a crime.
 "Crimea Is A \u0026#39," "Sacred" "For Whom?""Crimea is a crime. But for Whom?""CrimeA is a criminal. But For Whom?".
 1,025th anniversary of Christianity of Kievan Rus .
 Ukrainians could deploy the same logic to justify Crimea’s inclusion in the modern Ukrainian state, historians and religious experts say . Ukrainians could also use the same reasoning to justify the inclusion of Crimea in Ukraine, they say .
 Crimea was home to Greek colonies some 2,500 years ago and controlled by various kingdoms and empires . Russia annexed it from the Ottoman Empire in 1783 .
 Putin compared the site of Vladimir the Great’s baptism to holy sites for Jews and Muslims in Jerusalem .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko could take the same message to his electorate, says Karl Qualls . Kievan Rus established the Orthodox foundations for future Russian and Ukrainian states, he says .
 The Crimean Tatars have a strong claim to the peninsula . Their ancestors lived there as far back as the 13th century, Qualls noted .
 The mainly Muslim Tatars administered their own khanate there in the 15th century . Crimea became an Ottoman vassal state until Crimea's annexation into the Russian empire by Catherine the Great in 1783 .
 According to the 1897 census taken in the Russian Empire, Crimean Tatars constituted more than one-third of the population on the peninsula .
 Crimean Tatars began returning to the peninsula in the late 1980s and early 1990s . Currently constitute around 13 percent of Crimea’s 2 million population .
 Crimean Tatar leaders accuse Moscow-backed authorities on the peninsula of targeting their community for criticizing Russia’s annexation of Crimea in March .
Qualls said the word “indigenous’ is a misnomer when describing any single population in Crimea . Qualls said it is not a word for any one population.
 Greeks constitute a tiny minority in Ukraine according to its most recent census in 2001 . Khersones, mentioned by Putin in his state-of-the-union speech, was an ancient Greek city-state .
 Putin made a similar reference to Crimea's central importance to Russia as the site of Vladimir the Great's baptism .
 Putin is employing religious themes to “give more legitimacy to the illegal annexation of Crimea,’ says Hovorun . The Institute of Theological Studies research director says .
 One poll conducted last year suggests Putin’s religious reference may be somewhat arcane for most Russians .
 Just 25 percent of Russians surveyed were able to recall that the conversion of Kievan Rus to Christianity took place under Vladimir the Great .
 Carl Schreck is an award-winning investigative journalist . He serves as RFE/RL's enterprise editor .