 Russian New Art of Hybrid Warfare in Ukraine Soňa Rusnáková1 Abstract . Main aim of this paper is to analyse the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation .
For the purposes of the paper, the theory of hybrid warfare was chosen as an analytical category . The paper was chosen to focus on hybrid warfare for its purposes .
 The concept of hybrid warfare is examined and applied on case study of Crimean annexation . Throughout the paper, the concept of hybrids is examined .
 Hybrid warfare has been an intensely debated concept. Hybrid warfare, especially in connection with Russia's actions in Crimea, has been a debated concept .
 There is an ongoing debate among scholars concerning the meaning of the concept, its existence and employment by Russian Federation .
Valeriy Gerasimov is the incumbent Chief of the General Staff of the Russian Federation . The article of the article showed that the article of ValeriyGerasimov – the incumbent chief of the Russia Federation –invoked a new warfare strategy for the Russian federation .
 Russia, Ukraine, Crimea, Crimea and Crimea, hybrid warfare, annexation, annexation. Russia's actions in Crimea can be approached as a projection of the new capability of Russia to simultaneously employ vast spectrum of warfare means in one battlefield .
 New Challenges Demand Rethinking the Forms and Methods of Carrying Out Combat Operations was released in February 2013 in Russian military newspaper .
 opinions of scholars on Gerasimov's interpretation vary . However, the opinions on the interpretation of Ger asimov vary .
 The article is in the West known as the ‘Gerasimov’s Doctrine’ It is considered to affirm the new orientation of Russian military operations towards hybrid warfare .
 Russia lags behind the USA and NATO in terms of its conventional capabilities, according to scholars . Russia has to rely on developing rather non-conventional capabilities .
 The hybrid warfare has become ‘Russia’s new art of war’ , an updated military strategy of Russian military directing its future operations .
 Russia itself poses a serious security threat for neighbouring countries by projecting its offensive hybrid capabilities into the post-Soviet region . One of the main objectives of this thesis will be to advocate this view on Russia and hybrid warfare as its new military thinking .
 The West is misinterpreting the article and is overanalysing it, according to them . The article is merely a foresight on how future military operations are and will be conducted worldwide .
 Moscow has developed a doctrine and operational strategy referred to as “hybrid warfare,’ or that its operations in Ukraine can be explained by reference to new and evolving defense and security capabilities . McDermott further adds to these untested and certainly unproven assertions .
 Usually the elements of unconventional/irregular/non-linear operations such as diplomatic, political, economic, social, financial, information and psychological ones can fall under the category of soft power .
 The understanding of these means and their range varies between the West and Russia .
 Such understanding is in contrast with the Russian approach because it is based rather on attraction than coercion . Russian approach is based on attraction rather than coercion, says the author .
 Russia's actions are evaluated by Russia as threatening its state interests and undermining its spheres of influence . These actions are seen as threatening the state interests of Russia .
 debates over the definition of ‘hybrid warfare’ and more specifically its understanding as a new way of waging war by Russia have arisen .
 For this reason, it is necessary to define its meaning and take a closer look on debates encompassing it .
 Scholars agree that hybrid warfare is neither an entirely new phenomenon nor that it can be attributed exclusively to Russian actions in Crimea and Ukraine .
 The concept came to light for the very first time in 2002 when William J Nemeth used it to refer to the tactics of Chechen guerrilla against Russia during the Second Chechen War in 1999-2009 .
Frank Hoffman used it to describe Hezbollah's tactics during the Lebanon war in 2006 . It is assumed to be one of the most suitable examples of hybrid warfare . But the concept has become more popular among scholars after Hoffman's use .
 The level of complexity of actions performed by the non-state actor and its effectiveness was unprecedented, says the U.S.
First theoretical basis for the concept of hybrid threats and warfare can be traced to Hoffman’s Conflict in the 21st Century published in 2007 .
 There is no unified and mutually agreed definition within the academics . There are several characteristics upon which its advocates find consensus .
 hybrid warfare can be characterized as difficulty in distinguishing between peace and war as well as blurring warfare modes . The hybrid warfare has attributes of being dynamic, flexible, unpredictable, subversive, complex and multidimensional .
 Hybrid threats incorporate a full range of modes of warfare, including conventional capabilities, irregular tactics and formations . Terrorists include indiscriminate violence and coercion, and criminal disorder .
 Glenn proposes that hybrid threat is ‘an adversary that simultaneously and adaptively employs some combination of political, military, economic, social, and information means, and conventional, irregular, catastrophic, terrorism, and disruptive/criminal warfare methods’
 The most accurate understanding of hybrid warfare will be a …form of warfare that includes multi-modal activities that can be conducted by state or non-state actors .
 Emphasis is placed on simultaneous and unprecedented fusion of a variety of means such as political, military, economic/ financial, financial, social and informational . Use conventional, irregular, catastrophic, terrorist and disruptive/criminal methods.
 The main dispute line among scholars rests in the controversy of novelty of the concept of hybrid warfare . However, the main dispute lines among scholars are in the debate of novelty.
 hybrid war is a unique, distinct phenomenon that requires to be examined individually as a method of warfare . Opponents argue that there is nothing new about the concept of hybrid warfare since the multidimensionality of warfare methods was typical .
 The principal debate over the concept centres on whether compound and hybrid warfare are interchangeable concepts or whether they deserve to be approached respectively .
 Hoffman refuses to admit the blurring of these concepts, further explaining differences between them and the definition of hybrid warfare .
 In case of hybrid warfare the tactics of regular and irregular forces “become blurred into one force in the same battle space, creating a layering of threats.’
 The concept of hybrid warfare is a unique concept existing on its own, but taking into account its strategical, tactical and operational synergy as distinctive from the compound warfare .
 The cyber threat is potentially seriously destructive to state’s security in particular if we consider the high level of dependence of state's defence, security and intelligence systems on computer technology and internet . It has impact on command and control as well as leak of sensitive information .
 Depending on the intention, the level of covertness can vary from open attack to anonymous attack . The attacker can refrain from being taken liable for the harmful cyber actions .
 Information warfare emerged as one of the most efficient tools of hybrid warfare with its main objective of influencing the attitude of population . To achieve these ends, the information warfare emerged.
 The challenger can affect the policies of government of the targeted state . Through the manipulation and influence of population, the challenger can influence the government .
 Cyber and information operations can be considered as part of broader psychological operations2.2. Thirdly, the cyber and information operation can be part of a broader psychological operation .
On the one side, they are “used to demoralize, disorient, and confuse hostile groups’s enemies, says the author .
 psyops can also be used to unite, inform, and bolster the morale of nonhostile groups, says author .
 The ban on imports and/or exports as well as on loans for banks and companies, restricted traveling, measures causing the decrease in production and investments, power cuts, the disruption of infrastructure and other forms of economic blackmailing and intimidation .
 This most often means taking advantage of targeted state’s vulnerabilities in terms of the lack of natural resources and its dependency on other state's natural and energy resources .
 Gerasimov continues to broaden this view only in relation to the United States and explicitly referring to its foreign policy . This is interpreted as threatening Russian interests globally .
 As explanations are used colour revolutions that have occurred in the northern Africa and the Middle East which are mentioned, rather than addressing the contemporary warfare style in a broader understanding .
 The article resembles the traditional Cold-war narrative where Russian identity in foreign and security policy is almost exclusively determined and threatened by the actions of the USA, NATO, EU and their foreign involvement . Still, the article resembles a traditional Cold War narrative .
 The Arab Spring is a source of knowledge for Russian military elites . In the first part is especially highlighted the Arab Spring which is in the article .
 The events are typical of warfare in the 21st century. But maybe the opposite is true, says the author .
Modern warfare requires layering of various threats, total war, and the important role population plays in destabilization of enemy’s internal order .
 The article is dedicated directly and explicitly to Russian military strategy . The following parts of the article are dedicated directly to Russian Military strategy .
Gerasimov sums up the previously gained experiences from waging wars in Afghanistan, North Caucasus and World War 2 . Gerasimov describes the state and necessity of future improvements .
 There are in particular three vital points relevant for this thesis that can be derived, which additionally confirm that the hybrid warfare is not a mere myth in Russian military thinking .
 This part seemingly refers to the awareness of technological superiority of the U.S. and NATO forces over the Russian forces . This part seems to be a sign of a growing awareness of the United States' technological superiority .
Gerasimov criticized the lack of innovative thoughts in Russian military as compared to World War 2 . Gerasimov emphasized the necessity of new ideas in the military .
 Next, the analysis of the context that contributed to the effectiveness of Russian hybrid war will be presented . The analysis will focus on the impact of the hybrid war .
 The application of concrete unconventional and conventional means of hybrid warfare will be demonstrated on Crimean operation . Then, the application will be shown on Crimean operations .
 These specificities are important for deciding on the employed character of hybrid operations and selection of hybrid means .
 Ukraine is undoubtedly a very specific case and several specific factors enabled effective hybrid warfare in order to achieve the political end the annexation of Crimea . Ukraine is the demonstration of great Russia revival, according to the author .
In case of Russia and Ukraine, the matter of ethnicity is indeed the most relevant for explaining contemporary situation . In case of Ukraine and Russia, the issue is most relevant to explaining contemporary situations .
 The Federal Law, 2009, which is in contrary to international law, was signed in 2009 . It allows Russian armed forces to intervene abroad, apart from other .
There are 8,334,100 of Russian nationals4 inhabiting Ukraine, measured in percentage terms 17.3% of the entire Ukrainian population . This represents the largest diaspora of Russian population abroad .
 95.9% of Russians consider Russian language to be their primary language . Only 3.8% of these Russians approach Ukrainian language as their mother tongue .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea inhabits 1,180,400 of Russians which is in total 58.5% of total population of Crimea . In total, there are more than 1,200,000 Russians in Crimea .
 The number of Russians in Crimea exceeds other nationalities inhabiting the peninsula . The number is higher than any other country in the Crimea region .
 Russia's demographic statistics make especially favourable conditions for Russia to be taken advantage of . Russia has been taking advantage of its demographic statistics .
Russian historians agree that Russians, Belarusians and Ukrainians “share a common origin and only began to diverge ethnically following the Mongol invasions. This is also the view of most Russian historians .
 This act has later become the root of disagreement between both countries due to the question of the legacy of the transfer . The act has now become theRoot of disagreement.
 Russia's current foreign and security policy still drives current foreign policy of Russia . As it can be seen, the interpretation of certain historical realities still drives Russia's foreign policy .
Civil societies of post-Soviet countries are generally labelled as weak . Thirdly, the civil societies are generally called as weak.
 Euromaidan has brought about a decisive break with the typical ‘postSoviet’ model of civil society . Overall, post-Soviet societies were generally characterised by apathy and low social capital .
 The disunity of population over the inclination of the country towards the West or the East significantly deepened its fragmentation . However, on the other side, in terms of cohesiveness of population, the dis Unity of population significantly deepens its fragmentation.
 Ukraine is an easy target for hybrid warfare despite increased civic engagement in public affairs that was sparked by Euromaidan . It is this fragmentation that makes Ukraine an easy targets for Hybrid warfare .
 Russia's dependence makes neighbouring countries vulnerable if Russia decides to employ economic or energy instruments in pursuit of its goals . This dependence makes neighboring countries vulnerable to Russia .
 Russia and Ukraine share a history of serious disputes over the supply of gas and its redistribution to Europe through Ukraine through Ukraine . The dispute even led to cut off supplies from Russia.
 Ukraine was dependent on external energy sources, mainly from Russia, according to the Russian government .
 Ukraine is reducing its dependence on Russia by diversifying import partners in order to prevent Russia from exploiting former dependence vulnerability for the purposes of hybrid warfare . Ukraine is also diversifying its import partners.
 Russia took advantage in available context and applied the above mentioned specificities in it for the purposes of hybrid warfare . Observing the context will help us to understand how Russia took advantages in available contexts .
 Ukraine’s potential admission as a member of the alliance was unthinkable to Moscow . The economic, cultural and ethnic ties that run deep into the history of the two states .
 Russia was alarmed by the possibility that Ukraine may host BMD components on its territory . Russia was also alarmed by possible BMD component presence on Ukraine .
 The character of this document was unprecedented due to the fact that its signing would represent a breaking point . The decision on future direction of Ukraine towards the EU rather than Russia would be a 'breaking point' for Ukraine .
 Crimea was annexed by Russia in March 2014 as a reaction to the changing situation . On 18 March 2014 Crimea was annexed by Russia as a response to the situation .
 The most important feature of information warfare that enabled the annexation of Crimea is Russia’s reflexive control through the substantial Russian speaking minority and sympathizers on the peninsula .
 The objective of Russian information warfare in Crimea was to in secrecy deceive, confuse, convince and attract Russian speaking minority inhabiting the peninsula without any resistance or use of force . Russia's political objectives were to evoke the rise of pro-Russian sentiments and through this to legitimize its illegal actions
 The Crimean operation perfectly shows the essence of information warfare . The victim of the aggression does not resist it .
Holding the 'referendum' contradicted with the Ukrainian constitution and did not meet the basic internationally agreed standards institutionalized in the Code of Good Practice .
 Russia misused the high percentage of its misinformed ethnic minority in Crimea for its political objectives . This was one of the most dangerous examples of how Russia misusing the high percent of its minority for political purposes .
 The same institute conducted a survey in May 2013 concerning the preferred affiliation of the residents of Crimea . The survey was conducted by the same institute.
 The information warfare on Crimea employed also the form of media censorship .
 Russia successfully isolated Crimea from independent news from the outside world . Russia also successfully achieved control over telecommunications including the notionally independent internet .
 Crimea was only a demonstration of hybrid warfare on operational level . These actions had also further reaching goals than annexation of Crimea .
Ukrainian naval communications jamming is reported to have been jamming by Ukrainian naval communications .
 Crimean cyber operations were part of broader cyber warfare targeting also Ukraine . As it could have been seen, Crimean cyber attacks were also seen .
 FireEye says after annexation of Crimea it tracks more than 30 million ‘callbacks’ messages sent back from infected computers .
 Russian psychological operations are especially aimed at delegitimizing and intimidating the opponent . The operations are also aimed at perfecting the image of Russia in the eyes of the foreign public and legitimizing its actions .
 Crimea was the attempt to legitimize Russian invasion of Crimea by delegitimizing Ukrainian government through evoking fear as a political tool . The best example of psychological operations was the effort to legitimized Russian invasion.
 Crimea was saved by prompt intervention, but the south and east of Ukraine fell into civil conflict’s civil conflict .
 Putin aware of losing his ally Yanukovych also recalled the historical fear of Nazis fighting in Crimean campaign during the Second World War in 1941 .
 Russia is trying to undermine the legitimacy of Ukrainian government and the EU, NATO and the USA as its affiliates . With this are also connected subversive efforts from Russia that pursue to undermine Ukrainian government .
 It is then understandable where the conspiracy theories on the EU, NATO and USA pro-fascist inclination came from . It is also understandable where it came from.
 The invention of a non-existent threat accompanied by the historical fear, restricted access to alternative media and information from the outer world and the seeming will to protect the citizens make Russian strategy especially dangerous and effective .
 Nato fighters scrambled 68 times along Lithuania’s borders this year, by far the highest count in more than 10 years . Nato fighters policing Baltic airspace were scrambling 68 times.
 The FSB was and continues to be active in Crimea mainly in persecution of dissidents of the regime .
 The Russian parliament’s lower house approved amendments that would see all public incitement to separatism penalized . The amendments were approved by the Russian parliament .
 Violation of the law through the media or the Internet will now be punishable by up to five years in prison . The law will now apply to the media and the Internet .
 Although peace has been established in our land, there still are scums who want chaos, disorder, and war .
 The British public transport service is one of the world's most popular public transport services . The service is based in London, London and London .
Several examples of persecution by the FSB can be traced in Crimea . Several examples of this persecution are found in Crimea.
 The FSB is then glorified as “anti-terrorism agency’s fighting “Ukrainian saboteurs’ What seemingly legitimizes its actions and reprisals in the eyes of public. The agency is now glorified by the public .
 A Russian soldier and a Federal State Security agent were killed during these actions . The soldier was killed during the actions .
 The presence of conventional military means also cannot be refuted in case of Crimean operation . However, the presence of traditional military means can be refuted .
 In February 2014, armed men dressed in military camouflage were spotted in Crimea . The presence of armed men was spotted in Ukraine .
 On February 27 the parliament of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Council of Ministers in Simferopol were seized by these armed men .
 SOC was behind the seizing of the local parliament on September 27 .
 Sergei Aksenov was elected as new Crimean prime minister . This act made it possible to elect the Russian ‘marionette’ Sergei AKSenov as new prime minister.
 SOC also led the takeover of the Ukrainian military’s headquarters and a number of other hard-target military compounds .
 SOC could not provide more troops than SOC could provide . These were operations that demanded more troops, however, that required more troops .
 The organization was also aided by units from Spetsnaz-GRU and naval infantry . The organization is also supported by SpetsNaz- GRU.
 Russia Today turned the information warfare on special operation forces too . The SOC was always in the lead. The SOC, however, was always the lead .
 Some of the most occurring actions of this kind were illegal persecutions of journalists and their mistreatment .
 The FSB says authorities detained Kokorina and initially refused her access to her lawyer . In the previous case of persecution of Crimean journalists, victims witnessed to the Centre to Protect Journalists .
 Russia misused pro-Russian Ukrainian population in its paramilitary operations on Crimea for broader political objectives . This is another example of how Russia misusing pro-Russia Ukrainian population for political purposes .
Pro-Russian self-defence forces supported by Russia in Crimea were gradually emerging . In addition to this, pro-Russianself-defences forces were slowly emerging .
 Russian nationalist biker gang Night Wolves, known for maintaining close ties with Putin, were linked to subversive operation in Crimea . There were also hints that Russian nationalist group Night Wolves was linked to a subversive operation .
Kuznetsov left his family in Moscow in February 2014 and headed south . The Kremlin claims Ukrainian ‘fascists’ had overthrown a legitimate, pro-Russian government .
 In his interview for Guardian Kuznetsov, he proclaimed that “We were the first to be given weapons and to patrol Sevastopol.’
 Ukrainian authorities had proposed imposing asset freezes and other sanctions against Chernomornaftegas . Ukraine's foreign ministry spokesperson MaryanaBetysa criticized Russia’s removal of the rigs .
 When Russia seized Crimea in March, it acquired a maritime zone more than three times its size with the rights to underwater resources potentially worth trillions of dollars . The move also extended Russia’s maritime boundaries, quietly giving Russia dominion over vast oil and gas reserves .
 Russia used its experience from Crimean socalled independence ‘referendum’ also in case of poll deciding on signing new electricity power supply treaty with Ukraine .
 The energy warfare reached also to tactical and strategic levels, however, projected in the form of cyber-attacks .
 The BlackEnergy3 malware was discovered in cyber-attacks against Ukrainian power grid . The malware is notoriously known to be used by Russia .
 The content of Gerasimov’s article cannot be underestimated and simplified to the plain description of the current and future global security environment . It cannot be refuted as a basis for new model of warfare strategy directing Russian foreign and security policies .
 The high probability that this style of warfare will reappear in Russia’s future operations given its unprecedented effectiveness .
 Gerasimov’s article provided a theoretical basis for a new warfare strategy for Russian military .
Gerasimov appeals for a more inventive, innovative and more aggressive strategy . Russia is a more engaged and a more – if not the most prominent actor .
 The Anatomy of Russian Information Warfare – The Crimean Operation, a Case Study . In Centre for Eastern Studies .
 Putin reveals moment he ordered the plot to take control of Crimea . Putin reveals the moment he orders the plot.
 Contemporary War, Military Planning and the Advent of Unrestricted Operational Art. Contemporary War and Military Planning .
 ISIS and Russia in Action, A Comparative Study of Non-State and State Forms of Non -Linear Warfare, is published .
 Radvanyi, J , Psychological Operations and Political Warfare in Long-term Strategic Planning, was a key figure in the strategy .
 Nato Countries Begin Largest War Game in Eastern Europe since Cold War . Nato countries begin LargEST War Game.
 Putin's Information Warfare in Ukraine – Soviet Origins of Russia’s Hybrid Warfare . In Institute for the Study of War.
 Vladimir Putin offers Ukraine financial incentives to stick with Russia . Putin offers financial incentives for Ukraine to stay with Russia.