 Viktor Pinchuk of all the Ukrainian oligarchy has always been the most intriguing for this blog . It has to be said that Viktor Pinchesuk of the Ukraine oligarchy is most intriguing .
 He had managed to become a multi-millionaire through his engineering creativity before marrying the daughter of former President Kuchma . He then leveraged that marriage to move from being a multi millionaire to a billionaire .
 His time directly in Ukrainian political life was brief and began in the same year as his marriage to former President Kuchma’s daughter in 2002 . Mr Pinchuk had backed Viktor Yanukovych in 2004/5 .
 Despite easily being able to buy his way into any parliament, he chose not to do so . He was able to purchase his way to any parliament .
Since then his political influence has been indirect insofar as manifesting via parliamentarians both national and local that are loyal to him . Since then he has been indirectly influenced by parliamentarians and local politicians .
 It should also be noted that “his people’s people are generally far more subtle than the drones of Kolomoisky, Firtash or Akhmetov .
 He also has a penchant for collecting famous friends – The Clintons, Damien Hirst, Elton John and The Clintons . He is also known for collecting the likes of EltonJohn and The Queen .
 Mr Pinchuk set about rehabilitating his image through philanthropy and his own foundation from 2006 onward with very little domestic public oratory or prose .
 The annual YES conference is a Pinchuk brainchild that he funds . In 2016, he paid Donald Trump to speak at via a video link via video link .
 Mr Pinchuk funded the provision of medical supplies to treat the injured during the 'Revolution of Dignity'
 Ihor Kolomoisky rarely features in the news, unlike many of his peer oligarchs .
 There is in fact very little that can be attributed to him personally by way of public statements or on the record oratory .
 An article appeared in the WSJ, authored by, or ghost written and then attributed to, Viktor Pinchuk .
 The article has ruffled many Ukrainian feathers, both political and societal . It has been interpreted as a plan for capitulation to The Kremlin .
 Ukraine would not be joining the EU any time soon, he says . In a nutshell he spoke out in favour of elections in the ‘DNR’ and “LNR” by politely forgetting about Crimea if it meant an end to the deaths in the occupied Donbas
 Crimea Committee of the Verkhovna Rada say they foresee Crimea returning to Ukraine only if the Russian Federation implodes in similar fashion to that of the USSR .
 There is no committee that would advocate anything other than “Crimea is Ukraine’s Ukraine” as a domestic and international policy . That said, there is none on the said committee that will advocate anything else .
Only the completion of the Aquis Communautaire can do that – and that is a process Ukraine has not even asked to commence . Only the completed Aquis communautaire will do that .
 The Association Agreement is as a document that brings “European norms’ to Ukraine at a speed at which Ukraine can achieve them . It brings ‘Europe’ and in chunks that Ukraine can handle/digest. The simplest way to view the Agreement is to view it as
 Ukraine to go to the EU is more demanding than anything within the Association Agreement . Ukraine's Aquis route is the only route for Ukraine to travel to the European Union .
 Ukraine may or may not do with NATO, it is currently a long way from being at a civilian and military standard .
 Ukraine is decades away from meeting the requirements of the Aquis for EU accession – if it ever applies . In short, Ukraine is years away from met the requirements.
 It is probably about a decade away from fully meeting the civilian and military standards required for NATO entry . If it ever asks to join, it would be a decade from meeting the standards required.
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin is expected to sign a deal to allow access to the country's borders . Putin has said he would have to agree to any Ukrainian accession to the Crimea .
 Peace at any cost does not bring peace – it brings an armistice fated to fail at some undetermined point in the future . Peace at a cost is not a good thing, it brings a bad thing to the world .
 The WSJ article was written and published in the WSJ specifically for one reader . The answer may be that the article was published for a reader .
 Mr Pinchuk has little belief that what he has written will become policy and be implemented . It may well be that Mr Pinchesuk has no belief that his ideas will be implemented.
 Some nations prima facie voting against their own interests in order to curry favour with others . The UN vote will be vetoed by yet another nation .
Ukrainian Pinchuk may be seeking to become the Ukrainian “name’s most liked and granted most access by Donald Trump . Nigel Farage is angling to get more personal interaction with Donald Trump than Theresa May .
 Ukrainian President Porosehnko may feel it a gamble worth taking with the repercussions among Ukrainian domestic politics a prize worth chasing .
 One year ago, the blog lauded the passing into statute of a new civil service law . “The Ukrainian civil service has frequently appeared as a source of disillusionment and frustration,’ the blog said .
 This entry will not concentrate upon the usual failures associated with Ukrainian policy, be that policy good, bad, or counterproductive . The usual failures of implementation will be the usual failure of implementation .
 The processes employed to deliver results/civil service appointments have been far from transparent or consistent . It is sufficient to say that implementation is at the very least problematic, and that the processes employed are at the least problematic .
 Shoddy, less than transparent and inconsistent implementation and internal processes aside, that such really rather good legislation has survived 12 months without sabotage is in itself worthy of note . The legislation has been passed without sabotage.
 Those hardened souls that have had to scramble to man the ramparts to beat back attempts at sabotaging this statute have managed to do so – thus far .
 The battlements will have to be robustly manned once again in 2017, for sabotage is once more at the gates .
 MP Artur Gerasimov has submitted Draft Bill 4370-1 which would effectively destroy much of the right-minded text within the current statute .
 His proposed amendments would critically undermine the a-political and professional civil service . The current legislation provides statutory framework for the service .
 Ukraine is to move forward with a fully functioning State nervous system . Not good when institutional independence, structure and processes have to be robust enough to repel political shenanigans .
 He is a recognised “presidential representative’s” within the Verkhovna Rada . He is also a recognised ‘presidential representative within the Rada.
Ergo that the President is unaware of Draft Law 4370-1 being submitted by his Verkhovna Rada envoy is somewhat unlikely . The President is not aware of the law being submitted .
 The question is whether Mr Gerasimov submits it on behalf of The Bankova and by extension President Poroshenko – or not .
 A brief outline of the last few years is sufficient to paint a picture of this legislative assassin . Without providing an unnecessary curriculum vitae and full personal history, it is sufficient for a brief outline .
 Skimming over his various scandals mostly contained within the Donbas . It is sufficient to state that he is closely associated with Sergei Shakhov a dubious “businessman’s from Luhansk .
 Mr Shakhov in turn is closely associated with former Prosecutor General Viktor Pshonka . He is part of the elite of the former Yanukovych regime .
 Mr Gerasimov stood for election to the Verkhovna Rada in a single mandate seat . He was supported by the shadowy team of Sergei Shakhov .
 Mr Bezler’s participation in the election campaign of Artur Gerasimov clearly occurred long before the current events within the Donbas .
Mr Bezler and team were employed for the purposes of intimidation and voter bribery . Nevertheless Mr Bezlers and team are employed to intimidate and bribe voters .
 Mr Gerasimov did not hide the fact that he was in the orbit of Petro Poroshenko .
 Mr Gerasimov eventually made it to the Verkhovna Rada in 2014, not by winning a single mandate seat, but via the plain sailing of proportional representation .
 Mr Gerasimov and President Poroshenko go way back, although how and why remains somewhat opaque . Indeed it appears the pair have gone way back.
 President Poroshenko puts loyalty ahead of ability, for him to tap Mr Gerasimov as presidential representative within the Verkhovna Rada .
 Mr Nedavoy is inextricably linked to the wanted and much loathed Yuri Ivanyushchenko . He is a close ally of former President Viktor Yanukovych .
 There is perhaps no need to continue and sufficient has been written for a read to draw their own conclusions about the character and morality of Mr Gerasimov .
 It is difficult to see who benefits from Mr Gerasimov’s Draft Bill 4370-1 if not The Bankova .
 If this draft Bill passes through the Verkhovna Rada then toxic executive political interference will once again legitimately sully and/or mortally wound the internal workings of the civil service . The draft Bill is expected to pass through the Rada .
 The President will then either sign it into law if the cacophony of shrieks and screams from European “friends’ and Ukrainian civil society prove not to be loud and rude enough, or he can veto it . The issue can be internally spun as a false flag for external
 If the Europeans and Ukrainian civil society have any sense, the maximum efforts will be made to have this Draft Bill withdrawn or smothered by the relevant Verkhovna Rada committee .
Regular readers all knew that quality legislation would sooner or later be subjected to attempts at sabotage . Still, regular readers all known thatquality legislation would soon be subject to attempts to sabotage .
 A 24-hour hiatus from policy and politics and a climb from that grubby valley unto the high arts and cultural peaks . For my erudite readers, a 24 hour hiatus fromPolicy and politics.
 The Odessa Philharmonic performs 12 concerts at as many venues around Italy . The New Year sees the OdessaPhilharmonic performing 12 concerts around Italy.
Viennese returns to Odessa on 15th and 17th January . There is no orchestra as accomplished with its Viennese programme anywhere east of Vienna .
 26th January is for those with a taste for Haydin and Beethoven . 13th February is for the lovers, with the traditional Valentine's programme . 21st February Mr Earle heads to Moscow’s Tchaikovsky Hall to dabble in some Grieg and
 The Odessa Philharmonic is at its best when playing its Polish programme . It is worthy of pointing out that whenever it plays its Polish program, it is also at the best .
 The agenda is going to be full and no doubt the meeting will be prickly affair . The agenda will be full.
 The agenda sees Ukraine as the lunchtime topic for discussion . Ukraine is probably the agenda item least likely to cause indigestion compared to all other items up for discussion.
 Greek issues apparently do not appear this time – there are only so many hours in a day. Greek issues do not seem to be at this time .
 The issue with the Dutch Association Agreement is one of optics for the domestic Dutch constituency . The issue is also one of the issues for the national constituency .
 In order for the Dutch to ratify the agreement, they insist upon official recognition that in ratifying the EU – Ukraine Association Agreement, it is not a pathway toward EU accession for Ukraine .
 The EU has no way affords collective security guarantees or obligations to military aid . The EU must recognize that it does not affords EU guarantees regarding collective security assurances .
 Ukraine does not provide an entitlement to financially support Ukraine. Lastly that it doesn't provide a financial entitlement to support Ukraine .
 The Netherlands remains to ratify the agreement and now seeks such official understanding to pacify its domestic electorate . The EU-Ukraine Association Agreement offers none of these entitlements/EU obligations toward Ukraine .
 The Association Agreement is a stepping stone toward EU accession. Nowhere does the Association Agreement infer, let alone state, that the agreement is a step stone toward accession .
 The clauses regarding defence and security offer no expectations of collective security or obligation to military assistance .
 Any and all financial aid to Ukraine comes with conditionality relating to reform. It has always been abundantly clear that any and allfinancial aid to the country comes with Conditionality .
 Ukraine to formally accede to the EU, and that is to first formally apply, and then go through the Acquis Communautaire 31 – 35 chapters therein . There is only one way for Ukraine to officially accede. Ukraine is to formally apply to theEU .
For almost all Acquis chapters it will have traveled perhaps 80% – 85% of that journey in each and every chapter . There is no denying that if Ukraine complies with the Association Agreement fully and in its entirety that for almost all chapters it would have traveled almost 80% of the
 Aquis chapter will be then closed. There will be few, if any, where it will have traveled the full distance . However, there will be a few places where it would have traveled .
Ergo would be a few more years thereafter to complete that process if embarked upon at all . Ergo would have to wait years for the process to complete .
 There is a need to better conceptualise the legality and spirit of both the Association Agreement and the Acquis Communautaire in fundamental terms .
 Dutch requirements make no difference to the legalities of the Association Agreement, nor the spirit in which it was negotiated and offered .
 The Dutch will get the official recognition that they seek even though some Member States will cringe while agreeing . Ergo, it can be expected, despite the ugly optics, that the Dutch will be expected .
 To get the Association Agreement over the finish line by officially acknowledging what is not contained in the Agreement will ultimately be a price paid . To get it over the end line by acknowledging what isn't included in the agreement will be a cost paid .
 The Ukrainian issue is the least likely to put a Member State leader off their luncheon . Ukraine is the most likely issue to be put off the luncheon.
 UK Prime Minister Ms May has left the Summit and the building. For good measure the issues are to be discussed at evening dinner .
 Ukraine for once, may prove to be one of the easiest agenda items. In fact Ukraine is one of Europe's most popular countries .
 A very short entry to bring a reader’s attention to the official EU overview of Ukrainian progress during 2016 .
 Ukraine's problems are left to the concluding paragraph of the article . Ukraine's failure to make progress in Ukraine is a common theme in the article.
 Mikhail Saakashvili and the inaugural gathering of his newly minted “Rukh New Forces’ in Kyiv on 27th November . The political/influential decline of Dmitry Firtash continues apace .
 More so than any of the other oligarchs associated with PoR, such as Rinat Akhmetov or Sergei Liovochkin .
 He finds himself marooned in Austria following an unsuccessful U.S. attempt to extradite him over corruption accusations .
 Matters will not improve for Mr Firtash – they will actually deteriorate further. Matters will be worse for him, he says .
 Chief Commissioner of the Criminal Police Mecklenburg-Vorpommern received €300,000 . Ex-Stasi officer Nina Vilkening received €500,000 cash to facilitate desired outcomes .
 No doubt inquiries will continue and as none of the defendants are particularly youthful, it is not beyond the realms of probability that a deal can and/or will be cut with defendants in order to bring to light the full extent of Mr Firtash’s active involvement in bribery among
 Mr Firtash is wanted by Germany. Austria will not be denied an extradition request by Austria .
 The Spanish are far ahead of the Germans in the race for the top spot in Germany .
 Spain has been pursuing "Slavic organsied crime" for several years . Spain has admirably been pursuing “Slavics organsies’ for many years .
 Russia has decried Spanish investigations, reports and arrest requests for several years . Russia has publicly decried the Spanish investigations for years .
 Only recently a number of Ukrainians, including the son of the former Mayor of Kyiv, have been arrested for organised criminality and money laundering .
 Bravo Spain – an example for Austrian and UK banking and organsied crime investigative bodies to follow . Bravo Spain is an example of Austrian and British banks and organsies to follow.
 Mr Firtash, and two other as yet unidentified Ukrainian businessmen, have fallen foul of Spanish investigations .
 Judge Ignacio Sánchez García-Porrero leading the Spanish inquiry seeks Mr Firtash and the two unidentified Ukrainian businessmen .
 Mr Firtash will be brought before a Spanish court when he is brought before the court .
 Semyon Mogilevych is the Russian ‘Don of Dons’ The former Cabinet of Viktor Yanukovych’s ousted government, a debt and thus beholding to Russia's Gazprombank of between $4 and $5 billion, and by extension a beholding
 The Spanish have been diligently working upon the misuse of their territory and legislation for several years . Nevertheless, the Spanish are still working on the misuse.
 Austria's extradition request to Spain will be a far smoother, almost seamlessly slick affair compared to the U.S. Extradition to Spain, no differently than the possibly forthcoming extradition request from Germany, when received by Austria will be far smoother .
 The EU Arrest Warrant and the EU Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters are the entire point of the EU arrest warrant . That is the whole point.
 Mikhail Saakashvili's fall may well become a very messy, public and revealing fall indeed .
 Once within Spanish jurisdiction, even if the Spanish case fails, there will be a U.S. request and a probable German case that the Spanish can extradite him to the United States .
 The outlook for Mr Firtash currently looks rather bleak – a lesson for Ukrainian kings and pawns alike .