 Crimea will celebrate the second anniversary of its ‘integration’ in March 2016 . Crimea has been absorbed into the Russian Federation and will celebrate its second anniversary in 2016 .
 The ongoing nature of the conflict contrasts with the lack of academic exploration of the issues surrounding it . The ongoing conflict contrasts. with the absence of academic investigation of it .
 To date, most analyses have focused on the geopolitical implications of the Ukrainian crisis, such as the impact on NATO-Russia relations .
Non-state actors threatening to fundamentally alter the basis of traditional state-based power . In post-Cold War era, there has been a change in the distribution of power throughout the international system .
 Many scholars would argue that there has been an erosion of state sovereignty brought about by the relative empowerment of supranational institutions such as the UN and EU .
Military power can influence the state, sub-state and sometimes regional and international levels . They can be individuals or organizations with economic, political, social, or sometimes military power .
 The impact and influence of non-state actors is dependent upon the political, economic and social context within which they exist . The impact is dependent on the political and economic context of the actors' role .
 From the Russian diaspora, non-governmental organizations, paramilitary groups and volunteer militias, there are a diverse range of non-state actors involved in the crisis . The crisis is also having an impact on sub- state actors in other parts of the post-Soviet space .
Laura Cleary looks at the role of civil society in Ukraine . She argues that it has generally been classed as apathetic, weak and ineffectual .
 In the 1990s, civil society came to be seen as a key enabler for both democratization and conflict resolution . It was deemed to have the ability to question and challenge undemocratic practices and values .
 Critics argue that the assumptions that civil society is organized, coherent, inherently democratic and external to the political process are flawed . Over time, that received wisdom has been challenged .
 Cleary identifies what she terms a ‘hybrid’ civil society, once which does not have the capacity to truly hold government to account .
 CSOs have redirected their activities in order to provide humanitarian assistance to the military or their dependants . The majority of CSOs are raising funds to support the military, and assist the wounded .
 Anna Matveeva explores the development of conflict in eastern Ukraine from the perspective of polarized identities and conflict escalation prompted by collective insecurities . She argues that the grounds for the conflict in Donbass were prepared when different sections of Ukraine's population developed conflicting perspectives of the past
 These differences lay the foundations for what became polarized identities and mutually-exclusive ideologies . These differences lie the foundation for what become polarized identities, says author .
 The events of 2014 resulted in an extra-constitutional power change that triggered, rather than caused, an explosion of deep societal rifts that had been growing .
 She examines the changing political landscape of a leaderless uprising and the process of formation of the protest movement .
 The article explores a changing political landscape of a leaderless uprising and formation of a protest movement out of locally available ingredients . The article goes on to explore the emergence of armed militias in unfolding security vacuum .
 As rebel-held territories drifted away from the control of the authorities in Kiev, their new identity was formed by Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 3 the war .
 The paper assesses Kiev’s fluctuating war and peace responses . The paper argues that understanding the internal dynamic of the guerrilla war and the population's survival is the key to the resolution .
 Stelios Sotiriou examines how enduring regional political preferences, embedded in a fragmented and porous national identity framework, have acted as destabilizing factors in eastern Ukraine .
 His paper juxtaposes two critical periods of post-Soviet Ukraine, the post-independence period of the early 1990s and the crisis of 2013–2015 . It identifies a range of ‘sources of change’, including the impact of economic crisis, military conflict, ideas and
 He argues that while his conclusions offer an understanding of the 2013–2015 crisis, they can also be extrapolated to other regions of the post-Soviet space . He argues the conclusions offer a better understanding.
 Decentralization in Ukraine could be the key for an effective and auspicious nation-building process . In the long term, it could alleviate the regional political preferences .
 The devolution of power to local communities could smooth the absence of social trust . It could allow for local democracy and regional development to advance .
 Sotiriou argues that such a policy path could be of major assistance to Ukraine . In turn, it could also serve as a paradigm for other states in the post-Soviet space like Moldova .
 Ivan Loshkariov and Andrey Sushentsov examine the role of the Russian diaspora in Ukraine . They argue that the country’s post-independence political institutional design was unfavourable for Russians .
 The Euromaidan protests of 2013 prompted the Russian diaspora to explore their identity, as well as their social and political goals, they say . They conclude that the Eurom Maidan protests prompted the Russians to examine their identity .
 The government no longer had a monopoly on the use of force. This led to the establishment of alternative authorities in regions of the country where the government was no longer having a monopoly .
 The fire in Odessa in May 2014 led to the deaths of 40 ‘anti-Maidan’ activists . Loshkariov and Sushentsov argue that the critical juncture was not the Euromaidan protests nor the overthrow of Yanukovych .
 Vladimir Rauta focuses on the role of non-state armed actors in the Ukrainian conflict . He also assesses the types of military interventions in Crimea and south-eastern Ukraine .
 His paper seeks to provide a theoretical framework that will facilitate distinction between the armed groups involved and their external support .
 Russia has the objective of stimulating ‘sovereign defection’ in Ukraine, he says . He argues that the use of political violence by Russia in Ukraine has the aim of stimulating 'sovereigned defection'
 The article examines the literature on non-state armed actors . A clear demarcation has developed between those acting on behalf of a state and those acting in conjunction with a state’s armed forces .
 Rauta argues that Russia’s instrumental usage of pro-Russian separatist as proxy forces is part of its objective to create a de facto state . It has used for years in regions such as Transnistria or South Ossetia .
 Tatyana Malyarenko and David J Galbreath examine the role of paramilitaries in Ukraine . The unit is an overlooked unit of analysis for civil wars and their resolution .
Pro-government and pro-Russian paramilitaries pose the biggest threat to a sustainable peace . They argue an understanding of the important role of paramilitary on both sides is key to understanding the conflict as a whole .
 paramilitary troops on both sides have become an obstacle to effective and efficient military operations . They have resisted efforts to integrate them into regular armed forces or disband them .
 Both sides are able to use paramilitaries to absolve themselves of responsibility for many of the actions carried out in their name . All covered under the Geneva Conventions .
 Russia has sought to use paramilitaries, including the deployment of its own troops on both sides of the border, as a way of providing disinformation in what has been called hybrid warfare .
 Emmanuel Karagiannis focuses on Ukrainian volunteer fighters who joined pro-Kiev battalions engaging in combat in the eastern part of the country .
Far right parties have used armed groups to promote their political agendas . The formation of armed groups is the result of separatist actions .
 The mobilization and recruitment of volunteer fighters is not a phenomenon exclusive to the Ukrainian far right .
 Tens of battalions have been formed to defend the territorial integrity of Ukraine . The Ukrainian army has been formed in recent years to defend its territory .
 Karagiannis examines the existing literature on militias which is heavily dominated by rational choice and social sanctions approaches .
 For a number of reasons, both of them are not applicable to the Ukrainian case . Both of the reasons are not related to the Ukraine case .
 He argues that mobilization mechanisms such as ideas, political–social norms and emotions may explain why individuals joined these armed groups .
Nationalist ideas have motivated some individuals to join the campaign against a perceived archaic enemy . Nationalist ideas are being used to fight against an archaic enemy.
 Political–social norms have also generated collective action because they can influence behaviours and perceptions . Political-social norms can influence behaviour and perceptions of others .
 Karagiannis brings into the role of emotions in militia recruitment . In addition to the analysis, the analysis of emotions is also included .
 Ukrainian volunteer fighters have a strong cognitive–normative–emotional dimension . To sum up, the phenomenon of volunteer fighters entails a strong Cognitive-normative-emotionaldimension .
 Tracey German explores the intensification of relations between South Ossetia and Russia . She looks at the extent to which South Ossenia exists as a functioning state entity .
 Moscow confers statehood with one hand, using the language and discourse of statehood, but takes it away with the other . Moscow is manipulating its relations with these actors in order to achieve broader foreign policy objectives .
 What has been happening in these territories is important, despite being overlooked and overshadowed by the events in Ukraine .
 Moscow has been providing support for Abkhazia and South Ossetia since the 1990s . Moscow has manipulated its position there to undermine Georgia's autonomy .
 One of the major criticisms levelled at Putin in the wake of Crimea annexation was the apparent ‘redrawing of international borders’ through the use of force and the disregard for international law .
 There has been only a very muted response from the West to Russia’s increasing ‘absorption’ of South Ossetia . Similar activity Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 5 occurred in the South Caucasus .
 Igor Istomin and Irina Bolgova analyse the strategy of Moldova’s separatist region of Transnistria . In the context of Russian-Ukrainian relations, they discuss Moldova's separatist region .
 They explore the challenges of Transnistrian ‘foreign policy’ through the lenses of various realist perspectives . They also explore the concept of bandwagoning and balancing .
 Transnistria has sought to compensate for its resource limitations by aligning with external partners . The company has been criticized for its lack of resources .
 Tiraspol has developed relations with multiple partners in the post-Soviet space . It has become increasingly reliant on Russia as the primary source of both security and economic assistance .
 EU and Ukraine have tried to undermine Russia’s influence in the region by isolating Transnistria . It claims that recent attempts by the EU, Ukraine have led to strengthening of ties between Tiraspol and Moscow .
 Istomin and Bolgova conclude that the Transnistrian case demonstrates the limits of multilevel alignment under conditions when main potential partners are in controversial or conflict relations . The case shows that the weakest actor in a vulnerable position and limits the scope of its external action .
 Tracey German is a reader in the Department of Defence Studies . She is a member of the Defence Studies Department .
 Her research focuses on Russia’s relations with its neighbours, and conflict and security in the Caucasus and Caspian region .
 Previously, he held positions in the United States, Greece, Kazakhstan, and Bulgaria .
 He lectured as a visiting professor in Italy, Cyprus, Spain and Russia .
 His research interests include Russian foreign and security policy, ethnic conflicts in the former USSR, energy politics, and political Islam . He also has interests in Russia, Russia, the former Soviet Union and Russia .