 The former Ukraine, Russia, Donbas and Ukraine gained and the latter Ukraine; Russia; Donbas; losing the strategic Crimean peninsula . This resulted in what is almost certainly a permanent change.
 Russia's moves also set in motion a violent conflict in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine . But Russia’s moves also geopolitical storylines.
 The United States and NATO alliance have advocated a geopolitical storyline that attributes blame for this to Russia . But close scrutiny of the evidence they have adduced in this regard fails to establish this culpability conclusively .
 Data collected and analyzed in the public realm, it is possible to determine with more certainty that Russia was indeed the aggressor . However, by utilizing data collected and analysis, it's possible to find out more .
 The rapidly increasing amount of public-sourced information globally and the growing sophistication of analytical methods by nongovernmental groups presages more complete understanding of such conflicts without reliance on official information .
 Russia’s seizure and subsequent annexation of Crimea region in early 2014 ushered in heightened tensions between Moscow and the United States on the one hand .
 Russia’s alleged complicity in the spread and intensification of fighting to the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine1 in the summer of 2014 poses an even greater risk to peace and security in Europe . The crisis has already resulted in thousands of casualties, well over 1.
 Russia has violated Ukraine’s territorial sovereignty, most obviously by its capture of Crimea . As such, it is usually taken as a point of departure that Russia has indeed violated Ukraine's territorial sovereignty .
 USG and NATO have adduced evidence purporting to prove Russian aggression in the Donbas specifically . Evidence has been widely accepted uncritically by established journalists and by most foreign affairs commentators .
 The Russian government has been accused of Russian malfeasance in the past . The government has denied any wrongdoing . The U.S. government says it is investigating the allegations .
We should ascertain if unofficial information is available that might shed additional light on what is a prime example of Clausewitz’s maxim that “war is the realm of uncertainty,” and what the implications of those data sources might be for geopolitical analysis writ large .
 Adducing facts and attributing hostile acts Governments present information to shape discourse consistent with the state’s goals in the conduct of its international relations .
 Governments, as well as international and non-governmental organizations, work furiously to establish and propagate their storylines by providing information through official channels and via print and digital media .
 This anonymity allows an aggressor state to present a more compelling denial of complicity in hostile acts through its own storylines. Further, this anonymity allows the aggressorState to present its own stories .
 A reported event shown in satellite or ground level imagery occurred at the time and place stated would be a good starting point . That a reported event was a good start point, according to a report .
 That a vehicle, aircraft, or missile is in fact of the type or model indicated, and that imagery thereof is sufficiently detailed to make that determination and place it at a particular location is another .
 The axis of attack can be determined by forensic analysis, likewise might be relevant .
 satellite imagery that would meet such a standard has long been almost entirely within the control of governments . Government officials have been loath to release such information to the public .
 The public collection, analysis, and dissemination of types of data is rapidly transforming and enhancing the public’s ability to observe, but to confirm, what states have, or have, done on the ground .
 There are four major technological changes that have enabled the rapid expansion of public-sourced data analysis . The first three involve technologies that originated in the military or government sector and migrated after a time into the civilian world .
 Other innovations such as exponential increases in data storage capacity, more capable software, and powerful algorithmic search engines further enhance the capability to process and analyze information gathered from private sector surveillance systems .
 A central tenet of official intelligence analysis is that the efficacy of a product is enhanced by the incorporation of data from multiple sources . Ground-level photography or video of an event might be more relevant if ground-level imagery were available as a complement .
 Often referred to as ‘all-source analysis’ in official intelligence parlance . This practice should also apply to research on national security issues or events .
 The focus of this paper will be on the much narrower time frame of June-August 2014, by which time the fighting had shifted to eastern Ukraine and during which the most intense combat took place .
 It is not my intent to take up the related and important question of whether these actions constitute “acts of war’s war, as those are essentially political judgments made by the interested parties, he says . It's not his intent here to take the related question, he adds
 The scale of fighting in eastern Ukraine would appear to be warfare . It involved large numbers of troops in typical military formations, accompanied by armor, artillery and air strikes .
 The focus is on the direct action of states in armed conflict rather than involvement through proxies . The separatists are undoubtedly important actors in the conflict, and their existence allows the Russian state to obscure its role in the military dimension of the crisis .
 The subject has been extensively analyzed elsewhere . As noted above, we leave aside the earlier Russian invasion and subsequent annexation of Crimea .
 The USG and NATO release intelligence products to the media of selected intelligence products . The issue at hand is how the storyline portraying Russian actions in June-August 2014 in eastern Ukraine has been shaped by two of the most important external actors .
 Russia and the Donbas have been involved in the conflict in Crimea since the annexation of Crimea . Russia's invasion of Crimea was accomplished by stealthy means and involved little, if any, loss of life . The Donbas has been devastated by the Russian invasion .
 The Ukrainian government launched a major offensive against separatist forces on July 1 . The pro-Russian rebels were driven into pockets around the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk proper .
 sections of the border with Russia remain under separatist control . Russia has been able to resupply or equip rebel fighters or even infiltrate Russian troops into Ukraine .
 Moscow had carefully laid the groundwork for both supporting the DNR and LNR and/or preparing for direct action against Ukraine if necessary . Moscow is preparing for large-scale military exercises as early as February 2014 .
 The exercises involved tens of thousands of troops, many of which were deployed along regions bordering Ukraine . Many of the exercises were carried out in the Ukraine region .
 From that time, ever-larger concentrations of Russian troops and huge numbers of tanks, armored personnel carriers, and various types of artillery were massed inside Russian territory just across the Ukrainian frontier .
 The survival of the DNR and LNR is hanging in the balance as the Ukrainian government offensive progressed in July 2014 . There is broad consensus among academics and members of the foreign affairs commentariat that Russia was simply not prepared to allow the Ukraine government to crush the separatist insurrection.
 Russian army sending units of Russian army into Ukraine may be verified by official and public-sourced data is the purpose here .
 The territory previously gained by government forces was lost within a matter of weeks . Other areas to the south within Donetsk Oblast were also lost .
 Kyiv agreed to an internationally brokered ceasefire effective September 5, 2014, bringing to a tenuous end this phase of the war . The absolute nadir for the Ukrainian government cause was the virtual annihilation of a large concentration of their troops and equipment near the town of
 The USG and NATO alliance have made literally dozens of statements, press briefings, information releases, and diplomatic demarches condemning Moscow's actions against Ukraine .
 A series of economic and other sanctions were imposed to alter Russia’s behavior, a series of sanctions have had little effect on turning Russian public opinion against the Putin government and have not, as of this writing, brought an end to fighting in the Donbas .
 Washington and Brussels continued to place the blame for the violence in eastern Ukraine on Russian meddling and later on Russian aggression .
 USG and NATO must provide sufficient official information relating to Russia’s alleged actions . To provide evidence backing up their storyline, it would thus fall to the USG.
 Later, it appeared that more sophisticated weapons and ammunition of all types were being supplied by Russia . Later, however, it seemed that more sophistication weapons and ammo of all kinds were being sold by Russia.
 The first serious instance of Russia's complicity in this conflict might be definitively established via the release of official information . The alleged movement of three tanks and multiple launch rocket systems across the border from Russia into Ukraine in June 2014 .
 The acquisition of heavy armor by separatists by the separatists was a very serious matter . The aphorism “If you want to make an impression, send a tank’ is apt .
 NATO imagery released by NATO shows tanks observed on the Russian side of the border . But it does not conclusively demonstrate that the tanks observed in the satellite imagery are those from inside Ukrainian territory .
 The presumption is that the three MBTs on the transporters subsequently moved toward the Ukrainian border and eventually were off-loaded . They are later found moving through cities in eastern Ukraine .
 The tanks are identifiable as T-64 MBTs, but bear no national markings . In the public-sourced images from inside Ukraine, the tanks are not identified as MBTs .
 USG and NATO claim Russian involvement in eastern Ukraine has been cited as a factor in the alleged escalation of the fighting in Ukraine . The evidence presented fails to validate the assertion put forth by the U.S. and NATO concerning Russian complicity in the fighting .
 USG/NATO intelligence did not have higher resolution imagery or other types of intelligence that would allow for the identification of the suspect T-64 MBTs on the Russian side of the border . They had that information but were precluded from releasing it out of concern that sources or methods
 The USG/NATO briefing is the unsophisticated use of the public-sourced imagery showing the T-64s inside Ukraine .
 The second image of a T-64 in Snizhne, Ukraine, in the NATO information release has no locational corroboration whatsoever . The second public-source image of the T- 64 has no Locational corroborations whatsoever .
 Photos of the same tank available on the Internet would have allowed an analyst to identify that specific location by reference to landmarks identifiable with street level or overhead imagery .
Within 48 hours Russian Internet bloggers attacked the evidence as superficial . It is no surprise that within 48 hours the evidence was attacked .
Official sources do not show conclusively that MBTs imaged inside Russia were transferred to pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 There were reports yesterday on these three tanks that you were talking about, which you said was an escalation . You said there were reports that were an escalation. There were also reports that the tanks were being used against each other .
 There were reports that these in fact were Ukrainian tanks that had been kind of ripped off by the separatists .
 The videos and photos of the T-64 tanks driving through what are supposed to be Ukrainian cities are helpful in understanding what actually happened . In this case, however, other public-sourced information is not dispositive .
 NATO did not identify the MBTs on the Russian side of the border as T-64s . Mark Galeotti provided a timely and appropriately cautionary initial analysis on June 14 .
 Ukrainian bloggers posted videos of the T-64s moving through two towns and correlated the video with Google maps . They misidentified the tanks, but they misidentified them .
 The Donbas separatists did not possess tanks prior to the June 12 incident, according to Russia's hypothesis . The two men conducted a thorough search of public-sourced video to ascertain that they did not.
 The videos and photos of the T-64 tanks driving through what are supposed to be Ukrainian cities are not helpful in determining what happened in this case .
 NATO press release on June 2014 tank incident rendered in sufficient detail to establish that the tanks in question were in fact inside Ukraine .
 As will be seen, this will change dramatically beginning with the events of July-August 2014 . The events of this year will be more dramatic .
 Cross border rocket attacks in July and August 2014 . July 1 Ukrainian offensive against separatist forces in eastern Ukraine began well .
 A motorized rifle unit of the Ukrainian army was severely mauled by a barrage of artillery rockets near the village of Zelenopillya in Luhansk Oblast in July 2014 .
 Some of these attacks were actually launched from inside Russian territory in the direction of Ukraine, says Michael Weiss and James Miller .
 Weiss and Miller used videos taken of rocket launches . They geo-located the camera positions with reference to ground-level imagery . They were able to establish that rockets were fired from a point in the vicinity of a town in Russia .
 The U.S. and NATO were quick to point to these attacks and to denounce them, building them into their evolving storyline . What this analysis does not show are the vectors between these rocket launches and specific impact areas inside Ukraine, which renders them inconclusive as to Russian culpability .
 USG says Russian attacks added a new and more serious dimension to the conflict in eastern Ukraine . U.S. leadership made a series of public presentations and statements by top USG leadership made to publicize the Russian actions .
 We have detected that firing, and that does represent an escalation in this conflict, we have detected . We have found that firing is a sign of an escalation, we've detected .
 Two of the four graphics, annotated on images from Digital Globe, juxtapose what appear to be firing sites for multiple rocket launchers and artillery on the Russian side of the border and impact crater fields on the Ukrainian side .
 Russo-Ukrainian border is shown, which provides a visual cue to back up the contention that the attacks were cross-border . The Russo-Ukraine border is also shown .
 The specific location of the images is not provided . Only a small reference map is included which makes it difficult to verify .
 No assessment is provided of the alignment of impact craters inside Ukraine that would provide the azimuth of attack back to the firing site inside Russia . Second, and more importantly, no assessment of the impact crater in Ukraine is provided .
 The other two images are of what are alleged to be rocket and artillery attacks within Ukraine . The point is that the artillery units are from the Russian army operating within Ukrainian territory .
 satellite imagery of both rocket launch sites on the Russian side of the border and impact crater fields on the Ukrainian side . Higgins and his associates painstakingly compiled satellite images of both sites .
 The Bellingcat report scrutinized over 1,300 impact craters within Ukraine to derive trajectories and then trace those back to firing locations within Russia . In addition to a much more detailed analysis of the suspected launch sites than that released by official sources .
 The Russian army attacked Ukrainian government forces maneuvering inside the sovereign territory of Ukraine . In several specific incidents over the period July 14 to August 8, 2014, Russia attacked Ukrainian forces .
 Actual Russian army units, not individuals or small groups of special operation troops, might account for the dramatic reversal of Ukrainian fortunes on the battlefield in August 2014 .
 USG accused Russia of introducing units of its armed forces into the war . The USG made clear that Russia has introduced units into the conflict .
Yesterday, you decried what you said were incursions and for all intents and purposes an apparent invasion .
 Russian and Ukrainian forces have had direct contact with Ukrainian forces . The action has gotten much more serious, with direct contact between Russia and Ukraine .
 "You didn’t really outline anything specific you were going to do yesterday. Because you didn't really outline what you were doing yesterday," says the author of the book . "I'm not sure what I'm going to be doing," says author .
 Three images purported to show Russian military equipment inside Russia, albeit near the Ukrainian border . It is not possible to deduce that Russian units are operating inside Ukraine .
 Fourth image claims to show Russian self-propelled artillery moving east to west inside Ukraine . equipment alleged to be Russian because the vehicles are in area where the Ukrainian army had yet to penetrate .
 NATO-released imagery has been released for the first time . It is not clear where the locations are, so it is difficult to check .
 The vehicles could belong to Ukrainian army units or were captured by separatists . The vehicles are not identified, but one cannot rule out that they may belong to the Ukrainian army .
Official analyses provide a more comprehensive and compelling portrayal of Russian army activity in the eastern Ukraine theater of war than anything officially released . Linking those photos to satellite imagery in the unofficial analyses provides a more complete and compelling depiction of Russian military activity in Ukraine .
 The overwhelming tendency of the sovereign state is to withhold information from the public or to characterize it in ways sufficiently vague as to cloak the full extent of the state’s knowledge .
 In some cases this is a reasonable approach, but in other cases, the necessity for secrecy is less obvious . In other cases public sources are used in making the state’s case .
 The assessment of the evidence is not made clear . It's not clear what the evidence actually shows .
 The tendency among the professional media is to defer to military and governmental authority. Despite the occasionally expressed frustration at not having more compelling evidence from official sources, the tendency among professional media has to defer .
 The proliferation of public-sourced data and more sophisticated non-official analysis is now being lifted in the specific case of the conflict .
 The public-sourced reporting on Russian activities in eastern Ukraine now manifests previously unseen scope and depth of analysis . The tracking of particular types of Russian weapons and military vehicles is front-line reporting by new media organizations .
 reporting aims to influence government policy and often advocates for an agenda tied to the priorities of funding sources . It can also be the case, however, that such reporting is often linked to funding sources.
Official releases are hamstrung by the perceived need to cloak certain details in secrecy . Images and other data are readily available from commercial sources .
Public source investigations provide much more persuasive evidence that Russian aggression did indeed occur . On the other hand, public source investigations, although longer in gestation, provide more evidence .
 This incongruity raises questions about the depth of commitment of the external governmental/inter-governmental parties to pursue vigorously the case against Russia . The culture of protecting sources and methods involved in gathering and analyzing official intelligence even when open sources are being used .
 This last raises the possibility of yet more Western involvement in a conflict that might escalate to a more serious level . Most individual Western governments have been reluctant to entertain the conflict .
 The rapid expansion of publicly generated data allows the critiquing of official storylines and attributing blame in a geopolitical context beyond that previously possible .
Official security breaches are more likely to be challenged without having to resort to breaches of official security . The official storylines, hitherto difficult to parse, are now more likely than ever before .
 Analysis conducted wholly in the public realm will almost certainly enhance the study of geopolitics . It will also allow for greater transparency into the actions of states, especially those involving territorial conflict .
 The author wishes to thank participants at that conference and Gerard Toal for comments on previous versions of this paper . The author wished to thank the participants at the conference for their comments .