 Russia's stock market boom has Russia outperforming the world will be revalued in short order . If this heats up, the stock market market boom that has Russia outperforming the world is revalued .
 The Market Vectors Russia exchange traded fund is up 38.35% year-to-date in dollar terms . The market is based on the market value of the Russian market .
 The weaker ruble has provided a lift for investors with ruble equity . Over the past year, the weaker rubles have provided a boost for investors .
The ruble, helmed by central baker Elvira Nabiullina, is up 18.4% against the dollar . The ruble is helmedby central baker E.Nabiullin .
 Ukrainian government will tout progress on Europe’s Marshall Plan experiment there, it is clear that the country is in dire straits . Some in the Ukrainian government are touts progress on the project .
 The only way to look at Ukraine right now is through the Minsk II Accords, which was essentially a cease fire agreement between pro-Russia separatists and Ukrainian government .
 Donbass is an important industrial hub in the region that is known to house a few Russian defense contractors . But squirmishes have occurred since in Donbass, a region known for its defense industry .
 The positive break in previous trends in this crisis represented by the frozen conflict prospect may already have been priced into Russian markets . But the base case scenario underpins this year’s strong bounce-back in Russian assets .
 The two sisters part ways, one believing she is evil and harmful, before the other shows her the error of her ways . Like the movie, the two sisters believe each other is evil, but the other is harmful .
 This will probably happen when Poroshenko and Arseniy Yatsenyuk are voted out of office .
 The violence has not escalated into another full-blown conflict . It demonstrates the steady political will in both countries to prevent conflict escalation .
 Russia’s sanctions expiring in July . It is Moscow's interest to play the good cop here and keep the separatists in line .
 If sanctions are lifted, then the recent rise in oil prices bodes well for Russia . If they succeed, and if they are successful, then they will be good for Russia.
 Putin’s track record during the present Ukraine crisis shows that his reactions can be aggressive and destabilizing .
 Ukrainian government would be another attempt at a military solution by the Ukrainian government, says Granville . But the important point is that something must happen to elicit such a reaction .
 Putin was asked by a state TV reporter whether the government would recognize the Donbass as independent from Ukraine . The government may even annex it like Crimea in the Black Sea on March 17, 2014 .
 A frozen conflict is better than an escalating one. Say what you will, but a frozen conflict will be better than a escalating one .
 A typical E.U. compromise decision on sanctions is likely as late as December . In the absence of any serious territorial conflict in the Donbass, combined with the Minsk II process remaining alive, then the decision is likely to be made .
 Brussels and Washington have walked hand in hand into this with sectoral sanctions first introduced last July, and then again in September . It is unclear whether the United States will follow .
 The ruble traded in the 60s before falling to an all-time low of 70 to 1. Months later, the ruble fell to a low of 1.1 .