 Ukraine's President Petro Poroshenko said Crimea will be returned to Ukraine . Ukraine's president said Crimea was returned to the country during the campaign .
 Putin's repeated statements that it won't happen before the election . He hopes that Poroshenko and the Ukrainian government will crawl to him and give him Crimea .
We are strengthening our international support and providing for economic growth. That is why we're enhancing our military strength, says John Sutter . Sutter: "That is why I'm enhancing my military strength"
 The Poroshenko interview was aired ahead of the March 18 5th anniversary of Crimea's annexation to Russia . It is worth noting the Poroshenko's interview was broadcast ahead of March 18.
 In 1991, our Russian government, too, hadn't committed a number of tragic mistakes, then we could have protected the residents of Crimea . It would have been better if the events of the famous Crimean Spring had happened 25 years ago instead of just five years ago .
 Crimea's Prime Minister, Sergei Aksenov, called Poroshenko's statements jive talk . Crimea's PM, SergeiAksenova, called the statements jives talk .
 Russian publicist Alexey Melnikov wrote in his blog on Echo of Moscow that Ukrainian politicians repeat that they want Crimea back . But they do not say how they say how .
 Melkinov says Ukraine is better than Russia . He says the only way for Crimea to return to Ukraine is to convince Crimeans to return .
 One of the issues of the electoral campaign is how to get back Crimea, which was annexed by Russia . Russia annexed Crimea in Crimea in March 2014 .
 One candidate said he was confident Crimea would be returned to Ukraine after his victory . One candidate was confident that he would return Crimea to Ukraine .
 Another one said that would be returned only after a change of leadership in Russia . Another said that will be returned after a new leadership change in Russia.
 Many also do not deny that Ukraine is weak and can do nothing about it . Many also say that Ukraine can't be blamed for its problems .
 If somebody in Ukraine is willing to give up Crimea, this will be the beginning of the end of the new Ukraine . To act differently would be impossible, and if someone in Ukraine was willing to do it, this would be the start of the Ukraine's end .
Today's Europe, created at the end of the Second World War, cannot recognize the annexation in any form . Also, today's Europe can't recognize the annexed in any way .
 Russia is in a hopeless confrontation with Europe over Crimea, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen says Russia is "in a hopeless battle" over Crimea .
 Grigory Yavlinsky, leader of the liberal political party Yabloko, focused on the "huge" price that Russians had to pay for Crimea's annexation . Crimeans themselves are nor freer nor safer than before 2014, he said .
After Crimea, no country in the post-Soviet space sees Russia as a strategic reference point . Neither the EurAsEC countries, nor the CSTO, nor Belarus, with which we are formally close .
 All the nearest neighbors are scary and it is pleasant for them to deal with us. On the contrary, all the nearest neighbor are scary .
 The perfidious and heavily mixed with lies and propaganda violation of all international and Russian treaties and laws has led all former republics of the USSR to irreversible disappointment .
 Vladimir Putin has turned Russia into a country that is perceived as an aggressive mafia state . Russia is perceived throughout the world today as a mafia state.
 Russia's economy is cut off from world connections and is opposed to them . But even more damage to Russia has been caused by the fact that the Russian economy, being peripheral, is cutting off from the world connections .
 Millions lost their normal lives, becoming a bargaining chip in a stupid and hopeless geopolitical game . Millions of people lost their lives, become a bargainingchip in a hopeless geopoliticalgame .
 Five years later, life in Donbass was destroyed literally and figuratively . Life in Don Bass was destroyed literal and figurative .
 As in the USSR, the present authorities can no longer talk to the people without lies and hypocrisy . The present authorities are no longer able to talk to people without lying and hypocrisy.