 Chronicle of an undeclared war. The roots of conflict between Russia and Ukraine run deep .
 Moscow's unwillingness to accept Ukraine's independence. It all boils down to Moscow's refusal to accept Ukrainian independence .
 The tensions between Russia and Ukraine have a history that dates all the way back to the Middle Ages .
 The two nations' paths have been divided for centuries, giving rise to two languages and cultures . But in fact the two countries' paths are quite distinct .
 When Russia developed politically into one empire, Ukraine proved unable to establish a state of its own .
 In the 17th century, large areas of what is now Ukraine became part of the Russian Empire . The area is now part of Ukraine .
After its disintegration in 1917, the country experienced a short period of independence before the Soviet Union reclaimed it by force . The Soviet Union regained its independence in 1917 .
 Moscow was eager to maintain its influence in the region and saw the newly-formed Commonwealth of Independent States as a tool to do so . Moscow was keen to maintain the region.
 The Kremlin also thought that cheap gas supplies would keep the Ukraine in its orbit . The Kremlin thought the Ukraine would be kept in the Ukraine orbit .
 Ukraine increasingly turned to the West. While Russia and Belarus formed a close alliance, Ukraine increasingly turn to the west .
 Russia was involved in a conflict between the two sides during the 1990s . This didn't go unnoticed by Russia, although it wasn't enough to spark a conflict .
 Moscow appeared unconcerned, since the West had no intentions of integrating Ukraine into its sphere of influence . Russia appeared uncon concerned, since it had no intention of integration with Ukraine .
 Russia itself was economically depressed and militarily tied up in its wars in Chechnya . Russia itself is economically depressed. Russia itself has been economically depressed .
 Moscow recognized Ukraine's official borders, including the Crimean peninsula, home to an ethnic-Russian majority . With this agreement, Moscow recognized the Crimea peninsula as the Crimea region .
 The first big diplomatic crisis between the two sides occurred with Vladimir Putin at the helm in Moscow .
 Russia unexpectedly began building a dam in the Kerch Strait near Ukraine's Tuzla Island in the fall of 2003 .
 Kyiv saw this as an attempt by Russia to redraw national borders . The conflict was only resolved after a face-to-face meeting between the two presidents .
 The construction on the dam was halted, but cracks had begun to show in the friendly facade the two sides presented .
 The tensions mounted during the 2004 presidential election in Ukraine . Moscow threw all of its weight behind the pro-Russia candidate, Viktor Yanukovych .
 The election was declared fraudulent and the pro-Western candidate, Viktor Yushchenko, became president . The election is declared fraudulent .
 Germany and France thwarted Bush's plan and at the NATO summit in Bucharest, Romania, accession was discussed . No timelines for beginning the process were set .
 Moscow played hardball and exerted massive economic pressure on Kyiv in the summer of 2013 . It forced the government of then-President Yanukovych to put the agreement on ice . In the summer 2013, just a few months before the official signing of the document, Russia played hard
 It effectively placed an embargo on Ukrainian goods headed for Russia, sparking massive opposition protests throughout the country . The embargo was effectively placed on Ukrainian products heading for Russia .
 The Kremlin took advantage of the power vacuum in Kyiv and annexed Crimea in March 2014 . Annexation of Crimea marks a turning point for the Kremlin .
 It was a turning point relations betwen the two countries and the beginning of the undeclared war between the two sides . The two sides have been at odds for years.
 Russian paramilitary forces began mobilizing for an uprising in the eastern Ukrainian Donbas region . They instituted Russian-led "people's republics" or quasi states in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Ukraine's newly-elected president Petro Poroshenko met on the sidelines of the 70th anniversary of the D-Day celebrations in Normandy in June 2014 .
 The meeting would later be known as the Normandy Format talks . The meeting was under German and French mediation .
 Russia intervened militarily and on a massive scale, according to Kyiv . Around the same time, the Ukrainian army was able to push back the separatists, says Kyiv.
 Ukrainian units near Iloviask, east of Donetsk, suffered a major defeat . The defeat was a turning point in the war .
 A cease-fire agreement in Minsk ended in September with the signing of a cease- fire agreement . The agreement was signed in September .
 In early 2015, separatists went on the offensive once again, and were supported by Russian troops who, prior to the fighting, removed their identification marks .
 Ukrainian forces suffered a second defeat, this time near the strategically important city of Debaltseve . Ukrainian forces were forced to withdraw from the city .
Western mediation would later produce what was to be known as the Minsk Protocol . The agreement serves as the basis for peace efforts that to this day remain unfulfilled .
 The last time there was a glimmer of hope in the region was in the fall of 2019, when some troops were withdrawn from both sides of the front lines . A concert back in March in Moscow celebrated the annexation of Crimea .
 The Normandy Summit in Paris back in December of 2019 was the last time the two sides sat down at the same table . The two sides met at the Normandy Summit back in 2019 .
 Russian President currently has no interest in a face-to-face meeting with his Ukrainian counterpart Volodymyr Zelensky . Moscow says he is not implementing the Minsk agreements .
 Putin continues to demand that the U.S. keep Ukraine out of NATO and that the country should not be provided with any military assistance .
 DW takes a look at the origins and purposes of the trans-Atlantic security alliance . DW looks at NATO's eastern expansion and Russia's aggression toward Ukraine .
Russia's invasion of Ukraine, Ukraine, war, Crimea, Russia, conflict. Send us your feedback to the Daily Discussion .