 The same two GRU operatives that attempted and failed to assassinate the Skripals in the UK are said to have also frequently infiltrated the Donbas in Ukraine . They are also said to be trying to “instigate conflict’ in East Ukraine.
 Russia is accused of attempting to assassinate people inside another sovereign nation . They are a direct accusation of Russia as actively in attempting to kill people inside the country .
 Russia is augmenting its forces with conventional Russian Army soldiers and officers . Russia is using the military to incite a revolution in Ukraine and others .
 Alexander Mishkin arrived in the UK on March 2 under the alias of Alexander Petrov . Mishkin is also an operative with the GRU, the Russian military spy agency .
 Mishkin was awarded with Hero of the Russian Federation medal – along with alleged accomplice Colonel Anatoliy Chepiga . Mishkin spent considerable amounts of time in Ukraine between 2011 and 2018 . He was awarded Hero of Russia Federation medal along with an alleged accomplices .
Investigators have claimed the two suspects were likely active in GRU efforts to kick-start Russia’s war . During their time in Ukraine, the suspects were most likely to be active in the war .
 Mishkin was likely decorated by Russian President Vladimir Putin for his role in extracting former President Viktor Yanukovych from Kyiv on Feb., 2014 . Investigators presented evidence at a U.K. parliamentary committee .
 Robert Seely, a British member of Parliament, says GRU operatives in Ukraine at the time were likely acting as “firestarters’ and were there to instigate conflict across country .
 In September, Bellingcat investigators revealed that the first Salisbury suspect, Ruslan Boshirov, was in fact a decorated special forces officer and GRU operative . He spent considerable time deployed on the Ukrainian border and likely saw active duty in eastern Ukraine .
 Grozev and Higgins affirmed that they're “100 percent sure’s about the identities of both Chepiga and Mishkin . They said they had no other reason to be in Ukraine as GRU operatives, other than to instigate conflict .
 The pair are believed to have smeared the novichok nerve agent on the front door of Sergei Skripal's home . The former Russian double spy was released by Russia in 2010 in a prisoner swap after being convicted and sentenced to prison in 2006 .
 Sergei Skripal, 66, and his daughter, Yulia, 34, were hospitalized for months after the poisoning . They have recovered and have recovered .
 Police link the Skripals attack to a separate novichok poisoning on June 30 in Amesbury . Dawn Sturgess, 44, was killed in the attack, police say .
 She and her partner Charlie Rowley were exposed to the nerve agent after handling a contaminated perfume dispenser .
 GRU’s interference, manipulations and subversions in Ukraine are probably their crowning achievement so far, investigator Grozev says . The GRU's interference and manipulations are likely to be their crowns, he says .
 In 2014, Ukrainian journalists reported that Anatoliy Chepiga’s unit, the 14th Spetznaz Brigade, was mysteriously redeployed from far-eastern Russia to the border with Ukraine .
 Photographic evidence purported to show that soldiers were frequently flown into Donbas, Crimea or both on low-flying helicopters .
 Investigators confirm that evidence is correct. Investigators in the United Kingdom confirmed that evidence was correct .
 Bellingcat’s investigators have suggestions for the British and warnings for Ukrainians .
As Ukraine approaches presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019, lawmakers and the public should prepare for significantly increased Russian interference .
 Seely is convinced that the conflict has actually had the ironic effect of bringing Ukrainians together . In response to Russia’s war in eastern Ukraine, Seely has increased support and solidarity for Ukraine abroad .