 This Article is brought to you for free and open access by USAWC Press . This Article has been brought to the attention of the USAWC press .
 Special operations forces have played an important role in Russian warfare against Ukraine . Special operations have played a key role in the Ukraine conflict .
 In Crimea, they engaged in mostly covert action tasks, while in Donbas they engage in more regular special operations functions such as special reconnaissance, military assistance, and direct action .
 The annexation of Crimea was the first time in which the new Special Operations Command took on a leading role . Crimea was annexed by the Russian government in 2014 .
 Based on Ukrainian experience, there is little reason to doubt Russian capacity in special operations has increased . Based on the Ukrainian experience.
 This may have consequences for other countries, including the U.S., including the United States .
T his article investigates the roles special operations forces have fulfilled in Russian warfare against Ukraine . T his article also investigates the role special operations force has fulfilled in Crimea and Donbas .
 The Russian SOF is based on the “hybrid warfare paradigm’s ‘hybrid’ warfare paradigm . It starts with a brief survey of the different types of RussianSOF and how these forces fit into this paradigm .
Russian special operations in both Crimea and Donbas are analyzed in relation to standard categories of SOF tasks . Russian special operations are then analyzed.
 Crimea and Donbas examples are discussed . The question of what lessons other countries, including the United States, may draw from them is discussed .
 Given the particularly secret nature of special operations, reliable data is difficult .
 The Russian press has been timidity due to recent events and the current timidity of the Russian press . This is even more so due to the recent nature of the events .
 Much investigative journalism is “scared into silence’ in Russia today. Barring a few media outlets and Internet sites, much investigative Journalism is ‘scared’ into silence .
 There is little available in Russian open sources. Except for the officially admitted use of SOF in Crimea and the arrest of two Spetsnaz GRU officers in Donbas .
 Since Ukraine is party to the conflict, these sources are obviously biased . Since Ukraine has been in conflict, sources have been biased .
 The Ukrainian sources used are relatively independent from the Ukrainian government . The Ukrainian source is relatively independent.
 Most of them display varying degrees of patriotism in the face of Russian military aggression . Some of them, understandably, display varying levels of patriotism .
 Definitions, areas of defense and Capabilities, Scope and Possible Responses financed by the Finish Prime Minister’s Office .
 No modern army would engage in a foreign mission of this scale without having designated roles for its SOF in operations . The army would not be able to engage in foreign missions without designated roles.
 The bias in Ukrainian sources could skew the analysis of Ukrainian sources, according to a report .
 The special forces of the armed forces’ Main Intelligence Directorate, Spetsnaz GRU, the Special Operations Command, and the 45th Special Forces Regiment of the Airborne troops are the most relevant .
 One should note special forces only make up parts of each of these organizations .
 GRU, FSB and SVR have a number of agencies beyond special forces, such as spying bureaus, SIGINT units and others .
 These latter agencies are also included in this study, since they often work in close cooperation with “their special forces’s special forces.
 The same super-structure is no guarantee of close cooperation . However, belonging to the samesuper-st structure is no guarantees of close Cooperation .
The rivalry between Spetsnaz and Agentura within the GRU is well known . The rivalry between the two GRU teams is known .
 This organization was established in the early 1950s . It played an important role in the Russian warfare in Afghanistan and Chechnya .
 Most of the operational experience of the organization is as elite light infantry rather than as special forces in the current Western understanding of the term .
 Spetsnaz-GRU may today better be compared to the United States Rangers than to the U.S. Delta Force .
Spetsnaz-GRU was to some extent formalized as part of the Serdiukov reforms . This supportive role for Spetsnazi-GRu was to be formally formalized .
Spetsnaz GRU as a provider of services to the other branches of the military was enhanced at the expense of its former more independent position . The responsibility of SpetsnAZ GRU was enhanced by the move .
 A new Special Operations Command was established to be the military instrument most directly at the hands of the political leadership . In parallel, a new Special Operation Command was set up .
 Spetsnaz GRU consists of seven brigades spread around the country, with approximately 1,500 servicemen in each . About 1, 500 servicemen are in each battle and support units combined .
 There are four naval Spetsnaz-GRU detachments, one connected to each of the fleets . In addition, there are also four naval spetsnazz-GRu detachments .
 All Spetsnaz-GRU were supposed to be contract soldiers by the end of 2014 . They were due to become contract soldiers in 2014 .
2 Minister of Defense Anatolii Serdiukov in 2008 initiated a fundamental reform of all the Russian armed forces . So far, it has been 2 Minister of defense Anatoli SerdiUKov in the past .
 The main element of this reform was the transition from mass mobilization to high-readiness troops, but the reform also changed many other aspects of organization . The main part of the reform was to change the organization's structure .
 Russian Military Power Bukkvoll 15 difficult to find verification as to whether this aim was achieved or not .
 The establishment of SOC was announced by Chief of the General Staff, General Valery Gerasimov, in March 2013 . It had been under development since 2009, but it had been in development for years .
 It is modelled directly on the U.S. Delta Force and the UK Special Air Service .
 The organization is divided into five special operations divisions with about 50 service personnel in each . The total number of troops, including support personnel, is probably no more than 1,500 .
 SOC was seen as both a reason for, and a symbol of, GRU’s institutional loss of status . GRU was seen by many as a sign of GRU's loss ofstatus .
 The new special force was initially part of GRU, then removed from GRU . It is now again officially part ofGRU, but with a very significant degree of autonomy .
 The main strategic idea behind SOC is for the political leadership to have a small and very competent military tool at its disposal for national and international contingencies where the use of force is needed .
 Alfa consists of five sub-units at different locations in Russia . The main responsibility of the organization is anti-terror operations .
 Vympel consists of four sub-units, and has protection of strategic objects, such as nuclear plants, as the main responsibility . VyMPel has protected nuclear plants as a main responsibility.
 These special responsibilities, however, do not in any sense mean these forces cannot also be used for other purposes . The special responsibilities do not mean these special responsibilities cannot be used in other purposes.
 The 45th SOF Regiment of the Airborne forces basically fulfills the same type of SOF support for these forces as the army Spetsnaz-GRU does for the land forces and the navy SpetsNaz- GRU for the naval infantry .
 Russian official personnel will also be available for other assignments . Their primary mission is the protection of Russian officials around the world, but they are also available for assignments .
 SOF and ‘Hybrid Warfare’ have been attempts to define the concept of hybrid warfare . Many have also dismissed the concept .
 Russian aggression against Ukraine has been focused on non-military means for the achievement of strategic goals .
The use of SOF in regular battle would therefore fall outside most definitions of hybrid warfare . The use of soF inregular battle would also fall out of most definitions.
 The use of SOF to attain political goals in non-combat settings would be an example of the use of these types of forces for hybrid warfare . However, one could argue that SOF could be used to achieve political goals.
 Special Forces sometimes execute covert "political" tasks that special forces sometimes execute . This categorization does not really accommodate some of the more covert “political’s” tasks .
 The concept of covert action in addition to the three NATO types to structure the analysis . Since these latter missions are important in the present context, I use the concept of secret action to structure this analysis .
 Russian SOF has become a hybrid warfare tool. It is primarily in this covert action role that RussianSOF is used as a covert action tool .
 Russian SOF were part of larger regular operations in Crimea and Donbas . They played the hybrid warfare covert action role of influencing local political events in non-combat settings .
 Crimea The Crimean operation, although most probably conducted according to existing contingency plans, was sudden and executed mostly without direct fighting . Crimea The Crimea operation, though most likely conducted by contingency plans.
 Pre-deployment special reconaissance by Spetsnaz-GRU may have taken place, but so far it has been difficult to find evidence of it .
 The Ukrainian military observer Dmytro Tymchuk claims both FSB and GRU became very active in Ukraine after Viktor Yanukovych became president in 2010 .
 Ukrainian security service SBU changed its focus from counterespionage against Russia to counteresionage against the U.S. SBU made the change to the Russian security service .
 It would probably be wrong to claim any significant military assistance role for the Russian SOF in Crimea . "Crimea self-defense units" seem largely to have been décor, providing the Russian forces with a local image .
 The Military Operation for Crimea,’ in Brothers Armed: Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine Second Edition, ed. The Military operation for Crimea.
 Since the operation in terms of SOF was largely a covert action, it was only to be expected that the newly created SOC would play the crucial role .
 The take-over of Crimea was the first operation of a significant scale undertaken by the SOC.14 . SOC was behind the seizing of the local parliament on September 27 .
 Crimean operation used speed and surprise to establish fait accompli on the ground . Ukrainian military response from the Ukrainian side was difficult .
 The Russian victory was secured by the transfer of additional troops to the peninsula . SOC and other special and elite forces elements were the decisive element .
 Crimean parliament to the signing of the treaty making Crimea a part of Russia took only 19 days .
Seven days later all Ukrainian military units had laid down their arms . Seven days later the Ukrainian army had laid their arms down .
 The Crimean operation makes the Crimean operation very different from the follow-on operation in Donbas . Such a time schedule makes the Crimea operation very Different from the following-on operations in DonBas .
 Ukrainian group “InformNapalm’s” has identified by name a large number of individuals from different Russian SOF units on Ukrainian soil . Donbas is based mostly on “selfies’ posted by Russian soldiers on the Internet .
 The SOC seems to have taken part in these operations . The FSB.17 No open source seems to claim the SOC has taken part .
 SOC is an exclusive force used only where the chances of further fighting were small . Their absence in Donbas fits the image of SOC as an exclusive group used only to fight .
 SOC is a capability of such value and cost that it will be used mostly when others cannot do the job . It also underscores that SOC is also a capability that it can be used when others can't do the jobs .
 The first GRU operative was arrested on Ukrainian soil by the Ukrainian security service SBU in March 2014 . He was arrested by SBU.
 He was arrested together with three others while gathering intelligence on Ukrainian military positions on the Chongar Peninsula just north of Crimea . He and three others were arrested together.
 As a result, the author says, "Little, Green and Polite,’s" The author also says, “Little,Green and Polites,” and Nikolsky .
 These are elite in the sense they have a much-higher degree of professional soldiers than regular army units . Selection of personnel is much stricter, and selection of personnel has been stricter .
 Russian Internet site Zabytii Polk claimed the 45th Spetsnaz Regiment had been present with a base in Novoazovsk, Ukraine .
 Ukrainian general staff claimed to have evidence the SVR had been active doing political work in the area . Both FSB special units, Alfa and Vympel, had taken part in the fighting .
 The claim has so far been difficult to corroborate from other sources . This latter claim, however, has been hard to corroborated from others .
 Exactly when Spetsnaz-GRU first started to send operators into Donbas is still unknown .
 One of the first eyewitness accounts was provided by the Ukrainian war correspondent Inna Zolotukhina . The Ukraine war correspondent was also a war correspondent .
 That is a month before the Donbas anti-Kiev rebellion became full blown . That is one month before it became full-blown .
 Ukrainian oligarch Serhiy Taruta has also confirmed Russian special operations forces most likely had a role in the initiation of the rebellion .
 Taruta took part in the Ukrainian government’s negotiations with the rebels in Donetsk .
 Ukrainian authorities were able to bribe the rebels to leave the town hall in Donetsk, he says . The rebels had taken over the building in Donetsk .
 "green men" came to Donetsk from Sloviansk and changed the mind of the Donetsk rebels . "Green men" changed the minds of the rebels .
Evidence suggests Russia was involved in initiating parts of the anti-Kiev rebellion in Donbas . Russian SOF was one of the main tools, according to the evidence .
 This is a prime example of the use of SOF in a covert operation hybrid warfare role . This is the first time SOF has been used in covert operations in the past .
 The Russian Military Power Bukkvoll 19 no way excludes that there also was significant local initiative for rebellion against Kiev .
 Crimea for Russian SOF was mostly about covert action, but it also saw them engaged in the full spectrum of regular SOF tasks from July-August 2014 onwards .
 Ukrainian military observer Konstantin Mashovets claims SpetsnazGRU at any time have had from three to four combined units/battalions in Donbas .
 Russian SOF trained and provided intelligence for the local rebels . The former RussianSOF trained the rebels .
 Russian not-in-service volunteers have been able to do the same job . At the same time, there has been a reluctance to operate together, especially in Russia .
 The Russian tactic seems to have been to keep political and military assignments somewhat separate . Thus, the Russian tactic appears to be to keep the military assignments separate .
 Russian SOF in general have tried to avoid direct combat in Donbas . Spetsnaz-GRU do special reconaissance and military assistance, while the political work is taken care of by embedded “curators’ from Agentura- GRU.
 One of the GRU officers identified in Donbas is an individual known as Krivko . For example, one of the officers identified is a member of the U.S. Army .
 In May 2015, two soldiers from the 16th brigade in Tambov were wounded in battle by Stsjastye near Luhansk . Simultaneously, in May 2015.
 Spetsnaz-GRU has been only partially successful in avoiding participation in regular battle . These examples suggest SpetsNaz- GRU has only partially succeeded in avoiding Participation in regular battles .
 Another area of direct action has been sabotage in Ukrainian rear areas . Another area has been sabotaged in Ukraine .
 One example, of a sabotage mission gone wrong, was the killing of an alleged GRU-agent in Kharkov in September 2014 .
 He was suspected of blowing up train wagons with air fuel at Osnova railway station . He was probably in order to create problems for Ukrainian military aviation .
 Ukrainian sources additionally claim combined groups of rebels and Spetsnaz-GRU increased their activities in Ukrainian rear areas in 24 . This point is currently contested among specialists .
This activity included mine-laying and attacks at poorly guarded Ukrainian transport convoys . This activity includedMine-lays and attacks on poorly guarded transport convoy .
 FSB special forces special forces have been the responsibility of the FSB's special forces . The FSB has been responsible for some of the most direct-action activity in the world .
 Ukrainian military observer Dmytro Tymchuk states that the FSB special forces have had supervision and disciplining of the different separatist groups as a special responsibility .
 This has included both diplomacy and more “physical measures’ against recalcitrant individuals . This has also included both diplomatic and more "physical measures" against recal citrant individuals.
As in most countries, there are problems with the coordination of policies among different agencies . There are problems in many countries, but there are also problems in other countries .
 Russian observer Konstantin Gaaze claims there are at least three different agencies of the Russian state that implement policy in Donbas . Gaaze says there are three agencies that implement policies in the region .
 Russian military has been directing the DNR/LNR militaries . For example, presidential adviser Vladislav Surkov has supervised political leaderships . Russian military have been directing DNR-LNR military.
 FSB has done things on its own that very few have heard about . In addition, the FSB is doing its own things .
 None of the three have informed each other very much about their doings, Gaaze says .
 In October 2015, a joint coordination center was established between the GRU and FSB in Donetsk to deal with the problem . In October 2014, the center was set up in Donetsk, Ukraine .
 The two operations will limit what other countries can learn from them . As always will be the case, the U.S. will learn from these two operations .
 Crimea and Donbas set apart from many other areas where Russia may get into conflict in the future . Both the presence of largely ethnic Russian, pro-Russia elements in the populations, and the historical ties of these areas to Russia .
 The increased Russian ability to deploy SOF at high speed to a conflict zone is worth attention. First, the increased Russia's ability to use SOF is worth Attention .
 It is especially the establishment of the 28 See “Spetsnaz GRU nachal okhotitsia na ukrainskykh voennykh v tylu,” Novoe Vremia .
 Russian Military Power Bukkvoll 21 SOC that has strengthened Russia’s capability in this area . The 21 SOC have strengthened Russia's capability in the area .
 In Crimea they were very rapidly able to create a fait accompli on the ground that Ukrainian authorities found it hard to respond to . Ukrainian authorities were unable to respond. In Crimea, they were quickly able to make a very rapid accompli .
 It is possible to imagine something similar also in Russia’s relations with other countries .
 Russia uses SOF to quickly establish a fait accompli, the Russian government may face a serious dilemma . If it's in a conflict of interest between Russia and another state, Russia uses soF to establish an agreement . Russia could face serious dilemma.
 Russia's actions will not be easy, but risking escalation to a full-scale conflict by striking back is not easy either . Accepting what Russia has done will be not easy.
 The real damage of accepting the new status quo is limited. That is especially the case if the actual material and/or political damage is limited . That's especially the cases if the real material and or political damage of acceptance is limited, says the author .
 NATO countries must take into account how other members of the alliance are likely to judge the new situation . NATO countries also must consider how other countries will judge the situation .
 The host government may think a military response is justified, but this does not mean the other members of the alliance think likewise .
 The host government should probably secure clarity on the issue of assistance before deciding on its own type of response . The host country should secure clarity before deciding its own kind of response.
 Second, Russian use of SOF in particular, and hybrid warfare in general, will probably look very different from case to case . Second, Russia's use ofSOF will probably be very different, and Hybrid Warfare in general .
Training according to Ukraine-like scenarios may be of limited value, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Each country needs to identify what their particular vulnerabilities may be in the case of a potential conflict with Russia .
Third, the effect of the use of SOF may be enhanced by the simultaneous use of other, non-military, tools . Third, the impact of the using SOF could be enhanced.
 In Crimea and Donbas, this was propaganda by state-controlled Russian television and disruption of the normal information infrastructure . In the cases of Crimea and donbas, it was propaganda.
 The main lesson is to be ready for the fact that several threats are likely to manifest themselves at the same time . There are several threats likely to be made at same time, according to experts .
 The increased Russian ability to conduct high-speed limited scope military operations with SOF against U.S. allies should be of concern . Also for the United States, the increase in Russian ability is of concern.
 Reaction will be easier if the right mix of military and/or political response has been given some thought in advance .
 In terms of NATO solidarity, the threshold for Article 5 assistance may become more blurred . The threshold for NATO solidarity may become less blurred .
 Russia could be exporting its new model for SOF to other countries . The U.S. could have consequences for the United States .
 Russia already has some experience in this field, helping establish SOF in Ethiopia in the late 1990s . Russia has already had some experience with this field .
 Russia often cooperates in the military sphere with countries that have strained relations with the U.S. Russia often cooperate with countries with strained relations.
 Stronger SOF capabilities among potential U.S. adversaries may have consequences for United States contingency planning . StrongerSOF capabilities could have consequences.
 Russia's relations with many countries look set to be challenging for years to come . Unless there is a change of regime, Russia’s relations with some countries look likely to be difficult .
 This means that even if Russia is not actively seeking confrontation, diverging interests and interpretations of political realities are likely to make conflict a real possibility . This means even if Russian is not seeking confrontation.
 For many countries, until a broader understanding and more stable relations with Russia have been achieved, the danger of violent conflict remains a possibility . For many, until an understanding and a more stable relationship with Russia is achieved, it is a possibility.
 In this setting, growing Russian SOF capabilities are a particular concern . In this set, growing Russia SOF capability is a particular worry .