 The HVC-304, interview in the above matter was held in Room Capitol Visitor Center, commencing at 10:08m. The interview was held at 10.08m .
 Representatives Schiff, Himes, Sewell, Carson, Carson and Quigley, Swalwell, Heck, Maloney, Demings, Krishnamoorthi, Conaway, Wenstrup.
 Representatives Norton, Malinowski, Raskin, Rouda, Phillips, Engel, Perry, Meadows, and Zeldin are all members of Congress .
 The House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence is conducting this investigation as part of the official impeachment inquiry of the House of Representatives . The Foreign Affairs and Oversight Committees are also investigating .
Today's deposition is being conducted as part of the impeachment inquiry . Today's deposition will be conducted by the House of Representatives in Washington .
 White House had no choice but to compel your appearance today . State Department in coordination with the White House to direct you not to appear .
 We thank you for complying with the dually authorized congressional subpoena, as other witnesses have done as well . The subpoena was issued by the House of Representatives .
We expect nothing less from a dedicated career civil servant like yourself. We expect nothing more from the civil servant than yourself .
 Deputy Assistant Secretary Kent has served with distinction as a Foreign Service officer with deep experience relevant to the matters under investigation by the committees . Kent has also served as a foreign Service officer.
 Deputy Assistant Secretary in the European and Eurasian Bureau . He oversees policy towards Ukraine, Moldova, Belarus, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijani .
 Previously he was deputy chief of mission in Kyiv from 2015 until 2018 when he returned to Washington to assume his current position . He was Deputy Chief of mission from 2015 to 2018. Previously he had been deputy chief-of-mission inKyiv from 2014 to 2018 .
 Since 3 joining the Foreign Service in 1992 he has served among other 4 postings in Warsaw, Poland, Kyiv, Tashkent, Uzbekistan, and Bangkok .
We look forward to hearing your testimony today, including your knowledge of 7 and involvement in key policy discussions, meetings, meetings and 8 decision on Ukraine .
 This includes any effort by 23 the State Department, the White House, or any other entity of 24 the government to claim that in the course of your testimony 25 under dually authorized subpoena today .
 We expect you to 8 notify us immediately and we will hold those responsible to 9 account . Should that not be the case, we expect to be held responsible for 9 accounts .
 22 Democrats are conducting a rushed, closed-door and 23 unprecedented impeachment inquiry . Instead, 22 Dems are conducting an unprecedented impeachment probe .
 Democrats are ignoring 45 24 years of bipartisan procedures designed to provide elements 25 of fundamental fairness and due process . Democrats are ignored 45 years of bipartisanship.
 The majority and minority had coequal subpoena 2 authority and the right to require a committee vote on all 3 subpoenas . In past impeachment 1 inquiries, the majority and minorities had co equal subpoena 2 power .
 The President's counsel had the right to attend 4 all depositions and hearings, including those held in 5 executive session .
 The President's counsel had the right to 6 cross-examine the witnesses and theright to propose 7 witnesses . The President had theRight to propose seven witnesses .
 The President's counsel had the right to present 8 evidence, object to the admission of evidence, and to review 9 all evidence presented, both favorable and unfavorable . The president's counsel was allowed to present 9 evidence, including 8 evidence .
 Democrats are conducting an inquiry behind closed doors . Most disappointing, Democrats are 13 conducting this inquiry . The inquiry is being conducted behind closed door .
 15 Democrats have been clear every single session that there's 16 unclassified material being presented in the sessions .
 "I conduct myself as both chairman and ranking member in a very bipartisan way," he says . "I think that should apply here as well," he adds .
 Congress can't declare war under Article I To hide behind that, to have it in a 5CIF, to defy historical precedent . It guarantees the participation of counsel, White House counsel in the room in an adversarial way .
 Both sides recognized that with a fair. That was done during both prior impeachments, because both sides recognize that .
 Republican, Democrat, and Independent constituents wanted to see this done right way . If -I would just urge you, if you're going to continue, and I've been back in my district for 2 weeks, talking to my constituents both Republican, and Democrat .
 I hope that this resolution will come to the floor so that we can participate in a democratic system, with a democratic vote, up or down, to proceed with this inquiry . The resolution is backed by the American people, he says .
 To do so otherwise, I think, defies democracy, it defies fairness, and defies due process . To do that otherwise, he says, itdefies fairness and it defys due process, he adds .
 If we're going to 10 1 do this, for God's sakes, let's do it right way, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I think my colleagues will have 4 an opportunity to discuss these matters further, but in the 5 interest of moving ahead with the deposition, I recognize 6 Mr Goldman . I think his colleagues will certainly have 4 a opportunity to talk further, and I recognize Mr Goldman.
This is a 8 deposition of George 9 Kent conducted by the House Permanent Select Committee on 10 Intelligence . This is a deposition of Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, George9 Kent . The deposition is pursuant to the impeachment inquiry announced 11 by the Speaker of the House.
 The deposition is part of a joint investigation led by the Intelligence 18 Committee . Now, along with other 16 proceedings and furtherance of this inquiry, this deposition is 17 a part of the joint investigation .
 Members may ask questions during 25 their allotted time, but there will be equal allotted time for the majority and minority . This is a staff-led 24 deposition, but members will be allowed to ask questions.
 Daniel Goldman is the senior adviser and director for investigations for the HPSCI majority staff . His name is Daniel Goldman .
 Nicholas Mitchell is the senior investigative counsel for the HPSCI majority staff . Mitchell is a senior investigator counsel for HPSci majority staff.
 Mr Mitchell and Mr Mitchell will be conducting most of deposition for the majority .
 Minority staff members from the minority staff will also introduce themselves as well .
 The Oversight Committee is the Republican staff of the Oversight Committee . The committee's chairman is Steve Castor .
 The deposition will be conducted entirely at the unclassified level . Now this deposition will not be conducted at a classified level .
 The deposition is being conducted in HPSCI's secure spaces, and in the presence of staff with the appropriate security clearances . As we understand as of this morning, your attorneys all have appropriate securityclearances, as we understand .
 State Department letter addresses concerns about disclosure of classified information . State Department: We understand that you received a letter from the State Department .
 In any event, any classified 2 information that is disclosed is not an unauthorized 3 disclosure today . But we want 12 1 you to rest assured that, in any case, it is not a breach of privacy .
 EO 13526 states that, "In no case shall 10 information be classified, or continue to be maintained as 11 classified or fail to be declassified" EO13526 states, that, quote, 'In no cases shall 10 info be classified'
 We would ask you to inform us of 16 that before you provide the answer, and we can as just as just the 17 deposition accordingly . We would also ask us to inform you of 16 other answers .
You and your attorney 23 will have an opportunity to review the transcript at a later 24 date . You and your lawyer 23 will be able to review your transcript at later 24 dates .
 We have previously provided counsel with a copy of the regulations . Let us 4 know if you need additional copies of those regulations .
 The 6 majority 1 hour to ask questions, and the minority will be 7 given one hour to answer questions . The minority will also be given a 1-hour time to question questions .
 At any time, if you or your counsel need a 10 break, please just let us know .
 Under the House deposition 11 rules, counsel for other persons or government agencies may 12 not attend this proceeding . "We understand that none are 13 here," the House says .
 You are allowed to have personal attorney 14 present during deposition . You are also allowed to bring a couple, but you can have a personal attorney .
At this time if counsel could please state 16 his or her name for an appearance for the record. At this time, counsel could state 16's or her names for a appearance for a record .
 A stenographer 21 takes down everything that is said, all questions and 22 answers . There is a written report for the 23 deposition .
 Please wait until 24 questions are completed before you provide your answers . All staff and members here will wait until you finish your 14 1 response before asking the next question .
 The stenographer 2 cannot record nonverbal answers such as a shaking of the head 3 or an uh-huh . So please answer questions 4 with an audible verbal answer .
 If a question is unclear or you 7 are uncertain about the response, please let us know . We 8 can rephrase the question and we 8 can answer it .
 You may only refuse to 11 answer a question to preserve a privilege recognized by the 12 committee . You can only answer 11 questions to preserve the privilege of the committee .
 Staff may either proceed with the 14 deposition, or seek a ruling from the chairman on and 15 objection, in person or otherwise, during the deposition .
 If the chair 17 overrules any such objection, you are required to answer the 18 question . If you are asked to answer 18 questions, you must also answer 18 question.
 You must give 23 full and complete answers to all questions asked of you . It is imperative that you answer our questions truthfully .
I swear that the testimony I am about to give is the truth and nothing but the truth . I swear that I will give the testimony. I swear it's the truth, but nothing but truth, he says .
Deputy Assistant Secretary Kent will make any opening remarks . But before we begin, now is the time for you to make any Opening remarks .
 17 1 officer for more than 27 years, under five Presidents, three 2 Republican and two Democrats . Mark Meadows, North Carolina, has been a police officer for over 27 years .
 I am 3 appearing here in response to your congressional subpoena . As you all know, I am three appearing here. I'm 3 appearing on CNN.
 I do not know the Department of State's views on disregarding that 8 order . I do 7 not know what the State Department's views are on the issue .
 The executive and legislative branches not of my making, says the author . He says he finds 17 himself today, faced with the enormous professional and 18 personal cost and expense of dealing with a conflict between 19 executive and Legislative branches .
 The Bataan Death March is a family tradition dating back to before 11 World War II . A 12 3-year stint in a Japanese POW camp was unbroken, and a 12-year POW camp stint unbroken .
 I hope the 13 drama now playing out does not discourage my son > 14 from seriously considering a life of service . I hope it doesn't discourage his son from considering life of Service .
 I served twice 19 in Ukraine for a total of 6 years, posted in Kyiv, first 20 during and after the Orange Revolution from 2004 to 2008 . In the aftermath of the Revolution 22 of Dignity, I worked at deputy chief of mission .
 Wess Mitchell joined his team as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State in the summer of 2018 . He covers six countries in the front line of Russian aggression and malign influence .
 The administration's national security strategy, which Wess helped write, makes clear the strategic challenge before us great power competition, says Wess .
 Ukraine has been on the front lines, not just of Russia's war in eastern Ukraine since 2014, but of the greater geopolitical challenges facing the U.S. today .
 Ukraine's success is very much in our national interest in the way we have defined or national interests broadly in Europe for the last 75 years, since the fall of the Wall in 1989 . Ukraine is one of Europe's most important countries in central and Eastern Europe .
 Ukraine is full free 2 and at peace, including Crimea and Donbas, both current 3 occupied by Russia .
 Former 24 Ambassador Pyatt is the current ambassador to the United States . Pyatt has been in charge for three years . He is also the former 25 Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 You don't step in to the public arena of 4 international diplomacy in active pursuit of U.5.5 interests against venal vested interests without expecting 6 vigorous pushback. You don’t step into the public arenas of 4.4 international diplomacy.
Some 17 issues, conversations and documents span a number of 18 years . I suspect your questions may well involve some 17 issues .
 The State Department is in the process of collecting 19 documents in response to the subpoena, not to me, but to the 20 Department . The subpoena may contain facts relevant to my testimony, the State Department says .
 I will do my best to answer as accurately, completely and truthfully as I can . I will, thus, 22 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 17 18 19 18 19 20 21 21 22 23 24 24 25
 The subpoena has ordered me to appear before you today . I'm ready to answer all your questions regarding the subject of the subpoena .
 Could we get a copy of the Secretary's opening statement for us? Please, please. Could we getting a copy, could staff get a copies of it?
 Q Mr Kent, I'm going to pick up just where you left off there about the documents, he says . The documents will be published in the coming weeks .
 A request to appear voluntarily and to provide documents was emailed to me on September 27th . In the letter, there was a request to be voluntarily and provide documents, yes .
 The documents would be collected as part of a subpoena request since they are considered Federal records . The documents are considered federal records .
 A I collected all the different types of records that possibly could be considered part of the request and provided them to the listed authority at the State Department .
 The first interaction was with somebody who works with our congressional liaison .
 The first interaction was with a personal request for a document production request .
 The Department issued written guidance on how to be responsive to the subpoena for documents to the Department late on October 2nd and that was in writing . The second interaction with the Department was in written guidance .
 The instructions were sent from the executive secretary of the Department, Lisa Kenna .
 European Bureau staff would convene at 9 o'clock the next morning to discuss how we could fully be responsive to the request . The senior bureau official at the time was Maureen Cormack .
 A We had roughly 20 members of European Bureau still there . The overall staff meeting of the morning was from 8:30 to 9:00 .
 The State Department identifies a number of individuals as key record collectors . The first paragraph of the State Department's instructions identifies the individuals .
 26 1 self-identified as from congressional liaison 2 and from the Office of Legal Counsel at the 3 State Department . Two people in the room who are not members of the European Bureau staff, there could have been more .
 5 others who might have records should also be responsive . They clarified that that was not an exclusive list, meaning not only those people listed, but 5 others should also have records .
 At any -I just want to back it up a little 7 bit and a little bit more generally here. At any, I just want it to be a little more general here .
 We didn't want to stay here 9 all night. I appreciate your 8 detail, but we are somewhat -we didn't wanted to stay there 9 . I appreciate our 8 detail but we don't like to stay at all night .
I did have several interactions with 21 other State Department officials on Tuesday, October 1st . I did have many interactions with the State Department .
 A letter sent to these committees 5 that characterized interactions that I do not feel was 6 accurate. And there was a letter sent from this committee 5 that described interactions that he does not feel were 6 accurate . The letter was sent to the committees 5.
Two career 11 foreign service officers had received letters from the 12 committees . They had not felt bullied, threatened, and 13 intimidated . And I was one of two career 11 Foreign service officers which had received Letters from the12 committees .
 The Foreign Service officers had requested the 15 committee's to route all communications through House liaison 16 . I think your colleague who sent me the 17 initial email on Friday night received my reply . The 19 congressional liaison had requested that the information be routed to them .
 The letter itself 21 did not accurately characterize the interaction . So I was concerned that the letter itself21 did not accurate characterize the interactions .
 Perez is one of the top two career foreign services officers and oversees the personnel system . She had worked for her previously directly in a previous job .
 The European Bureau's leadership is outside of the European Bureau . I suggested that it was time that somebody engaged me personally, particularly since representations were made about me .
 She said when that was finished, she would reach out and find somebody that reached out to me . She said she would find someone that would reachout to her when that had been finished .
 The acting legal counselor of the Department, "L"" in our parlance, Marek String, would reach out to me. If I did not hear from him in 24 hours, I should contact her again. And so she came back after an hour and said that the acting legal
 He called me back through Operations Center in the evening when he was already at home . He called him back through the operations center in the night when he had been home .
 He said it was a very busy day, that they had responsive and were doing a lot . But I'd known Marek previously and respected him, he said .
 If it weren't for Marek, we would not have had Charge Taylor out in Kyiv. If it wasn't for him, we wouldn't have had him out inKyiv .
 He helped with the process of getting him brought back on board as an Active Duty person .
 "I respected his professionalism previously, so it was a professional conversation," he says . "So I respect his professionalism," he adds . "I respect his professional conversation"
 A He apologized, because I mentioned that there had not been an exchange . He apologized because he said there had been not a exchange .
 A phone call at night when I was in my kitchen eating dinner at about 9 -between 8 and 9. A to the best of my recollection, again, it was a phone call.
 The guidance that we received in writing came shortly after close of business on the 2nd .
 The European Bureau's meeting at 9 o'clock on October 3rd. The next sort of point was the meeting, then the next kind of point.
 The 3rd was when I formally engaged Andrew Wright as my counsel in this process . That was also the time when we formally engaged him as his counsel .
 There were additional engagements, interactions with -through counsel. And therefore, there were more engagements, engagements with - through counsel .
 A I can read the news, but as I've answered you before, I'm not aware . I did my role, but I did not know what it was .
 There were a lot of documents and records that I had that I needed to provide, based on the subpoena and the State Department issues .
 I do not know the process on reviewing the records, but I have provided those records . I don't know how the process is being reviewed .
 A representative from L, as I previously mentioned, who attended the European Bureau guidance meeting on October 3rd.
 The 7 exchange started when we were discussing the issue of who 8 needed to be responsive to the records collection . The exchange started at the end of the 7 exchange .
 Rudy Giuliani tried to get a visa for the former corrupt prosecutor 15 general of Ukraine, Viktor Shokin . Shokin is a former Ukrainian prosecutor .
 17 took issue with my raising the additional 18 information, and the conversation rapidly, I would say, 19 either escalated or degenerated into a tense exchange . And my read of the 16 request would include that .
Representative Speier asked me a 25 question and you answered it . I've got two questions here, so I don't know 24 how you want to manage .
 He objected to my raising of the additional information and said that he didn't think it was appropriate for me to make the suggestion . He said he doesn't remember his exact words, but -he made clear that he did not think it would be appropriate for him to make it.
 The meeting was the first time that we were discussing guidance for being responsive to a subpoena . I took the opportunity, then, to point out that the first - the meeting was a first .
 The request for the documents and the request for submission had been delivered on September 27th and we had less than 2 business days to be responsive . "I don't think I should be even talking to you," he says .
 I should only talk to counsel, and I talked to your counsel last night. I should just talk to Counsel, I said last night . "I talked to you last night," I said .
 The conversation ended at that point, but later on when I picked up this issue of guidance and our responsibilities, he raised his voice again . It is against the bar ethics, for me to contact and talk to you directly, he said .
 I said someone provided information to the Secretary that he said publicly in Italy that the congressional committees were preventing me from talking to legal counsel . I said somebody provided information. I said person provided information that the Secretary had said publicly that he had been prevented by congressional committees .
 I said I've got 15 witnesses in a room hearing you say that you don't want to talk to me. And I said he said he's got 15 witness witnesses in the room hearing. And he said I'm getting 15 witnesses.
 The Secretary of State's office is providing the State Department with positions at odds with the language that your office is giving .
 The State Department and the Secretary would be protected from a legal subpoena, he says . "My interest in this process was so that the State Department ... would be fully responsive to the legal subpoena," he adds .
Secretary of State said he represented the Secretary of State and the Department's interest in this process . He said to me that he represented his interest in the process .
 He said he was the author of the lines about the -of the letter that included the language about the bullying and intimidation . He also said that he was also the author.
 I pointed out to him that I thought the language he had 34 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 9 10 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 then drafted, since he said was the drafter, was inaccurate .
 I said that the career Foreign Services are being intimidated . I said, well, you say that the Foreign Service is being intimidated, I said .
 There are only two career Foreign Service officers who subject to this process . Only two career foreign service officers who are subject to the process .
 The other one is Ambassador Yovanovitch, who is teaching at Georgetown . I'm the only one working at the Department of State .
 I'm not asking to reveal anything that isn't already commonly known. So I don't ask you to reveal what's already known, I'm just asking you to share it .
 Q Did he disagree that Mr Risch should be included in the -A We did not return to that topic. Q Did we disagree that he should have been included? We didn't return to the topic .
 A Correct then said, then opened the door after 35 1 minutes and asked if I could come out . A Correct. Then said, "I'm out for a few minutes," then said.
 I apologized for them 3 having had to hear an uncomfortable conversation . I apologize for them having had a conversation with me .
State 7 Department legal staff of the State 7 Department. I said 4 that it was important that they had been there as witnesses . 5 since that was likely the only such only conversation 6 engagement.
I said that's called 16 projection. And what I said 15 to him was what I hear you saying - I said that was 16 projection . And what he said 15 was what he told him.
 The 20-year-old says he doesn't think it's appropriate for you to go back into that 21 room . He then tells him, "I don't think that's appropriate" He then says it's not appropriate for him to return to that room .
 I will go back in 23 and tell colleagues that since I'm one of the chief 24 records collectors, I will resume 25 collecting records . I told him that's not your business, that's my 22 meeting, but I will agree with you, though, he said .
 The only other thing we did was I gave him my business card, he wrote his name and phone number in my notebook . He wrote the name and number in his notebook .
 I imagine you will be writing up your version of this conversation and I will be too, he said . And he said, "I imagine you'll be writing your own version of the conversation"
An earlier set of letters were sent prior to the September 27th letters. So I am not a lawyer and I understand there are different ways of signaling how serious the issue is .
 There was no request for anyone to collect records prior to the subpoena, to my understanding, on the 27th .
 The tone and further back and forth between L and her counsel was fully professional and respectful, she says . A No, and I think as counsel can confirm, he was taken off of my account .
 The initial document request under the subpoena was to the State Department and State Department . The State Department did share the consideration that communications would be considered Federal records, he says .
 The letter that came to me on September 27th was sent concurrently with a 4 subpoena for those documents . The letters that came in, the letter that comes in, came to him on Sept. 27th .
 The request was under 7 subpoena to the Department for those records to be collected . I was responsive to the request under 7 subpoenas .
 I would have to go back and look at the 12 written guidance that was issued on October 2nd . The guidance was issued by the U.S. Department of State Department of Education .
 The 14 documents will be part of the subpoena to the Department of the Department for the 15 documents . But I will 13 say it was my understanding that I would provide the 14 documents .
 Any 16 record that I create in the performance of my professional 17 duties would be considered a record of the Department of 18 State . If I create a 16 record, it would be a record.
 Michael McKinley, senior adviser to the Secretary of State, sent in his resignation letter . McKinley was a former adviser to President Barack Obama . He is now a senior adviser.
Mr McKinley had no prior interaction with Mr McKinley until the weekend after the letters were issued, and he reached out to talk to me . He had no previous interaction with him before the weekend .
 He reached out to me through the Operations Center in Markham, Virginia . He wanted to know if I had any objection to him trying to get the Department to issue a statement .
 State Department leadership should stand up for its career foreign service officers, says John Sutter . Sutter says it is entirely appropriate for the State Department to stand up.
 I asked him if he'd already floated the idea, and if he got any 40 1 responses, he said yes . He said he's not sure if he's already floated it, but if he had got any responses .
 The 3rd of October. And I did describe my -the 14 guidance meeting and what had occurred on the 3th of October . The meeting took place at the end of the month .
Secretary of the Foreign 21 Service said he had no problem with his senior adviser . He asked if he would mind sharing it with him so that he could share it with other leaders of the Department .
 Marek String told me he shared it with the Deputy Secretary Sullivan, Under Secretary Hale . He later told me that he shared the story with the deputy secretary and the under secretary .
 I presume that included people outside of the European Bureau, but I did not ask specifically which individuals he had engaged . That's -so I presume - but I didn't ask specifically who he was engaged to .
 I did ask him, one of the times he dropped by my office, if that statement had gone anywhere, and he said no . He said, no .
 He's been an 2 ambassador in four places - three times in South America and 3 Afghanistan . He's also been an ambassador in three places -three times in the U.S.
 He appeared to be in person to be a 4 genuinely decent person who was concerned about what was happening . But he appeared to have been a 4 genuine decent person .
 21 people will discuss Ukraine policy and efforts by 22 nongovernment individuals to influence Ukraine policy today .
 Rudy Giuliani is one of the central players in this 24 investigation . Giuliani has been named in the first 24 investigation into Rudy Giuliani . Giuliani is also a central player in the investigation .
 Giuliani has traveled to Ukraine over the course of the last decade, he says . He says Giuliani is a private individual .
 I never met with him, never had any communication with him. A I never had a conversation with him . I never was in the presence of him, and never met him .
 The first indication that I heard of contacts in 2018 came in May 2018 . A first indication of contacts came in 2018 .
 Q Were you still in -A I was in -I left Kyiv, Ukraine on August 12th, 2018. Q Were You still in-A.
 Giuliani was calling the State Department regarding the inability of the previous prosecutor general Viktor Shokin to get a visa to come to the United States . The next time I heard Mr Giuliani's name mentioned was on the 9th of January this year, 2019 .
 Deputy Assistant Secretary of State covering Ukraine, and it was a matter about Ukraine, he says .
 A I was involved extensively in conversations and exchanges over the next 2 days, yes . A man who was involved in conversations with me was involved, he says .
 Viktor Shokin served as prosecutor general of Ukraine from February 10th, 2015, until sometime of the spring, perhaps late February, early March 2016 . Shokin is a former prosecutor general from Ukraine .
 He was known to have been the godfather of then-President Poroshenko's kids . He was also known to be the father of the then-president's children .
 A broad-based consensus that he was a typical Ukraine prosecutor who lived a lifestyle far in excess of his government salary . He never prosecuted anybody known for having committed a crime, and covered up crimes known to have been committed .
 Rudy Giuliani was trying to call into the Office of the Secretary of State . I believe it may have been from one of the staff .
 The initial redirection was to the Assistant Secretary of Consular Affairs, Mr Risch .
 The State Department is the part of the State Department that deals with visas . Since it was about a visa, I think it was entirely appropriate for the matter to be referred to the part.
 I believe with apologies to any German Americans, I think it is R-i-s-c-h, but sometimes names get changed . I believe, with apologies, I believe it isR-i.s-C-h. But sometimes names are changed .
 My original German name was Kindt, K-i-n-d-t, and then my great-great-grandmother changed to anglicize it to K-e-N-t .
 There was a series of conversations between members of the Consular Affairs front office and European affairs front office .
 For the European office, that included Assistant Secretary Wess Mitchell and myself principally .
Assistant Secretary Risch and deputy assistant secretary for visas, who I believe is Ed Romatowski .
 A Mr Shokin, as I mentioned, was well and very unfavorably known to us . He was a well-known to us, as he mentioned .
 We felt under no circumstances, should a visa be issued to someone who knowingly subverted and wasted U.S. taxpayer money. And we felt, under no circumstance, should it be issued .
 Wess Mitchell: "As somebody who had a fiduciary responsibility for anticorruption programs, I felt personally strongly that it was incorrect" Mitchell says he felt "very strongly" that the view was incorrect .
 Shokin wanted to come to the United States to share information suggesting that there was corruption at the U.S. embassy . Shokin says he conveyed the story to colleagues in Consular Affairs .
 A Knowing Mr Shokin, he was looking to basically engage in a con game out of revenge because he'd lost his job . He was looking for revenge after losing his job.
 Giuliani may have had between two and three conversations with the Assistant Secretary in that period of time, Giuliani to Risch .
 A I recall what I recall, and I presume that either that was in one of those conversations were an email exchange, but I couldn't tell you for sure. A I shared what I recalled, and it's not clear if it was a conversation .
 Former Mayor Giuliani attempted to call the White House, and deputy chief of staff, Rob Blair, then called the State Department to ask for a background . The State Department was not being responsive.
 He identified his role at that point to ground truth the situation and look out after the interest of the Office of the President .
 I only know that Mr Blair reached out to us to ground truth about the situation . I only knows that he reached out for the truth .
 He said he was asked, which suggests 7 that he did not have the conversation himself . He said that he didn't have the discussion himself .
 I was at the embassy in Kyiv when a series of 11 corrupt prosecutors accused us of not sharing our assistance to improve the prosecutor service 13 in Ukraine . I was in the embassy when the corrupt prosecutors, including Shokin's team, were accused of 12 not sharing their assistance .
 The campaign was released 14 as part of the disinformation campaign . It included a 15 letter from April 2016 which he signed as Charge .
 Minister of Interior Avakov said it was to throw mud. I said he knew what the purpose was, and did he know what it was, he said . I said, did he knows what the reason was, I said .
 At that point, to the best of his recollection, he mentioned specifically Masha and me, and then said others but did not mention the others . He said he didn't mention the other people he'd mentioned .
 It would have happened at the U.S. Institute of Peace or in my office, which is right across the street .
 Frankly, at the time, was the second most powerful person in the country after President Poroshenko . At the time he was the most powerful man in the nation .
 It was to talk about his ideas about trying to bring peace to the Donbas . He was talking about his idea of trying to make peace in the area .
 Lutsenko's comment about the trip and meeting with Giuliani was and, by the way, probably the last thing he said before the meeting.
 I would say that Mr Avakov likes to keep lines of communication open to all sides and -but I cannot say why he chose to share that information .
 Lutsenko thought he was a fool to have made a private trip and to have done what he did . He thought he had made a 'private trip' to Russia .
 A Mr Avakov is a very well-informed person, and I'm absolutely sure he knew who Giuliani was connected to . He is a well- informed person.
 Avakov passed to me with 53 1 others . A I cannot say with complete certainty, but I know that I shared the information that Avakov gave to me .
 The business card was the one 16 I used in 2015, the letter itself was completely fake with 17 lots of misspellings .
 Lutsenko might have been passing to Giuliani. But I have never -no one has ever shown me what he may have been doing .
 I cannot say for 13 certain whether I talked or whether I sent a brief email . I could say -I cannot say. I can't say.
 A Mr Lutsenko is somebody with whom the embassy had a long relationship dating back to the Orange Revolution period . He first met him when he was at the embassy in Moscow .
 He was imprisoned for 2 years under former President Yanokovitch, and he came out and resumed politics . He was jailed for two years. He was released from prison .
 When Shokin was forced out, the intent of then-President Poroshenko was to appoint someone he trusted . Shokin is a former Ukrainian President .
 The question was whether someone who didn't have a law degree could be a reliable partner to try to reform the prosecutorial service .
 I had a series of meetings with him in the spring of 2016 to judge and assess whether he would be a serious partner for us . So I had to judge him in 2016 to assess whether they would be serious partners .
 Mr Lutsenko was not any more serious about reforming the corrupt prosecutorial service than Viktor Shokin had been . He was not more serious than Shokin was .
 The relationship between the embassy and Mr Lutsenko began to sour . At that point, our relationship was not personal to me, but our relationship became more personal .
 Ukraine minister of interior was talking about another politician serving as prosecutor general . He's a Ukraine politician serving in the interior, but his focus was on that dynamic .
 He said he'd heard my name mentioned, he'd passed that along . And because he said he had heard it, he passed it along . He said it was because he'd seen his name mentioned .
 A series of news articles that came out starting March 20th, this spring. Well, that was part of a series of articles that come out .
 John Solomon of The Hill gave an interview with Yuriy Lutsenko earlier in March .
 There was, I believe, video somewhere, there certainly were pictures of them doing interview. And so, there was, there were, there definitely were pictures.
 Lutsenko had claimed that Ambassador Yovanovitch had given him a list in their first meeting of people not to prosecute . One of those articles was released because the interview was on the first day of the interview .
 The photograph had a copy of my temporary business card that I used for a short period of time in 2015 . Several days later, a list of names was circulated on the internet .
 The card was genuine, and someone attached it to a list of names that was a hodgepodge of names . So I think the card was real, and it was genuine .
Not the way that any American, or even Ukrainian, or Russian would transliterate Ukrainian names . Not the way any U.S. or even Russian would translate Ukrainian names.
Linguistics semantic point is the person who created the fake list was either Czech or Serbian . My best guess, just from a semantic point, is that the person created the list was a Czech .
 This was the -it wasn't a letter, it was just a list of names with my actual business card attached . The -it was just an actual businesscard with my real business card on it .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch had a very high -a media promise, so he was on TV, his Twitter feed ramped up and it was all focused on Ukraine . The four story lines that unfolded between March 20 and 23rd.
 The U.S. media and the Ukrainian media are in danger, both in peril . The Ukrainian media have been in trouble for months .
Both the Hannity Show and the Laura Ingraham Show covered this topic extensively . There was a lot of tweeting.
 59 1 it was primarily non-truths and non-sequiturs . It was, if not entirely made up in full cloth, it was mostly non- Truths andnon-sequits .
 The first part 3 was focused on any corruption efforts in which he went after 4 the Ambassador and other actors on anticorruption issues . The second part 3 focused on the Ambassador's role in the investigation into corruption .
 I 5 think that is where he claimed that we hadn't shared his 6 money, meaning his assistance to the prosecutor general's 7 office . I 5 thinks that's where he claims that we didn't share his money, and that he didn't .
 The Hill, The Hill and 17 amplifiers, and in Ukraine by what are known as Porokhobots, 18 trolls on the internet, particularly Facebook, in support of 19 then-President Poroshenko and against people that are 20 perceived to be Poroshenko's opponents .
 The names of 25 people were not meant to mean anything to me until they all of a sudden became 60 1 very active . They all became very active, talking about Ukraine and particularly the 2 activities of our embassy in Ukraine .
 I think I mentioned one or two of the story lines, but 19 you said there were four story lines . If I could -just for clarification 18 again, I think it would be better to clarify that .
 The third story line that came out the next 22 day was focused on the Bidens and Burisma . The third was the third 23 story line .
 The National Anti-Corruption Bureau for Ukraine was set up in 2015 and proved very effective at trying to investigate high-level corruption as it was intended to do .
 Yuriy Lutsenko came into the embassy the night before with a completely inebriated, drunk, drunk and angry, he said . He described his conversation with a drunk man who was angry and angry .
 Lutsenko said he'd accused the embassy of undermining him, and that was his motivation . He said the embassy had been supportive of the Democrat party, and was not supportive of Trump party and that .
Before March 19th, there was no other indication other than television or -A . The story was not in play publicly until the first articles appeared .
 The Hill asked the press officer of the European Bureau whether we had reaction to a number of assertions, allegations .
 Mr Uglava had a very good working relationship with the embassy. A I believe, first of all, he had a good working relationships with the Embassy .
 NABU was one of the key anticorruption organizations that had been stood up after the Revolution of Dignity . His organization, NABu, had been standing up for the revolution .
 It was in its first year, it was working surprisingly well, meaning it was putting together investigations on high-level corrupt individuals . It was also working well.
 It was a target of people in places of influence, because it had been effective, he says . And because of its initial effectiveness, it then became a target for people in place of influence .
 Yuriy Lutsenko was one of the people looking to destroy NABU as an effective Bureau . He was also looking to kill the agency's chief executive . NABu is a federal agency.
 The State Department has a system that is supposed to automatically pull all emails and cables that have key words . It should be part of the records collected, not individually, but not individually .
 That's my understanding of how that material should be provided eventually to the committees after review . That's how that information should be given to the committee after review. That's what the committee should do .
 The first one was the anticorruption line in which the embassy was attacked, and anti corruption actors in Ukraine were attacked . The second was the anti-corruption line, the first was the first one, the second, the third .
 The second line was the 2016 cycle, allegations that somehow, somebody, or people at the embassy had animus towards Paulafort . The second. line was allegations that somebody, whether it was Ukrainians or people, had an animus toward him .
 The third line was a line of reporting related to the Bidens, and the interconnectivity between Vice President Biden's role and the presence of his son, Hunter Biden, on the board of the gas company Burisma .
 The fourth line of attack was alleging that certain civil society organizations were funded by the Soros organization . And the fourth line was alleged that some civil society groups were funded.
 The State Department has 65 1 statements that would usually come out by a spokeswoman . If asked, or if a situation warrants it, the spokeswoman says . The spokeswoman says the State Department works together to prepare press guidance .
President's son issued a 15 Tweet in which he suggested that we needed more like 16 Ambassadors like Rick Grenell and fewer . It was 18 taken by people as an attack on Ambassador Yovanovitch . It accelerated on whatever 14 that Sunday was, because the
 The State Department is a major threat to the Ambassador, and 21 major threats to the U.S. State Department . This is the first time the ambassador has been in charge of the State Department.
 A There was no high-level Department endorsement of Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 Q Fabrications is a fake list that is going to the heart of the ability of the Ambassador to serve effectively . Q Fabrication is a false list that goes to the president of the United States .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch was in a crisis after Tweets by members of the Presidential family . The crisis was threatening to consume the relationship .
 There should be a clear statement of support for Ambassador Yovanovitch, according to our recommendation to our superiors .
 The initial media guidance that we released and was quoted extensively was, I think, complete fabrication, utter nonsense as well as in rebutting Prosecutor General Lutsenko's allegation that somehow we had misdirected assistance met for the prosecutor general . Q Clear statement of support.
 "We redirected it for more productive purposes," he says . "We said something along the lines that we had a fiduciary responsibility to the American taxpayer"
 The President's Tweet against the Ambassador was the first time he had a tweet against him .
 There were exchanges with officials, including, Under Secretary Hale, under Secretary Hale .
 It may have included the Counselor of the Department, Brechbuhl, at that point . It may also have been at that time .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch should issue a statement, or do a video or tweet declaring full support for the foreign policy of President Trump . Sondland, our Ambassador to United States EU also joined some of the back and forth .
 There was 5 no such list, and that was part of our reason for pushing 6 back firmly . There was five no such lists, but that was one of our reasons for pushing back firmly.
 A 7 cluster of issues around the anti corruption theme. And -but that was part of the issue, I would say, a 7 Cluster of issues . The anti-corruption theme is part of a series of issues.
 A judge alleges criminal activities, and then a judge allege criminal activities . Our advocacy is to help, in terms of 12 programming, is to build capacity .
 If there is a criminal nexus in the United 17 States, we have several different ways of conveying that 18 interest . The 15 issue of whether we asked at any time that they follow up on 16 a prosecution is a question .
 Department of Justice can write direct 21 from the Justice Department . The legal 22 attaches engage their counterparts .
 The types of conversations that we have that might be construed as different are different . The type of conversations we have may be construed are different.
 A Artem Sytnyk is the still and the first head of the so-called NABU, National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine . He is also the first chief of the NABu, National anti-corruption Bureau.
 There were open prosecutor general investigations on Mr Sytnyk, says the judge .
 Lutsenko says efforts to destroy NABU as an organization threatened to unravel a key component of our anti corruption cooperation . He says the interactions are different because what he would say is different .
 Mr Lutsenko has claimed that there was a list, but he also claimed there was no list . He also made a lot of other claims, including that he made a list .
 This is an issue of believability about someone who routinely lies. And so as I said, this is a matter of believeability about people who routinely lie .
 A He is one of the leaders of the NGO known as AnTAC, it's the anticorruption center in Ukraine . He is also a former member of the Ukrainian National Council of Ukraine .
 It has also received grants from the International Renaissance Foundation, which is the Ukrainian name and arm of the Open Society Institute .
 A The Open Society Institute was initiated 20-odd years ago by George Soros .
 He was subject to harassment by the security service known as the Security Bureau of Ukraine . He has been a member of the Ukrainian security service for years .
Someone threw what's known as bright green, it's iodine-based disinfectant, and they threw it on his face .
 It can damage eyes but is oftentimes done as a form of intimidation in the former Soviet Union . It can also damage eyes, but is often used to intimidate people in the country .
 Shabunin was outspoken, he was certainly the target of harassment . So because he was outspoken he was likely to be harassed .
 The prosecutor general's office doesn't know if there was an active criminal investigation . But it's unclear whether there was a criminal investigation.
 Shabunin pushed him near his house and threw green material on him . He claims to be a journalist even though he wasn't, he was pushed by the man .
 U.S. officials had with Ukrainian officials in sharing concern about the direction of governance and harassment of civil society activists, including Mr Shabunin .
 Slava Vakarchuk is now the leader of one of the parties in parliament . He is the country's leading rock star, who is now a member of the parliament .
 It included a person who was a 74 1 friend of the current President Poroshenko and was 2 head of the overseer of the defense industry named 3 Gladkovskiy . In parentheses it had his previous name, 4 Svinarchuk .
 The reason why that's memorable is because it 5 means a pig or a pig farmer . He changed his name before 6 he went into government so he didn't have a name that said 7 basically Mr Piggy .
 The list allegedly was created in 9 2016. But no one knew that was his name when it was allegedly created in 2016 .
13 Mustafa Nayyem, Svitlana Zalishchuk, and Serhiy Leshchenko are named . Their names include 13 Mustafa Niyem and SvitLishchuk . The names of the 13 are also known as Mustafa
 He ran for parliament as one of the young 23 pro-western members of then-President Poroshenko's party . He was one of 23 members of the then-president's party.
 He continued to act as an investigative-style public figure even 25 as a member of parliament . He is now a 24-year-old.
 He was an active parliamentarian, 3 because he had been an investigative journalist . He was 4 someone that the U.S. Embassy had known for years .
 Andy Kramer from The New 9 York Times was the first person to write a story in English 10 about it . Kramer's story was published in the New York Times on Sunday .
 Mr Kramer may have shared that he had 16 talked to Leshchenko as one of his sources for that early 17 article .
Mid-2016 is when he became involved with the 25 President ' s campaign . Mid-2016 was when he took part in the campaign .
 Ukrainians followed his reemergence as a U.S. figure 3 very closely . Mr. Manafort had spent a decade in 2 Ukraine .
 Mr Yanukovych tried to steal the election that became the 10 Orange Revolution that was the end of 2004 . He first appeared in Ukraine in 2005 when he was hired by former Prime Minister 9 Yanukovych .
 Mrafort's time in 15 Ukraine started in 2005, and according to public records, he has participated up through the campaigns of 2014 .
 Many Ukrainians blamed Paulafort for Yanukovych's success because he gave Yanukovych advice that helped him win the presidency .
 A Well, I will just say, I was in Ukraine at the time so I don't know what the reaction was, he says . A well, he'll just say. A Well. I will also say, he was in the Ukraine when the incident happened .
 Mr Chairman with all due respect, with all Due respect, we didn't cross-examine you .
 The State Department says it's not aware of a State Department witness's testimony . But it seems that you're asking for an answer that's beyond the knowledge of a witness .
 A Again, I can't say how any American would react to a narrative. A Again. A again, I cannot say how anyone would respond to a story .
 Paulafort was an extremely successful political adviser who had helped President Yanukovych win, I said . No one should underestimate his abilities to help any candidate that he advised .
 The candidate's professional ability to help a candidate win, regardless of the country, was assessed . That was his assessment of his professional ability. And that was my assessment of him.
 Yuriy Lutsenko, Rudy Giuliani, John Solomon and John Solomon were doing what they were doing, says John Solomon . Solomon: I would suggest that's a question for those three individuals .
 There were so many story lines put in play at the same time to assess how any one of those story lines had an effect on any given audience . It's hard for me to make an assessment since there were so much story lines in play .
 Our primary concern was that our Ambassador and our embassy were being subjected to inaccurate accusations . A primary concern is that our embassy and our ambassador were being subject to inaccurate claims .
 As situational awareness, we followed or tried to follow because the volume was intense . We followed or followed because of the various different stories .
 A I first became aware of the owner of Burisma, 80, when I first went to our embassy in mid-January 2015 .
 At the time, he was the senior anti corruption coordinator, but had already been selected to be the next deputy chief of mission .
 The Russians were pushing the final push to take as much territory as they could . They needed an extra officer. He was going to go out, because so much was happening at the time .
 Ambassador Pyatt thought he could be helpful in the anti-corruption front .
 Former prosecutor Lutsenko shut criminal case that had been the basis for a British court to freeze $23 million in assets held by Mykola Zlochevsky .
 Ukrainian Government is trying to recover an estimated tens of billions of dollars of stolen assets out of the country . The Ukrainian Government has made a commitment to the Ukrainian Government in 2014 to recover the stolen assets .
 U.S., U.K., 81 1, 81 1 and Ukrainian investigators worked on a case against 2 Zlochevsky . British Serious Crimes 3 Office had already opened up a case, an investigation against 4 Zlochesky .
 The director of the office which provided that funds to 10 find out what had happened and why were our monies being wasted. And so, 8 again, I had a fiduciary responsibility .
 President Poroshenko asked us 18 last week. And he laughed and 17 said, ha ha haha ha ha, that's what he asked us .
 He said $7 million, and it happened in May before his team came 20 in, May of 2014 . And he said it happened before the team came to the top of the list .
 Somebody, a prosecutor under your 22 command, signed a letter on December 25 - which is not 23 Christmas in Ukraine . It is not the 23th Christmas.
 The FBI and Serious Crimes Office could react. They celebrate it late - and provided 24 it to the lawyer who provided it to a British judge .
 Zlochevsky is in Dubai 5 right now . He's been friends with him for 21 years . He did, however, say, well, he's in Dubai five right now.
I think you should actually arrest him next time he comes back to Ukraine. And I 6 said, no, I think he should actually be arrested next time .
Ex-minister Zlochevsky was minister of ecology when he was 15 . He was in charge of the unit that issues 16 licenses to do substrata geologic exploration for gas .
 Whatever the roster may say, he's the 83 1 beneficial owner, as they say . He is the 831 beneficial owner .
 The company does 9 not have a good reputation in Ukraine . It's a legitimate company, but it does 9. So it's aitimate company.
 The prosecutor 21 general should prosecute whoever took the 22 bribe and shut the case, he says . There was still 23 the outstanding issue of trying to recover the stolen assets, he adds .
 There is 7 issue of how they got the licenses and then their 8 reputation . If you're asking about the corruption of the company, there is 7 the issue .
 U.K. and Ukrainian law 10 enforcement authorities had frozen assets that, to the best 11 of his knowledge, were in accounts under his name .
 Serious Crimes Office had opened up a case in the spring 17 of 2014 . It became the test 21 case for our ability as partners in the U.S., U.K. playing a 22 key role together .
 Zlochevsky was the first westerner to be appointed to the board of the Russian government .
 "I've served my entire life in government service, so I'm not familiar with corporate boards," he says . "I'm not aware of corporate boards. And I've served his entire life," he adds .
 The big name in Ukraine was former President of Poland, Aleksander Kwasniewski . He was also a former Polish President .
 I've never met Mr Zlochevsky, and I do not know why they did what they did . I've not met him and I don't know why he did what he did .
 Hunter Biden, son of then-Vice President Biden, was also appointed to the board . Hunter Biden is the son of former Vice President Biden .
 A Again, I've never had a conversation with 86 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 10 11 11 11 12 13 14 16 17 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 Zlochevsky .
 I don't know how much corporate board members get in any country, but I understand a lot of people get paid a lots of money . I'm not sure how much Corporate board members are in any countries .
 A Again, I don't work in the corporate sector so I don’t know what standard board compensation would be .
 A I have read articles, and I have no idea how much Burisma may pay its board members . A I've read articles. A I'm not sure if Burisma will pay its members .
 A I personally never met and I don't know if board members met with the embassy . I don’t know if they met with embassy board members . I personallyNever met and never met.
 There was no one affiliated with Burisma that asked to come to the embassy to meet me . And there was noone affiliated with the embassy that asked for the meeting .
 USAID was sponsoring a contest related to clean 4 energy . I will say that now that you mention it, there was an effort for Burisma .
 AnTAC board member Daria 21 Kaleniuk has agreed to take Burisma as 23 a corporate sponsor . He recounted to me an 20 exchange with another member of the board . He criticized him because the Atlantic Council, 22 where he runs the Ukraine Project, agreed.
 The chronology of the ambassadors of the U.S. would be helpful to just go through the chronology .
 A Again, I went to -I was then serving in Thailand afterwards, so I wasn't necessarily focused on Ukraine . I was then served in Thailand after returning to the country .
 Q The fourth narrative you identified, you know, going after the civil society organizations -A Right .
 NABU was a -well, it was -AnTAC was a civil society organization . The Ukraine Crisis Media Center was set up to help be a platform for information about Ukraine starting during the Revolution of Dignity .
 In May, Giuliani 4 alleged that former Ambassador Yovanovitch was going to work 5 for a Soros organization and after she left post, which was 6 false. So, in May, former Mayor Giuliani 4 claimed that she worked 5 for the Soros organization .
 She went to work, still as a United States State Department 7 employee, as a diplomat teacher/lecturer at Georgetown . She is still a U.S. State Department employee .
19 A. Those were the only ones that I remember having 20 being mentioned . But, again, there are a lot of stories out of 21 there .
 $1 billion in aid was freed up after Shokin's removal . Shokin made some statements that have been videotaped about how he played a role in removing Shokin .
 U.S. State Department officials feel when we're spending taxpayer money in a country we have a fiduciary responsibility . The State Department says it has a "fiduciary responsibilities"
 92 1 policy is an issue of 92 1 Policy . I'd like at this point to explain what we felt our fiduciary responsibility had been and why this became an issue .
 The 4 previous year we'd worked with Minister of Interior Avakov, 5 whom I mentioned earlier to the launch of what was known as 6 the patrol police .
 California Highway Patrol trained 7 new police officers . They were 8 highest female police officers in the world at the 9 time .
 New deputy prosecutor named David Sakvarelidze is a Georgian name . He was appointed by President Poroshenko . He has been appointed 12 times .
 The focus was to create an 20 inspector general's unit inside the prosecutor's office . 21 could go after corrupt prosecutors .
 We started working on that project, and 25 they hired a bunch of young, enthusiastic prosecutors . They hired a group of young prosecutors .
 In the summertime they launched what was going to be their first case, in the central province of Poltava, as a test case .
 A businessman complained he was being shaken down by corrupt prosecutors . They had a businessman who complained he had been shaken down . The businessman said he was a victim of corrupt prosecutors.
Two prosecutors whose names are Shapakin and Korniyets. They worked with the security service, which had wiretap authority, and they tapped these two prosecutors .
 Former driver of Shokin was a prosecutor in the first case . He was a former driver of the former driver, who he made his driver a prosecutor .
 IG unit had no idea that the first corrupt prosecutor - and there were a lot of them - were targeting . Former driver and personal friend of the prosecutor general was the former driver and close, personal friend.
 The deputy prosecutor general heard about it and tipped them off, except he tipped off the wrong corrupt prosecutor in the province . Shokin went to war .
 The judges tried to fire and put pressure on the judges who would issue 94 warrants . The warrants were issued by a judge in the U.S.
 He eventually managed to force out everybody associated with that, including the deputy head of the security service, the intel service, who provided the wiretapping coverage .
 It was absolute warfare protecting his associate, and he destroyed the inspector general unit that we'd been standing up . It wasabsolute warfare protecting the associate, he destroyed his associate .
 The IMF, the U.S. and the European Union said collectively the justice sector and the prosecutor is so important for the success of this country and it's so important to reform it . Victor Shokin has shown that he's actively wasting United States taxpayer dollars .
 The conversations were then brought ahead of the Vice President going to Ukraine in December of 2015 . Shokin's removal then became a condition for the loan guarantee .
 The visit that we're talking about by the Vice President was in December 2015, I believe . A visit by the vice president was inDecember 2015, he says .
 He was actually the head of -he was basically the majority leader in parliament . He was also the president of - he was the leader of the parliament .
Q: Lustenko wasn't a tremendous prosecutor. Q: There were similar issues with Lustenko that he wasn't great prosecutor . Q: He was a great prosecutor.
You said his kids were -him and 11 Poroshenko were godfather to each other's kids . You said his children were his kids. You said he and his wife were his children's children .
 Lutsenko and Mr Poroshenko are godfather to each other's 16 children . The new guy, 14, who 14 you said is just as bad, also kids are -you know, kids 15 with -Mr Poroshenko .
Yuriy 21 Lutsenko was prosecutor general for over 3 years, almost 3 22 and a half years . First of all, the first phase, was the prosecutor general . First phase, the second phase, is the first.
 His 23 unwillingness to do anything and his venality and his 24 undermining U.S.-supported projects started within several 25 months . And his 23 inability to do any of the projects started in several months .
 Former President Poroshenko asked for a former New Jersey State prosecutor in one of his 6 calls with then-Vice President Biden . Poroshenko had served for 2 years as an anti corrupti on 10 adviser under contract to the Department of Justice in 11 Ukraine .
 12 Poroshenko had thought about appointing him as the first head of the NABU, this National Anti-Corruption Bureau .
 It's been reported that there was broad international consensus on Shokin . It was reported that Shokin was being considered by many in the world .
 The IMF, particularly in the economic sphere, has, the primary voice. When it comes to certain conditionalities, the IMF has, I would say, the main voice .
 The U.S. is often the lead voice for some efforts in the United States .
 The security sector includes in the security sector where we provide the most military assistance .
 The U.S. had a lead voice in the European Command . Poland, Lithuania, U.K., Canada, Canada, and the United States also had a leading voice .
 I am not aware of any case that came to conclusion, but I do not have insight into what all the prosecutors do in Ukraine . There are about 25,000 of them in Ukraine, and there are about 20,000 in Ukraine.
 It sounded like you were talking about actual corruption, says Zlochevsky . Earlier on in response to the questions you were asked with regards to Burisma and Zlochesky, it sounded like a real corruption .
 I have read claims by people that there were 13 investigations, but I have no specific knowledge about the nature of those investigations . I've read claims that there are 13 investigations but I've no specific information about 14 .
 The series of articles starting in March 25 brought this set of issues to the fore . I read stories referencing that in the last 24 several months after the series ofarticles starting inMarch 25 . The last 24 months have brought this series of issues into the fore.
 The IMF keeps its own counsel, but oftentimes when they go on factfinding missions they often have conversations with embassies . The IMF often has discussions with embassies.
 The European Union Ambassador and the United States Ambassador coordinate very closely . In terms of the European Union, traditionally in Ukraine, the ambassador and the U.S. Ambassador coordinate closely .
Since 2014 and the German presidency of the G7, there is a coordinating process for G7 ambassadors plus the head of the European Union mission . Since 2014 and 2014, there has been a coordination process for the G 7 ambassadors .
 The pair meet almost weekly, and they discuss issues like this in very deep detail . They discuss issues and they go into issues like these in verydeep detail . And they meet almost every week.
 Shokin's continued presence as prosecutor general prevented any hope of prosecutorial reform . The ambassadors spoke and compared views on their concerns about his continued presence .
 Burisma is one of the largest private producers of natural gas in Ukraine . Burisma had a reputation for not being the sort of corporate, cleanest member of the business community .
School kids or young 8 Ukrainians came up with ideas for a clean energy campaign . There may have been something like a camera for the best 10 proposal .
 The mission head of 14 USAID in country at the time shared her concerns with the mission head . She said she had concerns about 13 people in the country .
Central American policy. So I would defer to my colleagues who are working on Central American policy . So I'd defer to colleagues who work on Central America policy .
In line with previous statements, the whole notion of looking at corruption in foreign governments is an appropriate thing . But in line with your previous statement, it's appropriate.
 Congress is trying to fight drug trafficking and improve the law enforcement systems in Central America . I believe that my colleagues who have worked on international narcotics and law enforcement see when there are funds appropriated by Congress to fight drugs trafficking .
 It's intended to help our national interests to both stop the drug trafficking and improve the justice system so that corruption can be contained . It's meant to help national interests.
 Ukraine has a strong and long history of corruption, says Ukraine's former president . Ukraine has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Ukrainians came out into the streets in 2004 when somebody tried to steal the election and again in 2014 because of a corrupt, kleptocratic, pro-Russian government . The Ukrainian government eventually collapsed in 2014 .
 Ukraine has made great progress in the last 5 years, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine is a country that has struggled with these issues, he says .
 Chairman Engel signed with Chairman Engel a letter to obligate the funding security assistance to Ukraine .
 Diplomatic discussion is a normal issue of diplomatic discussion at the highest level. So that is anormal issue of the diplomatic discussion, says U.S. official .
 IRI and NDI have done extensive polling in Ukraine since 2014 . President Poroshenko was elected with roughly 55 percent of the vote in 2014 .
 Prosecutor General Shokin's support levels plummeted from about 55 percent to the mid-20s over that period of time . His support levels, as polled by the International Republican Institute in particular, plummeted from 55% to 55 percent .
 The issue destroyed Poroshenko's credibility and his high-level support in the eyes of the Ukrainian people . The issue was the issue that destroyed his credibility.
 What I was going to 10 suggest is let's take a half an hour lunch break . Actually, what I wasGoing to 10 suggests is let't take ahalf an hour break .
 Members and staff are not to discuss the 20 substance of the testimony . But those are the rules, and I'm 19 just reminding members and staff they're not to talk .
 Mr Secretary, I want to just ask you a few questions to follow up on my colleague's questions, and then I'm going to turn it over to Mr Mitchell. Mr Mitchell to continue going through the timeline with you .
 Some Ukrainians apparently came to believe that President Trump had called into that meeting .
 The State Department did not issue a statement of full-throated support for the Ambassador . That statement was not forthcoming .
 The statements of that nature could come from a variety of people or levels of people .
 State Department official: "We were looking for a statement of support from a high-ranking state Department official"
Top leader 4 issues a statement, but he cannot recall during 5 that week whether he was on travel . It's always most helpful if the top leader 4 issue a statement .
 Deputy Secretary Sullivan might have been the 7 top-ranking official in the building . If he were on travel 6 then he would have been on the top-ranked official in building .
 I just don't recall on 8 particular days who was essentially in charge . I justDon't recall those particular days. I don't remember on 8 that day .
 The Ambassador should go out herself, 16 defend herself, and express her personal support for the 17 President, she says .
 I think I recall being copied on emails in 21 which Under Secretary David Hale made the suggestion . I remember being copied by David Hale in 21, he said .
 Gordon made the suggestion specifically to be 24 aggressive on Twitter or to tweet . I think 23 with Gordon he made the idea specifically for him to tweet or be aggressive .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch and his guess would be leaders in the European Bureau . It may not have been from him, but it was an exchange between ambassador and his staff .
 An email that should be part of the document collection should be collected, says the author .
 Attorney General Bill Barr and others at the Justice Department are essentially doing an investigation into the origins of the Russia investigation .
 I am not aware of any Justice Department inquiries to Ukraine regarding 2016, no one has been asked about 2016 . The Justice Department has not made any inquiries into Ukraine .
 Shokin testified that it was U.S. policy and IMF policy and other allies and allied organizations that Shokin needed to go . "I think you testified in an answer to my colleague's questions," he says .
 Shokin essentially dismantling an inspector general office the U.S. had helped fund to fight corruption in Ukraine . This was based on Shokin's role in the prosecutor's office, particularly in the Prosecutor's office .
 At the time this was occurring, I 10 was in the capacity of the number two at the embassy, the 11 deputy chief of mission . I 10 is now the 11 Deputy Chief of mission.
 That was not something that I recall ever 17 coming up or being discussed . That was never something that was not anything that I recalls ever coming up .
 President of 21 Ukraine asked for more javelins or expressed the need for 22 more Javelins . My colleague also asked you about whether 19 it was appropriate to bring up the conversation .
 The first time I had detailed knowledge of 7 that narrative was after the White House declassified the 8 transcript that was prepared . The record of 9 conversation was prepared by staff at White House .
 As a general principle, I don't think that as 16 a matter of policy the U.S. should do that period . I've spent much of my career trying to improve the rule of 18 law .
 Ukraine and Georgia want to join NATO, both of which have enjoyed billions 20 of dollars of assistance from Congress . There is an outstanding issue about people in office in those countries using selectively politically motivated prosecutions to go 23 after their opponents .
 That's wrong for the rule of law 24 regardless of what country that happens, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "That's wrong. And that's wrong" He says that's not what country is.
I would say that request does not align with what has been our policy towards Ukraine and many other countries, yes . I would say, yes. I would says that request doesn't align with our policy toward Ukraine .
 Mr Goldman left off, which was the end of March of this year, 2019 . Q I'm going to pick up where he left off .
 NABU's deputy director testified earlier that he met with the deputy director of NABu on about March 19 .
 The deputy director of NABU had a meeting with someone in the embassy in Kyiv. Q And you received correspondence regarding the meeting.
 The following day, March 20, was the day 11 that Mr Solomon published the article . There was 12 video of part of the interview that he had with Mr Lutsenko .
 It would have been on March 20 that the U.S. 21 Embassy, which is 7 hours ahead of us, would have worked to prepare guidance .
 Press guidance is just that. But I cannot tell you in detail because press guidance is only that . I cannot 11 tell you.
 It's 12 then provided by a press officer in response to press 13 inquiries . It's then provided to the press officer. It's now 12 then given by a Press Officer in response.
 The director of the office had the responsibility for 20 undertaking these programs . I can tell you it was my language about 17 the fiduciary responsibility, the same language you heard me 18 use today .
 Ambassador Sondland's communications would have been with Ambassador Yovanovitch . Then she would have communicated with the Department .
 There would have been potentially communications with the European front office with Under Secretary Hale and Counselor Brechbuhl .
 It would have been over the next perhaps 10 days, basically the last 10 days of March . It would be 10 days before the end of the month .
 The articles came out, if not daily, almost daily, nearly daily, and they often combined two of the four themes I laid out before . A The articles come out, as well as the articles.
 Many articles combined two of the previous four themes. There was never a new line of attack, but many articles combined both .
 The suggestion was made to the Ambassador to release a tweet or make some sort of strong statement herself .
 A back and forth was done in the context of the upcoming Ukrainian presidential elections . The first round in the presidential elections took place on March 31 .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch recorded some preelection videos encouraging Ukrainians to vote . She made a decision to record some pre-election videos for Ukrainians .
 She included in a statement of support of the administration and the foreign policy, she said . She also included in that statement.
 The purpose of the videos was to publish them in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . The videos were published in Ukraine .
 The embassy was already planning to issue in a preelection encouragement for Ukrainians to engage in their civic duties . These were videos that the embassy planned to issue .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch used that metaphor of civic duty in making reference to support of President Trump as she had with other Presidents .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch's intent was to send a signal, according to an email back and forth from her press officer . Her intent was that she was being suggested by her within the context of something that was already being planned that was focused on presidential politics .
 The European Bureau could ask those outside of the European Bureau. A question is whether they should be asked by the committee .
 The acting assistant secretary is the one who engages officials above our bureau . David Hale has oversight over our bureau, and then depending on the situation, the Secretary himself .
 Department counselor Ulrich Brechbuhl suggested to Hannity that if there was no proof of the allegations, he should stop covering them. A counselor for the Department, UlrichBrechbUhl, reached out to Hannity .
 It could have been from Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker . It could be from acting assistant secretary Reeker.
 Deputy Assistant Secretary of State overseeing relations with Ukraine . He would have primary communications with ambassadors or charges for six countries .
 A I unplugged when we moved back to the United States and so we don't have a TV at home, so I do not watch TV at night. A I don't watch TV in the night so I can't watch at night .
 The week of the Ukrainian presidential election is the week of Ukraine's presidential election . U.S. national interests would be the potential impact on the United States national interests .
 If you had asked me that question before you gave me a timeframe, I would have given you a rough timeframe, he says . If you'd asked him that question, he said, he would have been given a rough timetable .
 A to the best of my recollection, there is some sort of email regarding that, yes .
 The first person who asked her to consider extending her stay was me, she says . She was back for the chief of mission conference in January .
 We had a challenge in the process of finding someone that we would nominate to replace her . We had to find someone that they would nominate.
 "Because of a different assignment, it was clear that that was not going to happen on schedule," she says . "It was clear, because of adifferent assignment, that was clear," she adds .
 Ukraine is going through transition and we might not have an Ambassador there . And we had concern that the country, Ukraine, would be going through Transition and we may not have a Ambassador .
 She initially asked her to consider staying on through the election season in Ukraine . But she said she wanted to stay through the season .
There were parliamentary elections scheduled no later than the fall . There were presidential elections in the spring and then there were parliamentary election elections .
 A proposal was through the end of the year to give us a chance to find a potential number . The White House could put forward and possibly be confirmed and possibly have an experienced Ambassador there .
 Wess Mitchell was our assistant secretary at the time . Mitchell was a member of the staff at our office in London . Mitchell is a former journalist .
CNN's John Sutter was asked about a recent incident in March . Sutter: "She thought about it for a little bit and got back to us, to me some point"
 The 5th to 7th of March, I think, was the time 15 when Under Secretary Hale was there . It was 15 when Hale was at the time .
 The media storm that 16 was launched with the interview of Prosecutor 17 General Lutsenko started on March 20, 2 weeks later .
 She indicated on April 25 that she'd been instructed to get on a plane to come back to Washington as soon as possible . A to the best of my recollection, she indicated that she had been told to get a plane .
 I believe that was the first time I heard that instructions had been sent for her to come back to the U.S., yes. A I believe it was a first time that she had been told to come home .
 The Secretary of State said she had a conversation with the deputy secretary of state . She referred to the conversation as part of her opening statement that was published .
 A State Department official was not having conversations with anybody on the 7th floor about this issue, he says .
 The Under Secretary of State asked her to stay another year. A personal level, she felt awful for her because it was within 2 months of us asking her to remain .
Decisions had been made by the leadership of the State Department and ambassadors serve at the pleasure of the state .
 When an instruction comes down that is a decision that was being made, an instruction is being made. So when an instruction come down that's a decision, it's not a decision .
Ambassador Yovanovitch was ending her assignment in Kyiv as planned . The State Department issued a statement on May 6 .
 A management notice was issued by the embassy in Kyiv, not by the State Department . I believe it was in the form of a management notice, according to the embassy .
 A If I'd been the DCM, I don't think that's how I would have had that news released to the embassy community . I'd have been the D.M.
 A situation of that magnitude would have been more serious than a townhall meeting . I would have called a town hall meeting and talked to people face to face . I think of a situation of this magnitude I would've called aTownhall meeting.
 The deputy chief of mission was in charge of the embassy from 2015 to 2018 . If I 10 had still been the deputy Chief of mission, I would have handled notification of the staff differently .
 Mr Giuliani had been carrying on a campaign for several months full of lies and incorrect information about Ambassador Yovanovitch .
Mr Giuliani has First Amendment rights to say whatever he wants, but he's a private citizen . A U.S. citizen, as a United States citizen, has first Amendment rights.
 His assertions and allegations against former Ambassador Yovanovitch were without basis, untrue, period, period . His assertions against former ambassador are without basis.
Ambassador Yovanovitch was going to be recalled after it became clear he would be recalled . His responsibilities were to find and resolve how we are going to ensure that our key missions have appropriate leadership .
 The person who replaced me had already been moved early to be our DCM and Charge in Sweden . So 3 we had a temporary acting deputy chief of mission .
 4 left the embassy not only without -the early withdraw of 5 Ambassador Yovanovitch left us without an Ambassador 6 but without somebody who had been selected to be deputy chief 7 of mission .
 Bill 17 Taylor had not been a career Foreign Service 18 officer but had been a senior executive civil servant . It would be very difficult to go through the process of recalling him and getting in him in a position to go out .
 The first time the team has been called Charge, it took 3 or 4 weeks to achieve the goal . The team eventually got to the answer that was 6 yes, and he went out as Charge, arriving June 17th or 18th .
 Mr 15 Taylor described much more 16 than he knew, and it was very ugly . And then he went on to say that you, Mr Kent, describe much more than he knows .
Mr Kulyk was interviewed by 13 people . Some of them were 12 interviewed .
 Mr Giuliani publicized his meeting with Nazar 14 Kholodnytsky in Paris about the same time that he gave an interview to censor.net . He accused former Ambassador 16 Yovanovitch, me, and the entire United States Embassy of partisan 17 activity in 2016 .
 We've already talked about his 18 engagement with Shokin and Lutsenko . And we've already spoken about his engagement to Shokin .
 I first heard their names through a series of conversations with a variety of people . The names of the men were revealed to me through conversations with people .
 The U.S. President Barack Obama has been in the United States for more than a decade . The president has said he's trying to figure out what he heard from whom, when .
 He sent an open letter complaining about corruption and pressure that he was facing . He said he was trying to unseat the American Ambassador in Ukraine .
 Giuliani associates were coming to Ukraine in the first week of May . The names that were mentioned were Fruman and Parnas .
 One of the people I met was an affiliate of the new President-elect at that point . He was not yet President -and his name was Ivan Bakanov .
 "I don't remember his name. And he mentioned Fruman's name, and he said and there's another one, I don't recall his name," she says .
 The first time Rudy Giuliani was planning to come to Ukraine was the first time he heard that he was coming .
 He said that he had heard that they were coming to town and that their associate Rudy Giuliani was coming as well . He said he had also heard that he'd heard that their associates were coming .
 The first day I was there, that would be the 8th, would be May 8th . Avakov said he heard that Parnas and Fruman were coming, and that they were coming with their associate, Mayor Giuliani .
 Mayor Giuliani had reached out to Avakov, who had been in the U.S. in February . Avakov was in Florida when Giuliani reached out and invited him to meet the group of Florida residents .
 He said he was planning to meet with them in Kyiv . But he said he did not say that he was going to have coffee with them .
 I met him before that, but he said that if they want to meet, I'll meet and have coffee with them . He said that he said he'd meet him if he wanted to meet him, but that he'd have coffee .
 Mr Avakov thought it was unwise what Mr Giuliani was doing, he said . Mr Giuliani's actions were unwise .
 The prosecutor general of his country should not make a private trip to the United States, he says . He says .
 Zelenskyy told me that the person he had known the longest was Ivan Bakanov . He had grown up on the same corridor in their apartment block from kindergarten . He told me the first time we met him that he'd known him the longest .
 A to the best of my recollection that was a conversation where we talked about what might happen since it was pre-inauguration . The conversation was in between post-election, pre- inauguration .
President-elect's childhood friend was now the President-elect . He described to me his interest in either being chief of staff or the new prosecutor general .
 The only name in that meeting that I wrote down was Fruman . The State Department records are part of the records which I provided .
 Parnas is the name of a man who can't remember the other name . He followed up because he couldn't remember his other name, which turned out to be Parna . He then followed up and said he didn't remember it .
 The author met with Mr Avakov in the morning, and he repeated what he told him .
 You can always 4 meet and have a cup of coffee with people, he says . You don't have to make any commitments, he tells me . He says you can always have a coffee with someone .
13 coming to Ukraine on or about the 10th and 11th of May. But I did not know their specific purpose in 13 coming to the Ukraine . I didn't know why they came to Ukraine .
 At this point I was not a regular -I don't tweet personally, and I don't follow all the tweets of everybody. As I said earlier, at this point, at the point I wasn't a regular, I was a regular .
 The extent that I might have had concern, it would be what he might try to do as a private citizen involved in the U.S.-Ukraine official relationship, he says .
 I did not know the purpose of his trip, but I only heard that he might be coming in . I didn't know that he was coming in, but he was going to be there .
 The State Department's regional bureau does not go through the regional bureau . That is not -relations between or communications between the leadership of the State Department and the White House at that level .
 There was no effort to keep you in the loop, says CNN's John Sutter . "You can't be believing this stuff," Sutter says .
 Yovanovitch. Let us make our case for removing him, let us make a case .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch said she was recalled by the White House on Friday . "There were high-level discussions," she said .
 Former Mayor Giuliani reached 6 out to the White House, and then 7 Deputy Chief of Staff Blair was tasked with calling us to 8 find out the background of the story .
 The former prosecutor was a corrupt former prosecutor . He is accused of having a corrupt visa for a corrupt ex-prosecutor .
 He didn't try to travel to the U.S. and was denied a visa . He did not have a visa. He was denied the visa .
 The visa was revoked under the assumption that we don't want corrupt individuals coming to the U.S. The visa had not expired prudentially, says the author .
 Lutsenko was in office 10 3 years, and so he had more opportunity to take some action . He had more opportunities to take action than he had been in office for 10 years .
 A corrupt official who was sort of 8 the apex of the scheme went to him or to the prosecutors and 9 became essentially a cooperating witness for them . Lutsenko 7 became aware of it, and this corrupt official became a cooperating Witness .
 He exposed 12 undercover agents that had been part of this case . He went further and exposed 12 of the undercover agents .
 He was 16 when he was involved in a corruption investigation . He was actually 15 engaged in pursuing an actual crime, while he was 16 essentially colluding with a corrupt official to undermine 17 the investigation .
 All the 4 officials involved in this ring needed to be held 5 to account and prosecuted . We needed to see that they 6 were taking seriously our concerns about the integrity of 7 their passports .
 Zlochevsky 20 returned from his external home in Monaco and resumed a 21 public life in Ukraine . Burisma paid a penalty 19 for nonpayment of taxes.
Former New Jersey prosecutor let Petro Poroshenko's contract lapse after roughly 9 months . It was 19 clear that Lutsenko was not going to push forward reform as 20 he had promised to us. We did, however, we did .
 There was less 10 consistent high-level engagement on Ukraine, says John Sutter . Sutter says there was less than 10 consistent highs on Ukraine .
 We worked 24 intensively with Nazar for almost 2 years, until we reached a 25 breaking point with him . We worked with him for almost two years .
 Laura Kovesi 4 is a very well-known anticorruption prosecutor in Romania . She is now the 5 lead prosecutor in Europe .
 Kholodnytsky was the new 7 anti corruption prosecutor in Ukraine . His success would be 8 Ukraine's success, and his success, would be our success, he says .
Under a Ukrainian warrant 12 a bug, a tap was put in his fish tank in his office . There was suspicion that he had been involved in corrupt acts .
In the first 2 weeks, he was caught trying to suborn a witness, coach him to lie, and obstruct 15 justice . He was caught in the first two weeks of a case that involved his hometown . He tried to bribe the health minister of health, Ulyana Suprun
 If he were to remain as the anti corruption prosecutor, we would cease cooperating with him . We would cease cooperation with him if he was to remain.
 He stood up, walked out and tweeted that he was going to have a defiant attitude . And he stood up and walked out, and you know, he tweeted, you know .
 We stopped cooperating with him once presented with evidence that he was actively suborning a witness and obstructing justice . So we stopped cooperating. So we stop cooperating.
 Q You have regaled us over the course of many, many minutes today about the deep issues of corruption in the Ukraine .
 The problems are in the Shokin era, during the Lutsenko era, and even now with Kholodnytsky . You talked in extensive detail about the problems in the past, including the problems of Shokin .
 Former prosecutor 5 Lutsenko says he didn't show him the money . Former prosecutor says 6 fundamentally misunderstood how our assistance is 7 administered .
 I 8 think this is part of the packet that I 9 signed in April 2016 . This was the issue in the letter that I 8 thought was part of a letter I 8 signed that I signed .
 I 13 talked to one of his temporary deputy prosecutors who was a 14-year-old reformist who later chose not to work with him . I talked to him about his time as a reformist .
 OPDAT, Overseas 23 Prosecutorial Development and Training. They have this program, OPDT, Overse as 23 Prosecutors Development and training .
 Another was with the 24 U.N. organization called IDLO, International Development Law Organization . The 24 United Nations organization is also known as IDLO .
 AnTAC, the anti-corruption center, is a civil society association . The center was founded by the same group as the National Council of the United States .
I would hesitate to offer a number because I don't -it's been years since I've seen any spreadsheets. I would hesitate. I'd hesitate to give a number. I've never seen a number of spreadsheets .
 Mr Kent wants to go back to questions Steve asked earlier. I just want to go to questions Mr Kent asked earlier .
Government to take the same position as Shokin, says Mr Lutsenko .
 The guy he hired for this new prosecutor's office was every bit as bad as the new prosecutor . The new prosecutor is a former prosecutor who has been in charge since 2007 .
 Mr Lutsenko is the former President of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko . The dismissal of the Ukrainian President requires a vote in the Ukrainian parliament .
 I just want to clarify something that's been kind of veered on numerous occasions before you got here and today . I just wants to clarify what's been sort of veering on numerous times before you get here .
 President asked President for an investigation. But in a kind of exchange on the last round the implication was that there was a favor asked by the President for investigation .
 The implication was in the last round that 7 the President was asking to do him a favor .
 Do the President 8 of the United States a favor, but the verbiage says do us a 9 favor . Do the president a favor?
 It's the first time I'd ever heard of this line of 14 thought . It refers to 12 CrowdStrike and Mueller and then so on and so forth, and so on, so forth .
 There's nothing referred to in on page 3 24 regarding Biden or Burisma that can be connected with the 25 line, do us a favor .
 The 17 transcript is a transcript of 15 days of testimony . The transcript is part of the 17 transcript . "I just want to make the record clear 14," he says .
Politically related 4 prosecutions are not the way of promoting the rule of law, he says . 5 prosecutions undermine the rule. I believe it is a matter of U.S. policy and 2 practice, particularly since I have worked in the area of 3 promoting theRule of law .
 10 prosecutions are in the U.S. national interest, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: I've never been in a position or a meeting 9 where I've heard somebody suggest that politically motivated 10 prosecutions were in the United States national interest .
 If there's any criminal nexus for any 17 activity involving the U.S. law, law enforcement by all 18 means should pursue that case, he says . The Justice Department will ask 20 through Department of Justice MLAT in writing or 21 through the presence of individuals representing the FBI,
 Deputy Secretary of State 14 to her. The 13 view was expressed and conveyed by the deputy secretary of state, she said .
 A call was going to take place the day before on the 24th. A I heard that the call would take place on -I heard that it would be a day before .
 Lieutenant Colonel Alex Vindman is the director at the National Security Council responsible for Ukraine . He is also the head of the Ukrainian government's security council .
 The Embassy suggested that they send a communications officer over to the presidential office to check the quality of the line . It had been a long time since we had a formal call, and sometimes those lines don't work when they get calls .
 The embassy did that to ensure that when the White House situation room called out the call would go through. So as far as I know, it did that .
 There had been discussions on and off for awhile for a followup call to the congratulatory call . The timeline slipped until it was after the parliamentary elections .
 Those occurred on July 21st, and the call eventually happened 4 days later on the 25th . The call happened on July 25th.
 The National Security Council has been asked about the council's security staff . The council's top security officials have been asked to answer the question .
 There were some people who had some misgivings about the call, yes. A I read that there were some. Some people who were misgivable, yes .
 A I may have heard that there were some views, but I did not understand what the views were behind that expression .
 There was at least one official uncomfortable, but I didn't understand what that was about . I got the impression that there was one official's discomfort .
 I, the State Department, was in favor of a congratulatory call after the election . I, a State Department official, said, "I'm in favor" of the call .
 The White House Sit Room was going to try to patch through the counselor of the department, Ulrich Brechbuhl . The counselor was trying to fix the problem with the White House.
 A phone call would not be normal to have the embassy patched into the phone call .
 It may not have been the day after, but it could have been July 26th or 27th, several days after .
 He felt uncomfortable. He felt -I could hear it in his voice and his 2 hesitancy that he felt uncomfortable . He said he was uncomfortable .
 He actually said that 3 he could not share the majority of what was discussed because 4 of the very sensitive nature of the topic was discussed . He said that he was not able to share most of the discussions because of the sensitive nature.
 Someone who 8 had just won an election with 73 percent. That had been a 7 short, bubbly, positive, congratulatory call from someone who had just just won a election with 74 percent .
 President 10 Zelenskyy tried to turn on the charm, but the dynamics didn't click in the 12 way that they had on April 21st .
 He 16 mentioned that the characterization of the Ambassador as bad 17 news . He said that he had been told that the Ambassador was a bad news .
 The 18 conversation went into the direction of some of the most 19 extreme narratives that have been discussed publicly .
 Zelenskyy said if anything bad had happened in the past, that was the old team . He said that Zelenskiy said that if anythingbad had happened, that would be the former team .
 I'm a new guy, I've got a new team, and anything we do will be transparent and honest. I'm new guy. Anything we do would be transparent, honest, he says . I'm just a new man, I'll be transparent. I
 Lieutenant Colonel Vindman mentioned a brief mention by Zelenskyy about U.S. energy issues .
 President Zelenskyy thanked the United States for all of its military assistance, he said . Previously, I should have said, at the front earlier in the conversation, that he said that Lieutenant Colonel Vindman told me .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman told me that the President replied, yes, we do, and it's not reciprocal . And Lieutenant Colonel VINDman told him that the president replied, Yes, we did, and we do .
 A man did not mention, to the best of his recollection, including the notes that he took, which he submitted to the State Department . A man said he didn't mention the notes he took .
Q and Q. Q: Did you make any followup inquiries with him like, hey, can I come over and speak with you in a secure environment or learn more about this call -A None. Q And did you make a follow-up inquiry with him?
 A second conversation between the two Presidents was in April, May, June, July, 4 months . That was the second time the Presidents had a conversation .
 The Office of Management and Budget had put a hold on security assistance . We were focused on trying to sort through why the Office of management and Budget was put on hold .
Military assistance and military assistance are the next step issues in the relationship . Military assistance is both functionally in terms of military assistance, as well as the possibility of meeting .
 The start of World War II was the 1st of September 1939, so commemorations were the 1th of September 2019 in Warsaw .
 The 23rd through the 27th was the week of the leaders' participation . The Monday may have been the 24th or the 23rd, so maybe the Thursday was the 23th .
 It is possible that I 21 discussed part of that with Charge Bill Taylor, it is possible . We have a weekly 19 secure video conference call with the leadership of Embassy 20 Kyiv .
 The second half of August I was on vacation 7 with my f ami ly . So there's no contact there .
 In Kyiv, In Washington, a social gathering, a meal shared, was a social event . It essentially was a meal share, and the meal was shared .
 The President of the United States may have mentioned her on a call with President -15 A. As I think she may have said to you Friday, in part 16 because of what the Deputy Secretary of State told her, 17 she aware of the President's views of her .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch is 23 an intensely private person, she's an introvert .
 The 24-year-old follows very strict what is deemed 25 proper and proprietary, and so that's -we did not linger on any conversation of that nature .
 I had mentioned that previously we used to run essentially remedial writing seminars for the officers in the European bureau as well as Embassy Kyiv, that I helped conduct . I said I did, and I did.
 I passed her essentially the notes of presentations I had made about writing well. And so she passed her basically the notes she had made.
 The communication you had with Vindman on the 29th, and that was an estimated date .
 It's several days later, depending on what day the call happened, it could have been the next Monday . "I just don't remember," says CNN's John Sutter . "It could be the Friday," he says .
 A I did not seek to revisit that issue nor did I talk to anybody else at the NSC about the call. A I didn't seek to revisit that issue .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman was clearly 9 extremely uncomfortable sharing the limited amount of 10 information that he did .
 He shared what he felt 11 comfortable sharing, and that constituted the read-out that he received from him . He said he felt comfortable sharing .
 He made clear to me that he felt 16 uncomfortable sharing as much as he had actually shared . He said he felt uncomfortable sharing more than he did .
 The relationship between a director of the NSC and someone at my level is intense, it's 19 frequent . You have to develop a trust factor, says a NSC director .
 He shared as much as he felt 21 comfortable sharing, and I respected that, he said . And he 20 made clear to me that he had shared, and he made clear that he felt comfortable sharing . He said he felt safe and comfortable sharing.
 Why don't we take a 10-minute break and 25 use the facilities, and we'll come back .
 I think a couple of my colleagues do, and then we'll go back to the 6 timeline with Mr Goldman . I think 5 couple of his colleagues do. Then we'll return to the six timeline with him .
 This is again the July telephone call between 11 President Trump and President Zelenskyy . If you turn to page 2 of that call record at the 10 bottom, this is another July call .
 President 13 Zelenskyy: We are ready to continue to cooperate for the 14 next steps . We are almost ready to buy more 15 javelins from the United States for defense purposes .
 I would not have known except for the newspaper media coverage explaining what that was a reference to the incident . I would have known only for the media coverage afterwards explaining what it was .
 The President says Ukraine has one of his wealthy people, the server they say Ukraine has .
 The founder of CrowdStrike is a Russian American, he says . The media said that he was a confused identity .
 The only basis I have to judge that passage is what I've read in the media. But that's again - the only basis he has to judge it is what he's read.
 The President says he would like to have the Attorney General call you or your people . He says he wants to get to the bottom of it .
 The first time I saw this declassified document record of conversation was after it was declassified by the White House . I wasn't on the call, and the first time we saw it was after the declassified record was released .
 Colonel Vindman said there was certain very sensitive topics he did not feel comfortable mentioning . When you 4 spoke to him, he said he was not comfortable mentioning some sensitive topics .
 This whole passage, which you just went 8 through, he made no reference to it . This whole passages, which he just went eight through, were just 8 through .
 If he had read this to me, I would have asked 14 him what is CrowdStrike and what does that mean, because it's 15 just not clear to me just reading it. If he'd read it, I'd have asked him what he was doing, he said .
 17 people interpreted what the context was for that, but again, 17 I'll go back to what I said before . As I said, other 16 people interpreted the context for that .
 If anybody did anything in 2016 that violated U.S. 20 elections or election laws, we should open 22 that investigation . "There's a reason 21 to investigate something with the United States nexus," says John Sutter .
 Ukrainians had a part in 23 of the 23 requests they made to the Ukrainian government . If the Ukrainians had part of 23 that, then that would be natural for us to formally convey a 24 request to them .
 A declassified memorandum of conversation has been declassified . He said that there were sensitive issues that he didn't feel comfortable talking about .
 Let me ask you about another matter that it appears he did not bring up with you . Let me tell you that it seems he didn't bring up to you .
 Biden stopped the prosecution and a lot of people want to find out about that . "Whatever you can do with the Attorney General would be great," he said .
 He made no reference that would have matched that passage of the memorandum of the conversation . That passage was not mentioned in his limited read-out .
 Earlier you mentioned that media campaign against the Ambassador took place. Earlier you said that media campaigns against the ambassador took place .
 I could only see the figures that voluntarily associated themselves with that campaign in both countries . I could not only see those figures that voluntary associated themselves.
 Yuriy Lutsenko, the prosecutor general at the time, retweeted the tweet of Don Trump, Jr. attacking the Ambassador .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin is a former president of Ukraine . He is a member of the Ukrainian parliament, the parliament's parliament, and the parliament . He has been in charge of the parliament since 2008 .
 There were -I made references earlier to what were known as the Porokhobots, the trolls who were active in support of Poroshenko .
 10 days before the election, rather than attacking Russia or attacking his political opponents, as they normally did, they were attacking Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 The U.S. people in the United States were promoting it, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Then obviously the people in America that were promoting"
 Referencing Mayor Giuliani, you became aware of his activities in Ukraine . Referenced Mayor Giuliani's activities in the Ukraine, you become aware of him .
 His role in orchestrating connections with information from Yuriy Lutsenko seemed to be a classic, you scratch your back .
 Yuriy Lutsenko told Gizo Uglava, that he was bitter and angry at the embassy for our positions on anti-corruption . Lutenko said he was angry about the embassy's positions.
 The campaign was directed towards Americans, principally the Ambassador, as well as organizations that he saw as his enemies in Ukraine . And in exchange, it appeared that the campaign was aimed at Americans .
Ukrainian President Poroshenko was trying to get President Trump to endorse Poroshenko's reelection . Several Ukrainians at the time told me that they saw what Lutsenko was doing was getting President Trump's endorsement .
 Zelenskyy, as noted before, won with 73 percent. It would not have made a difference either because Zelensyy won with73 percent .
In the first 4 phase of Mr Giuliani's contact with Ukrainians and his 5 efforts to orchestrate the media campaign, nobody from the 6 State Department had contact with him .
 Prosecutor 8 General Lutsenko through the election of President Zelenskyy, 9 which occurred on April 21st . The first 7 phase, that is essentially the phase involving Prosecutor 8 general Lutsko, is the first 7 .
 Volker says he would be reaching out to Rudy Giuliani in July . Volker is a 16-year-old special representative for Ukraine .
 We intend to go 20 through this in a timeline. And 19 THE CHAIRman: I just want to mention, I just wants to mention that we will go 20 in this timeline .
 It's somewhat news to me, 22 and I'll pass it back if that's what you want, but it's 23 seems -24 The CHAIRMAN . We'll get into all of this.
 Yuriy Lutsenko, as prosecutor general, vowed revenge, and provided information to Rudy Giuliani in hopes that he would spread it and lead to her removal . Based on what I know, Yury Lutenko vowed revenge.
 Lev Parnas and Igor Fruman have been reaching out actively to undermine Ambassador Yovanovitch . The former Congressman Pete Sessions wrote a letter to Secretary Pompeo impugning Ambassador Yovovitch's loyalty .
 Others in 2018 were engaged in an effort to undermine her standing by claiming that she was disloyal . Others also claimed that they were disloyal.
 The early roots of people following their own agendas and using her as an instrument to fulfill those agendas. So that's the early Roots of people using her to fulfill their agendas .
 Deputy Assistant 3 Secretary of State for Eastern Europe and the Caucasus . It would seem to me that you would be familiar with the efforts to engage with Ukraine .
 I've never in 27 years been on a call made by a President of the United States. I've been on 11 calls made by President of U.S. President Barack Obama .
 I have never served at the National Security 15 Council, I've only served at State Department and at 16 embassies overseas . I've never served in the State Department, I have served in 16 embassies.
 You said earlier that you provided all of your documents to the State Department for 19 them to make available to us . You said that you 18 provided all the documents to State Department .
 Likely the WhatsApp exchange between me and Ambassador, or sorry, Charge Taylor . Likely the exchange between the two was a WhatsApp exchange .
 WhatsApp has become a very active method of communication for a variety of reasons . It's considered encrypted, but I don't think text messages are secure .
In countries like Ukraine, there's actually no data charge for use WhatsApp . But when they use social media apps they don't actually pay for that data .
Rate setting has altered communications in parts of the world by rate setting and how people communicate . So that has altered the way people communicate.
 WhatsApp has become the dominant form of communication in Latin American and Asia . In parts of Europe and Asia, applications like WhatsApp have become the dominate form of communications .
 Burisma is a company that lacked some ethical commitments and moral compass of sorts . Burisma has been a company on the other side of the aisle .
 There are many companies in Ukraine that might fall into that category, yes . There are some companies in the Ukraine that may fall into the category .
 If you took the roster of the richest 7 Ukrainians, they didn't build value, they largely stole it . If you take the roster, you'll see how much value they had .
 Mr Zlochevsky's actions 16 stood out in one way that he was the actual minister who 17 awarded himself the licenses to explore for gas exploration . I would say that Mr Z Lochevski's actions stood out.
 The 24 aid would be forthcoming, whether or not the statement would be written . A lot of exchanges between Ambassador Sondland, Mr 23 Volker and also the Charge Taylor .
 "I did not participate in those exchanges by virtue of the fact that, to the best of my knowledge, you don't have me as a participant," he says . "None of those have been released," he adds .
 I did have my own dialogue with Charge Taylor in the course of our work, in the same way that I had a dialogue with Ambassador Yovanovitch and with our ambassadors in Moldova, Azerbaijan and Armenia .
 I would like to address my colleague we're going to get to that through the timeline. And I would want to address his colleague we'd like to talk to him about the timeline .
 Can I suggest that we have the counsel continue with the timeline, and then as we get through it members can add in with questions. Can I suggestion that we has the counsel continuing with the timetable. Can we have a timeline? Then as we got through it, members can added in
 Rudy Giuliani met in Paris with Nazar Kholodnytsky, who was the prosecutor of the anti-corruption prosecutor . Q Focusing your attention on May of this year when I believe you said that Giuliani met with KholODnytsky .
 We 2 stopped cooperating with them approximately in March of 2018 3 when the so-called fish tank scandal emerged . The scandal emerged in March 2018 .
 Mr Giuliani met with Yuriy Lutsenko in January, that he 6 advocated to get the former Prosecutor General Shokin a visa 7 in January . Mr Giuliani testified today that he met with the former prosecutor general in January.
 The U.S. had ceased all former relations with the United States in May .
 9 Lutsenko and Shokin are generally, the general consensus 10 belief is that they either are or, at this point, or were 11 corrupt prosecutor generals . The general consensus is that the pair were corrupt prosecutors .
 Giuliani had been on television and in the media 16 advocating for the four story lines that you summarized from 17 March articles . By May of this 15 point, Mr Giuliani was on television. And you also indicated that by May of that 15 point.
 In May you had meetings with Ukrainian officials, two of whom mentioned 21 to you that Mr Giuliani wanted to meet with them . And then in May you went to Ukraine and had meetings.
 Ukrainian officials don't meet with every private American citizen who travels to Ukraine, says Q Now . Q Now, you would agree, right, that high-level Ukrainian officials do not meet with private Americans .
 Ukrainians understood that Mr Giuliani was not a regular private citizen. Q So the Ukrainians certainly understood that he was not an ordinary citizen .
 Giuliani asserted he represented Mr Trump in his private capacity. A They understood that Mr Giuliani asserted that he represented him in his own capacity .
 A Ukrainians such as Arsen Avakov are experienced players willing to meet with anybody . A Ukrainians like ArsenAvakov are willing to play with anybody.
 President-elect Zelenskyy's team had no experience in politics . They had spent their entire careers as a tight-knit group of entertainment company executives .
 They were looking to try to figure out to understand how to navigate political networks . So they were trying to find out how to use political networks.
 At this time it would be my 9 best counsel to you to shield your President-elect from 10 private citizens . But at this time, it would also be my best counsel.
As a general rule, we don't want other countries involved in our own domestic political process, no. As a generalRule, we do not want others involved in their own political process .
 At the end of May, there was the inauguration of President Zelenskyy .
 The starting point was the conversation between Presidents Trump and President-elect Zelenskyy on election day .
 President Zelenskyy asked if it would be possible for President Trump to come to the inaugural . President Zelenkyy said it was possible for him to come.
 President Trump suggested that he would talk to Vice President Pence, and schedules willing, that he hoped it could work out . But in any case, the U.5. would have representation at the inaugural .
 We were 5 looking for an anchor, someone who was a person of stature 6 and whose job had relevance to our agenda .
Energy was one of the top 12 issues that we were working with Ukraine . Energy was also the top three issues that the U.S. team was working with .
 13 years ago, it was a matter of 14 building out possibilities. So that was 13 the start of that conversation, and then it was 14 . It was 13 years later, and that was the beginning of the conversation .
 As an 18 example, when President Yushchenko was inaugurated in Ukraine 19 in 2005, I was the control officer on the ground at the 20 time . I was Secretary Colin Powell in his last 21 act as State of State, and five Ukrainian Americans .
 It included some Ukrainian American leaders here in the United States, as well as officials . It includes some Ukrainian leaders.
 Former National Security Advisor Bolten weighed in at some point in the process . In the end, Secretary Perry, Lieutenant Colonel Vindman representing the NSC, Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker, and then our Charge in country .
 Ambassador Sondland has his own networks of influence, including chief of staff Mulvaney . He was not somebody that we initially proposed, but he has a network of influence .
 Ambassador Sondland had started cultivating a relationship with the previous Ukrainian President Poroshenko .
 He visited Odesa, which may have been where he first met Poroshenko and other leaders . He visited, as I recall, a ship visit to the city .
 Chief of staff had an independent relationship with the chief of staff, says Q .
 The delegation went to the inauguration on May 20th and had a meeting with President Zelenskyy . Senator Johnson was there not as part of the Presidential delegation but separately .
 Zelenskyy joined a briefing to the President in the Oval Office on May 23rd . But he sat in the meeting with Zelenkyy, and then he joined the President .
 Ambassador Sondland's connections with Mulvaney got them the meeting with the President . It was ambassador Sondlands' connections with the president .
 It was not done through the NSC staff, through Lieutenant Colonel Vindman and Ambassador Bolton . The NSC has not yet been able to find out what happened .
 A Well, normally for international issues, would appear on the President's calendar . National Security staff pushed through the National Security Advisor .
 Ambassador Sondland's connections through Chief of Staff Mulvaney, to the best of his knowledge, he says .
President Trump's debriefing after the inauguration on May 23rd. Q So you're talking about President Trump'sdebriefing.
 The Oval Office 2 meeting to talk about that and the way forward occurred in 3 the Oval Office on May 23rd. The Oval office 2 meeting was to discuss how to move forward .
 If that 13 was during the time that President Poroshenko was the 14 President, that was earlier. If that was during that time, that would be the time of the 14th President .
 16 did call President Poroshenko in March for instance after 17 attack started on Ambassador Yovanovitch to suggest the 18 Porosheno back off .
 President Zelenskyy's assumption of 22 office on May 21st. His acceleration of his involvement 19 in Ukraine was in one phase, just 20 starting the last month.
 Ukraine's relationship with Ukraine has been at odds for years. Ukraine's leaders say they would be the 15 drivers of the relationship with the country . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin has said they will be the '15 drivers' of the Ukraine relationship .
 She gave a 2 readout to her office director who was probably acting for me 3 that week . mm|, normally office director of Eastern 4 Europe, is normally Office Director of Eastern4 Europe .
 Kurt Volker gave a readout to his then-special 5 assistant, Chris Anderson . Anderson is currently a language 6 student .
 Gordon Sondland would have given a readout to 7 somebody that would have been forwarded to us . And Gordon would have said that he would have sent it to him .
 He said 18 that President Trump had been very angry about Ukraine, he said that they had wished him ill in 20 2016 . He said that he was very angry at Ukraine, and that they were corrupt .
 The last point that I recall from the readouts was that there would be an accelerated search for a political nominee for Ambassador, as opposed to having a career Foreign Service officer proposed .
 A I have read the documents that have been made available to me as part of my read . The documents are part of a book that has been published in the past .
 The Office of Intelligence and Research briefs me twice a week, but that does not mean that I've read every document about Russia, no.
 The Intelligence Community assessment about Russian interference in the 2016 election. Q No, I understand, there is specific document that the Intelligence Community assesses Russian interference . Q No.
 The findings have been discussed in general in the media. I'm aware of those findings. And to the extent that it has been discussed by the media, I'm know of that .
 Special Counsel Mueller indicted 12 Russians and laid out an indictment . Q and Q: Are you aware of Mueller's indictment? Yes. Q And are you aware that Special counsel Mueller indicted? Yes .
 The 2 President agreed to call on election day on a Sunday. And we were very pleased that the 2 President had agreed.
 We had 3 presumed that it might happen the next workday, which was a 4 Monday . The next day was 4 Monday.
 President Zelenskyy was in a good mood when it was 5 probably past midnight in Ukraine . President Trump was 7 very positive and congratulated him on a great win .
 President Trump invited President Trump to his inaugural to be determined . The 12-year-old will be the first time he has been in charge of the White House .
 President Trump acknowledged he would try to find someone appropriate to 14 attend . President Trump, as he said, as I said, 13 acknowledged that he would tried to find somebody appropriate to14 attend .
 We obviously stand ready to 4 be supportive, but that's their function, says author . "We obviously standready to 4Be supportive"
 Ukraine is an 8 important country that Congress appropriates roughly in the 9 ballpark $700 million a year in assistance . Zelenskyy won 10 a clear mandate for change and so we were supportive of a visit to the White House .
 Ihor 19 Kolomoisky had 18 prior association with a fairly notorious oligarch . He was going to be a mark of his willingness to make a break from past relationships and stand on 21 principle .
 Ukraine 7 is Ukraine 7 in the Ukraine 7 context . It's very important to show that they can establish 8 a strong relationship with the U.S.
 The U.S. spends a considerable amount of our 13 resources supporting Ukraine . It makes sense to support Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The time on a 15 President's schedule is always subject to competing 16 priorities . The President's time is subject to a competition of 16 priorities.
 Special Representative Volker traveled frequently to Ukraine so it is possible that he may have gone in late May .
 There was a coordinating meeting in the Department of Energy in mid-June, on June 18th .
 Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker from the State Department, Acting Assistant Secretary Reeker, my direct supervisor, Tyler Brace, all attended that meeting in Secretary Perry's office . Charge Taylor from Kyiv.
 The meeting was the next meeting where officials got together specifically to talk about policies and programs towards Ukraine . "To the best of my knowledge, I would say that, to thebest of his knowledge, after that May 23rd meeting, this June 18th meeting," says
There was a 4 June 28th conference call between Secretary Perry, Sondland, 5 Volker, and Charge Taylor . At the end of which they 6 were patched through to President Zelenskyy .
10 Ambassador Sondland wrote Charge Taylor to 11 to suggest that that would be a U.S.-only meeting or a U.-only 12 call . Initially I have an email suggesting that 10 Ambassador SONDland had written Charge Taylor.
President Zelenskyy had a pre-conversation among the 14 Americans, based on what Charge Taylor has told him . But in the end, on the next day, it turned into a call 13 with President Zelenkyy .
 The direction of our engagement with 20 Ukraine shifted into shall we say unusual channels . But again, that was a 19 period of time where the direction of the engagement with20 Ukraine shifted .
 Charge Taylor is the lead representative in country . His listed responsibilities were focused on negotiating with Russia over their war in Ukraine .
 Charge Taylor was the primary voice for our full interests as the Charge of our mission in Kyiv .
 You learned of the call from Charge Taylor, you said that you learned of it .
 A He indicated that there was a discussion about the need to raise a sensitive issue with Zelenskyy . He indicated there was an issue that should be discussed .
 Ambassador Volker volunteered that he would be seeing Zelenskyy in person the next week in Toronto . The meeting was held on July 2nd .
 A Kurt Volker told me that it was giving guidance to Zelenskyy on how he needed to characterize his willingness to be cooperative on issues of interest to the President . Volker said it was also giving guidance on how to characterize Zelensyy's willingness
 I did not have the full details of what exactly that was, but I think it was sending signals about potential investigations . I didn't know what exactly was but it was sent signals about possible investigations .
 The initial readouts I got were, yes secondhand from these three people . The first readouts were a good readout .
 Kupperman may have gotten it from deputy -then deputy national security advisor. Her understanding is that she may have got it from Deputy -then Deputy National Security advisor Kuppman .
 She had a conversation with who was the acting deputy assistant secretary at the time . She had been talking to who was acting deputy deputy assistant Secretary .
 Chris Anderson's readout was from Kurt Volker and a third readout from someone in the State Department who worked with our mission to the European Union that would have had Ambassador Sondland's version .
 Q So Sondland gives a readout to his staffer who writes it up, sends an email . The staffer writes up the email .
While she was away at her daughter's was acting in her stead as acting deputy assistant secretary . To the best of her recollection, she had a conversation with who is normally the director for Eastern Europe .
 Fiona's readout came from 8 Kupperman, not from her participation in the meeting . Fiona's readingout was not from the meeting, but from a meeting .
 Secretary Perry, Ambassador Sondland, Ambassador Volker and Senator Johnson would have been the briefers to the President .
 A and I wasn't in the meeting and wouldn't have been in it even if I were in Washington. A And I was in Washington, Washington, for the first time .
Kupperman -or Kupperman. A To the best of his understanding, all I know is that Charlie Kuppman is the man behind the wheel . He says he has a lot of respect for the man he is in the world .
 Kupperman, former deputy National Security Advisor, may have been in the meeting . The former deputy national security advisor was in a meeting at the time .
 When I returned from work I had three different versions or readouts of the meetings from others . I didn't ask if he was in the meeting, because when I returned, I had a different version or readout of meetings .
 I had three different 7 versions of the meeting so I wasn't looking for a fourth . The meeting was held in London, London, on Monday .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman has 19 communications with him by email and 20 phone call . He would say he has more than 20 phone calls with him .
 He's a -he was a campaign planner before he came 2 over to the NSC . He has that campaign planning mentality, 3 you know, what's the goal and he'll plow forward .
 Lt. colonel spends his day 11 working on campaign plans . He's a lieutenant colonel who spends day 11 on campaign planning plans .
 The role of 15 the National Security Council is to coordinate the work of 16 other agencies, not to task us . I think if you talk to most State 14 Department employees will have an opinion that the role of the 15 is not totask us .
I would say there's more tension 5 perhaps between him and the staff that work for me, but we 6 have a respectful working relationship . I would say more tension would be more tension, but there is more tension between them .
 Ambassador Sondland helped draft a version of the original version . But by the end of the 19 meeting, he'd been convinced and the version he'd be convinced .
 21 the second version of the letter actually read better than 22 the first version . The second version is better than the first .
 I wasn't involved in either of them 23 because I had been on leave and eventually that letter was 24 signed . I was not involved in any of the 23 incidents .
 I was, as I mentioned, in Ukraine and Kyiv at the 9 embassy on May 8th . I was in Ukraine, Kyiv and Ukraine and in Kyiv on May 9th .
 I did offer to have a restricted 10 townhall meeting for Americans, essentially, in our version 11 of the SCIF, and the country team, the meeting room, where 12 we'd have . The meeting room would have 12 people, including anyone who wished to have
 The 19 embassy staff were asked what was going to be the impact on them, on 20 the embassy, and on our policy towards Ukraine . Their question, as people working at 19, was what was to do with Ukraine, they said .
 We still had to work out 9 whether we could bring him back. He was the one we all wanted at that point . He was one of the one they all wanted .
 Details with the 10 personnel system had not yet been finalized . Those details with the ten personnel system are still not finalized .
 Ukraine 19 wished him ill in 2016 and they were going to work 20 towards an Oval Office meeting, energy issues were important 21 and then you mentioned that there was a decision to put in a 22 new political Ambassador .
 A man called back essentially to government service because he knew all the players . He was called back because he was known the players and knew all of them .
 He's a bundle of positivity and gets along with everyone and he's a real leader . He's not just a man of the day, he's also a man with a lot to do with .
 He was a graduate of West Point who joined the 101st, and was platoon leader in Vietnam and in Germany . He was also a senior executive at the State Department .
 The White House is the President's prerogative to appoint, nominate an Ambassador and then the Senate's role to confirm .
 During his tenure as Vice President, Joe Biden had a role with regard to Ukraine .
 A I was, although his involvement in Ukraine predated his return to the Ukraine account, he was involved in Ukraine .
 Vice President visited Ukraine six times, which probably is unusual for any country outside of the usual countries like Germany . I believe -it should be a matter of record, but I believe as Vice President he visited six times .
Pyatt as chief 15 of mission, Toria as assistant secretary, and Vice President Biden as Vice President . Toria is the assistant secretary of mission .
 I had come out on an emergency basis for my 25 predecessor I. And I came out on 24 hours' notice to Ukraine the beginning of October for my third stint .
Ambassador Pyatt and Toria Nuland discussed what to do on the way forward with the Office of the Vice President . The conversations were near-daily between Ambassador Pyatt. The conversations then included pitching the Office to push President Poroshenko to remove Shokin .
 There was a similar push against Prime Minister Arseny Yatseniuk, who had several different corrupt political backers .
 Martynenko was involved in all sorts of dirty business, including nuclear fuel supplies from Russia .
We pressured Yatseniuk to have one of his corrupt cronies resign, and Martynenko resigned . And so we pressured him to resign .
Shokin was not dismissed until early March after Vice President Biden's visit in December 2015 . Poroshenko was also under pressure on Poroshenko, on the corrupt prosecutor general .
 Q The Vice President relates to some of these details on a video that's been published on the Wall Street Journal .
 He was at some conference, maybe Council on Foreign Relations, sometime in 2018 . He was telling the story in a sort of folksy manner .
 $1 billion worth of aid would be held up until they fired Shokin, he says . He describes a quid pro quo where, you know, $1billion worth of Aid would be kept up until Shokin was fired .
 A Again, I was in -briefly in Ukrainian language training at the time of his visit so I was not in Ukraine . A Again. A Again,. I was also in -Briefly, in Ukrainianlanguage training at his visit .
 I would think that the State Department could produce documents related to the sovereign loan guarantees and the timing of those three guarantees to align the timing . The State Department would also be able to produce documents relating to those guarantees .
 The timing of the loan guarantees aligned perfectly with his visit to Ukraine on December 2015 . I do not recall the exact timing of those loan guarantees .
 The idea came from Ambassador Pyatt in discussion with Assistant Secretary Nuland . It was pitched to the Office of the Vice President .
 I would just note 3 having read the subpoena that the document request was date 4 timed . I believe starting January 20 or 21st, 2017 is the date of the request .
 We're 5 talking about events that happened in November, December, 6 2015 .
 The 13 U.S., the IMF, the European Union countries had all come 14 to the conclusion in the wake of the diamond prosecutors 15 affair . There was going to be no progress for reform on 16 the prosecutor general under Shokin .
 I left the day before 19 Thanksgiving to fly back to the U.S. and to go into Ukraine 20 language training .
 Vice President's 22 visit to the United States is scheduled to take place in the next two weeks . He was not privy to those 21 discussions in the two weeks prior to the visit .
 Ambassador Pyatt and 4 Assistant Secretary Nuland in her visits that was an agenda 5 item that they were pushing. This was an issue that Pyatt was pushing .
 Department of Justice official asked me to go to 7 prosecutor general office office in February 2015 and ask who 8 took the bribe and how much was it to shut down the case 9 against Zlochevsky . Ambassador and Assistant Secretary 10 Nuland asked the office of Vice President if
17 it was pushing the Ukrainians essentially for an additional 18 what would be called a prior action before we would issue the 19 sovereign loan guarantee . So I believe 17 it was pushed the Ukrainians basically for an extra 18. The Ukrainians were pushing for a further 18.
 The documents from that period of 21 time. But I think that's something that 20 we would have to look at the documents from the time .
 You as the deputy chief of mission were not 23 involved in that process . You were not involved in the process. You as a Deputy Chief of Mission were not.
 In parts of 2015 I went out as essentially 25 the acting deputy chief of mission. So in part of 2015, I was essentially 25 acting deputyChief of mission .
 I then came back to the United States the day before Thanksgiving and was in the U.S. for 3 months for language training and then returned to Kyiv in late March 2016 .
 The Vice President's visit to the U.S. came two weeks before his visit . He was a language student as opposed to being an active participant in the conversations .
You referenced Ambassador Pyatt, you referenced Assistant Secretary Nuland. And you referenced ambassador Pyatt.
 The idea that we were going to call for Shokin's removal it didn't just develop in those two weeks . But this policy, this idea, this time, wasn't just developed in that time .
 The Vice President will ask the Vice President to do this. You weren't involved in a discussion and a decision to say this is going to be our official policy we're going to ask him to do it .
 I think someone made a reference to Ambassador Pyatt's speech in September . I think a reference was made to the Ambassador's speech .
 Earlier today, he gave a strong, hard-hitting speech against corruption . It was clear then that we were pushing for Shokin's ouster .
 Nuland, the Ambassador, and you to 9 say, we're going to ask the Vice President to do it on this 10 trip .
On a daily basis Ambassador Pyatt 13 and Assistant Secretary Nuland had conversations, that was 14 conversations that the Ambassador would have on his office 15 with her on a secure phone .
 Ambassador Pyatt's speech 19 in September of 2015 was a 20 powerful public statement of U.S. concern about the lack of 21 progress . But I cannot give a precise date 17 other than to say that -18 .
 The case against Zlochevsky had been shut 24 down and frozen money was released . Shokin may have specifically mentioned 22 shortcomings of prosecutor Shokin .
 The way a trip would normally be staffed, there would be conversations prior to the trip . There would be paper prepared and conversations before the trip.
 Assistant Secretary Nuland went over and participated in a pretrip brief . He said it would often be someone like Assistant Secretary.
 I think I -I don't recall -I mean, he gave a public speech and in the well of the Ukrainian parliament . I think he didn't recall, I don't remember, he said . He said that he was not a politician .
 This demand would have been delivered in private in his meeting with President Poroshenko . But this demand would be made in private.
 I was a language student for a period of several months in the United States . I was aware that he'd made the request .
 Shokin remained an embattled prosecutor general for several months more until there was a vote held in their parliament to remove him . He was also aware that he was an embattled Prosecutor General for months more .
 17 American Ambassador speaking on the record about our concerns 18 about the lack of progress and the rule of law reform in 2015 19 a year and a half after the Revolution of Dignity . It's just that I 16 think that's a public mark where people could see this is the 17
 At the 20 same time, there was constant private messaging, messages and 21 meetings that Ambassador Pyatt had in Kyiv . Vice President Biden would talk to both President Poroshenko and Arseny Yatseniuk .
 I would say that -well, again, we're now talking about conversations, of which I was not a part, that happened 4 years ago . I'd say that. I would says that - well, again. We're now talk about conversations of which he was not part,
Shokin's status was raised prior to the Vice President's trip, possibly during a conversation . I do not think -my guess, to the best of my ability, I would anticipate that the issue of Shokin's Status was raised .
 The Vice President of the United States and the President of Ukraine were not on those calls . But he was not on the calls between the two countries .
 Vice President Biden pushed that issue when he visited Kyiv . Biden's decision to push the issue got to the point of having the Vice President raise that .
 Vice President's son Beau was dying of cancer and there was no further bandwidth to deal with family related issues at that time . The message that I recall hearing back was that the Vice president's son was dying.
 Beau Biden died in February, the best of his memory would have been in February .
 I then returned to Ukraine in August of 2015 and I believe he passed before then . I then went back to Ukraine and then returned in August 2015 and believe he died before then.
 The only time that conversation could have happened is between January, February, 2015 .
It's easy in a conference room like this to have a considered discussion about things. It's easy to talk about things like this in the conference room, says the author .
 Ambassador Pyatt would wake up between 4:58 and 5:01, when he would get the last email from him . He would go to bed between 12:59 and 1:01. That was when he got the first email.
 You referenced earlier the President's congratulatory note to President Zelenskyy . You referenced an earlier message to the President .
 If there's a letter that's signed May 29th that would be the second version that was then signed . The letter would be a second version of the letter that was signed .
 The penultimate paragraph says, to help show that commitment, I'd like to invite you to meet with me at the White House in Washington, D.C. as soon as we can find a mutually convenient time .
2 Ambassador Sondland helped arrange, yes, sir. Q So this was the spiffed up letter or -230 1 A .
 I don't know who the drafter of the first version 10 was and I don’t know how many people were involved in 11 production of the language of the second one . The first version of the 10 was written by 11 people, including the first 10
 By the end of the meeting he agreed to sign a 24 revised version and this is the version that he signed . This is the first version he signed.
 President-elect Zelenskyy had invited President Trump to come to his inauguration . He said he would send someone there, but he'd like to get you to the White House .
 The President and the President of two countries can have an agreement in principle to meet . But then schedules are complicated, particularly when you're dealing with two Presidents of two nations .
 A that would probably in certain circumstances also be a fair assessment. That would also probably also be an fair assessment . A That would probably also probably be a good assessment . But that would also also probably in some circumstances also being fair .
Former prime minister tells me that Poroshenko authorized the attacks . A former prime minister told me to be careful .
 Giuliani authorized Lutsenko to share information with Giuliani that led to the attacks on Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 Pam Tremont believes Ambassador Yovanovitch could have been from the DCM at the time .
 Ambassador Sondland has engaged Georgian leaders in the U.S. and Georgia . He also has responsibility for Georgia .
 Georgia's President Poroshenko was the then Georgia prime minister . He was also the president of the country .
 Senators Menendez, Durbin, Leahy and Leahy wrote to Poroshenko about the Mueller investigation . Q This is a letter from Poroshenko from Sen. Menendez and Sen. Leahy .
 The U.S. Congress does not copy embassies on its correspondence with other countries . But we often do receive courtesy copies sometimes through the State Department .
 A letter could have been sent from a phone call to a friend in the UK .
 A Well, that there were some people expressing interest in whether Ukraine had possibly stopped cooperating. A Well said some people were expressing interest.
 This is not the first time I've heard it, but I honestly could not give you precisely, you know, information . It's not a first time, but it's a good thing to know, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This was not a communication that went through the embassy -Q Of course. Again, this was not an embassy communication .
 A -nor did we go to the prosecutor general to raise the concerns of the three Senators who sent this letter . The three Senators sent the letter .
 At the time, I was working in Kyiv, so I would not necessarily have been aware . Do you know if anyone in the leg affairs is in the business?
 My predecessor was Bridget Brink, who is now serving as our Ambassador in Slovakia . Bridget is currently serving as the Slovakian Ambassador.
 She was the Deputy Assistant Secretary at the time, so I'm not sure if this letter was passed through and was discussed. So she was the deputy assistant secretary .
 The State Department would dispatch their legislative liaisons to talk with the Senators or their Senator's staff to -A Honestly, again, I was in Kyiv at the time, so I do not have knowledge of any interaction between the Senate's -three senators, their staff -Q Fair
 A Again, I didn't have any conversations with Mr Lutsenko as a general rule . A Again. A again, I did not have any talks with him as ageneral rule .
 The United States Embassy did not meet with the U.S. Embassy frequently . We didn't have a complete break in communications .
 Do you know if anyone at the State Department had a -picked up the phone and called the Justice Department and said, you know, this Lutsenko fellow is not so great. Q Do You know if any State Department employee had a phone call? Q Do you
 Our time is about to expire after this round. I'll ask you one last question, and then our time will expire .
 There was some discussion about instances where Mayor Giuliani was operating in Ukraine and having meetings .
 The other individuals that former Mayor Giuliani has chosen to associate in Ukraine have far less positive reputations in Ukraine .
 Ukraine was focused on its own issues and challenges at the time . But, again, that would have had less impact in Ukraine, which would have been focused on itself .
 Ukrainian oligarch Pavlo Fuks was the mayor of Kharkiv and a Russian oligarch . His main paying clients in Ukraine at the time were the mayor and an oligarch in Ukraine .
 Mayor Giuliani's association with Mayor Kernes and Pavlo Fuks contractually began in 2017 . Q Is this before 2016 - I'm sorry, before 2018 in the A .
 We still have a lot of material to get through, and we want to try to get you out as a reasonable hour . We want to make sure you get out as well as areasonable hour .
 Secretary has just a few questions before handing it back to Mr Goldman .
 I want to go back to one of the origins of the narrative they were getting at, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he wants to return to the narrative he was getting at .
 There were four false narratives in the Solomon article back in April of 2019. You mentioned there were fourfalse narratives in that article .
 There were four narratives that were introduced, led off by the Solomon articles .
 There were a number of different platforms in play that week . The first two were definitely part one, part two, but there were many different platforms . There were several different platforms.
 I believe that the first day the two themes that were introduced were the anti corruption theme, and that was targeting the embassy, and then the 2016 conversation . I signed a letter that I had signed in April 2016.
 The Bidens and Burisma was the third narrative theme that was introduced a day or two later . The discussions of the Bidens, Burisma and Bidens were also discussed .
 Lutsenko himself would later recant. The false narrative that the Vice President had pressured the firing of Shokin was false, he says .
 Mr Lutsenko has held many positions on many issues that are mutually exclusive, including on this issue . He has held several positions on the issue .
 Mr Lutsenko did an interview with Bloomberg in mid-May of 2019 . He said he had no evidence of wrongdoing by Biden or his son .
 Hunter Biden came on to the 5 board several years before Hunter Biden was on the board . He said the activities 3 related primarily to Zlochevsky's actions as minister .
Former prosecutor general's interviews this year are more in accord with the facts than his assertions at the time . He left 6 office in 2012 .
 The false narrative since recanted has recanted. So let me ask you a little bit more again about this false narrative .
 He was not allowing for reform of 20 prosecutor general service . He actually was actively undermining reform of the prosecutor general 22 service .
 The first one was held in Denmark; second in London; third was hosted in Canada by the Canadian Government .
First a 19 phone call, which is a conversation happening on July 2, says Volker . And Volker said, first a 19 call, is a phone call .
 You have a reputation of loving and 2 cherishing this U.5-Ukraine relationship and dedicating your 3 life toward strengthening the relationship between the United 4 States and Ukraine .
 Lieutenant Colonel Vindman says 6 doesn't have a lot of details about the call . You don't try to get any 7 more information about the phone call .
 You should not try to get any more information. I just want to better 8 understand your mindset that, once you got that readout that 9 was lacking substance, that you chose not to try to find any more info .
 This is what you've dedicated your life 11 to strengthening your relationship . This is the best way to strengthen your relationship with others .
 Some people try to be in the middle 14 of everything, and some try to do their job based on 15 conditions which they are issued . I think some people are trying to be 'in the middle of everything'
 The State Department has under its ability to pursue 23 national interests . It has 22 programming funded by appropriations from Congress, including 22 programs .
 In 27 years in the 2 Foreign Service, I've never been on a Presidential call . 3 that is not normal for officials that are at the Embassy or 4 at the State Department .
 The people who normally are on a 5 Presidential call are staff at the National Security Council 6 and the White House 6 . The White House is usually on a five Presidential call .
National Security Council member has not served as a detailee to 7 the National Security Council in his career .
 I would say that it was standard procedure 15 for the director to give a readout to the Deputy Assistant 16 Secretary . I'd say it wasstandard procedure 15.
 Lieutenant Colonel 17 Vindman gave me the readout in April after the 18 inaugural -sorry, the election day victory call .
 State 21 would 20 give a readout to the DAS so that the policy DAS would know the substance of what was discussed so we could 22 make sure that our policy going forward was aligned with the 23 conversations had by the President .
 I have not been part of the meeting with 3 Zelenskyy since this call happened, and since 4 I first saw this text 2 weeks ago . I have been a part of this meeting since the call happened .
President-elect 9 Zelenskyy, Ambassador Yovanovitch, had already been recalled . He was running as a candidate for President in 2019 .
 Under Secretary 18 Hale was the ranking visitor to the U.S. House of Representatives . He was only 17 when he was with Candidate Zelenskyy.
 President Zelenskyy says her attitude toward him was far from the best as she had admired the previous President .
 I have no idea because I do know that President Poroshenko thought she was not a fan of him . I do not know that she thought she wasn't a fan. I haveno idea.
 President Poroshenko had targeted Ambassador Yovanovitch, which is why I wanted to ask you about this particular quote .
 Did you have an opportunity to meet with President Zelenskyy? Do you have a chance?
 The amounts made available for assistance to Ukraine has increased yearly since 2014, says the appropriators on the Appropriation Committee .
 Belarus desk officer was an officer who used Javelins -is that they are incredibly effective weapons at stopping armored advance, and the Russians are scared of them .
 Earlier on, in one of the rounds, there was discussion with regards to the firing of Ambassador Yovanovitch, he testified .
 The Ambassadors, collectively, the 4 G7 Ambassadors and EU Ambassador, plus the EU Ambassador had a meeting 5 with President Poroshenko . This was the 6 type of issue that was raised .
In August 18, 7, I was back in Washington, so I did not participate in those 8 meetings . Again, starting in August 18. 7, 7 I was in Washington .
 The trend line and deterioration started about 9 the time I came back to Washington. The trendline and deterioration began about 9.
Eight Ambassadors come in to see 16 President Poroshenko . I do not think it was normal for the prosecutor general to be attending the 15 meetings .
 On any given month, there would have been 3 perhaps cases that rose to the fore as being emblematic of 4 direction . On anygiven month, 3 maybe cases would have risen to the front .
 One of the 5 candidates for President, Anatoliy Hrytsenko, was assaulted 6 in a parking garage in the city of Odesa .
 A former Defense 7 Minister running for President was assaulted by thugs . There was no effort to investigate the assault .
 The lack of an investigation is 10 a suggestion that those in power were not interested in 11 holding the people to account . The accounts indicated 12 people were probably connected to the power organizations .
 The Embassy, as part of its advocacy, would 16 have no doubt kept a running list . The Embassy would have discussed this extensively with 18 other likeminded Ambassadors .
 19 Ambassadors to the G7 countries, plus the Ambassador to 20 the EU, met almost weekly . There was a collection of 19 of the ambassadors.
 The issue of the 21 deterioration of the rule of law and the lack of 22 accountability and impunity for these attacks was a frequent 23 topic . The issue was also a frequent topic for the BBC .
 The initial attack occurred in the summer of 9 2018, I believe . The activist eventually died in roughly 10 November of 2018 .
 "I just don't want to put any words in 12 your mouth, that's why I'm asking the question," he says . "Yeah, I justDon't want the words in your mouth," he adds .
 The number of uninvestigated assaults on members of civil society, the media, and the 21 opposition, as I said, eventually reached 100 . That was a 22 trend line and a message to everybody, he said .
 In the last 3 years, the 10 most prominent case was this anti corruption activist . I would say that in the last three years, this anti-corruption activist was this case . The case is one of the most prominent cases in recent years .
 There were politicians connected to 14 President Poroshenko, including Prosecutor General Yuriy 15 Lutsenko's party, and Yuliya 16 Tymoshenko's party . She was in a town in Kherson, according to activists, civil 13 society, and journalists .
 There was no 17 firm action taken by the prosecutor general . Despite this general knowledge, there was no firm action.
 This was a case important for the rule of law 21 under a President who had run to change Ukraine, starting 22 with the Revolution of Dignity . This was the first time the law had been changed by a President .
 The Ambassador and I 14 raised concerns specifically about action taken without 15 evident merit to pressure civil society, media, and 16 political opponents .
Kavalec was the 8 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Russia . Nuland was not aware of what the nature of engagement would have been . Kavalec would have 11 been, no. 11, no .
 Ambassador Volker has not released anything himself, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A I do not engage the media and have studiously avoided the media before coming here . A I don't engage the press and I've avoided it for years . I've never been to the media, but I've been in the media for years.
 A I do not know how his WhatsApp messages made it into the public domain . A I don't know how he made it to the public Domain .
 The Hill side would push certain messages out. Q I mean, it's conceivable that somebody on the Hill side, I know that might come as a shock, he says .
 The 25 Administrative Bureau is under our what's known as the A Bureau . It's in an office 24 that is under the 25 administrative bureau .
 This morning, we were talking about the State Department's record collection procedure and responding to a subpoena . We were talking to the Department about the subpoena .
 The only previous record request that I have seen was the Senate's Select Intelligence Committee's request for documents related to Paulafort and Konstantin Kilimnik .
 A Well, again, has been present or seen the process happen twice, once when she was at an Embassy and, the other time, the past 2 weeks at the State Department .
 At the Embassy, there was a mechanism where our information management resource, our specialists, went through and were able to extract any emails that had reference to the individuals listed .
 I did not have any discussions or coordination about what I would say personally. Subsequent to that, he did not say personally .
 The conversations with the counsel, legal office counsel, then went through counsel with I got several letters that were signed by Under Secretary of Management Brian Bulatao . There were a number of conversations that had, which I did not participate in .
 My wife visited her mother in hospital and then had a conversation with Masha . Masha was also visited by her wife in hospital .
 7 generally, because of the budget and staffing patterns, they ask for detailees, which the host agencies pay for . 8 generally, as well as the host agency, they asked for det ailees .
 9 generally come from State, Office of Secretary of 10 Defense, or JCS in the Intel Community, and Treasury also provides individuals .
 Under Secretary Tillerson tried to limit all detailees when he had 12 staff freezes . He tried to reduce the freeze when he was in charge of his staff .
 Those jobs are 21 incredibly draining, so most people are happy to do 1 year 22 and move on . Most people are also happy to move on to their jobs .
 I've never discussed that issue with him with him. But he clearly got an extension to a second 23 year, but he's never discussed it with him . He clearly got the extension to his 23 year.
 At some point, it was extended by a 25 second year . But my 24 presumption is that at some point it was extension by 25 second years . But it's not that, it's that it's extended by some point .
 Deputy 3 Assistant Secretary of the NSC works on 4 Ukraine, Moldova, and Belarus . He was recruited to work on Russia, but ended up 7 working on Ukraine and Moldova .
 He 9 would turn to office that had multiple people working on 10 countries to see if they could be supportive . It was natural that he 9 would go to office to check if they were supportive .
 If he did not feel his 19 conversations with Alex could provide sufficient relief, he 20 would ask me to weigh in . 17 usually they would raise their complaints to their office 18 director, and 17 would raise them .
 Catherine had worked at the Ukraine desk at the State Department for 1-year . Her return from 24 Kyiv was the day after Labor Day in September 2018 .
 The State Department director's principal interlocutor was the NSC director . He travels on their own, but they often accompany principals .
 Victoria Nuland was Assistant Secretary, sometimes Celeste Wallander and Charlie Kupchan would travel with her to countries, whether that would be Russia or Ukraine .
 People remember who the principal on the trip was and not all the staff who actually do most of the work. And, again, I spend most of my life in support of others .
 Q The story walks through Serhiy Leshchenko's role in publicizing the Manafort ledgers . Q The Story walks through the story.
Documents apparently found at the former estate of the previous President who fled to Russia, Viktor Yanukovych . The documents indicated individuals who had been receiving payments by the former ruling party .
 I'm not going to ask you to, you know, adopt the article as a personal endorsement or anything . You know, you can't use it as your own personal endorsement, or anything, I'll tell you . You can use the article to help you understand what
 Gordon Sondland messaging of what the Ukrainians need to say in shorthand 2016 . A message was described in the shorthand of the desire to have .
In shorthand, it was suggested that the Ukrainians needed to go to a microphone . The Ukrainians needed three words in the message, and that was the shorthand .
 A Politico article to that effect in the spring of 2017, yeah. A I recall reading a Politico article in 2017 .
 Ukraine's prime minister has been in Ukraine for three years . He says he wants to be able to communicate with him and his country's president . He wants to use the embassy's apps to communicate .
We checked with our 6 communications and Diplomatic Security specialists . We checked with 6 communications, Diplomatic security specialists .
 The 7 assessment was that Viber was not as secure as WhatsApp, and 8 that we were authorized to use WhatsApp for communications as 9 long as records were saved . The 7 assessments were that WhatsApp was not a secure.
 A We obviously want Ukraine to have effective law enforcement and justice sector institutions . A We Obviously want Ukraine's law enforcement, justice sector institution to be effective .
That's in order to be able to investigate, prosecute, and judge any criminal acts . That's in place to investigate and prosecute, or judge any crimes .
 Ambassador Yovanovitch had her first meeting with the then new prime minister of Ukraine, Volodymyr Hroysman . He asked if she was on WhatsApp and Viber, so I'm presuming it was late August or early September .
 Rudy Giuliani saw Rudy Giuliani as an issue 3 to be addressed, and potentially an ally to be incorporated 4 to get the U.S. President to where we wanted our relationship 5 to be . Giuliani is having a meeting with President Obama this week .
 Rudy Giuliani thought that it was a relationship 19 he had to try to work on if he could . Since 17 the President and Rudy Giuliani had communications on 18 somewhat regular basis .
 A Well, I think I can only share the conversation I had with Kurt, and the conversation was framed differently . A Well is a well-known author and author of the book, "A Well"
 A conversation took place 3 months ago, but neither of us were taking notes . The two people who -we’re talking at this point are not taking notes, he says .
 "I would say that, you know, he has shared his recollection of the conversation, and I shared mine. And so, I would say he has share his recollection, and he shared mine," he said .
 Rudy Giuliani was clearly influencing the President's views of Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he had concerns about Giuliani's comments on Ukraine .
 I think Kurt was approaching -in my understanding, he was approaching this issue tactically . That's why I say that I think that he was approached -in his understanding, I say. That's what I think he was doing .
 Kurt Volker's WhatsApp messages have been seen by some of his followers . Volker issued a series of tweets, but not his tweets, which he has not seen .
 It appears to be that Ambassador Sondland was sharing his concerns with Ambassador Volker . It appears that he was sharing concerns with the ambassador and ambassador .
Volker was communicating to you about various investigations that would occur in the Ukraine, whether it relates to Burisma 2016, is it possible . Volker was talking about various probes that would happen in the country .
 Ukrainians should investigate fellow Ukrainians, says Burisma . The way he communicated it was that if there were Ukrainians engaged in misdeeds, corruption, then you know, you know .
 That used to stand 2 for Yalta European Strategy back when Crimea and YaltA were 3 under Ukrainian control . That was the same time when Crimea was 3 under Ukraine control .
 Charge Taylor indicated that 7 Ambassador Sondland was pushing a line that included having 8 President Zelenskyy give an interview potentially with CNN 9 during the YES Conference .
 Charge Taylor asserted to me 19 that both Tim Morrison and Gordon Sondland specifically said 20 that they did not believe that the two issues were linked . However, Charge Taylor said that both Morrison and Sondlands specifically said that they didn't believe that they were linked.
 "I recall him saying to me, again, orally 25 reading out of a conversation of which I was not a part," he says . That's what he says to him again, and he says he was not part of the conversation .
 Bill Taylor then followed up with a video 9 conference . He elaborated on 10 conversations with both senior director Morrison and Ambassador Sondland .
 The next communication or data point that I can 19 recall was a WhatsApp message that Charge Taylor sent me on 20 September 7, which would have been, I think, the Saturday 21 after Labor Day . The next communications or data points that I could recall were a text message that Taylor sent
 President Poroshenko spent several years trying to get a visit to the White House . The visit was more happenstance, the visit he made in June 2017 .
 A leader of a country 5 wants to visit Washington and have an Oval Office visit 6 doesn't mean it happens, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There was another track of what we were engaging 9 Ukraine formally through normal channels . There was also another track.
 U.S. Ambassador 13 Volker says his concerns grew after a series of tweets by private citizens . He says the tweets were not just what he read on 11 tweets, but a greater understanding of 12 actions taken by officials .
 President Zelenskyy was elected on June 21 . He was elected in the spring .
 I just want to be clear that when you say politically motivated investigation -A that is what I'm referring to, yeah. That is what he's referring to. I just wants to beclear that when he says it's politically motivated, yeah, yeah .
 Ambassador Volker released tweets that he released, no, not until I had read those . I was not aware of the effort to negotiate the text of the statement that came out as a result of Ambassador Volkers' testimony .
Bill Taylor's account of the engagements with Andriy Yermak with Kurt Volker was incorrect, he says . The investigations that were being suggested were those that Rudy Giuliani had been tweeting about, meaning Biden, Burisma, and 2016 .
 The President mentioned the Biden investigation that the President mentioned, as well as the CrowdStrike 2016 investigation .
Bill Taylor: "We shouldn't be doing that as a matter of United States policy" Taylor says he told Taylor, "That's wrong, and I told Bill Taylor, that's wrong"
 Q had any conversations with -well-A about this issue, I mean, we had a -Q Yes. Q Had you had any conversation with - well-A About this issue? Q Had any conversations? I mean.
 A -regularly scheduled weekly teleconference that involved teams, and if there were anything sensitive, we could finish up in a one-to-one .
 If there were needs, just like with any ambassador, they could call me up for an unscheduled conversation . We also had a relationship that if there were need, they would call me.
 A I do not recall us having a conversation specifically, you know, if you will, out of the regular schedule until Friday, August 16 . I don't recall us talking specifically, but if you'll, you will.
 The author was scheduled to get on a plane, leave her house at about 6:00m. to go to the airport, fly out to California to go hiking in Yosemite with her family .
 A special U.S. 13 Government employee could align to that 14 view . It became real for me and a matter of 15 concern .
 A new special assistant to Special Representative Volker, Catherine Croft, came to her office . She was trying to find out some information on behalf of Kurt Volker .
 Ukraine has a history of violence and violence in Ukraine . Ukraine has been involved in Ukraine's conflict with Ukraine in the past .
 I told her, well, Catherine, there are two ways of looking at that question . And I said, Well, there is two ways to look at thatquestion .
Ukrainians have the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty, and we have the legal attaches at the embassy . A law enforcement investigation should engage the Ukrainians, the embassy says .
 The other option, which I -from the context of what has been spoken about in the press, is the political option, he says .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin says he has never gone to the Ukrainians to investigate or prosecute individuals for political reasons . He says he hopes we haven't, and we shouldn't, because that goes against everything we are trying to promote in post Soviet states for the last 28 years .
You knew everything that you knew, and you certainty have indicated today that you were aware of the public narratives - a Yeah. But given everything that he knew, you sure have indicated that you weren't aware of what you knew .
 Giuliani: I may have put in my notes just in parentheses, Giuliani, and that was the way I interpreted what he said . A I had presumed at the time, and I might have put it in his notes, Giuliani.
 He initiated the conversation, but it was very clear he was uncomfortable sharing this limited summary . He was not going into the detail of the call itself, including not going in the detail .
 A Kurt told me he was going to meet, and so, I had every reason to believe that he then followed up on what he said he was to do . He then told me that he would meet and then follow up on his promise .
 The Mayor did not share with me the exact contents of his discussions with the Mayor, no. But he did not tell me the details of his talks with him .
 The conversation had a personal component that had 3 nothing to do with work . But, again, it was a conversation that had no personal component, and then part of the conversation 4 had toDo with work.
 A message to the embassy 10 suggests that they test the line to make sure the call went 11 through . It's not the first time the call has gone through .
 At that point, I don't think he said that President 23 Trump discussed. Is that -22 A At that time, I didn't think that he said he discussed .
 At this point 24 the conversation went into the most extreme narratives. What I recall is that he said at this time 24 the conversations went into a most extreme narrative .
 Ambassador Sondland had a direct connection with Chief of Staff Mulvaney, he says . The May 23 readout was put on the President's schedule .
 It was not, to the best of my knowledge, done through the national security staff and Ambassador Bolton, says Ambassador Bolton . "It was not to thebest of his knowledge," Bolton says .
 A conversation was a conversation, but it was also not entirely about work . It was also about work, but I will say that it was not all about work.
 His wife died of cancer, and he is a Foreign Service officer and studied in St. Louis . We have a mutual friend whose wife died from cancer .
 Q And the part that was about Ukraine, was there anything more that -257 1 call or a meeting, discussion, discussion. Q and a meeting. Q And a call or meeting was more than a meeting .
I only had responsibilities for six 4 countries. But, again, I don't remember 2 the content, and also keep in mind that we had 3 responsibilities .
11 she expressed concern with Gordon Sondland's approach . I believe in that conversation, 11 she expressed concerns with Sondlands' approach .
 A Well sends the right signal without the details of the -Q Without the details . A Well, sending the right message without the information, is a good way to send a message .
 The President was listening to the 5 Giuliani, Orban, Putin contingent -6 A. I don't know .
 Hill, in assessing the change from 9 late April to late May, had also the instructions 10 coming out of that meeting leading to the signing of the 11 letter on May 29 and the efforts to help Ukraine particularly 12 in the energy sector .
 Hill told us that she departed on July 19, and 14 that prior to leaving, she had a conversation with you . Hill said that she left July 19 and 14 before leaving .
 As I was 18 looking through my notes to find records to provide to the 19 State Department to be responsive to the subpoena, I found 20 notes that I took when I talked to her .
When I was 21 going through my notes I did not find notes of our 22 conversation in July . When I was 20, I didn't find any notes of the 22 conversation .
 President Trump and former Mayor Giuliani's communications with President Trump shaped the President's view of Ukraine and Zelenskyy . President Trump's first call on April 21 to his negative assessment of Ukraine.
 Sondland, Perry, Volker, were very positive about President Zelenskyy, they say .
 A We were cautiously optimistic that this was an opportunity to push forward the reform that Ukraine needs to succeed in resisting Russian aggression . The justice system will treat American investors and Ukrainian citizens equally before the law .
 The message from Orban, Putin, and Giuliani was different than the State Department was relaying. Q But the message was different from the message that the State Dept. had relaying .
 President 15 Trump had a meeting with Viktor Orban, the leader of Hungary, as well as a call with Russian President 17 Putin in early May . The meeting was in the wake of meetings that Trump had with Hungary's leader ViktorOrban .
 U.S. policy is where United States policy is headed, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We are in your exploration of a timeline, not yet to the point where that became apparent"
 A Well, I think in retrospect, from the release of the WhatsApp messages, it started earlier than I was aware . A well, he thinks in retrospect. A Well.
 The middle of August, specifically August 15 and 16, was when I became aware that this was actively in play. A would say that that was when he became aware of this .
 The Ukrainians were Oleksandr Danylyuk and Andriy Yermak, close assistant and associate to President Zelenskyy, as well as the Americans .
 Secretary Perry convenes a meeting with a number of State Department officials .
 Gordon Sondland gave a public interview that the three amigos were now in charge of Ukraine . He said that by that he meant Perry, Sondlands, and Volker .
 I heard Volker say that to President Zelenskyy in Toronto, but I was in that meeting . Volker was in the meeting .
 Volker just stated that coming out of the meeting with President Trump at the Oval Office, that those were the three officials that would be taking the lead on our policy towards Ukraine .
 Every Monday there is a generally scheduled secure video conference . There's a schedule of -every Monday there's a generally set-up video conference.
 Usually it's with office director, deputy director from his side, and members of the country team on his side . Usually it is with office directors, deputy directors from my side.
Q well, let me rephrase the question. That was the schedule that dated back -Q Well .
 The message was relayed from Acting Secretary Reeker's supervisor, Under Hale .
 Assistant Secretary Reeker was told to keep her head down and a lower profile in Ukraine .
 A Well, I oversee policy for six countries, and this was a day or two before I was going on leave to go visit . I'm going to go hiking in Maine .
 "I said, Fine, you're not going to hear me talk about any country for the next week and a half," he said . "So I said, so I said. And so he said, fine, you'll not see me talk to any country"
 I did cancel some public appearances on Ukraine in June, sort of think tank sessions around Washington . And I did canceled some public appearance on Ukraine .
 He met with other Ukrainians who were there . He went to the leaders meeting, and met with others .
 At the time, he was on a multi-country swing that included Moldova, Moldova and Ukraine .
 The principals for that meeting were Ambassador Bolton and Oleksandr Danylyuk . The National Security and Defense Council in Ukraine doesn't have an analogous role to our National Security Council .
 Oleksandr Danylyuk is a Ukrainian official well-known to many of us who have worked on Ukraine . He is known for his work in Ukraine and for his role in Ukraine .
 At some point in July, at some point, the State Department exchanged with the U.S. State Department .
 A We arrived, to the best of my recollection, on the 1st and departed late afternoon of the 3rd . We arrived on the 2nd day of the trip .
 I do not recall us having working meals together, but it was a hectic trip, not trip, but set of meetings . I don't recall us working together.
 There were a lot of Ukrainians there, and I had lots of sidebar meetings with attendees at the conference . The conference was held in Ukraine .
 At the time, I was interested to see where this thought pattern would go . A at the time. A at a time, he was interested.
 I do not recall whether the follow-on conversation I had with Kurt was in Toronto, or whether it was subsequently at the State Department . I don't recall whether this was in Canada or in the United States .
 The former mayor said it was clear that the former mayor had influence on the President in terms of the way the President thought of Ukraine, he said .
 The mayor tried to engage anyone working on the issues with the mayor . It was self-evident to anyone who was working on issues, he said .
 Former Mayor Giuliani has a track record of asking for a visa for a corrupt former prosecutor . Giuliani is a former mayor of New York .
 The new President needs to investigate Biden and the 2016 campaign, Masha says .
 Kurt was sending a signal of a desire to have Zelenskyy be cooperative, but he did not know the details of what the ask was on that date .
 He explained -he was relatively transparent beforehand . But he explained - he was, he would say, relatively transparent before .
 President Zelenskyy was trying to get through what seemed to be a hiccup in the communications. He wanted to get President Trump and President Trump together, counting on his personal skills to build rapport and carry the relationship forward .
 A meeting was held on Monday night in New York City, New York . The meeting took place in the early hours of Monday morning .
 If you're not there, you miss the 22 sidebar conversations that can take place . So sometimes I can get readouts 21 officially of meetings, but I can't get 21 .
 There was not a discussion in the full format of everyone on both sides of the table . There was no discussion of everyone's views on the table.
 Ambassador Volker told me that he would need to have a private meeting separately with the President . However, prior to the meeting, Volker said he would pull him aside .
 Zelenskyy explained to me that the purpose of that private conversation was to underscore the importance of the messaging to President Trump about his willingness to be cooperative .
 As the meeting broke up, he announced that he needed to have a private meeting . And that happened - as the meeting ended, he said he needed the meeting .
Ukraine's chief of staff, Bohdan, pulled Zelenskyy and translator from table . He went around to the Ukrainian side of the table.
 I was standing about 10 feet of the way, introducing myself to Andriy Yermak and talking to him . He was standing 10 feet away from him .
Volker had several minutes with Zelenskyy, his chief of staff and interpreter . So that was -Volker's chief of Staff and interpreter.
 I am juggling responsibilities for 3 these six countries and traveling to all six countries . And so I am juggled responsibilities for three these six nations and traveling.
 4 we are focusing on one of six countries today for which I 5 have responsibility . So 4 we will focus on a country for which we are responsible for . 4 we're focusing on a nation that has responsibility for one of the six countries .
 The author's life is focused on Ukraine, no. 6 second of her life .
 The members are 12 going to have to go vote in about 20 minutes, I think they will go to vote in 20 minutes . The members of the 12 will have to vote on the issue .
 Mr Kent, thank for your patience and 21 diligence today, we are nearing the end. Mr Kent. Thank for his patience and21 diligence .
 Traditionally, foreign assistance was 5 appropriated under what's known as foreign military financing 6 in the State Department budget .
Several years ago, Congress 7 started appropriating monies in the Defense budget . The Defense budget is the largest in the military budget .
 The Ukraine Security Initiative is made 9 available in the Defense budget . It is made up of 8 monies that are made available to the military .
 10 was started maybe 3 years ago and has grown in scope. And that's something that is something that started maybe three years ago . And that is what is now 10 years old .
 The direction in how we spend that money is usually determined in a joint military 25 commission between EUC0M and the Ukrainian general staff administrative heads .
 The authorizers in Congress have put conditionality for the last several years on the second half . The authorizer in Congress has been in charge for several years .
 This past year, $250 million, there was a conditionality on the second $125 million . So, for instance, this year, this past year was $250million .
 In a previous year, I don't know if it was the previous year or the first year 3 years ago . The appropriators did not appropriate as much money as the authorizers authorized .
 Secretary of Defense Laura Cooper plays a principal role in Congress, she says . Cooper: "My counterpart, Laura Cooper, plays a major role in that"
 On the front end, 7 discussed what might be appropriate conditions, there is a 8 discussion, but ultimately that is a process, and the 9 specific conditions, and whether they have been met, is determined by the Office of Secretary of Defense .
 The FMF is 16 also cut over to the U.S. military, specifically, the DSCA is 17 the executive military agent .
We don't spend and implement 18 the programming the way we would, say, for law 19 enforcement programming . We don't spent and implement the way that we would. For law 19 law enforcement programming, we would have to implement 18 .
 In the end, it's 21 executed by U.S. military components . It's a monies where we have 20 greater policy role upfront and voice, but in the end. It, again, is monies.
 I was at the State Department in a security video conference, I did not recognize the face . I was in the video conference for a security conference .
 The individual representing 0MB at the time was not normally the person who did. And I believe the individual represented 0MB was not normal .
 The individual said that he 14 apologized, that he normally did not deal with these issues, 15 but this was the message he was asked to convey and he 16 conveyed it . And the individual said he 14 apologizes, and that he usually did notdeal with these problems
 Tyler Brace is a former staffer for Senator Portman . He understands budgetary processes in great detail . Brace also worked for Portman's Senate office .
 A we discussed what the significance of that was because none of us could understand why . A We discussed what it was because we couldn't understand why it was so important .
 Since there was unanimity that this was in our national interest, it just surprised all of us . Since there were unanimity, we were surprised by this .
 A Well, eventually, the hold was released on September 11th . The funds were then apportioned by 0MB to the extent that it was possible to spend them by the end of the fiscal year, yes .
 Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, and Ambassador Bolton would meet to discuss the issue and then take it to President .
 I photocopied quite a lot of notes, but certainly the statement of conclusions should be included, although now I'm thinking . I'm not sure if sub-PCCs have statement of conclusion .
 To the extent I took notes on that meeting, I would have included them, yes, yes . But to the extent he took notes, he said, "Yes"
 DOD 10 comptroller determined that they needed to move forward 11 by August 6th in order to spend the money and meet Congress' 12 intent . We were ending 8 the end of the fiscal year.
 Normally, conversations with 0MB 17 prior to notification to Congress is a courtesy, not 18 something required under law . Normally, the conversations with0MB 17 before notification are a courtesy .
 The position 19 was expressed by Laura Cooper, to the best of her 20 recollection . DOD counsel had determined that they would 21 move forward by August 6th regardless, Cooper says .
 The State Department also has to review its legal requirements and be prepared to have that 24 briefed at the next meeting, which he set 3 days later .
 A Again, this is about an account that was not appropriated to my department nor executed in my department . So I would defer to my colleague, Laura Cooper, who is in her department .
 DSCA says they may not be able to execute all of the requirements by the end of the fiscal year . The agency says it will not execute all the requirements .
 0MB's position was what it had been on the 18th, that they were under the direction of their boss to put all security assistance to Ukraine .
 A PCC would be a matter of record because that was a PCC, and there’s a statement of conclusions . A statement of conclusion would be an issue of record, according to the report .
 In the statement of conclusions, on the first page, there's a listing of all participants in the meeting . On the second page, all participants are listed .
 Mr Mulvaney's attempt to push a rescission at the end of the last fiscal year. A I had read about him.
Secretary Pompeo protested vigorously, and the effort to have a rescission was then suspended . "My understanding was that Secretary Pompeo protest vigorously," she says .
 Ukraine assistance was lifted in August, but it was also lifted, and that left us with just the hold on Ukraine assistance . The same thing happened this year, but this overall greater effort to have a rescission held up the process was lifted .
 The document call did not change the ultimate situation. That would also be documented in the document call .
 Secretary of State Pompeo and Secretary of Defense would both be in Washington so they could have a small group meeting to discuss the same issue and then take it to the President .
 The bottom line was the hold, and we needed a principal small group to carry the process forward . The hold remained, and the hold remained .
 There was unanimous support to release the funds to lift the hold on the July 26th meeting . But it's your understanding that, again, there were unanimous support for releasing the funds .
 Senior Director Morrison was attempting to schedule a principal small group meeting . Morrison says he didn't say that, but it may have been one of the dates .
 A to the best of my knowledge, because of the travel schedules of the two Secretaries, no. A To thebest of his knowledge, he says . A To The best of his know.
 Many Senators, particularly from the Republican side, had traveled to Ukraine from the relevant committees, he says .
 Senator Inhofe had about a 20-minute conversation with Senator inhofe . I'm aware that -I saw an email that Senator In Hofe had had about an email .
 Oklahoma National Guard was doing training at the main training base in Ukraine . He had visited twice when he was in Ukraine because of the training .
 Senate Majority Leader McConnell also called his Senate Majority leader McConnell. And his understanding is that he also called the Senate MajorityLeader McConnell .
 We wanted to get the hold lifted so that we could get the money apportioned by 0MB and then obligated . We wanted the hold on the money to be lifted .
 The 5 money could be obligated before the end of the fiscal year. So we were 4 preparing for a decision so that we could ensure that the 5 money can be obligated .
Both Morrison and Sondland insisted that there was not a direct link . Both of them insisted there was no direct link.
 Charge Taylor, with whom he had a conversation on the 7th 21 of September, had a 22 conversation with Ambassador Sondland . Taylor says the 23 two were not directly linked .
Just 12 on one in a secure communication, we ask all of our staff to leave . It is just 12 one on one. And that part of the 11 conversation we asked all of us to leave.
 Rudy Giuliani had another 18 conversation with the President, as well as what Sondland 19 relayed Rudy to be his interaction . The President had another conversation with Rudy Giuliani .
 A I believe I shared my concerns with my colleagues in the European front office . I believe my concerns were shared by my colleagues .
For large stretches of time earlier in 2019 it was our senior Bureau official and also the deputy assistant secretary . That includes relations with Ambassador Sondland and the mission he leads in Brussels .
 Ambassador Sondland was engaged in the types of conversations that he had been engaged in on Ukraine even though that was not part of his portfolio as our ambassador to the European Union .
 Their offices are between 5 and 10 feet away from my office and so I -this was a direct conversation in their office .
 The Pentagon, Office of Secretary of Defense, did a review 17 and responded that they felt that the conditions and concerns 18 that we had had been met. At least in 15 relation to the USAI, there were some concerns expressed .
 A hold was lifted on September 11th and we moved forward with notifying Congress and ensuring the funds were obligated before the end of the fiscal year . A hold on the funds was lifted.
We were not asked and we proceeded with what we needed to do in order to obligate the funds as to meet the congressional intent in appropriating them . We were not told what we need to do and we went through with the funds .
I believe the start of USAI was while I was there. A They were receiving FMF, yes, and I believe that they were getting FMF . I believe they were receivingFMF .
 I don't recall specifically which fiscal year USAI funds started to be appropriated . I do not recall specifically how the funds began to be used .
 The training that we do, which is probably the most valuable in training Ukrainians to fight, has been critical to the success of the Ukrainian armed forces in defending their country .
At the same time I would say that we probably derive more benefit from the relationship than the Ukrainians do. At same time, we probably derived more benefit than the Ukrainian do.
 "That would be something to discuss in a classified manner, particularly with my colleagues from the defense and intel agencies," he says . A classified manner would be a topic of discussion .
 By the time I started engaging Ukrainians in person, it was a good news story. So by the time we started talking to Ukrainians, it had been a good story .
 A I was prepared for the possibility that it would not be lifted and therefore the conversations would be very difficult . I would not by able to provide an adequate understanding or answer. A. was prepared to be prepared for a possibility.
 The situation was resolved essentially as I arrived in Ukraine. A Fortunately, I didn't have to worry about that hypothetical .
 Tim Morrison wanted to have Pompeo and Esper in the same place at the same time . A We -it was very clear that this issue was only going to be resolved.
 It didn't matter what the deputy assistant secretary or an assistant secretary thought, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: It's not what a deputy secretary or a under secretary thought .
 A To the best of his knowledge, there was never a principal small group meeting on this issue. A To The best of my knowledge, he says .
 It was clear starting, if not from July 18th, that this was an issue that had to be resolved in Washington . It was a tough nut for everyone to crack without a lot of clarity, says John Sutter .
 A once we cleared the deputy small group meeting, which I believe was July 26th, it was clear it had to be resolved at a principals level and above .
 A Well, the principal small group, could take the issue to the President . Members of the Cabinet could then take it to the president .
 In the sort of climbing the ladder we started with a sub-PCC on the 18th. So in the kind of climb the ladder, we start with a Sub-P CC on the18th .
 There was an attempt to schedule but lack of principals subsequent. And there was a lack of principal.
 Tim Morrison was driving the interagency policy review process in the way it was intended . Morrison was responsible for the review process, he said .
 It strikes me that the association was a meeting with the White House, not related to the security assistance .
 Some people may have different opinions. But again, that's just my personal opinion, other people may be different .
 A WhatsApp exchange where he expressed concerns that it might be linked may have been linked . I think there is the WhatsApp exchange that he expressed concern .
 Ambassador 16 Sondland said there was no quid pro quo on security 17 assistance . But the same person, Ambassador 16Sondland, said there had been no quids pro quo .
 I believe I did 24 write that note up and share it with the records . But I believe he did 24 writing up and sharing it with records .
 The author had two conversations with 5 two individuals on the 15th and 16th of August . The two conversations took place between August 15 and 16 .
 I had subsequent 7 conversations with Ambassador -Charge Taylor on the 9th of 8 September, another note to the file .
Travel to 9 Ukraine, travel to Ukraine, return to the file, return, write a brief. And then travel to the Ukraine, talk about the country's history .
 Acting 23 Assistant Secretary Reeker's office is across the hall . And so two of them, 22 again, are collocated with mine .
 Q You testified earlier this afternoon about a conversation with Charge Taylor about Zelenskyy making some sort of TV interview or address .
 Ambassador Sondland had told Charge Taylor that he conveyed to me, yes . A few days later, he told him what he had told him, yes.
 The ambassador's conversation with Ambassador Sondland occurred on the 8th of September, he says . "I believe that's what I conveyed to you," he says.
11 A That was just Ambassador Taylor and me . Can you describe -who else was at that -11 A that was just ambassador Taylor and I .
 He went 12 out for a run, and I went down to breakfast, and we met and 13 talked 7:30 in the morning more or less . He went out to run, then he went out for breakfast, then went back to his office .
 Kurt said he felt that having three Americans on one Ukraine was too much . Kurt said if there were a second Ukrainian I could come, he could come .
 I decided not to push it since we were involved in another event, as well as anticipating that there was going to be an awkward conversation, which there was . I decided to not push it because of the other event .
 Charge Taylor provided the details of that conversation over breakfast over breakfast .
 The main part of the conversation was about negotiations with the Russians, and I won't mention that and that's not germane .
 Special Representative Volker made the point that the Ukrainians had opened their authorities under Zelenskyy . He didn't think that was appropriate .
 Kurt made a suggestion that Charge Taylor felt inappropriate he weighed in with his own personal opinion . Kurt said that that was not appropriate .
 Q And Volker was directly linking the White House meeting and the investigations that were being pushed by the President . Q and Volker said the President was pushing the investigation into the President.
 Charge Volker was referring to prior conversations that he had with Yermak and prior advice, meaning you should deliver the messages as we've discussed before .
 The hoped-for interview with CNN with Zelenskyy did not happen during the conference . The hoped for interview did not take place during the event .
 Fareed Zakaria was one of the hosts, but there was no special interview . Zakaria is a former host of the BBC World Cup .
Under Secretary Hale was in Belarus for 2 days, including a three-quarter day visit .
 The U.S. has not had an ambassador to Belarus since 2008 . It is the first time it has been returned to Belarus in a decade .
 It was very much focused on the intense engagement of many foreign leaders who were there at that time . It was also focused on a very intense engagement.
 Ambassador Volker and Ambassador Sondland were requesting of the Ukrainians, yes. That was my understanding of what ambassador Volker was requesting of Ukrainians .
 The only meeting that came up obliquely was with the foreign minister, Vadym Prystaiko .
 There were 12 conflicting messages, including what Ambassador Volker 11 said and what Charge Taylor said . There were two messages, and there were 12 messages .
 Ambassador Volker suggested that Andriy Yermak 16 should ensure that the agreed-upon messaging was delivered by 17 President Zelenskyy .
Kurt 9 advised Yermak that was not a wise way forward for the 10 country . Kurt 9 also advised that the country was not the best way forward .
 Vice President Biden was doing very fundamentally different than any advocacy for a politically oriented investigation . Biden's actions were very different than that of the vice president .
 The request for the dismissal of Shokin was related to his actions in the diamond prosecutors case . The request was related directly to him, according to the request . Shokin is accused of undermining our assistance to Ukraine .
 The distinction is between conditionality and conditionality to advance the national interest . The distinction between the two is between the personal interest and national interest.
 Mr Kent. Kent has been in charge of the NHS for more than 20 years . Mr Kent has worked with the NHS since 2001 .
 The President had phone conversations with Viktor Orban, the Prime Minister of Hungary, and Putin, according to Fiona Hill . Hill said she told you that they had both talked down Ukraine to the President .
 Fiona gave me a readout of both conversations at the same time . Well, to the best of his recollection, Fiona gave him a read out of both .
 It was a meeting at the White House, so it was an in-person meeting on May 13th .
 The President's engagement of Orban included a 1-hour one-on-one, and then subsequently the Hungarian foreign minister, Szijjarto, and Ambassador Bolton .
 He denies the existence of Ukraine as a nation and a country, as he told President Bush in Bucharest in 2008 .
 The Russian leader's agenda is to create a greater Russia and ensure that Ukraine does not survive independently .
 Viktor Orban's beef with Ukraine is derived in part to his vision, in his opinion, of a greater Hungary . Orban has a vision of a larger Hungary, says Orban. Orban says he wants to be a better person .
 There are about 130,000 ethic Hungarians who live in the transCarpathian province of Ukraine . And there are about130,000 Hungarians in the region .
 Next year is the 100th anniversary of the Treaty of Trianon, post-World War I, which resulted in more ethnic Hungarians living outside Hungary than inside . The issue of greater Hungary is at the top of Orban's agenda .
 He has blocked all meetings in NATO with Ukraine at the ministerial level or above because of this particular issue . And so he has picked this specific issue, for instance, he has blocked the meetings .
 His animus towards Ukraine is well-known, documented, and has lasted 2 years . So his animus against Ukraine has lasted now 2 years.
 You were responsible for anticorruption efforts in EUR for some time . You were also responsible for anti-government efforts in the EU .
 U.S. President Barack Obama says Ukraine is a fundamental issue for the United States in Ukraine . Obama: "I really believe this is an issue"
 The corruption is the obstacle to the transformation to this country that we seek, he says . The corruption in the country is the biggest obstacle to transformation, he adds .
 The Ukrainian government has been accused of corruption in Ukraine . President Vladimir Putin says he is prepared to use some leverage to do something about corruption . He says he may even hold up a meeting with the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine and other countries that have never prosecuted any large-scale crook. I think for Ukraine as well as other countries, putting one of the big fish in jail would be a great start .
 I think demonstrating that there's integrity in the prosecutor general's office is absolutely critical, particularly for post-Soviet countries . I think there's Integrity in the Prosecutor General's Office is absolutelycritical, particularly in post- Soviet countries .
 The two institutions in many of 4 countries are fundamentally still not reformed 28 years 5 years later . Many of the four countries in the U.S. are fundamentally not reformed .
 What I referred to is strategic and institutional, and what they were working on was tactical . What they were trying to do was tactical. What they referred to was strategic, institutional and institutional .
 I still believe they count on the U.S. as their best hope to get through very difficult times, yes . The United States are the best hope for the United States, I said .
 Chairman Engel has two quick questions for him before he goes to the Senate .
 A I am familiar with the name only recently and only based on what I've read. A I'm familiar with it only recently. A he is not familiar with what he's read .
 Q and I think you said that you may have discussed some aspects of it and that you don't recall what her response was . Q And I think she said that she may have talked about some parts of it .
 If there is other information that people want to provide context to try to trigger additional information, I'm open to that. And if there's other information, it could be used to help trigger additional info, I've been told .
Q: You may have reviewed them prior to coming here today to testify . Q: It appears to us at least as if, A, you took a lot of notes about these events, and, B, you may have review them . B: "B,
 In order for the Department to respond to the subpoena for document collections, I went through my notebooks to find any notes from meetings that would be responsive to those -that document request .
 A I did not and would not because that would have happened informally, not in the office . I would not have done it because it would have occurred informally. A I didn't, but would not, because it wouldn't happen informally .
 If she has a different recollection as to what you guys discussed, do you think that that's possible? That's possible. Q So if she has an different recollection of what you talked about, do we think that?
 She could have been much more specific about a conversation we had and the issues we've been discussing . She could be much more Specific about a discussion we had with her .
 Clark Kent was here. Well, I guess in closing I want you to know I stumbled in here before they told me Clark Kent had been here .
 You've done what you've done through the years. And thank you for what you're doing now, but for what they've done in the years .
 It's so critical that we learn the facts and your detailed, very careful testimony today, it's just so important for our country, so important. It's really so critical, we learned the facts, your detailed testimony today . It's very important to learn the details
 It should not be used by the administration or the Department of State to retaliate against you or anybody else . It should also not be use by the Administration or the State Department to retaliate.
 I have been very much chagrined over the way employees at the Department of State have been treated for the past couple of years . I have also been chagRined over how the department has been treated.
 It takes people like you who have not only had commendable records through the years, but who have the guts to come in and speak from the heart .
 "What you're doing, sir, is a tremendous accomplishment and tremendously important for the State Department and for the country as a whole"
 Chairman Schiff explained on the record why any retaliation against you or anybody else would be unlawful and just wrong . I know that Chairman Schiff already explained that he already explained on a record earlier today why such a retaliation would be illegal .
 I hope it continues without harassment or undue interference from the Department you have honorably served . Your service to our country for nearly three decades is commendable and I hope you continue without harassment .
 The House Foreign Affairs Committee chairman says he will hold the Department accountable to treat employees properly and with the respect you deserve .
 I believe that's it from the majority, we used 20 minutes in this record. I believe the majority of the time was used in the 20-minute period .
 The House has not received an answer as to 16 what House rule governs any of this process . We still have not received a answer from the House .
 President Trump and President 5 Zelenskyy were on the July 25th call between Trump and Zelensyy . The president and president were not on 6 that call .
 He could not give me the 21 normal readout of the full content that he normally did . It's 19 just that he said that the information obviously was of very 20 sensitive nature .
On this particular occasion I grabbed a piece of paper and started writing. On this particular time I started writing on a particular occasion .
I would say the last week of July would be the best I could bound it. So I would say it would be best I can bound it, he says .
 I cannot recall the exact content, particularly since I didn't get as much content as I just got a tonal poem . The poem was written by John Sutter .
 The State Department is a natural person for him to give a readout at the Department of State Department .
 His concern was that he did not feel at liberty to share all the substantive details of the call . What was different was that -his concern that he didn't feel at liberties to share the call.
 The readout, that he was giving me a readout was the normal procedure . But the readout is normal procedure, he says .
 He made clear his extreme discomfort that there was discussions in the call that were very sensitive . He said he would not be giving a full readout .
 The author says his discomfort in sharing what he shared without -with his disclaimer right up front that he was not going to give me the full normal readout . He says he was uncomfortable in sharing without the disclaimer .
 Ukraine has been accused of corruption in recent years . Ukraine has not been told not to prosecute a corrupt individual or person believed to have engaged in corruption .
 The National Agency to Prevent Corruption was set up to review the asset declarations of the initially top 1,000 Ukrainian officials . The asset declarations expanded to even more Ukrainian officials.
 reformist head of customs paid herself an $18 bonus on Women's Day when all the women in her office got it .
Serhiy Leschenko, a member of parliament and former investigative journalist, purchased an apartment . He also had an investigation into the purchase of an apartment he bought .
 The two investigations were the only two investigations that they did . They were both reformers who were also critics of people who were not engaged in reform .
 There were no investigations of people whose reputations were that they had engaged in corruption for years . And there were dozens of billionaire oligarchs and other individuals, and there were none .
 The National Agency to Prevent Corruption went after based on asset declarations of high ranking officials and members of pariiament . As far as I recall, those are only two individuals or officials of Ukraine that the agency went after .
 A new institution has been set up to help contain corruption based on asset declarations . The new institution was set up by a new institution that helped stand up to contain corruption .
Two reformists who were noted critics of the lack of reform in certain parts of the Ukrainian Government.
 I believe the NAPC, as it was known, was stood up in 2015, and so this would have been 2015, 2016 . I believe it was standing up in 2016, and that it would have happened in 2015. I believe this would be 2016, so
You were answering questions based off of information from others related to aid from the U.S. to Ukraine and the allegation of a quid pro quo .
Q: I just wanted to touch upon your -some of the documents that you have been discussing today . Q: I want to see some of the papers that you've been discussing .
Lieutenant Colonel Vindman and Tim Morrison had other conversations with the two men . The two men also had conversations with Lieutenant Colonel VINDman .
 I cannot imagine -or I can not recall any time where I was either in the presence of or heard a reference to Kash Patel . I do not -I cannot remember - or I can't remember any time when I was at the time of the incident .