 Ukraine's Interfax News Agency quoted Nuland's statement on May 15th without any link to its U.S. source .
 Nuland had actually been instructed by the White House to be quoted there as issuing this reversal of Kerry’s statement .
 Assistant Secretary Nuland's visit to Kyiv reaffirm U.S. support for Ukraine’s government, sovereignty, and territorial integrity .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin: "We continue to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people of Ukraine" Putin: We are committed to a single Ukrainian nation, including Crimea and all the other regions of Ukraine .
 I would just want to go back to what I said at the top, and just to review what has happened this week . I would — if I could take the opportunity, I would also want to take the chance, he says. I would be happy to go
 Secretary Kerry was in Sochi at the start of the week, where the Secretary was clear with Russia . He was clear about Ukraine and the consequences for failing to uphold the Minsk commitments .
President Poroshenko called President Poroshenko to update him and to reaffirm our support for Ukraine . Right after that discussion, he called the President to update his country's president .
 He went from there immediately to the meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Antalya, where he briefed them . He also underscored the United States’ commitment when he met with Foreign Minister Klimkin .
 Assistant Secretary Nuland is in Kyiv right now, and the message of all of these engagements is that we stand for the implementation of Minsk .
 We stand in support of the Ukrainian Government, President Poroshenko, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk, and the Ukrainian people, says the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine's President Poroshenko said on June 5th that Ukraine will retake both Crimea and Donbass . This likewise explains the reason why Ukraine’s president Poroshenko, as I reported on June 7th, said again, that Ukraine's president will retake Crimea and donbass .
 The people who say that Obama doesn’t have a plan are simply ignoring it, says CNN’s Tom Charity .