 The nephew of a key player in Russian state propaganda has been convicted in Germany for state security offences relating to eastern Ukraine . He was convicted three years after his uncle unwittingly boasted about his participation in the conflict .
 An officer of Russia's Black Sea fleet and his partner have been imprisoned on charges of spying for Ukraine . Russia's Federal Security Service said on February 28 .
 Dmitry Kiselyov's nephew sentenced to two years and three months in German prison . He is accused of planning to take part in military activities alongside Russia-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine .
None of this trio inspires confidence that they would lose habits of overt and veiled government by oligarchy .
 This graft scandal may be too much even for Ukraine, says OlehHladkovsky .
 Volker claims 24 sailors captured by Russia need to be returned to Ukraine . Volker says 24 sailors capture by Russia must be returned.
 As many as 30,000 wounded in the war in eastern Ukraine since it broke out in April 2014, the U.N. says .
 Vice prime minister claims Russia blatantly blocks attempts to release Ukrainian POWs till elections .
 Maruv has been dropped in a row related to tensions between her country and Russia . She said she did not want her appearance to be "a political promotion"
 Poroshenko says threat of Russia's full-scale war against Ukraine is "quite real" He says preparations for war are under way near the border with Ukraine .
 Russian occupation forces violated ceasefire seven times in the Joint Forces Operation area in eastern Ukraine over the past day . The ceasefire was violated seven times.
 He doesn't hold rallies, instead traveling around the country selling tickets to gigs at which he parodies many of the politicians he is running against .
 Zelensky also regularly communicates with supporters through behind-the-scenes campaign videos he posts on Facebook and YouTube . He is a fresh approach in Ukraine .
 SBU suspects 7 Russian servicemen of attack on Ukrainian sailors .
 On the fifth episode of Russia Rising, we’ll explore the growing information war between Russia and the West . The fifth episode will be on the fifth of the series .
 The Kremlin often promotes a much different version of events from the one being presented by western governments .
 The President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko Russia annexed Crimea after the illegal referendum held on the peninsula in March 2014 .
 The Russian military captured all strategic military objects and buildings of the key authoritative bodies . Earlier, the Russian military capture all strategicmilitary objects.
 Russia-occupied Makiyivka shaken by explosion on Feb. 1, 2014 .
 Danske Bank, currently at the centre of a $240bn Russian money laundering scandal, laundered money for the Ukrainian arms mafia’s sanctions-busting activities in North Korea and Iran .
 Pop singer Maruv has won Ukraine’s nomination to represent the country in this year's Eurovision Song Contest . Maruv will be representing Ukraine in the Eurovision song contest .
 Lithuania will propose additional sanctions against Russia if the country continues its aggressive policy toward Ukraine, President Dalia Grybauskaite said in Poland .
 An Air Force jet piloted by an Offutt-based crew is flying the first aerial photography flight over Russia in more than a year under the Open Skies Treaty . Pentagon officials confirmed, marking a return to some limited military cooperation between the two nations .
 Russian occupation forces violated ceasefire agreements 14 times, using weapons banned under the Minsk agreements eight times, in the Joint Forces Operation area in eastern Ukraine over the past day .
 Vladimir Putin and Patriarch Kirill of Moscow and All Russia visit the Saint Panteleimon Monastery on Mount Athos, in Karyes .
0,000t of wheat are on their way to Egypt this April . 50% of this wheat will come from France, while 50% is divided equally between Russia, Ukraine and Romania .
 Russian-led forces' tank, dugout destroyed in Donbas 13:20, 22 February 2019 War 1434 . Earlier, video was released showing Ukraine army's crushing strike on enemy positions along the contact line .