 Russia has seized unilateral control of the Kerch Strait, and the West has done nothing . The West has not done anything .
 Putin is already massing forces in Ukraine, trying to subvert the Ukrainian presidential election . This may tempt Putin to seize even more Ukrainian territory .
 President Donald Trump is right to say that Putin took Crimea and the West did nothing . The U.S. President says that Putin did nothing.
 Russian Coast Guard vessels fired on Ukrainian naval ships in international waters in the Black Sea in November 2018 . Ukrainian sailors were wounded by the vessels and wounded by Russian vessels .
 Ukrainian ships had attempted to pass from Ukraine’s port at Odessa to Mariupol, on the Sea of Azov .
 Russia has now built a road and rail bridge connecting Russia with Russian-occupied Crimea . Doing so requires transiting the very narrow and shallow Kerch Strait .
Ukrainian vessels refused to recognize Russia’s assertion of unilateral control over the strait . Russian Coast Guard told Ukrainian vessels to wait outside strait. Ukrainian vessels refuse to comply with Coast Guard instructions .
 The ships proceeded anyway and were first blocked, then attacked by the Russian Coast Guard . The ships proceed anyway and are first blocked and then attacked .
 Russia violated international law, the laws of armed conflict, and laws of Armed conflict . Russia and Ukraine agreed to share sovereignty and control over the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait .
 Russia argues that it now has sole sovereignty over the strait . Most of the world disagrees with the move .
 Ukraine will not lightly abandon its right to move naval vessels through the Kerch Strait and other territorial waters around Crimea . Ukraine will be able to move its naval vessels into the waters of Crimea .
 Russia is likely to respond as aggressively as it did in November, worsening the risk of further conflict . Russia is expected to respond more aggressively than it did last year .
 Presidential elections will be held in Ukraine on March 31 . Putin is keen to see Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko weakened and ultimately defeated .
 Russia is angered by the Ukrainian Orthodox Church gaining autocephaly from the Russian Orthodox Church for the first time since 1686 . Russia is also angered by Ukraine's independence from the Orthodox Church .
 Crimea is dependent on freshwater reservoirs on Ukrainian territory, making them a dangerous temptation for Russia . Crimea is also dependent on reservoirs on Ukraine's Ukrainian territory .
 In the nearly two months since Russia attacked the Ukrainian naval vessels, there has been almost no international response . There has been nearly no response.
 Russia may believe it will face little resistance to further attacks on Ukrainian territory or territorial waters . Russia concluded in 2008 prior to attacking Georgia or in 2014 when pivoting from annexing Crimea to attacking Donbass .
Pundit steps taken now could help deter further aggression in the first place . But prudent steps could help stop further aggression, say experts .
 Such measures should cover a wide spectrum of diplomatic, economic, and preventive military steps . Such measures could cover a range of diplomatic and economic, such as economic and preventive steps .
 European and American leaders should weigh in to condemn past aggression against Ukraine . On the diplomatic side, European and U.S. leaders should warn against further such action .
 The European Union and United States should introduce sanctions tied specifically to Russia’s unilateral claim to control the Kerch Straits and access to the Sea of Azov . On the economic side, the EU and U.S. should also introduce sanctions linked to Russia's unilateral claims to
 The U.S. should also redouble efforts to persuade Germany to defer the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline project . Russia’s aggression against Ukraine continues to continue, or better yet, to cancel it altogether .
 The U.S. should conduct regular port visits to Odessa and other Ukrainian ports in the Black Sea . The United States should increase its presence in the area and conduct regular visits .
International observers should be placed on Ukrainian ships as they transit the Kerch Strait . International observers should also be on Ukrainian vessels .
 It would also be prudent to establish an international observer presence in Ukrainian territory north of Crimea, near Mykolaiv .
 The United States and European allies should accelerate and increase planned assistance to Ukraine’s armed forces . The focus is on naval, coastal defense, and air defense capabilities .
 The U.S. and allied countries should work with Turkey to reinforce freedom of navigation activities in the Black Sea .
 The military situation is stalemated, and Russia is under economic sanctions . Russia is in economic sanctions, but the situation is still unclear .
 It may think that attacks elsewhere in Ukraine will break that stalemate . It may also think attacks elsewhere will break the stalemate.
 A better course for Russia would be a graceful exit through a negotiated political resolution that respects those Russian interests that are legitimate but restores the Donbass to Ukraine’s sovereign control .
 No such negotiations are likely until after the March Ukrainian presidential election . No such talks are likely to take place until the March election .
 Putin and Poroshenko have suggested that an international peacekeeping force be deployed to the Donbass . At that point, negotiations should pick up on suggestions made by both.
 The peacekeeping force would be accompanied by an interim U.N. administrative authority tasked with preparing for elections in the Donbass . It would oversee implementation of political and economic elements of an overall settlement based on the two Minsk agreements .
 Russia would turn over security of Russian-speaking Ukrainians in the Donbass to the international community . Russia would withdraw its forces back across the Ukrainian-Russian border .
 International sanctions imposed on Russia for its actions in the Donbass would be lifted . Russia's actions would also be lifted.
 A return to such a framework would benefit the interests of everyone, including Russia itself . Russia itself.