 Ukrainian version of the book is expected in fall 2017 . One of the important dimensions of bilateral relations is the dynamics of attitudes of citizens of these countries towards one another .
 A neutral attitude is preserved at the level of public opinion in the respective countries. Clearly, one can speak about truly “healthy’s inter-state relations only when a mutually positive or, at the very least, a neutral atmosphere is preserved .
 The attitudes of Ukrainians to their northeastern neighbor and the attitudes of Russians towards Ukraine and Ukrainians have been in the center of attention of sociologists of both countries .
 The Kyiv International Institute of Sociology and the non-government research organization “Levada-Center’s monitoring of public opinion was regularly conducted in both countries . It studied the attitudes of the population of Ukraine towards Russia .
 Nearly 6% of Ukrainian citizens on average had a “bad attitude towards Russia in the period from 2008 to 2010 .
 Ukrainians undecided in their sympathies or antipathies towards Russia was wery low – on average 3–4% of the citizens polled in Ukraine .
 Russia's public opinion in Russia regarding Ukraine was not characterized by the same permanence and high level of positive attitudes . It is worth noting that in this same period the dynamics of public opinion regarding Ukraine regarding Ukraine were not characterized as the same .
 percentage of Russians positively inclined towards Ukrainians sharply fell from 55% to 34% in April 2008 . In the second half of 2009 the dynamics began sharply shifting to the opposite . In October 2010 the percentage of Russian citizens positively inclined to Ukraine reached their peak indicator – in October 2010.
 The acute negative change in public opinion in Russia regarding Ukraine in 2008–2009 could have been dictated by a number of significant international political events .
 The issue of granting Ukraine the Membership Action Plan was discussed at the NATO Summit in Bucharest . The summit was also discussed the possibility of granting the Ukraine the membership Action Plan .
 In August 2008, the Russian-Georgian war broke out, during the course of which Ukraine came to support official Tbilisi . The war was negatively perceived in Moscow by Moscow .
 The Russian side fully shut off the supply of gas to Ukraine at the turn of 2008–2009 . The third significant event was the unfolding of the so-called “gas war’s’ gas war, when the Russian side shut off supply to Ukraine .
 The indicator “good attitude’ is the total number of the polled respondents in Ukraine, which have a “very good’ and “mainly good” attitude towards Russia .
 The indicator of “good attitude’ towards Russia among Ukrainian citizens somewhat grew in 2012 . However, during the next stages of monitoring in 2012, the indicator of good attitude towards Russia somewhat grew .
 Upon the rise to power of Viktor Yanukovych the pro-Russian vector of the foreign policy of Ukraine was notably activated . Viktor Yanukovych's pro-Russia vector of foreign policy was activated .
 The Verkhovna Rada adopted the law ‘On the Principles of Domestic and Foreign Policy’ on July 1, 2010.10 . Such steps did not bring about the expected counter-concessions on the part of Moscow regarding Ukraine .
 The Russian side began to resort to such unfriendly measures as launching “product’s and “customs’ wars against Ukrainian export products.
 The monitoring of public opinion in 2013 to a certain degree demonstrates the declining trend of positive attitudes towards Russia . It does not show very sharp fluctuations in both the Ukraine-wide and regional dimensions .
 The number of Ukrainians that have a positive attitude towards Russia continues to make up the majority in each of the major macro-regions and all across Ukraine, in general .
 Volynska, Rivnenska,  Ivano-Frankivska, Ternopilska, Zakarpatska, Khmelnytska, Chernivetska oblasts . Central macroregion: Vinnytskas, Zhytomyrs
Public opinion in Ukraine was dictated by the direct intervention of the Kremlin in the political processes in Ukraine . In February 2014 this indicator had already fallen to 78%.
 Monitoring conducted by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology in April-May 2014 showed genuinely stunning changes in public opinion in Ukraine .
 The steepest erosion of a good attitude towards Russia was observed in the Western and Central regions of Ukraine . In the South and East of Ukraine, there was a decline of 21% and 15% respectively .
 The majority of citizens continued to express a positive attitude towards Russia . Even given the annexation of Crimea and the start of siege of administrative buildings by proRussian separatists .
 In September 2014, sociologists registered a further decline in the positive attitude of Ukrainian citizens towards Russia . In September 2013, Ukrainian citizens were more positive towards Russia.
Less than half of the entire population had a negative attitude towards Russia . The share of Ukrainians that have a negative attitudes towards Russia increased to 41%.17 during the May and September 2014 polls .
 In the December 2014 KIIS poll a decline in the share of Ukrainian citizens positively oriented towards Russia was fixed as well as a parallel growth in the shared share of Ukrainians negatively oriented towards the neighboring country .20.20 .
 The decline in the positive attitudes towards Russia in Ukrainian society in 2014 was clearly a logical consequence of Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 Russia's covert role in hybrid intervention could have been explained by the covert role of Russia in the hybrid intervention . Seemingly, such a paradoxical situation could have, among other things, been explained .
 In the first half of 2015 the overall declining dynamics of positive attitudes towards Russia were preserved . In the second half of the year the overall decline in attitudes to Russia was preserved .
Only in September 2015 the trend set at the start of Russian aggression against Ukraine slightly changed . In September 2015, the trend was slightly changed.
 Monitoring of public opinion in the second half of 2015 fixed a certain improvement in the attitudes towards Russia among Ukrainians – to 34% . In the regional dimension the greatest dynamics of the increase in positive attitude towards Russia in May 2016 was observed in the Western , Central and Southern regions of Ukraine .
 KIIS polls in September and December 2016 once again fixed a decrease in this indicator and its stabilization at the level of 40%.25 . But the appearance of this trend after the dynamic decline over 2014–2015 requires additional explanation and research .
Data of sociological monitoring indicates the change in attitudes towards the citizens of Russia, but in no way towards its leadership . Russian citizens are more likely to be more friendly to the Russian government .
 Public opinion in Ukraine in the context of the annexation of Crimea Transformation began immediately after the military aggression of Russia on the territory of Crimea .
Ukrainian citizens see the future of Crimea in a new context . In this context it would be expedient to also pay attention to how Ukrainian citizens see Crimea .
 The Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation and Razumkov Center conducted a nationwide polling in all regions of Ukraine . Crimea and the occupied parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts were included .
 The results of the polling demonstrate a firm conviction of the absolute majority of Ukrainian citizens in the fact Crimea should be a part of Ukraine .
 Majority of respondents in all major macro-regions of the country share this opinion . South of Ukraine is the exception of the South of the Ukraine .
 The annexation of Crimea by Russia by Russia will probably remain a bone of contention in the context of public opinion of Ukraine and Russia for a long time .
 The Russian authorities have taken unfriendly steps in recent years . This is notwithstanding the existence of different conflicting situations, “product” and “gas’ wars, ‘product’ and ‘gas” wars .
In the period from 2008 to 2013 the indicator “good attitude’ towards Russia in Ukraine slightly fell only once on the cusp of 2010 and 2011 . In the period between 2008 and 2013, the indicator of good attitude towards Russia was slightly lower .
 Russian military aggression against Ukraine in 2014 became the determining factor in the collapse of the percentage of Ukrainian citizens who were positively inclined to Russia . Russia's military aggression in 2014 was initially hybrid and later open, but later open .
 The decline was observed among residents of all regions of Ukraine without exception .
 Ukrainian citizens continued to show rather positive than negative attitudes towards Russians, even after the start of Russian aggression . At the same time, this decline was associated with the sharp exacerbation of attitudes towards the Russian leadership .
 The factor of military aggression of Russia cannot be quickly negated due to the logical transformations in Ukrainian socio-political discourse of the neighboring country . It is clear that the factor of Russia's military aggression cannot be easily negated .
 The results of monitoring of public opinion in Ukraine and Russia regarding the future Crimea also point to the profound and, as it seems today, contradictions in the interpretation of the interpretation by citizens of both countries .