 The NPA capitulates outright to French Imperialism on Ukraine Lutte Ouvriere . Videos and pictures were posted by the fascists to celebrate the Odessa Massacre .
 The French Left and Imperialism Where We Stand 1.2 is a common nationalist/fascist slogan . Bottom title is “Glory to Ukraine!’, common nationalist and fascist slogan .
 The capitalist state consists of ruling-class laws within a judicial system and detention centres overseen by the armed bodies of police/army who are under the direction .
 It is a part of the Liaison Committee for the Fourth International with the Liga Comunista, Brazil and the Tendencia Militante Bolchevique, Argentina .
 We recognise the necessity for revolutionaries to carry out serious ideological and political struggle as direct participants in the trade unions and in the mass reformist social democratic bourgeois workers’ parties .
 The trade union bureaucracy is the most fundamental obstacle to the struggle for power of the working class . We must fight and defeat and replace them with a revolutionary leadership by mobilising the base against the pro-capitalist bureaucracy .
 We are fully in support of all mass mobilisations against the onslaught of this reactionary Con-Lib Dem coalition . We are in support. We are full of support of the mass mobilisation against this reactionary coalition .
 The Labour party and trade unions 5.7% oppose all policies which subordinate the working class to the political agenda of the petty-bourgeois reformist leaders of the Labour party .
 International finance capital roams the planet in search of profit and imperialist governments . It disrupts the lives of workers and causes the collapse of whole nations .
 Workers have the right to sell their labour internationally wherever they get the best price . Workers can sell their work internationally where they can get the most price .
Only union membership and pay rates can counter employers who seek to exploit immigrant workers as cheap labour . Only union membership can counter exploitation of immigrant workers.
 Marxists never equate the violence of the oppressor with that of the oppressed . We make no moral judgements on the people who have carried out these attacks and recognise the deaths caused by imperialism .
 "We have heard that half a million children have died," Lesley Stahl said in 1996 . "Half a million kids have died"
 We do not have the right to dictate to the militant representatives of the oppressed how they conduct their struggles, not the IRA or the Palestinians or those fighting imperialism today .
 Marxists oppose individual acts of terror like this on the political grounds that it cannot achieve its aims of defeating imperialism by these methods . We discuss below.
 The anarchist prophets of the ‘propaganda of the deed’ can argue all they want about the elevating and stimulating influence of terrorist acts on the masses .
 The more ‘effective’ the terrorist acts, the greater their impact, the more they reduce the interest of the masses in self-organisation and self education .
 The successor of the murdered minister makes his appearance . But the smoke from the confusion clears away, the panic disappears .
 One is not permitted to shout ‘fire’ in a crowded theatre because this would appear to fall under the remit of freedom of expression . This freedom is curtailed due to social responsibilities.
 As such one should not cry ‘scrounger’ at a minority group who suffer disproportionately from unemployment . It may cause a social stampede and get someone beaten up in the street .
 La Libre Parole, published by the infamous Edoard Adolfe Drumont, made highly effective use of the familiar anti-Semitic devices .
 Freedom of expression is not an abstract, free-floating right, but rather should be employed in conjunction with, and properly situated amongst, the social, historical and political context of the day .
 Brandon Duncan, also known as Tiny Doo, faces life in prison for album lyrics . He has no criminal record .
 Deputy District Attorney Anthony Campagna says the musician's CD has a revolver with bullets . Campagna: "We’re talking about a CD ... there is a gun with bullets,” he says .
 The state of California wants to affirm in law that freedom of speech is a privilege, not a right . The state wants to affirm in law the right to speech .
 Prosecutors believe that writing lyrics about crime is a crime itself . One sentence in prison is punishable by a life sentence .
 If we are to compare the case of Brandon Duncan and Charlie Hebdo ‘gross hypocrisy’ is the only phrase that springs to mind .
 Charlie Hebdo attacks the ruling class Christians, Jews and Jews . But that is not used to justify the mass murder of hundreds of thousands .
 Freedom of Expression and Racism Charlie Hebdo is a right-wing libertarian magazine . It promotes racism, Islamophobia, sexism and homophobia .
After the 2001 9/11 attack they have become ever more the mouthpiece of French imperialism .
 At the height of war in Ireland, anti-Irish jokes and racist cartoons were everywhere . At the time, anti Irish jokes were everywhere.
 The Evening Standard published one called, ‘The Irish, byJAK, on 29 October 1982 . Ken Livingstone withdrew all GLC advertising from them .
 The cartoon led to protests by the British Irish community and resulted in the GLC banning advertising in the Standard . Ken Livingstone led to the ban.
 The purpose of the attacks was to portray the Irish as sub human savages and so make the British army killing of them acceptable . The Irish were portrayed as sub-human savages to make the UK army killing acceptable .
 It is truly pathetic that those leftists who supported the stance taken by Livingstone then cannot do so over Charlie Hebdo today. It is really pathetic that these leftists who support the stance took by Livingstones then cannot.
 In 1930s America, whites could equally have used the argument that they, like Charlie Hebdo, attack all religions equally . White people were burning black people on trees when they were burning them .
Making insulting cartoons about white people who controlled the power structures was not the same as demonizing black people a powerless underclass .
 Imagery of black people being dumb, violent, lazy thieves re-enforced prejudices of those in power and subjugated blacks .
 Until the 1950s, signs like no dogs, no Negros, no Mexicans were common markers of legally enforced laws of racial segregation .
 The French law against Muslim women wearing the veil/hi jab is along those same lines . The law also applies to Muslim women in France .
 Most ugly Jews with the most enormous noses clad in either Russian-Bolshevik uniforms or with an ‘Uncle Sam’ Stars and Stripes top hat . Both apparently dominating the world, or trying to, profiting from exploiting good-looking Germans .
 The French Left and Imperialism The Muslims of France and other European countries are suffering that same type of attacks today .
 As Muslims of the Middle East and Afghanistan have been slaughtered in their hundreds of thousands by imperialist armies in the last few decades, racism against Muslims justified this mass slaughter .
 We identify anti Muslim racism today as gelling with the imperialist slaughter in the Middle East . We only superficially like the anti Christian and anti Semitic stuff, repulsive and reactionary.
 A poor people with little or no power. These vile cartoons made their lives worse and heightened the racist prejudice against them .
 Asghar Bukhari frequently confuses ‘Zionist’ with ‘Jew’ Bukhari is open to the charge of anti-Semitism .
 As an educated representative of the oppressed Muslims it really is not acceptable to confuse the two. And as an educated representation of the oppression of Muslims it's not acceptable.
 The task of Marxists is to forge a programme of action to defend the Muslims of France and of Europe against the state and the far right .
 It is equally urgent to build a broad united front against the anti-Muslim chauvinism . It is also urgent to building a broad unified front against anti- Muslim chauvinists .
 The French Communist party's national chauvinism has led them to support ‘national unity’ in effect that is their own ruling class attacks on Muslims .
 France’s imperialist wars against Muslim peoples, or its oppression and super-exploitation of migrants. At the same time, they fail to mention even in a single word the connection between this event and France's imperialism .
 This collaboration and silence of the left is all the more appalling considering the history of French Imperialism’s exploitation of North Africa .
14 African countries are forced to pay colonial tax for the benefits of slavery and colonization . Still to this day 14 African countries have to pay the tax .
 The crucial confrontations were by De Gaulle with Guinea, Togo and Senegal . The rest were forced to follow suit .
 In 1958 the French left Guinea and destroyed all infrastructure when they left, crushing cars and leveling buildings in an orgy of destruction . The French left the country and destroyed the entire infrastructure .
 Togo was forced to pay an annual debt to France for the so called benefits Togo got from French colonization . The next up was Togo, who were forced to agree to pay the annual debt .
 From then on France accepted only an “independence on paper’ for his colonies, but signed binding ‘Cooperation Accords’ in particular ties to France . France educational system, military and commercial preferences.
 Many demonstrators died when they were violently herded by police into the River Seine . Some were thrown from bridges after being beaten unconscious .
 Maurice Papon, who died in 2007, was the only Vichy France official to be convicted for his role in the deportation of Jews during World War Two . Papon was convicted of his role.
 Butchery by cowards is what one Facebook post called the attack on Charlie Hebdo . "Butchery bycowards" is what the Facebook post said .
 The French Left and Imperialism at what ‘doing your job’ does to built-up areas . Butchery by cowards is dropping bombs from 20,000 feet on defenceless civilians .
 The biggest cowards and butchers sit in the White House, Downing Street, the Elysee Palace and Tel Aviv .
 The victims' relatives are often not very politically sussed on how to extract revolutionary justice from these mass murderers .
 They assassinate workers in imperialist countries who have no responsibility for what happened to them . They assassinate and target workers in imperialism countries who are not responsible for their actions .
 The CIA, MI5, DGSE, Mossad and MI5 encourage and foster these methods by ‘false flag’ operations which are calculate to inflame sectarian tensions and strengthen the hand of the state against the oppressed .
 A revolutionary government would have to tackle this real problem sensitivity to separate the secondary oppressors from their victims .
Never as an ally of the ‘civilising mission’ of imperialism, never be taken in by that peace and democracy bullshit . It only puts double chains on these oppressed people .
 That is unforgivable in Ukraine, in Palestine, in the whole of the Middle East and the whole semicolonial world . That is not the case in Ukraine .
 Some conflict was and is inevitable if the power of the Mullahs, Khans and fundamentalists is again to be broken in the countries of Soviet Central Asia and in Afghanistan, Iran through to Algeria .
We defy anyone to say the cartoon of the kidnapped Nigerian women is not a vile racist, Islamophobic, sexist piece of French imperialist propaganda . We defy anyone who says the cartoon is not racist or Islamophobic .
 Young women are ‘finally’ angry because their benefits were removed and they did not mind being kidnapped and repeatedly raped . It has a double meaning which suggests that the young women are 'finally' angry .
 Charlie Hebdo lobbed in the anti-Russian stuff on the Ukraine to make sure no one doubted where their true pro-imperialist political loyalties lay .
 Minsk 2 is a blow to the plans of Anglo-American imperialism to force Franco-German imperialism into war with Russia . It comes just a week after the signing of Minsk2, it's a blow.
 Minsk 2 is Russia’s attempt to broker a new compromise for itself with global imperialism . Russia is trying to broker new compromise with its own global imperialism.
Pushilin and Deinego have been sent to DPR and LPR . Pushilin is the first person to be sent to LPR by DPR . LPR has sent out two different people .
 "We should adhere to the format we have agreed upon," official says . But we should adhere, he says .
 Kiev, acting as the mouthpiece of U.S. imperialism, was objecting that the Donbass had sent the wrong leaders .
 Deinego and Pushilin were Putin's supporters and wanted the heads of state Alexander Zakharchenko from Donetsk and Igor Plotnitsky from the Donetsk and/or Prime Minister Hennadiy Tsypkalov from Lugansk Peoples Republic . Shapinov
 Minsk 2 failed to save Debaltseve, the anti-imperialist struggle and thereby the working class of Ukraine and the global working has been enormously strengthened by this victory .
 Despite the renewed ceasefire now taking effect the impetus is with the fighters of the Donbass militias . This will strengthen their self9 The French Left and Imperialism Vladimir Putin, Francois Hollande, Angela Merkel and Petro Poroshenko in Minsk on 11 Feb.15 .
 These debates have echoes of the Truce and Treaty debates that led to the Irish Civil War in 1922-3 . Brokering a sell-out to Kiev in SF19, page 27 for these contradictions within the Donbass .
 The central aggressive power is Anglo-American imperialism, writes David Frum . The central target is the Eurasian capitalist bloc of Russia and China .
 The war in the Ukraine, the war against Iraq, Afghanistan, ISIS, Assad and Gaddafi cannot be properly outside of this geopolitical struggle being waged by U.S. imperialism in the first place .
 Russia mobilises its forces to defend the Caspian Sea because of its strategic importance . This region has the second biggest crude oil reserves in the world . The region is a boundary between the West and East, where “the great game has been played between great powers for over a
 A huge gulf has developed between the U.S. policy of arming Kiev puppets to risk WWIII and the far more cautious Merkel and Hollande who know that the USA is only too willing to fight to the last European to defeat Russia .
 The real interimperialist power blocs are Anglo-American imperialism and the Franco-German European blocs . The real Interimperialist powers are British imperialism and Anglo- American imperialism .
 As the global crisis of capitalism deepens, the tensions become greater and greater . As the crisis deepens these tensions become more and greater, says the author .
 Rwanda was French speaking it now speaks English, or rather American . In Africa for example French imperialism is being continually undermined and out manoeuvred by U.S. imperialism .
 The U.S. shows its contempt for France (“cheese eating surrender monkeys’ on the Iraq invasion by the United States in 2003 and sending no representative to the reactionary Charlie Hebdo photo op march in Paris on 11 January, for the EU (Nuland’
 Nuland gave instructions to the French Left and Imperialism to ‘fight against the Europeans’ on the issue of arming Ukraine to fight Russia .
 British ruling class itself is far more split than the USA is right now . The UK ruling class is more divided than USA is now .
 Timothy Garton Ash on 2 February laughed at the liberal Guardian readership . He crowed in a wisdom from the pre-nuclear age .
 We insist that by far the best thing for the British and American working-class is defeat of their proxy army in the Ukraine .
 The great leftist impulse this gave to the global working class before and after 1975 . Despite the liberal patriotism of the ‘bring our boys home’ peaceniks .
 We must re-establish the revolutionary Marxist understanding that defeat for imperialism in a foreign war opens up revolutionary possibilities for the working class in imperialist countries . We must want it and work for it with all our might .
Debalseve Sadovo-Khrustal. Hr above Svitlodars'l Vuhlehirs'k ChoriuAhym Oleksandrrvs'k ’Karlo-Maiksove I Ol'k hovatka Yun
 The red has replaced the blue against the AFDs in Debaltseve . After the battle on 18 February the red has been replaced by the blue .
 Shirokino, the Nazi paramilitary Azov Battalion, opened fire with artillery and tanks against residential areas . At the same time in another city, ShiroKino, a Nazi paramilitary battalion opened fire on residential areas.
 In both the ADFs and the regions are required to respond to coordinated attacks by agents of imperialism .
 Putin capitulates to Obama’s diplomatic blackmail negotiated by Germany and France . Putin capitulate to Obama's diplomatic blackmail.
 Merkel announced new sanctions against Russia to be implemented if Putin does not force the popular republics of Donbass to accept the agreed surrender .
 The first few days of what should be a cease-fire were marked by the resurgence of Ukrainian artil . The Right Sector will continue to attack the East and the East will be forced to fight back .
Max Shachtman’s Third Camp Labor Action repudiates defence of the USSR during WWII . The international media are charged with attempting to break the truce just signed .
 The military force of Obama is deploying marines in the Pacific against China and in the Middle East . They are using the fight against ISIS as justification .
 The scandal makes the murder of Nisman against the Cristina government in Argentina . Closing the encirclement via Eastern Europe, Asia-Pacific, the Middle East and Latin America, Venezuela and Brazil .
 Russia in the Caspian Sea is an attempt to break this encirclement . This rapid ongoing movement of Russia is a bid to break the encircment .
 Moscow replaced the leadership of the People's Republics and put in charge Russian as well as pro-Russian politicians from the Donbass region who had a history of being loyal instruments of Moscow .
 Putin government deployed thousands of troops in the eastern Ukraine . The Putin government also deployed thousands in the region .
 In early September, Moscow imposed a ceasefire. The August intervention of the Russian imperialist state marked a qualitative turning point, says the RCIT .
 Russia has withdrawn unconditional support from 12 The French Left and Imperialism the Donbass . It was under such vicious attack for fascist led forces who were slaughtering the civilian population in the east .
 We categorically reject the proposition that this war is one between rival imperialist powers . We also reject the notion that this is one of the world's most powerful powers .
 The Alliance for Workers Liberty and the Labour Representation Committee are profoundly in error . The party's majority leadership is in error.
 The only proxy armies in these three conflicts are US/EU proxy armies . The Benghazi rebels, the Free Syrian Army and the jihadists of the Al-Nusra Front and the Kiev regime are the only proxies .
 Libya, Syria and the Donbass fought or are fighting genuine wars of national liberation against imperialist aggression . Despite the fact that they are led by reactionary bourgeois nationalist politicians, they are not fighting the war .
 Russia has a right to get arms and assistance from anyone who will supply it, including Russia . Syria and the Donbass have the right to help them in the case of Syria and Syria .
 This is profoundly incorrect, it will not assist the working class in its struggles against U.S. imperialist aggression . The working class will not help the workingclass in its struggle against United States imperialist aggression.
 If taken seriously that position would have dire consequences for the Donbass and the revolutionary socialists in the region fighting for the leadership of the working class .
 It would undermine the position of a working class growing in confidence and class consciousness following their great victory at Debaltseve . It would demoralise them and undermine them, says the writer .
 The big working class base of the Donbass army desires socialism . It harks back to the nationalised property relations that existed in 13 The French Left and Imperialism the days of the USSR .
 revolutionary socialist is to offer all the political and practical assistance we can to fighters of the Donbass .
 We do not call for the overthrow of the Donbass leadership in the circumstances of this civil war until they have exposed themselves as anti-working class and collaborators with imperialism . The class has grown in strength and class consciousness to overthrow them with a revolutionary socialist leadership .
 Borotba union offers political and practical assistance to the Donbass stmggle for the working class .
 Imperialism mainly targets the semioppressed and semi-colonized nations who demonstrate some independence, like Russia and China . The United States can no longer tolerate Imperialism .
 A Ukraine ‘patriot’ celebrates the dollar . Some countries are trying to threaten the supremacy of a Ukraine “patriot.’s’
 Trade Union house in Odessa Ukraine as an important step to reach Russia and Eurasia and the vast resources of this region .
 The Svoboda party is a direct descendant of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists led by Nazi collaborator Stepan Bandera . The party has big influence in the Ukrainian government .
 The movement of Maidan was far right oriented, United States sponsored, mostly petty bourgeois and lumpen working class . The movement was sponsored by the United States .
 The U.S. received open support of the United States to overthrow the corrupt government of Yanukovych . It received the open support to overthrow Yanukovych .
 This coup d’etat caused a wave of opposition to the imperialist coup from the working class in eastern Ukraine .
 The East is highly industrialized and many of the inhabitants speak Russian or a mixture of Russian and Ukrainian .
 Svoboda declared they wanted to exterminate them physically . They understood that Svobododa had declared they want to kill them physically.
Within days, the government tried to ban the use of minority languages .
 The working class of the East also understand that the agreements with the IMF and the EU would lead to privatization . The French Left and Imperialism industrialization will reduce the already precarious social services after the “reforms of other oligarchs governments.
 Greece had no choice but to resist, first in Crimea and Odessa, then in Donetsk and Lugansk . They just had to look at Greece to see the results, they said .
 The Kiev government and the oligarchs were quick to establish a “national guard’ in the fascist party base to support the military operations of the Ukrainian army . The government and oligarchs are quick to set up a "national guard"
 These fascist gangs, mainly Privy Sektor / Praviy Sector terrorized workers who tried to organize, tortured and murdered socialists .
 Hitler's storm troopers committed the horrible massacre of Odessa in the House of Unions on 2 May, the anniversary of the liquidation of German trade unions .
 There can be no clearer indication of the fascist tendencies that the system uses as a tool of U.S. financial capital .
 The Western media were quick to present the working class resistance as an “aggression’ from Russia . Russia was forced to restore Crimea to its territory in Crimea .
 This was not an action parallel to the annexation of Austria and the Sudetenland by Hitler in 1938 . This was a defensive measure and not an act parallel to Hitler's annexation of the region by Hitler .
 Russia has a naval base in the Crimea which is of great strategic importance to it . Russia has great strategic military importance to the Crimea .
 Russia acted primarily to prevent threats to its sovereignty and protect the majority Russian population from a violently hostile government of Kiev .
 The U.S. and the countries of the North Atlantic bloc are practicing the type of aggressive expansion similar to the Third Reich and the Axis powers .
 Since the beginning of the 21st century the U.S. and NATO have caused war and imposed “regime change’ on any nation that does not allow the economic and political domination of the interests of United States finance capital .
 The European Union is Russia’s 20th largest trading partner . This has also led to military invasions near Russian territory Russia is the United States' U.S. is the European Union's 20th biggest trading partner.
 The U.S. is the European fifth largest third largest trading partner . The United States is Russia's fifth largest trade partner .
 The destruction of independent Libya was of course also one of the highlights of this policy, even if it was through their French vassal . Libya's destruction of independence was also a highlight of the policy .
 Angela Merkel says there should be no abandonment of sanctions against Russia unless it gives in to Western imperialism . The main representative of the ruling classes of the EU, Angela Merkel, met with the dictator oligarch.
 The U.S. and NATO now believe they can launch a pre-emptive strike against Russia or China and win . They concentrate thousands of troops in Central and Eastern Europe . They stand ready to fight with nuclear bombers in the Baltic sea and the Balkans .
 World War III is potentially upon us, and the slightest miscalculation could see Europe and the world enveloped in the flames of nuclear war .
 The current leadership of the working class is betraying us again as in 1914, says the writer .
 We must organize our class to call the leaders of the labour movement to support the resistance to fascism in Ukraine . We must form a united anti-imperialist front with the people of semi oppressed countries under the threat of imperialism, mainly in Syria and Russia .
 Ukrainian workers who struggle against fascism and imperialism have the same interest in defeating them that the Russian ruling class and the Russian people have, it is they who suffer the consequences of economic sanctions .
 The Russian and world working class must push in the same direction against the same enemy, says the author . The Russian working class should push in a similar direction, he says .
 Putin is trying to adapt to American and German imperialism, but still he is unable to get any other result than constant demonization of himself and Russia in the Western media .
 The U.S. is the main enemy of the world working class, the oligarchs and Putin are secondary enemies . The United States is the biggest enemy of working class .
 There are many people on the left and in the labour movement who see the United States and Russia as equal enemies of the working class . They refuse to adopt a policy that advocates the defeat of American imperialism .
 The struggle against imperialism and the struggle for socialist revolution requires that the working class forms a temporary alliance . 17 The French Left and Imperialism with the forces opposing United States financial capital, which dominates the planet .
 We must also recognize the need to form temporary alliances with existing mass workers’ organizations, despite their pro-capitalist leaders .
 We must rely on the masses and urge them forward to attack the base of financial capital that rules over them, says author .
 We must champion the independence of the People’s Republics of Donbass as voted by their peoples .
 We must denounce the perfidious role of the current leadership of the working class, we say . We must forge a new revolutionary leadership capable of reversing the global dominant U.S. capitalism .
 We will try to justify theoretically this in reference to the principles of communism . We will attempt to justify this theoretically in relation to communism .
 References for the communists on the national question and imperialism are the resolutions of the Communist International during its Second Congress . Lenin’s text, ‘Imperialism the Highest Stage of Capitalism’ and his writings before and after the trigger of the First World War.
 We emphasize this distinction, unlike bourgeois democracy and the Second International . We emphasize that this distinction is not bourgeois democracy .
 In the era of imperialism, it is particularly important for the proletariat and the Communist International to see concrete economic facts and to resolve all colonial and national issues .
 This is the essential starting point for any analysis of an international question. The ones who had “forgotten this have passed to the bourgeois camp’s camp. This is a key point for analysis of international question .
All supporters of the aggressive policy of U.S. imperialism seem to forget. Which is exactly what all supporters of America's aggressive policy are forgetting .
 Russian oligarchs may plan to become one, but that is not the situation that exists today, nor is it relevant to Ukraine situation . Such a “Russian imperialism’s own ambitions’ may have its own ambitions .
 Communists do not deal with “ambitions’ or “wants’ that have no influence on reality. Communists don’t deal with ’s ambitions and ‘wants' that have no influence.
 We seek above all to determine who is the oppressor and the oppressed, or is about to become one of these . We seek to find out who is to be one of those .
 This attack can even take an even more acute form and become a step in the confrontation between the U.S. and China for world supremacy . This attack does not affect the question of fundamental principles, says the author .
 Lenin’s theses were referring to semi-colonial and colonized capitalist countries, not just backward and dependent countries like Russia and / or China .
 The situation has changed, but the basic political features of the problem persist, says the author . "We can never make and equals sign between the current situation and the conflicting forces during the First and Second World Wars," he says .
 Russia and China cannot be compared in any way with the military power of the Western bloc . It is not the military capacity or rather the nuclear force, which could support such arguments, says the author .
 The Russian nuclear force is in a very poor condition and reconstruction has only recently begun . Even the Russian nuclear forces are in poor condition .
 This situation of imperialist aggression against much weaker countries is accompanied by unprecedented weakness of the international labour movement . This situation is accompanied with unprecedented weakness in the international labor movement .
 This lack of political presence of the working class and its organizations, including its ideology, is one of root causes of the ease with which imperialist adventures and military aggression occur .
 They use scandalous pressure to overturn governments who have become only slightly divergent from their interests or just because they have begun to covet their resources .
 All their policy is geared to maintaining this domination but it is decaying by slow degrees . The emergence of new economic powers can become as a real threat to their hegemony in the future .
 The working class has lost its political presence, but has grown in number and still continues to fight . This international situation, a hegemonic superpower dominance without shearing, began to be threatened by new capitalist powers in the making .
 The class desperately needs a strategy and appropriate tactics to stop the race of humanity towards the abyss, says the writer . "The class desperately need a strategy," he says .
 The aggressive plans of U.S. imperialism to maintain its global dominance are not going to stop . The aggressive Plans of United States imperialism are not to stop.
 The plans are essential to continue the operations and financial dominance of the U.S. to export its systemic crisis and fuel its military-industrial complex . The military is the centre of its profits from their production .
 It can only continue to cause more wars or local or global firefights by a more acute struggle against Russia, China or Iran, or with two or three of them together .
 The French Left and Imperialism nance of energy sources and the exploitation of Eurasia are among the most important plans of U.S. imperialism . The domi20 The French left and Imperialist nancy of energy source and exploitation of the Eurasia is among the
Russia, China and Iran will find strong opposition from Russia, China, Iran, which is not by a “conflict between imperialist’s and the most powerful imperialist coalition in the world .
 Lenin said the Communists should always actively support the wars of the oppressed and exploited countries . He said that the nature of these states or characteristics of their leaders should be considered .
 He illustrated this with the hypothetical case of a war between “democratic’ Britain and feudal India . He said it was the duty of the Communists to support India, even if Hindus were the initiators of the war .
 We had a proclamation of self-determination first and independence of the Popular Republics later . We had the proclamation ofself-determination.
 All these measures involve the liquidation of Ukrainian industry and the social benefits of the working class . All the measures involve liquidating the Ukrainian industry.
 Ukraine is an arena for NATO exercises against Russia and to impose the dictatorship of international finance . They seek to transform Ukraine into an arena. They also seek to impose international finance on Ukraine .
 The fate of Albania beckons for these regions and for the whole Ukraine . Albania is one of the largest countries in the world .
 The French and English imperialists do not want the strengthening of German power in Europe . The purported compensation they were to get was their integration into the EU and NATO, but it will not happen .
 Policy changes are the “specialty of the new “diplomacy’ of the French imperialists’s new ‘diplomate’
 Ukraine seeks to transform Ukraine into an exporter of agricultural products, mineral and other raw materials, without industry and without national independence .
 Ukrainian oligarchs would be satisfied with the status of parasites while collecting crumbs from the imperialist table .
 A national or regional war to oppose these plans is quite fair and correct, according to a recent report . A national and regional war is a good idea, says the author of the report .
 The Ukrainian army acts as an aggressor under the command of U.S. imperialism, which has the nerve to install its “intelligence service’s ‘intelligence service, and his mercenaries and agents directly in the Ukrainian land still controlled by the oligarchs and the fascists .
 The solution of these contradictions is the world socialist revolution that will pass through intermediate steps . The solution is that it does not develop in a single pulse due to the uneven development of world countries .
 Some people are discouraged in advance, forgetting that the people of Donbass are already struggling . Some people measure the magnitude of the task.
Short term geopolitical calculations. They see the enormous difficulties of such a struggle and the very real possibility that these fighters for socialism and national independence may be abandoned .
 A large part of the European and global left have betrayed them objectively . They may lose because they may lose. They may also lose because a large portion of the left has betrayed them .
 Others would materially help and some have even gone to fight alongside them . Others would help and even go to fight with them .
 Others are willing to accept any peaceful solution, any waiver of independence . Others want a minimum peace and stop attacks against civilians carried by the fascist oligarchy .
 The only policy to support these fighters is that of an anti-imperialist united front to fight against American ledimperialism by all possible means .
 This united front of workers and conscious communists must be open to all the forces opposed to the main aggressor without fear of the political nature of the attacked state, much less the nature and characteristics of their rulers .
 We propose this type of United Front to all those fighting or preparing to fight against imperialist in Ukraine or another country, as Syria, Iraq, Yemen or even Russia or China .
 The acceptance of such a united front in turn depends on the importance of the movement of workers around the world who support the Front .
 The difficulties are real but it is the only political line accords with communist political principles . The difficulty is real but there are only political lines with Communist political principles.
 We stand alongside Russia to fight against the main imperialism without making any political concessions to Putin nor the leaders of the People’s Republic of Donbass .
 We will go against the policies of the Russian oligarchs and the Donbass . We also know that once finished the fight that requires us to strike together, we'll go against them .
 Some may say that, given the state of our forces and our influence it is a sword thrust in the water, or a statement of principles empty of all content . Others may say it is not the case, but it is the case.
Today the political and consistent ideological defence with all the practice, experience and MarxistLeninist theory, its preservation and dissemination are the seeds that will bear fruit . Today the political, experience, and Marxist Leninist theory are the Seeds of the future .
 The other road is to follow the line of opportunism, ultra-leftism of centrism and betrayal . That is the real impasse facing all Revolutionary Communists, says the author .
 US-led imperialism's direct aggressions have been backed by and counted in the collaboration of other secondary imperialisms such as Great Britain and France . Germany, Spain, Italy and even vassal states or close allies like Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Israel .
 Since Yugoslavia wars and through to Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Syria, according to US imperialism’s obvious geopolitical strategy, they have smashed any country or any neighbouring former ally of the former Soviet Union on one pretext or another .
 Russia has recovered a bit of its strength, but this is done openly against it now . In the state of decay of Yeltsin’s Russia that would have happened without too much opposition .
 The fall of the Soviet Union Ukraine has been designated by the United States imperialist strategists as the weakest link to conquer . U.S. imperialism strategists have designated Ukraine as the weak link to conquering .
 Russia has been in backwardness vassalage since Gorbachev . Yeltsin saw the potential to limit and / or break up Russia and keep it in backward.
 Ukraine has been for more than a year a place for the imperialist manoeuvres and aggressions, first by U.S. imperialism . The United States plans for the political or military liquidation of Russia if necessary .
 German imperialism has its own designs on the “East’e. From the ‘black lands of Ukrainian to the Carpathian mountains as in the First and Second World Wars .
 The Euromaidan movement melds into this perspective and so the Ukrainian issue is of global importance because of its political consequences . The Euromsaidan Movement melded into this view and so it is ofglobal importance.
 A victory for the U.S. imperialism and their puppet oligarchs and their Nazi pawns may have devastating consequences for the struggle of the working class .
 The Libyan conflict has divided the international left in three perfectly distinct currents . Such international situation has gone on since the 2011 Libyan conflict, at least .
 This aggression against a small nation by an imperialist coalition, met with the open and/ or the hidden support of countless political movements of 24 The French Left and Imperialism .
 In France all organizations are located or are in an almost open support of imperialist policy on the right . The centrist “neither-nor’s’ position is called Trotskyst Lutte Ouvriere .
 revolutionary communist party could not support a “bloody dictator’s name given to the political leader on site by the imperialist mass media services of disinformation . These say they cannot support either the imperialist on the one hand nor a dictator on the other .
 In this way they contributed to the imperialist propaganda among the working class in their respective countries, says the author .
Toryists, Maoists, Stalinists, Hoxhaists, and other revisionists of all colours are divided in three or at least two of this currents . These currents are found everywhere.
 A political crisis like the one known in 1914 during the first imperialist war exists today . The political crisis is similar to that of the one in 1914 .
 The Anti Imperialist United Front defends the principle of the Anti Imperialists United Front in all conflicts between imperialist powers, or their proxies .
 Russia, China, Greece, Portugal and some former ‘Iron Curtain’ countries in Eastern Europe, from Imperialist attack . We also defend countries of intermediate development, with features of both imperialism and semi-colonies .
 A United Front has as its first condition that it be led by the industrial working class guided by their revolutionary communist party . Each temporary alliance he made should be made strictly in the short and long term interests of the working class .
In the colonial East at the present time the key slogan to advance is the anti-imperialist united front . Similarly in the colonialEast at the current time the main slogan is to advance .
 Its expediency follows from the perspective of a long-drawn-out struggle with world imperialism that will demand the mobilisation of all revolutionary elements .
 This mobilisation is made all the more necessary by the tendency of the indigenous ruling classes to make compromises with foreign capital directed against the fundamental interests of the mass of the people .
 The slogan of an anti-imperialist united front will help expose the vacillations of the various bourgeois-nationalist groups . The slogan is still helping to expose the social democrats’ sell-out of proletarian interests .
This may be extremely episodic for a single demonstration or a rally or it may be a military bloc . This may be very episodic, but it may also be very sporadic .
 Our position is that it is incorrect in non-imperialist countries to exclude the bourgeoisie on principle . We are incorrect inNon-im Imperialist countries, we say . We believe it is wrong to exclude bourgeois on principle.
In doing so, they refused to stay out of the movement and to identify all the movement with his right-wing component . In doing so they refused.
 The Ukrainian army must act under the control of citizens, the Ukrainian army says . “International brigades of fascists from Sweden, Poland and elsewhere rushed to Kiev and actual socialist brigades from Spain gathered to defend the Donbass .
 The silence of the NPA on the Odessa massacre of May 2, 2014 is more eloquent than any of their political degeneration . The NPA's silence on the May 2 massacre of Odessa has been more eloquENT than any other political degenerations .
 It is impossible to imagine that a Marxist International Group may tacitly approve the massacre of at least 48 anti-fascists by Nazi thugs .
 British comrades of the Socialist Resistance brought an equally reactionary contribution to their right skid . Their British comrades also brought a reactionary contribution.
 The USFI clearly works for Western imperialism, in the same way that Achcar has supported the Western imperialist attack against Libya . Now the USFI works for the Western imperialism.
 Lutte Ouvriere is a typical rightist and centrist tendency which has arisen in France . Voie Proletarienne has made a copy and paste of these positions with small variations .
Libya's positioning is indistinguishable from the one they have taken during the imperialist aggression in Libya and can, with no doubt, be described as centrist . Their positioning is identical to that of those of the Libyan regime .
 It has been also called Schatmanite in allusion to a political leader who had the position in 1939 of ‘neither Moscow nor Washington, for the working class’ or as a Kautskite position, similar to the “intermediate position taken by K
 A fight between ‘bandits’ and “bandits, that’s their justification for their political line, is the justification for the political line .
 As in Libya and Syria they tune their violins to the imperialist propaganda . As in Syria and Libya they tune to the imperialism.
 'balanced' title suggests the working class are caught between the petty-bourgeoisie, the bureaucracy and West .
 The term ‘bureaucracy’ is a very vague term and which particular ‘pettybourgeoisie’ we are referring to is also vague .
 The content of the article itself suggests very strongly that there is not an equal sign between the two contending sides . However, the content of this article is very strongly suggests there is not an equal sign.
 Actually the two sides are Western imperialism and the Ukraine oligarchs with Russia supporting a section of the oligarchs in the East .
 The Russian army did not have to "invade" Crimea since it is permanently stationed there . Indeed, the Russian army didn't.
 The article then goes into very useful detail of what happened, who was who and the history of the region .
 phrases that show how constant is their tendency to position itself as impartial judges of a situation that concerns them little, can manifest .
Western governments had bet on an output scenario of negotiated crisis, they write . They considered that recourse to such measures by one or the other party is unacceptable .
 This type of judgment is typical of the difficulties they find to make swallow a political line . It is often found all along their few articles they publish on the issue .
 When their last Congress they have found a way to walk around the world ... except in Ukraine . To the point that when they have been in the U.S.
 There's something for every taste but a condemnation of those truly responsible and a centrist position that helps indirectly US imperialism and its aggressive plans .
 The basic question for a communist is who is the oppressor and who the oppressed? The teachings of Lenin and Trotsky slide off them like water on a duck .
 Workers took no real part in the movement, until midFebruary at least, according to a report .
 The "working class" as described by the LO exists nowhere on the planet and can never exist . The LO is called "the working class" and "the LO is a class that can never be"
 The Odessa Massacre showed just a few months after this article was written, on 2 May . The first and most immediate interests of these workers is to stop themselves being slaughtered by the fascist-led Ukrainian army .
 LO's line of reasoning corresponds to what is known as Anarchosyndicalism that does not seek allies . It follows Lenin's advice to use any contradiction among the enemies of the working class .
Refrain from participation in bourgeois radicalism and arrange forces outside of it . Refrain from participation in radicalism and  arrange forces outside of it .
Demonstrators protest against the nationalist/fascist regime in Kiev in April 2014 . They proclaim the liquidation of the state and of bourgeois society .
 Chavez, Morales, Castro and others, for LO, are expressions of imperialist barbarism . LO is an acronym for the Latin American Movement .
 LO refuses to take a clear antiimperialist position on Charlie Hebdo . LO refused to take an anti-imperialists position on Hebdo .
 It targeted journalists for what they have drawn and written, as well as those who protected them . It also targeted journalists who have written and written .
 Those who use such methods are not only enemies of freedom of expression and freedom of the press, they are also enemies of the workers, their freedom to express themselves and organize themselves .
 Whatever the ideology they claim, their methods seek to impose the dictatorship to a population or a fraction of a population .
 Terrorism, whether employed by states or groups seeking to establish state power, aims to silence any dissenting expression . It always strikes especially freedom of the oppressed to struggle against their exploitation .
 Francois Hollande and Manuel Vails. At the same time, we can only be shocked by the political exploitation which is now made of this event by different political parties .
 In calling for national unity from this event, it seeks to restore credit in the opinion that he has largely lost by all their policy, it says .
 He wants especially to justified by the attack attributed to socalled “jihadists, the intervention of the French army in Africa and the Middle East . He also wants to justify the French intervention in the region .
 The government betrays the memory of murdered journalists themselves, it says .
Anti-militarists opposed to all military expeditions . They were not only irreconcilable enemies of religious ideologies, but also anti- militarist .
 The government would impose its policy as the only possible one . But more, for an operation that is basically symmetrical to that would make the “jihadists’s”
 The manoeuvres and military operations of the imperialist powers are conducted in Africa and the Middle East to uphold the interests of large Western companies . But they also seek to act here.
 LO has refused to participate in the demonstrations on Charlie Hebdo . It is good that LO has not participated in the protests .
There is no call to defend the oppressed Muslims of France, now threatened by the French state . There is no recognition of origin of this racism in Vietnam, Algeria and other former colonies in Africa and the Middle East .
 The revolutionary party must fight their prejudices, or antiimperialist workers living in or originating in countries semisettlements that have suffered oppression and massacres .
 These workers must learn class politics and class solidarity, but they will never learn of those who practice the imperialist prejudices themselves .
 LO simply portrayed them as “workers’ who must learn their “class interests’ outside history and cultural identity . LO simply portrays them as workers who must be aware of their class interests .
 The French Left and Imperialism ist class. The historical task of the working class is to free the entire human society of class domination, says the French Left .
 U.S. imperialism threatens world peace in its stmggle to maintain its global hegemony against Russia and China .
 revolutionary communists to take a stand in defense of the countries attacked by the main imperialism . And this force revolutionary communism to take an action .
 This elementary duty has been forgotten by many people and do not predict any good for both national as international working class stmggles .
 The ■XCMISIP CHARB ILLUSTRE SON DERNIER UVRE CHARLIE HEBDO. OrtlffANiCBftSaWHE EuroMaidan HQ proudly display the image of the WWII fascist monster Stepan Bandera .
 It is only the tactics of the United Front anti imperialist, already a century old . It is the only ones that can unite all who can possible be united to first liquidate U.S. imperialism .
 An open support or an indirect on of U.S. aggression can only divert peoples oppressed from the international working class . Such a policy not only is the only correct tactics but it is only one that preserves the political future of the working class in countries attacked by imperialism .