Mikheil Saakashvili, the former Georgian president turned Ukrainian opposition leader, has vowed that he will continue to resist arrest . His supporters freed him from custody in Kyiv .
 Saakashvili told supporters at a protest camp near parliament early on December 6 that he would not comply . Facing a deadline to turn himself in to the authorities later in the day, he told supporters . He told supporters that he will not comply with a deadline
"Our main goal is to remove a criminal group from power and impeach it," Saakashvili said . "Our maingoal is to removal the criminal group"
 Prosecutors issued a 24-hour deadline for Saakashvili to turn himself in to police on December 5 . The deadline came after a predawn clash between National Police officers and protesters camping out .
 At least 14 police officers and two civilians were injured in clashes that broke out as authorities began searching tents in an attempt to locate Saakashvili .
 The police "planned to take me out of a tent, but attacked the wrong tent" and "severely beat" activists who had been sleeping .
 That was reference to previous turmoil in Ukraine, including attempted crackdowns on the Euromaidan protests that pushed President Viktor Yanukovych out in 2014 .
 Some of Saakashvili's supporters were stockpiling bricks at the protest camp and setting up barricades with tires shortly after dawn on December 6 . Heavy snow fell on the Ukrainian capital.
About 3,000 members of the Georgian political party founded by Saakashvili staged a demonstration in Tbilisi . The demonstration was held to warn against the former president's extradition from Ukraine .
Demonstrators say mass protests will be held if Saakashvili is extradited and arrested in Georgia . They say their rally is a signal to authorities that mass protests are planned .
 The Ukrainian charges are unrelated to those Saakashvili faces in Georgia . The charges are not related to those in Ukraine .
Members of the opposition United National Movement said at the Tbilisi rally that they believe he might be extradited . But members of the U.N. Movement said they believe they might be deported .
 The United National Movement was ousted from power in 2012 parliamentary elections . It was the first time the movement had been ousted from the government .
 Saakashvili is wanted in Georgia for alleged involvement in the violent dispersal of protesters and a raid on a private television station during his 2004-13 presidency . He is also wanted for allegedly involvement in a raid in Georgia during his presidency .
 Authorities ordered the manhunt following a chaotic scene on December 5 in Kyiv . Security forces stormed Saakashvili's apartment and detained him, but supporters later freed him .
 Saakashvili now faces three criminal charges, including involvement in premeditated criminal activity by a group of persons . The prosecutor-general's spokeswoman said the charges were filed on December 6 .
 Sarhan said criminal investigations had been started against several parliamentary deputies suspected of obstructing Saakashvili's arrest on December 5 . Sarhan also said criminal investigation had been begun against several deputies suspected.
 Prosecutors have also informed National Police chief Serhiy Knyazev that Saakashvili is a wanted man . Prosecutors have told the police chief that he is also wanted .
 Saakashvili led hundreds of his supporters in a march to parliament . He demanded Poroshenko's resignation, calling him a "criminal" and a traitor to Ukraine .
 Saakashvili also urged Ukrainians to rally on Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or Independence Square, in the Euromaidan protests in 2013-14 .
 Ukrainian authorities claim that Saakashvili is being backed by Russia or forces there . Former Georgian president has been hated by the Kremlin since a five-day war between Georgia and Russia in 2008 .
 Prosecutor-General Yuriy Lutsenko alleged on December 5 that an ""organized crime"" group led by Yanukovych, who is in exile in Russia, has financed protests .
 The turmoil in Kyiv comes at a time when Ukraine is fighting Russia-backed separatists . More than 10,000 people have been killed in the eastern region known as the Donbas .
 Saakashvili became stateless when Poroshenko issued a presidential decree in July . The decree stripped him of his Ukrainian citizenship .
 He returned to Ukraine in order to challenge that decree in the Ukrainian courts . He has been leading opposition protests against Poroshenko .
 Saakashvili rose to power in Tbilisi during Georgia's peaceful Rose Revolution in 2003 . He served as Georgia's president from 2004-13 .
 He conducted major reforms and fought corruption in the former Soviet republic . But he was accused of abusing his power . He was also accused of abuse of power .
 Authorities in Tbilisi have charged Saakashvili of trying to organize a coup there after leaving office . He denies the allegation .
 Poroshenko appointed Saakashvili as governor of Ukraine's Odesa region in the wake of the Euromaidan protests that brought a pro-Western government to power .
 Saakashvili resigned from the Odesa governor's post and went into opposition in November 2016 . He said his reform efforts were being blocked by Poroshenko's allies . But he later said his reforms were blocked by his allies .