 Misconception of the Kremlin's goals stipulates inefficiency of Western policy towards the Donbass .
 The U.S. strategy is to make Russia understand that the continuation of the conflict in Ukraine is unprofitable for it, as it leads to the opposite goal, according to Washington . The United States strategy towards the ending of conflict in the Donbass.
 U.S. special representative for Ukraine. Kurt Volker sees this goal in a recent interview with the Ukrainian media . Volker: "This is how the United States special representative in Ukraine sees it"
 sanctions, military expenses and reputational loss of the Russian Federation have been existing for 4 years . Everything that the American envoy listed has actually taken place, but sanctions and military expenses have been already existing .
 Moscow did not make a decision whether it wants peace in the Donbass, says Kurt Volker .
 The USA offers Putin the idea of introducing the UN peacekeepers into the conflict zone . In order to give Moscow the opportunity to leave the Donbass, saving its face, the USA offers the idea .
 By this step, it increases its military expenses, reputational and human losses by its own free will . The move is the first step to increase the military's expenses .
 The fact that the Kremlin's advantages from these conflicts still outweigh the disadvantages that arise from them. The Kremlin's advantage from this conflict still outweighs its disadvantages .
 The entire policy of the West over three and a half years of the war in Ukraine has had no effect, apparently . It is built on the basis of misunderstanding of the goal that the Kremlin wants to achieve through the conflict in the Donbass .
 Subjection of Kyiv or strengthening the Assad regime are only stages of achieving the goal . Subjection is only stage of achieving goal, according to experts .
 Putin formulated and announced the ultimate goal in Munich in 2007 . It is a bipolar world, return of Russia to the status of the second world leader, the superpower, that she lost in the Cold War .
Security and well-being of entire regions depend on you . This goal can be achieved only when the security and well being of all regions depend upon you .
Security and well-being of Ukraine, Syria, Moldova, Georgia and the Korean peninsula depend to a great extent on Russia .
 Russia needs conflicts in which it is supposedly a third party, but the destiny of which entirely depends on it . In order to achieve its global goal, Russia needs conflict with other parties .
 West tries to persuade the West to be leaner while the West is trying to persuade it to beLeaner . Munich-2007 was the last years after Munich- 2007 .
 The Kremlin cannot be so naive as to steal Crimea from the Ukrainians, occupy the Donbass, deprive millions of Ukrainians of shelter, organize anti-Ukrainian propaganda hysteria among Russians .
 No Kyiv authorities will be able to return Ukraine to the "big Slavic family" if Russia dominates it . After all this, no Kyiv Authorities, even the pro-Russian ones, will be allowed to return.
 Ukraine was for the government the main source of the first wave of mobilization . Ukraine itself is not homogeneous, and what, perhaps, will be forgotten in the South, will never be forgotten .
 Russian politicians and political strategists have repeatedly said that they do not consider the western Ukrainian oblasts to be Ukraine .
 Ukraine has annexed Crimea and tens of thousands of victims in the Donbass . That is while the western oblasts are part of Ukraine, it is impossible to return Ukraine to the "family of fraternal peoples"
 The Kremlin initially relied not on subordinating Ukraine, but on dismembering it, destroying the statehood that emerged in 1991 . That is, seizing the Crimea and starting its adventure in the Donbass, the Kremlin first relied on subordinated Ukraine .
 The so-called "Novorossia" out of 8 southeastern oblasts of Ukraine was aimed at it . Actually, the idea was to create the so- called Novorossa .
 Alexander Borodai, close to the FSB, openly spoke about that . Russian political technologist and former ""Prime Minister of the DNR" Alexander BorODai was close to FSB .
 It is now clear that the liquidation of Ukraine without full-scale external military aggression is only possible if serious internal conflict is provoked . It is also clear that it is not possible to liquidate Ukraine without external aggression .
 The Minsk agreements would lead to an explosive mixture of co-existence with two regions within one country, both with opposite geopolitical and ideological orientations . If implemented, they would create an explosive mix ofCo-existence .
 Russia understands that the internal political situation in Ukraine will not allow the Ukrainian authorities to implement Minsk . The answer is simple – Russia understands it will not be allowed to implement it .
 Ukraine has hit rock bottom both in terms of the economy and domestic policy . Expecting the president of Ukraine to take a small step towards implementing the Minsk agreements is an exercise in futility .
 Putin still keeps a grudge against the West for the fact that the guarantees that the foreign ministers of Poland, France and Germany gave to Yanukovych in his agreement with the Ukrainian opposition in February 2014, were broken by Maidan . Yanukovych fled from Kyiv, as a result of which he
 The Russian leader no longer intends to believe the West, he says .
 Ukraine falls under the weight of war, corruption, and internal political strife, which is also Russia’s instrument in a hybrid war. Or until Ukraine falls beneath the weight.
 Russia would really introduce its troops, but they will be called peacemakers, as General Gerasimov writes . Then Russia will really introduce troops, he says .
 Moscow will become the second or third pole of the world, along with the U.S. and China .
 The West is trying to solve the “Ukrainian crisis, instead of the ‘Russian one,’ says CNN’s John Sutter . Neither the peacekeepers nor other initiatives to persuade the aggressor to change its policy will work .