 NATO is prioritizing conventional military capabilities to deter Russian encroachment on the Alliance . In this article, Niklas Masuhr writes that NATO has prioritized conventional capabilities .
 Western planners and strategists view the war in Ukraine as a key benchmark that defines future capability requirements .
 As a result, various adaptive processes are underway within national armed forces . The process is being carried out within the armed forces.
 This article was originally published in the CSS Analyses in Security Series by the Center for Security Studies on 3 April 2019 . This article is the latest in a series of articles by the center for security Studies .
 When Russian intervention forces occupied the Crimean peninsula in February 2014 in a coup de main, NATO was still committed in Afghanistan .
 The crisis in Ukraine triggered a reorientation towards its original purposes of defense and deterrence . After more than ten years of counterinsurgency and stabilization operations, Ukraine has reorientated to its original purpose of defense .
 During the same year, at the NATO summit in Wales, it was decided to enhance the speed and capability with which NATO forces could respond to a crisis .
 The subsequent Warsaw summit in 2016 added rotating multinational contingents in its eastern member states in order to signal the entire alliance's commitment to their defense .
National armed forces are being reformed and rearranged because of the shift in threat perception . NATO's national armed forces have been reformed and changed because of a shift in threats perception .
 This analysis focuses on the military forces of the United States, the United Kingdom and Germany . It also focuses on Britain, the U.S. and the UK .
 The tactics and capabilities Russia has brought to bear in eastern Ukraine in particular serve as the benchmark according to which these Western forces are being shaped .
 The World Trade Organization issued what the media is calling a "historic" ruling on the applicability of Article XXI . It allows nations to take trade limiting actions in the name of national security .
 The decision will inevitably be appealed and thus will get caught up in the dispute over the Appellate Body . The case is not about the United States steel and aluminum tariffs, but the decision has implications for them since they are also being litigated at the WTO .
 Russia has solidified its control over Crimea, but the contestation of that control by Ukraine and the West continues to loom large in their respective relations with Moscow .
 Military action or more sanctions are unlikely to convince Russia to relinquish control over Crimea . Military action is unlikely to persuade Russia to give up control of Crimea .
 The disconnect between pragmatically achievable objectives and symbolic resistance to Crimea's annexation has created a standoff that is now perpetuating itself . The disconnect has created the standoff that has now perpetuated itself .
 In international relations, extended crises or disputes eventually behoove parties to accept realities, albeit at a cost to those involved .
Pro-Europe protests led to Russia's annexation of Crimea and the ongoing separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine . President Viktor Yanukovich fell from power as a result of the euromaidan movement .
 Crimea's status continues to be a source of great contention, as Kiev rejects the Crimean Peninsula's accession to Russia . Moscow is concerned, de jure — control over it .
 The events in Crimea in 2014 continue to cloud political and military relations between Russia and the West . Several of the sanctions against Russia center directly on the Crimea question .
 The Ukrainian presidential election is only weeks away, and its outcome is highly uncertain . The Ukrainian president is expected to be elected in the next few weeks .
 Volodymyr Zelensky is a television actor whose only political experience consists of playing the president of Ukraine in a sitcom . He is currently in the polls behind Petro Poroshenko.
 The country will head to the polls while still at war in its eastern region of Donbas . In 2014, local separatists forcibly seized government buildings and declared people's republics in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russia arming separatist combatants and sponsoring breakaway regions . Since then, the conflict has taken on elements of both a civil war and an interstate conflict .
 Volodymyr Zelenskiy is an actor and comedian whose best known character is a school teacher . Ihor Kolomoiskiy is accused by a business rival in 2015 of ordering contract killings in Ukraine .
 The Sea of Azov would emerge as a key front in the ongoing conflict between Ukraine and Russia . Both countries would bolster naval assets in the area, with the United States weighing in through additional security support for Ukraine .
 A recent meeting between Ukrainian and NATO defense officials point to the growing importance of this front . Ukraine and Russia have been involved in a series of sanctions against Russia over the Sea of Azov .
 Ukraine's president postponed signing an association agreement with the European Union . Viktor Yanukovych, Ukraine’s president, chose instead to pursue closer ties with Russia .
 Protesters began massing on Kiev’s central square, known as the Maidan .
 Yanukovych’s ouster on February 22. Weeks of tension spilling into violence culminated with Yanukovych's ouster .
 The decay of U.S. military hegemony and the global international order that has accompanied it will likely become more hazardous than the recent past . The flashpoints may change over time.
 The world has avoided major power war since 1945, even if the U.S. and the Soviet Union came quite close on several occasions during the Cold War .
 In the first two decades following the fall of the Berlin Wall, great power war seemed virtually unimaginable . In the second two decades after the fall, the world's greatest power war was almost unimaginable .
 China's power still increasing and Russia's rejection of the international order apparently complete . Great power conflict is back on the menu .
 The fence spans the neck of land connecting Crimea with Ukraine's Kherson region . The fence was built in Crimea in the early 1990s .
 Most of its sensors pick up vibrations from any potential intruders, the FSB said . Some of the sensors are also radio-location devices .
 regular troops are deploying closer to Ukrainian borders . The trolls are waging information war and regular troops have been deployed to Ukraine .
 President Vladimir Putin held a four-hour press conference Thursday . He was asked pointed questions during his four- hour press conference .
 Ukrainian journalist Roman Tsymbaliuk became a hero of the day by pushing the Ukraine war into Putin's face .
 Russian president asked Russian president directly how much money Russia was spending on rebel-controlled “occupied Donbas’s’ east of the country .
 Several journalists from Kremlin-loyal publications began to laugh, some of them a little nervously .
 United States leaders should keep a close eye on Russian President Vladimir Putin’s cyber sleight of hand .
 Putin is ramping up cyber warfare to keep Western powers from keeping Ukraine from Russian state capture .
 Russia needs Ukraine to be aligned not only because of the large ethnic Russian population there, but also because it represents the last line of defense between Moscow and the Western powers, as well as a huge economic partner .
 Russia’s economic footprint in Ukraine will be diminished if current trends continue . Putin will either have to concede — or be forced into military action against the West .
 This Human Rights Day marks the 70th anniversary of the United Nations General Assembly’s adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
 The world is failing to uphold commitments enshrined in the document, particularly when it comes to protecting children . The world has failed to uphold those commitments, especially in the past few years .