Donbas is shorthand for two Ukrainian oblasts, Donetsk and Luhansk, based on two cities which were both founded by British industrialists . Today, the Donbas is a shorthand for the Donetsk-Lhansk Oblasts .
 Charles Gascoigne, an Englishman, built an iron works in Luhansk in 1795 . Welshman John Hughes started a steel plant and coal mine in Donetsk in 1869 .
 European colonists were encouraged to settle there . Russians, Ukrainians, Romanians, Serbs, Greeks were also encouraged to move there .
After the Industrial Revolution took hold in the late 19th century, the Donbas was largely settled by Russian workers . The Donbas were mostly settled by workers in the early 1900s .
 By 1913, it produced nearly 90% of Russian coal . The Donbas became one of the USSR's main coaland steel-producing areas . It was dubbed ‘the heart of Russia’ in Soviet propaganda .
 In Soviet and post-Soviet times, the cities were largely Russian ethnically and linguistically, while the villages remained Ukrainian .
 Ethnic Ukrainians form 58% of the population of Luhansk Oblast and 56.9% of Donetsk Oblast . Ethnic Russians form 39% and 38.2% respectively .
 Russia fought a “hybrid war, using local fighters backed by Russian special forces and mercenaries, and by extensive military support . Initially, Russia fought the ‘hybrid’ war, with local fighters backing by Russian Special Forces and mercenaries .
In February 2015, a ceasefire brokered by France and Germany – known as Minsk II – froze the conflict . About a third of Luhansk and Donetsk under separatist control . But when Ukrainian forces went on the offensive, threatening to take back nearly all the separatist-held territories,
 A 500km ‘line of contact’ bristling with trenches and landmines, cut the region in two . The region was cut in two by a single kilometre .
 Donbas has a political culture distinct from much of Ukraine . Language issue has caused resentment, and some rightwing Ukrainian nationalist parties are explicitly Russophobic .
 republics of DNR and LNR have evolved into "North Korea-like statelets," says Mansur Mirovalev on Al Jazeera .
 Both have restored the Soviet constitutions adopted by Stalin . In Donetsk, a 13.5m statue of Lenin dominates the main square .
Conversations, phone calls and text messages are monitored by secret police . The death penalty is prescribed for various crimes, an anomaly in modern-day Europe .
Both republics are “entirely dependent on Moscow for financial and military support’s financial support, a report by the Freedom House NGO said this year . There is no press freedom; electoral fraud is widespread; corruption is rife .
Official-language status for Ukrainian has been abolished, and schools have stopped teaching Ukrainian language and history . Crossings into Ukrainian-controlled territory are tightly restricted .
 The “liberation’ of those living under ‘neo-Nazi’ rule in Donbas is Putin’s casus belli . Before launching the invasion in February he recognised the separatist republics .
 It is generally thought that if he manages to conquer the Donbas, he will annex it, as he did with Crimea in 2014 . It is also thought that, if he managed to conquer it, he would annex it .
 England and Wales company registration number 2008885 . Follow us on Facebook and Twitter .
"Keep an open mind with The Week magazine. By threading together all sides of the story, The Week helps you to keep a open mind on the issues that matter."
 The Week helps you to keep an open mind on the issues that matter .
 By 1913, it produced nearly 90% of Russian coal . The Donbas became one of the USSR’s main coaland steel-producing areas .
 The death penalty is prescribed for various crimes, an anomaly in modern-day Europe . Conversations, phone calls and text messages are monitored by secret police .
Both republics are “entirely dependent on Moscow for financial and military support’s, a report by the Freedom House NGO said this year . There is no press freedom; electoral fraud is widespread; corruption is rife, it said .
 Crossings into Ukrainian-controlled territory are tightly restricted . Schools, universities, public services and businesses are dominated by people loyal to separatist leadership . Official-language status for Ukrainian has been abolished, and schools have stopped teaching Ukrainian language .