 Father Kostyantyn Kuznetsov rang the bells and swung open the doors of the blue-and-gold-domed St. Dmitri Kuznesov's St. St. John's in Ukraine .
 Stritenskiy Temple in 2015 marked a small but significant victory in an intensifying dispute . The Eastern Orthodox Church is the world's second-largest Christian denomination .
Construction of the Russian Orthodox Church is known as the local wing of the Moscow Patriarchate . The church was planned as a Ukrainian Orthodox church of the Patriarchate.
 Stritenskiy began in 2014, as Russia-backed separatists swept through Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region .
 Father Kostyantyn is a descendant of Russian aristocrats from Foros, in Crimea . He previously spent 11 years as a priest in the Moscow Patriarchate .
 Stritenskiy is the city’s first and only one loyal to the Kyiv-led church . It was completed soon thereafter .
 Kostyantynivka, an industrial city of roughly 80,000 in Ukraine’s east, sits on the front lines of the simmering war between the Ukrainian Army and Russia-backed separatist forces .
 Eastern Orthodox Christians are pitting each other against each other and setting the stage for a religious schism of historic proportions . It is also one of many at the center of a politically charged spiritual conflict .
 The dispute at hand centers around granting the Ukrainian Orthodox Church autocephaly, or the right to be ecclesiastically independent .
 If granted, the designation would strike a serious blow to Russia's historic claims to Ukraine . Russia denies Moscow religious authority over Ukraine’s roughly 30 million Orthodox believers .
 Bartholomew is expected to give Ukraine a so-called “Tomos,’ or ordinance, granting it autocephaly at a synod perhaps as early as this month .
 The push could prove critical to Poroshenko’s reelection effort in March . Of course, there are flagging poll numbers and growing public disillusionment with his administration .
President Obama claims to have paid more than $380,000 to champion the Tomos . billboards have sprung up across the country .
 Kyiv's Western backers have also come out in support of independence for the Ukrainian church . Kyiv’s Western backers are also backing the church's independence .
 Ukraine regards such statements part of Russia’s ‘hybrid warfare’ Russia is said to combine conventional and irregular warfare, propaganda, and cyberattacks against its smaller neighbor .
 The issue of independence for the Ukrainian church “goes far beyond religion” and is a matter of “national security,” in the words of Poroshenko .
 Ukrainian worshipers say they have seen the hand of the Russian church and its local arm, the Moscow Patriarchate, in that hybrid warfare .
 Father Kostyantyn said Crimea was not Ukraine, that Donbas was not. They said that Crimea is not Ukraine .
 priests of the Moscow-led church refuse funerals and last rites for Ukrainian soldiers killed in battle . They also harboring Russia-backed separatist fighters and blaming Kyiv for starting the war . Evidence has since come to light to suggest Moscow instigated it .
 Natasha Zhukova and her husband, Volodymyr Tsaryk, took the unusual step of baptizing their first-born daughter Sofia in the Greek Catholic Church . For instance, no Kyiv Patriarchate church in Bakhmut, a city of roughly 90,000
 Zhukova says they could not bring themselves to christen their child in a church that was "doing propaganda" for Russia and pro-Russian entities in Ukraine . The church had taken the side of the separatists in the war .
 Scores of Moscow Patriarchate churches across Ukraine ousted their priests and switched allegiance to the Kyiv Patriarchate . The idea of a church of the Kyv Patriarchate once seemed unattainable .
 Father Serhiy led Mass for around 40 parishioners. John the Baptist Temple of the Moscow Patriarchate led Mass .
 He has been offended by accusations that he and fellow priests of the Moscow Patriarchate are working against the country . He says he is offended by the accusations .
 As an active supporter of the Ukrainian Army, he was beaten by Moscow-backed separatists . He suffered liver damage and sutures in his face when they briefly controlled Bakhmut in 2014 . He struggles internally with the fact that the church he belongs acts like an arm
 Father Serhiy’s church in Bakhmut might go the way of Father Kostyantyn's in KostYantynivka .