 Russia's military invasion of Ukraine on February 24 placed the smaller eastern European country at the centre of international concern . Romain HOUEIX 8 min Russia’s military invasion.
 FRANCE 24 traces the chronology of the conflict between Moscow and Kyiv to the Maidan protests in late 2013 .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin launched an invasion on Thursday . The invasion comes after years of latent conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 The Maidan protest movement led to the removal of pro-Russian former president Viktor Yanukovich and the beginning of today's conflict .
 He renounces an association agreement proposed by the EU, which refused to grant him a €20 billion loan . The EU refused to give him a loan.
 Ukraine is divided between this European economic integration project and a competing Russian proposal for a customs union . Ukraine is also divided between a Russian proposal and a European plan to create a union .
 In Kyiv, protests will take place in Independence Square, or "Maidan" The movement will give its name to the movement, which will be known as the movement .
 Pro-Europeans such as former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko and current Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko are among the opposition .
 Putin announces lifting of customs barriers between the two countries . A reduction in the price of gas and a $15 billion loan is also announced .
 Ukraine experiences its bloodiest month of violence in February . Yanukovich departs, and Donbas and Crimea are at the heart of the crisis .
Nearly 90 people are killed in Kyiv between February 18 and 21, authorities say . Nearly 90 people were killed in the Kyiv area.
 Pro and anti-Russian activists clash in Simferopol, the capital of Crimea, an autonomous republic within Ukraine . Crimea's population mostly speaks Russian .
 The peninsula is a strategic territory for Moscow, which deploys troops there . With a naval base in Sevastopol and military airports in Kacha and Simferopol, the peninsula is an important territory .
 Putin signs a bill to annex the peninsula and Moscow gains control of Ukrainian military bases . Putin signs the bill.
 Pro-Russian separatists declare the independence of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic .
 Moscow supports and arms the rebels and many Russians join them . But the Russian Federation is not officially involved in the conflict .
 It also deploys militias that are often linked to the far right or the ultra right, such as Pravy Sektor .
 Two independence referendums are held in Donetsk and Luhansk, another area in eastern Ukraine on the Russian border . “yes’s wins massively. “Yes” wins massively, says one observer .
 Ukrainians elect Petro Poroshenko as president with 56 percent of the vote in the first round . Ukrainians elect Poroshenko with 56% of vote in first round.
 French president François Hollande, former German chancellor Angela Merkel, Putin and Poroshenko meet in France’s Normandy on the sidelines of the seventieth anniversary of the Allied landings .
 It is the first meeting between Putin and his Ukrainian counterpart since the conflict began in eastern Ukraine . It initiates the occasional “Normandy format’s four-way talks between Paris, Berlin, Moscow and Kyiv .
 A meeting in the ‘Normandy format’ consisting of France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine takes place . The meeting takes place in the "Normandy Format"
 Alexander Zakhartchenko is elected in Donetsk, and Igor Plotniski in Luhansk . Zakharchenko was elected to the Donetsk city of Donetsk .
 Ukraine denounces a violation of the Minsk accords, while Russia views the polls as respecting the protocol . Ukraine denounced a violation. Russia says it is respecting the protocols .
 Ukraine's parliament votes in favour of joining NATO, much to Moscow's displeasure . Russia is unhappy with Ukraine's decision to join the alliance .
 The leaders of Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France meet again in Belarus to impose a new ceasefire . The agreement includes measures such as the withdrawal of heavy weapons on both sides .
 Plotniski, leader of the self-proclaimed Luhansk People’s Republic, resigns after taking refuge in Moscow .
 Pasetchnik’s counterpart in Donetsk, Alexander Zakhartchenko, is assassinated . Pasetchenik”s counterpart, AlexanderZakhartchen, is killed .
 Russian forces board three small Ukrainian navy ships attempting to pass under Crimean bridge . Russia inaugurated the Crimean bridge with great fanfare the same year .
Volodymyr Zelensky is the new president of Ukraine . He will be the first Ukrainian president to be elected in a presidential election .
 Zelensky is an actor and comedian who campaigned against corruption and for a détente with Moscow . He is also a comedian.
 Emmanuel Macron meets with Putin at his summer residence at the fort of Brégançon in southern France . The leaders’ first meeting at Versailles Palace shortly after Macron’s election in 2017 .
 Russia releases the 24 detained Ukrainian sailors and 10 more Ukrainian citizens . The prisoner exchange includes filmmaker Oleg Sentsov .
 Ukrainian and Russian representatives meet in Minsk under the aegis of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe . They reach an agreement on the organisation of elections in the separatist areas of Donbas and on granting them special status .
 Putin and Zelensky meet for the first time at a Normandy format summit in Paris . The two leaders will meet for first time in Normandy for a week .
 The parties involved in the conflict in eastern Ukraine agree to implement the ceasefire reached under the Minsk accords before the end of the year, and to exchange prisoners .
 Moscow and Kyiv finalise a new five-year agreement on the transit of Russian gas through Ukraine . The agreement is part of a five- year deal between Russia and Ukraine .
 The agreement guarantees gas supplies to Europe, which were threatened by a previous crisis in 2009 . The agreement was reached in 2009.
 NATO grants Ukraine “enhanced opportunities’ allowing cooperation between NATO forces and Kyiv’s army .
 Zelensky openly declares that joining NATO is the only way to put an end to the war in Donbas . He says joining NATO will end the conflict in the region .
 Russia conducts another large-scale military exercise near the Ukrainian border in November . Western countries fear escalation after Russia conducts a large- scale military exercise .
 Putin announces security demands including a guarantee that Ukraine will never join NATO and the withdrawal of NATO forces from the former Soviet Union .
 NATO refuses to budge on its policy of allowing countries to decide if they want to join . Moscow continues to demand a guarantee that Ukraine never will .
 Putin announces recognition for independence of self-declared republics in eastern Ukraine . He orders Russian “peacekeepers’ to enter them .
 Russian forces invade Ukrainian territory on several fronts . This article is a translation of the original in French .