 The February 2015 Minsk II settlement agreement to end the conflict in eastern Ukraine’s Donbass is not faring well .
 Minsk II remains the only settlement arrangement on offer, and it continues to command at least rhetorical support in Kiev and Moscow . Still, Minsk has not yet agreed to a settlement agreement .
 Donbass is destined to occupy a place on the list of frozen conflicts that dot the post-Soviet space . For the foreseeable future, however, it appears that Donbass will occupy a spot in the future .
 Following Russia’s military seizure of Crimea, an armed separatist conflict broke out in eastern Ukraine in 2014 .
Ukrainian military in August 2014 appeared on the verge of retaking Donbass . Regular units of the Russian army intervened .
 A ceasefire was hastily brokered in Minsk in September 2014, but it never took serious hold . The ceasefire was quickly brokered.
 Fighting continued, and discussions in the trilateral contact group made little headway . The Ukrainian government, separatists and Russian government were involved .
 In February 2015, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Francois Hollande brokered the Minsk II agreement between Russian President Vladimir Putin and President Petro Poroshenko .
 Minsk II provided for a ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons from the line of contact within two weeks’ time . Minsk 2 provided for the ceasefire.
 Other provisions laid out the terms for a political settlement . Includes release of prisoners, special status for Donbass, local elections, constitutional reform .
 Separatist and Russian forces ignored the ceasefire and instead launched a major attack at the key rail center at Debaltseve . The attack was the first since the ceasefire was agreed .
 The line of contact between the two sides subsequently stabilized . The two sides continued to exchange fire .
 The ceasefire took better hold in September and the sides withdrew much of their heavy weaponry . Not all fighting came to an end, though not all fighting ended .
 The separatists, under some pressure from Moscow, agreed to the postponement . The separatists were under pressure from the Moscow government .
 Kiev and separatists have yet to agree on terms for holding the elections . Kiev and the separatists have not agreed on terms of holding elections .
 The separatists demand that Donbass receive special status before the elections are held . The Ukrainian government says the elections should be held first and certified by OSCE to meet democratic standards .
 separatist leader says pro-government political parties will not be allowed to compete in local elections . In another possible complication, a separatist leader has said that pro- government parties would not be able to compete .
 Ukrainian officials argue separatists and Russians have failed to meet key Minsk II provisions, including withdrawal of foreign forces and military equipment from Ukraine .
 The separatists claim that Kiev has not yet granted amnesty and has not enacted constitutional reforms to provide for decentralization . The separatists say that Kiev is not yet granting amnesty and is not enacting constitutional reforms .
 The vote generated controversy as opponents criticized it for rewarding the separatists . The vote has generated controversy for rewarding separatists .
 Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk suggested that the amendment instead be put to a referendum . In a new twist, he suggested on Jan. 23 that the referendum should be put on a vote .
 All the agreement’s provisions were to have been implemented by the end of 2015 . All the provisions had to be implemented by end of the year .
 Poroshenko, Putin, Merkel and Hollande agreed to extend the deadline into 2016 . But they did not fix a specific date .
 Russia has given no indication of similar intentions regarding Donbass . Russia moved promptly to annex Crimea in March 2014, but it has not said anything .
 Crimea has historical significance for Moscow and hosts the Black Sea Fleet . Crimea has historic significance for the Russian capital . Crimea is also home to the Black sea Fleet .
 Most analysts believe that Donbass would impose an even heavier burden on Donbass .
 The Kremlin appears to regard Donbass as a means to destabilize Kiev and to make it more difficult for the central government to proceed with needed reforms and implementation of the Ukraine-European Union Association Agreement .
 Moscow’s apparent support for ratcheting down the violence in Donbass and for postponing local elections there . The appointment of Borys Gryzlov, a Kremlin insider, has led some to suggest that Russian policy may be changing .
 Kremlin policy has hit a dead end in Donbass, says Kremlin officials . They argue that Moscow has now turned its attention to Syria, and the Russian economy is in more difficult straits than anticipated .
 The economy contracted by 4 percent in 2015 and faced with the low price of oil and Western economic sanctions . The economy is expected to contract further in 2016 .
 Moscow has concluded that at this point in time, no further destabilization is necessary . But it is also possible that Moscow has also concluded that, at this time, there is no more destabilization necessary .
 Russia is not yet prepared to reach a settlement of the crisis in eastern Ukraine, at least not on terms that would be reasonable for Kiev . Absent a more serious effort by Moscow to implement the Minsk II provisions, all indicators point to the conclusion .
 The most likely state in which Donbass will remain into the foreseeable future is thus a frozen conflict . There is no major fighting yet no complete ceasefire, and negotiations on implementing Minsk II continue yet show scant real progress .
 That would allow the Kremlin to ratchet up the conflict at a later point if it desired to further pressure Kiev . That would be possible if it wanted to pressure Kiev, the Kremlin said .
 Ukrainian government may consider frozen conflict acceptable for near to medium term . Ukrainian government regularly reiterates desire to implement Minsk II and restore sovereignty over all of Donbass .
 Kiev is not in a position to assume economic responsibility for Donbass . It would require significant humanitarian assistance and reconstruction funds to repair the heavy damage caused by nearly two years of fighting .
 Some privately question whether Ukraine should seek the return of Donbass or just let it go .
 Moscow appears to use Donbass as leverage to pressure Kiev, rather than pursue securing the territory as part of Russia . It is not apparent that letting Donbass go would settle matters with Russia .
 The EU and U.S. should continue pressing all parties to implement the Minsk II provisions, even if full implementation seems unlikely .
 Ukrainian government should be in a position to say it did everything in its power to honor Minsk II . Russia and the separatists will be blamed for the failure, if it is concluded that Minsk has failed .
 The key to settling the conflict continues to lie in Moscow, which has decisive influence with the separatists . The key is to settle the conflict in Moscow .
 Western policy should aim to change the calculation of costs and benefits underlying the Kremlin’s policy toward Ukraine .
 The West should continue to give Kiev political support, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says the West should help Ukraine with economic and anti-corruption reforms .
 Additional military assistance should be provided with the objective of driving up the costs of any renewed offensive by separatist and Russian forces .
 The West should make clear to Moscow that a return to more normal relations will depend on the Kremlin changing its policy toward Ukraine . The Kremlin should change its policy on Ukraine.
 The EU and U.S. should hold to their position that sanctions will be eased only after Minsk II is fully implemented, says the EU .
 Kiev has wisely said that it should be addressed in the longer term . Crimea is a separate issue of Crimea . Kiev has also said that Crimea should be discussed in the long term .
 The West must take into account the broader implications of Moscow’s use of military force against Ukraine .
 The likelihood of Russian military action against a NATO member state is low, but it cannot entirely be discounted .
 NATO should bolster its conventional forces and deterrent capabilities in the Baltic States and Poland . NATO should take steps to bolster its traditional forces and deterring capabilities .
 In many quarters of the West, there is interest in engaging Russia, which should certainly be part of the EU and U.S. approach .
 The West should recognize that the more effectively it bolsters Ukraine and demonstrates NATO’s readiness to deter other Russian provocations, the more likely it will be that engagement will prove fruitful . The more effective it bolster Ukraine and shows NATO's readiness.
 The Security Times is a special addition of The Atlantic Times for the 52nd Munich Security Conference . This article first appeared in the Security Times .