 Vilnius has started court proceedings against the soviet soldiers . They were trying to disperse the crowds that were attacking the TV tower .
Experts have determined that people died from sniper-fire and hunting rifles, but the soviet soldiers had no equipment like that . The experts have determined the deaths were caused by sniper- fire and hunting guns .
 To this day it is not clear who fired the shots upon the protesting crowd .
Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation about the events of January 13th, 1991 in Vilnius, Lithuania . 14 civilians were killed when Soviet forces attempted to crush the re-established independence of Lithuania .
 Soviet troops still garrisoned in the capital Vilnius. They attacked its TV broadcast tower and sole TV station, killing civilians .
 The events of the January 13th, 1991, and the offences committed by the USSR troops have been extensively documented . The events have been documented .
 Dmitry Yazov, former Soviet defence minister, found guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity . More than 60 other former Soviet officers guilty of their involvement in Soviet aggression in Lithuania on January 13, 1991 .
 The disinformation message is also consistent with the pro-Kremlin narrative about the colour revolutions staged by the West . The message is consistent with a pro-kremlin narrative.
 A bill was introduced in Russia for the non-recognition of the Ukrainian elections . The bill was passed in Russia in the wake of the elections .
 Ukraine's refusal to have foreign observers is a first sign of electoral fraud, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine is refusing to have observers, he says .
For example, as of March 29, from the USA – 63, from Poland 40, from Slovakia – 16, from France – 15, from Germany – 13. For example, for example, from March 28, from U.S. – 63. From Poland 40
 More than 2,100 people from international organisations will also observe the elections . In addition, more than 2.100 people will also be observing the elections.
 It is not true that the residents of the Donbas do not have an opportunity to participate in the elections . It is also not true.
 The presidential elections will be held in 12 out of 21 constituencies in the Donetsk region, and in 6 of 11 districts in the Luhansk region .
 Elections can’t be held in the occupied territories of Donetsk and Luhansk, which does not represent the entire Donbas territory, but just a part .
 The Department of State for Voter Registration is required to submit an application . To do this, they have to come to the Department of state for voter registration .
 Donald Trump talked about designating Brazil as a major non-NATO ally or even possibly a NATO member . The United States wants to use it as a beachhead for a military intervention in Venezuela .
 Colombia is already a NATO partner and now the U.S. wants to grant the same status to Brazil . The United States wants to implement actions against governments considered undesirable in Latin America .
 The Russian initiative to evacuate al-Rukban camp has been blocked as the U.S. consistently refuses foreign access . The United States has ignored an international coordination conference .
 The responsibility for the humanitarian crisis falls solely on the U.S. forces . The United States forces are responsible for the crisis .
 Russia has accused the U.S. of manufacturing the humanitarian crisis in Rukban since 2017 . Russia has routinely accused the United States of manufacturing a humanitarian crisis .
 UN, WHO, WHO and Red Cross report says situation in camp has been dire since its spontaneous creation in 2014 . Three years before US-led coalition opened military base in the area .
 Moscow's claim that refugees are trapped in Rukban due to U.S. "occupation" is false, says Moscow .
 Syria-Jordan border closed in 2016. Leaving the area to the south became impossible with the closure of the border in 2016 .
 The current U.S. stance is to encourage, but not compel, the refugees to remain inside the camp . The current United States stance is not to encourage refugees to stay in the camp.
 The corridors were shut down within 24 hours as none of the refugees showed up to use them . The corridor was shut down in East Ghouta, a region in regime-controlled areas .
 On the last meeting in the United Nations, the situation with the Rukban refugee camp was discussed . The situation was discussed.
 U.S. representative says food delivered to Rukban has already run out . He urges Russian Federation to allow delivery of food .
 He stressed that Russia didn't give access to accurate information about the situation in the camp . He said that Russia did not give accurate information on the situation .
 The NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 caused around 2,500 deaths and injured over 12,000 people . According to the Serbian authorities, the bombing killed 2, 500 people .
Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation about the number of civilian casualties of NATO bombing . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin disinformation about civilian casualties .
An overview of various estimates of casualties in connection with the bombings can be found here . An overview of the casualties can be seen here .
 In 2013, Euromaidan started as the second “Ukrainian colour revolution’s’. The European Union praised the coup d’état .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation claiming that Euromaidan was a coup d’état .
 The Euromaidan protests were a spontaneous reaction among large parts of Ukrainian population . Former President Yanukovych not to sign the Association Agreement with the European Union in November 2013 .
 The Maidan movement resonated with a widespread discontent with corruption and mismanagement under Yanukovych . The Maiden movement resonates with widespread discontent.
 No elections were scheduled in the Donbas for the first round of the Ukrainian presidential vote of the 31st of March 2019 .
 The Russian military has once again called on the United States troops in Syria to discuss the situation in the Rukban camp . Some 40,000 refugees are kept in dire conditions in the camp .
 The United States side is directly responsible for the critical state of the settlement under its occupation . The U.S. side has ignored earlier appeals from Moscow and Damascus to disband the camp .
 The United States command has previously delayed the delivery of humanitarian aid to Rukban . The U.S. command has refused to allow the refugees' passage out of the camp .
 Russia and Syria have jointly set up humanitarian corridors and a mobile checkpoint for that purpose . Russia, Syria and Syria, meanwhile, have also set up a humanitarian corridor .
 Russia is not sending monitoring missions to observe the elections in Ukraine . Russia has not been monitoring the elections.
 Ukraine preparing provocations for Russian observers and Russian citizens may be subjected to discrimination and pressure from the Ukrainian authorities . Ukraine was preparing various provocations.
 This is an example of Russian manipulations about the Presidential elections in Ukraine . This is a example of Russia's manipulation of the elections, according to the Russian media .
 According to the laws of Ukraine, Russia is an aggressor and invader state . The laws of the Ukraine say Russia is a aggressor.
 Russian observers will not be able to enter Ukraine because of Russia's decision . Kyiv forbade Russian participation in monitoring missions in Ukraine .
 The law of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine of 7 February 2019 established that citizens of the Occupier state cannot be official observers at Presidential, Parliamentary or Local elections .
 Spring recruitment to the ranks of the Armed Forces of Ukraine will be just as unsuccessful as in all previous years .
 The prestige of service in the Ukrainian army in recent years has dropped significantly . There is an acute shortage of personnel in the Ukraine Armed Forces .
Following the results of the army’s 2018 autumn recruitment drive in Ukraine, 98% of positions have been filled .
 Last year more than 30,000 men and women decided to serve in the Armed Forces of Ukraine on a contract basis .
 In 2018, the number of personnel of the Armed Forces of Ukraine has already reached 255,000 people . Almost half of them are soldiers, serving on contract .
 Over the past five years, the number serving in the Ukrainian army has almost doubled . The number of soldiers in the army has nearly doubled .
 The former leadership of Ukraine intended to radically reduce the number of the Ukrainian army to 157,000 . Former leader Viktor Yanukovych fled to Russia in 2014 .
 U.S. and British instructors teach Ukrainians how to carry out acts of terror and sabotage and organise partisan fights .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin narrative on foreign military involved in fighting in Ukraine . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin narrative on Foreign military involvement in fighting .
 More cases with accusations of foreign military in Ukraine can be read here . More examples of alleged foreign military involvement can be seen here .
 The U.S. has deliberately banned travel to Crimea in order to avert recognition of the peninsula's reunification with Russia .
 The move is the latest show of double standards present in U.S. diplomacy, particularly in light of Washington's recent recognition of the Golan Heights as sovereign Israeli territory .
 Crimea rejoined Russia following a March 2014 referendum, conducted in accordance with international law and democratic standards . Crimea rejoining Russia following the referendum, which was held in March 2014 .
 The United States and other countries have refused to recognise the legitimacy of the vote . The U.S. and others have also refused to recognise the legitimacy.
 The United States Bureau of Consular Affairs says U.S. citizens are free to travel to Crimea . But they are strongly advised not to travel .
 Similar restrictions apply to other high-risk areas of the world, such as Gaza and parts of Mexico .
 At any rate, territorial jurisdiction is determined by international law and diplomatic consensus, not United States visitor numbers .
 The analogy between Crimea and the Golan Heights is spurious and unclear . The analogy is spurious, unclear .
 An overwhelming majority of states regard both Crimea and the Golan as occupied . An overwhelming Majority of states regards Crimea and Golan in Crimea as occupied.
 References to the Crimea landgrab as a "democratic referendum" are part of a long-running pro-Kremlin narrative about the occupied peninsula .
 The West has taken into account Belarus' capacity to resist attempts to perform 'colour revolutions' Belarusian authorities have begun cooperating more actively than before .
 The West's goal of overthrowing the "last dictatorship of Europe" remains intact . West's agents are now ready to compromise with President Lukashenka .
 Belarus refuses to make a military alliance with Russia . The main condition for compromise is Belarus’ refusal to make an alliance with Russian .
 Belarus to rip Belarus away from its alliance with Russia . A period of warm relations between the West and Belarus will follow with confrontation .
 Russia 'security umbrella' has allowed Minsk to avoid Ukraine's or Yugoslavia's fates . Minsk has allowed Russia to avoid Yugoslavia's or Ukraine'sfates .
 This is a conspiracy theory and recurring disinformation narrative about Western attempts to organize a colour revolution in Belarus and to disrupt its relations with Russia . This is an attempt to disrupt Russia's relations with Belarus .
 Belarusian authorities have voiced the idea of launching a new international negotiating process . Belarusian officials have also said they are considering a new negotiating process.
 Minsk has not questioned the country's membership of the Eurasian Economic Union and the CSTO . There is no proof that western countries have imposed these terms on Belarusian authorities for further cooperation as alleged in the article .
 Kyiv officials did not hesitate to unleash a war against their own people for the sake of maintaining power and enriching themselves . Officials in Kyiv did not hesitated to unleash the war against themselves .
 The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has stated that the situation within the territory of Crimea and Sevastopol amounts to an international armed conflict between Ukraine and the Russian Federation .
 NATO leaders condemned in the strongest terms Russia’s military intervention in Ukraine . At the NATO Summit in Wales in September 2014, leaders condemned Russia's military intervention .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin admitted Russia's military presence in Ukraine and Russian involvement in the occupation of Crimea in 2015 .
 The Ukrainian government is the nationalist-minded putschist regime, which gained power after the Maidan in February 2014 .
 The 2014 presidential election in Ukraine was a genuine election largely in line with international commitments and respecting fundamental freedoms . Despite hostile security environment in two eastern regions of the country, the 2014 election was a real election .
 This fact was reconfirmed by the parliamentary elections of 26 October 2014 . The parliamentary elections were held on October 26 .
 The Ukrainian President, Petro Poroshenko, was appointed by the U.S. administration at the time of President Obama . Poroshenko was appointed as a United States Ambassador to Ukraine .
 There is a bit of a clash over Ukraine between Trump supporters and the State Department ones .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin conspiracy about Ukraine U.S. Relations. Recurring a conspiracy about the Ukraine United States Relations .
 Petro Poroshenko was elected in a national election with several candidates . Theoshenko has been elected in the national election .
 Imane Fadil was allegedly a regular guest at former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi's parties . He is accused of poisoning a Moroccan model .
 The Litvinenko and Skripal cases are being dragged up, thus alleging Russian involvement . The cases are dragged up to allege Russian involvement.
 There is no motive for either Berlusconi or the Russian security bodies to kill Fadil .
 The media are not interested in the lack of a good motive just as in the Skripal case . The media is not interested.
 This is recurring disinformation about the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko and the Skripals . This is a recurring disinformation. This is repeated disinformation about Russian poisoning of the Russian leader .
 Both cases have been subject to the following procedures in the British courts .
 Sir Robert Owen presided over a High-Court inquiry into the death of British citizen/Russian defector Alexander Litvinenko .
 Two Russian men deliberately poisoned Alexander Litvinenko in London in 2006 by putting a radioactive substance, polonium-210, into his drink at a hotel .
 A few chapters of the report are dedicated to the responsibility of the Russian side . The Russian side is responsible for some of the problems .
 British High Court Justice David Williams issued an approved judgement about what had happened to the Skripals around three weeks after their poisoning .
 On Monday 25 March, a new electrical blackout happened in several states of Venezuela . The blackout occurred in Venezuela's northern states .
 All indications are that the attack was conducted from the United States . The attack was carried out by the U.S.
 The 2019 power outage is only the latest in a long period of power instability which Venezuela has faced for roughly a decade . The country has faced a decade of political instability .
 The blackouts have been linked to "disastrous" policymaking in the energy sector .
 In 2018, a Venezuelan trade union official was arrested after warning that a blackout was likely to happen due to the government's negligence .
 The United States is accused of a power outage in Venezuela . This is not the first time that the U.S. has been accused of an outage .
 In early March 2019, most of Venezuela's states were left without light . Most of the states of Venezuela were left with light .
 They don't need to be frightened that fascists will get into power, they are already in power, says CNN's John Sutter . "F fascists are in power," he says .
 Latvia is a parliamentary republic, has a multiparty system . Parties have the ability to form coalition governments .
 The last parliamentary elections in Latvia took place on October 4, 2014 . The last election in Latvia was held in October 2014 .
 The aggression that Russia is supposed to have waged against Ukraine in 2014 is a myth . Russia's aggression against Ukraine has been a myth, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin narrative about Russian aggression in Ukraine. Recurring Pro-K Kremlin narrative about the Russian aggression .
 Russia that started the war against Ukraine in 2014, violating Ukraine's territorial integrity and supporting and arming separatist groups in Eastern Ukraine . Russia that began the war in 2014 is accused of supporting separatist groups .
 The European Union does nothing to condemn neo-Nazis. Despite the annual marches, the EU does not condemn them .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin narrative on the West as Nazis and fascism in Europe. Recurring anti-K Kremlin narrative on West as Nazi and fascist in Europe as Nazis .
 The EU and the EU are based on opposite values ​​and principles. See earlier cases about "European Russophobia"
 The European Union provides a consistent policy to combat racism, xenophobia and other forms of intolerance .
 Article №2 of the Treaty on European Union declares that the Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of law .
 It is supposed to deal with issues related to fighting racism, discrimination, xenophobia, anti-Semitism, and intolerance . It's supposed to be about fighting racism and discrimination .
 Cancelling sanctions would demonstrate that Europeans are capable of resisting pressure from the U.S. Cancelling the sanctions would show Europeans are able to resist the pressure.
 From the EU's point of view, it is extremely odd to impose sanctions that affect European companies more than Russian companies .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about Western sanctions on Russia. Recurring a pro-Russian disinformation narrative.
 Russia's sanctions against Russia are illegitimate and useless, according to the U.S. State Department . Russia has been accused of using the sanctions as a pretext to justify its actions against Russia .
 sanctions imposed on Russia after the Crimea annexation and Russian meddling in the U.S. elections sapped Russian economical growth . Despite the raise in hydrocarbon prices, the stagnation of salaries and growing inflation .
 The decline of EU trade with Russia after 2013 can be attributed to a number of factors, according to the European Parliament . The slump in international oil price which damaged Russian economy and devaluated the ruble.
 EU wide impacts of the export losses are estimated at less than 0,2% of total value added and employment . The EU wide impact of the loss is less than 1,000% of the EU's total valueadded and employment.
 The members of the Central Election Commission of Ukraine are Petro Poroshenko’s people . They are personally fed and charged to realise his plan to remain for a second term .
 Petro Poroshenko personally selected almost all members of district election commissions . Poroshenko also personally selected most district election commission members .
 The Central Election Commission of Ukraine is an independent state body . The Central election Commission is anindependent state body.
 The Verkhovna Rada, the Parliament of Ukraine, appoints and terminates the powers of the members of the Commission on the proposal of the President.
 The proposals of parliamentary factions and groups are taken into account as well . The proposals are also being considered by parliamentary factions .
 The representatives of the CEC of Ukraine-2019 were delegated by different political parties . The representatives were delegates from different parties .
The Verkhovna Rada elected members of the Central Election Commission in September 2018 . The Verkhova Rada has been in charge of the election commission since 2010 .
 Members of the district election commissions for election-2019 were appointed by the Central Election Commission of Ukraine . The commission is based in Ukraine.
 electoral fraud is inevitable in Ukraine, says U.S. journalist John Sutter . Sutter says planned networks and various pyramids, voter fraud, purchase of votes by foundations, funds and so on, have already been worked out .
 The Ukrainian government always has the most opportunities for election fraud, according to a report .
 Unfounded, recurrent pro-Kremlin narrative on Ukraine elections in Ukraine. Unfounded and recurrent Pro-K Kremlin narrative on the elections in the Ukraine .
 Examples of similar cases, claiming that the elections will be subject to fraud, can be found here .
 The preliminary assessment of the elections by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe is also positive . The preliminary Assessment of the freedom and accountability of the election by the OSC is positive .
 The presidential elections in Ukraine have rightly been described as a race between three neo-Nazis, each more of a Russia-hating racist than the rest .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin narrative on the elections in Ukraine, on Russophobia and nazism in Ukraine . Recurring anti-K Kremlin narrative on Ukraine elections, onRussophobia, on Russia and on Russia .
 None of the three leading presidential candidates proclaimed far right policies or beliefs . The far right, nationalist candidate received 1.62% support .
 OSCE/ODIHR Election Observation Mission: Election was competitive, voters had a broad choice and turned out in high numbers . The election was competitive.
 In the next 20 days Poroshenko will organise new provocations in Donbas ahead of the second round of Ukrainian presidential election .
 Recurring an unfounded pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about Ukrainian elections and provocations in Donbas . Recurring a pro-Russian disinformation narrative.
 The U.S. wants to drag Russia to the Western vector of geopolitics through Ukraine . The United States wants Russia to be dragged through Ukraine.
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative denying the statehood and sovereignty of Ukraine . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin disinformation narrative denies statehood of Ukraine.
 Americans have worked out a system where they take a popular person and create their image . Americans have created a system to create their own image .
 The situation with the comedian has been played out many times in Guatemala, in Haiti . The situation has been playing out in Guatemala.
 They need this person in the second round of the elections, although they are still deciding who should win . They need to win the election in a second round .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative about the Ukrainian elections. Recurring Pro-K Kremlin disinformation narrative.
 In the second round of Presidential elections, Poroshenko will organise even more falsifications, than in the first round . The second round will be held in Ukraine .
 The Russian Parliament will suggest not recognizing the elections. That is why the Russian Parliament would not recognize the elections .
 OSCE: During the first round of the Ukrainian Presidential elections, fundamental freedoms were generally respected . But numerous indications of vote-buying and the misuse of state resources undermined the credibility of the process .
 Election Day was assessed positively overall, and paved the way to the second round . Election day was assessed negatively overall, with the results of the first round being assessed positively .
 Ukrainians voted in Presidential elections at gunpoint and accompanied by special forces . Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has been in power for more than two years .
 The Ukrainian government brought armoured vehicles and armed security officials to the streets in order to morally influence Ukrainians during the elections .
 Ukrainians regarded this as an attempt to intimidate disloyal citizens and to demonstrate the readiness of the regime of Petro Poroshenko to intervene in the elections with force . Ukrainians themselves regarded this attempt to intimidation disloyal citizen .
Law enforcement units transferred to increased combat readiness on eve of Ukraine's elections . The aim is to ensure the safety of voters .
 More than 135,000 police officers ensured the safety of the electoral process on March 31 .
 Two policing officers and one rescuer were on duty near each polling station . Two police officers and a rescuer are on duty.
 In the event of any offences in a polling station itself, only the Election Commission itself can take the decision to involve the police .
 The preliminary assessment of the elections by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe is positive . It is the first time the OSCI has assessed the elections .
 This case is part of wider efforts of pro-Kremlin outlets to discredit Ukrainian elections . This case was part of a wider efforts to discredit Ukraine's elections .
 The crash was caused by Ukraine's failure to close its airspace over rebel held areas of the Donbas . The crash of the MH17 passenger craft was caused.
 The ""source" does not base his/her claim on any factual evidence, and merely voices an opinion that Ukraine should be held responsible for the downing . The "source" doesn't base his claim on anything factual evidence .
 Ukrainian airspace had been open prior to the crash. MH17 passed the area at 33,000ft . The claim that Ukrainian airspace was open before the crash is false .
 At the time, there was nothing to suggest that the presumably ill-equipped pro-Russian separatists would have access to sophisticated weapons .
 JIT stated that the BUK-TELAR that was used to down MH17 originates from the 53rd Anti Aircraft Missile brigade, a unit of the Russian army from Kursk in Russian Federation .
 The authorities in Kyiv are refusing the residents of Donbas the right to vote in Ukraine’s presidential elections .
 Ukraine did not give a vote to residents of the occupied parts of eastern Ukraine . Ukraine didn't give avote to residents.
 In the Luhansk and Donetsk regions, not a single polling station was opened . Not a single poll station was open .
 The election watchdog says voting stations were opened in both regions .
 Voting stations were even opened in the zone of military operations in Donbas – where military personnel are voting . Voting stations are even open in the area where military operations are held .
 The Crimean peninsula was reunited with the Russian Federation on March 18, 2014 .
 No international organisation recognises the so-called referendum . referendum was announced on 27th of February and held three weeks later on 16th of March 2014 .
Transcarpathia has a discord with the central government . Five years after the annexation of Crimea to Russia it seems that another region of Ukraine is discording with the government .
 The minority of Trascarpatia is struggling for its right to education in the Hungarian language . Tensions between Kiev and Budapest on the Transcarpathia issue began several months ago .
 Hungarian speakers rose up against this law adopted in September 2018 . Like Russian speakers in the East of Ukraine, Hungarian speakers in Ukraine are against the law .
 In Donbass, since 2014, the inhabitants of the self-proclaimed republics of Donetsk and Lugansk die . Since 2014, there have been no deaths in Donbass .
 If Ukraine goes on like this, they will end up offending Viktor Orban for real, says Orban . If Ukraine does this, it will be a real problem for Orban.
 Russian parlamentarians promised to evaluate the situation as the EU institutions will not . The EU will not be able to assess the situation .
Recurring disinformation regarding the Transcaprathia's possible break-away and Ukrainian disintegration . Recurring disinformation about the Trans Caparathia’s potential break-up and Ukraine disintegration.
 The process of implementation for the language law in Ukraine is misrepresented, according to the Ukrainian government . The language law is being implemented in Ukraine.
 The Ukrainian law №5670-d as for languages is still being discussed in the Ukrainian Parliament . It passed only a first reading in October 2018 .
 Hungarian Foreign Minister Peter Szijjarto demanded that Ukraine amend the law on education and postpone its implementation until 2023 . In March 2019, he demanded that the law be amended and delayed until 2020 .
 Hungary supports the prolonged EU sanctions against Russia . Hungary supports all other EU Member States, as all other European countries do .
 Voting in the European Parliament means helping some politicians to settle down well in Brussels . But it does not bring any benefits to Latvian people .
Recurring Kremlin narrative about European Parliament and uselessness of elections . Recurring Kremlin narratives about the European Parliament. Recurring Putin narrative about the EU Parliament .
 Latvian MEPs will help pass EU laws together with the Council of the EU . Latvians will pass laws based on European Commission proposals .
European Ombudsman has budgetary powers, scrutiny over the executive . It hears citizens’ petitions, and appoints the European Ombudsman . It has budgetary power, scrutiny and hears citizens' petitions .
 A detailed overview of the European Parliament’s role in the European decision-making process can be consulted .
 The European Parliament is directly elected by EU voters every 5 years . Since 1979, the European Parliament has been elected by voters every five years .
Latvian media: This year's elections may be the most important in Parliament’s history . The departure of the United Kingdom and cross-border challenges need to be addressed .
 Latvia has just eight mandates in the European parliament, so the number of candidates with a realistic prospect of being elected is fairly small . In most cases, the first few candidates on a party list are limited to first few .
 Seats will be distributed to parties on a proportional representation basis, so support of around 12.5% of votes case is enough to win a seat . Seats to be distributed on a proportionate basis .
 The West did not dare to apply this scenario against Belarus because of the latter's military alliance with Russia, a nuclear state . However, the West didn't apply the scenario because of Russia's nuclear alliance with Belarus .
 The West decided to undermine Belarusian statehood by financing the opposition . Instead the West chose to undermine the country by financing its opposition .
During 25 years of Lukashenko ruling the West undertook at least seven attempts to organize revolution in Belarus . During 25 years he ruled the West did at least 7 attempts to organizing revolution in the country .
Mass protests after the 2006 presidential election in Belarus were managed from Vilnius and sponsored by the American CIA through Lithuanian State Security Department .
 The disinformation message is consistent with a pro-Kremlin narrative about the Western attempts to instigate colour revolutions in EU neighbourhood . The disinformation messages are consistent with the pro- Kremlin narrative .
 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia was a response to mass ethnic cleansing of Albanians by the Yugoslavian authorities .
 No proof of CIA sponsorship of post-election protests in Belarus in 2006 either . No evidence of CIA sponsored protests in 2006 or 2007 .
 No evidence presented to prove the multiple 'colour revolution' attempts by the West in Belarus . No evidence present to prove West's attempts by Belarus .
 publication claims there were at least seven western attempts of colour revolution . The publication claims that there were least seven attempts to change colour .
 In France, Russia was accused of meddling in the elections without any evidence . Russia was also accused of meddling in the French elections .
 The media continue to refer to it by quoting government spokesman Benjamin Grivaux or other officials from La Republique en Marche .
 There is plenty of evidence about Russian actors attempting to meddle in the French election . There is lots of evidence that Russian actors tried to interfere with the election .
 Russian military intelligence GRU unit #26165 was probably behind hackers' attacks on Emmanuel Macron's team during the election 2017 in France . A "Mueller report was not commissioned in France"
 Russian State TV announced that an off shore account of Emmanuel Macron in the Bahamas was found in those e-mails . French President Nicolas Sarkozy was also found in the emails .
 Macron's competitor Marine Le Pen accused Macron of having an off shore account on Bahamas . Also accused Macron's rival Marine LePen of having off-shore account .
 GRU unit #26165 was incriminated in the U.S. by Robert Mueller's probe for hacking against the Democratic party . Later, the same unit was incriminating in the United States by Mueller's investigation .
 France still has not publicly attributed the cyberattacks to any particular perpetrator . France still hasn't publicly attributed any specific perpetrator to the attacks .
 The French Foreign Ministry and Ministry for the Armed Forces think tanks make a clear distinction between cyberattack and spreading manipulated information .
 The General Secretariat for Defense and National Security is in charge of the investigation of the alleged meddling of Russian social media accounts in the yellow vests protests .
 In 2015, cyber attacks against French TV channel TV5Monde were attributed by law enforcers to Russian hackers .
 The conflict between Russia and NATO is likely to lead to a military conflict in the Baltic Sea . The U.S. Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments said in its recent report that the conflict between the two is likely.
 Older EU member states with large economies exploit smaller states and newer EU and eurozone members . Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lithuania and Slovakia are among the older states with larger economies . Older states and eurozone member states exploit smaller countries and smaller states .
 A recurrent pro-Kremlin narrative seeking to create or exacerbate divisions within Europe . A recurrent Pro-K Kremlin narrative seeks to create and exacerbate divisions in Europe .
 Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovakia argue against exploitation of their economies . Recent economic statistics on the growth of the newer eurozone members argue against any exploitation .
 Eurostat data also reveals predominately stable GDP growth in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Slovakia since the last global crisis of 2009 .
 The Presidential elections in Ukraine have to be recognised as illegitimate . The Presidential election in Ukraine has been declared illegitimate .
 There has never been such dirty, brutal use of illegal funding during an election campaign in Ukraine as at this time .
 Recurring and unfounded pro-Kremlin disinformation about the Ukraine elections. Recurs and unfounded Pro-K Kremlin disinformation about Ukraine elections .
 The OSCE PA Election Observation Mission in Ukraine has declared that the first round of the presidential elections in Ukraine was competitive . citizens had the opportunity to freely express their will .
Since 1990, the Western answer was clear: under no circumstances should Moscow be able to sit at the same table . Since 1990, it has been clear that no one should sit at a same table.
 The new antagonism was decreed by the West and they tried to bring it about by global constriction of the Russian Federation . The West was trying to bring about it by constricting of the Federation .
 The warlike provocations of the West in the Black Sea must cease and there must be the opportunity for all sides to face up to their true behaviour . There must be an opportunity for the West to take responsibility for their behaviour .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin narrative on Western belligerence towards Russia and on Russophobia . Recurring Pro-K Kremlin narrative on West belligerents towards Russia .
 Russia was identified as a strategic partner for the EU . Russia was the only country with which the EU held summits not once, but twice a year . The EU held its first summits in 2010 and 2012 .
 A new EU-Russia agreement was being negotiated up until 2014, at which point talks were suspended due to Russia's involvement in the Ukraine conflict .
 The intelligence services of France and Belgium are preparing a false-flag chemical attack in Syria's Idlib province . They are in coordination with local terrorist cells and the pseudo-humanitarian White Helmets group .
 Once filmed, the footage will be doctored to "prove" Moscow's involvement in the attack .
 Russia has repeatedly warned of false-flag operations in Syria . The planned September 2018 chemical attack is designed to justify coalition airstrikes .
 The report is an amalgam of recurring pro-Kremlin narratives blaming Western governments and organizations for "false-flag attacks" in Syria . The White Helmets are accused of being terrorists and deflecting blame from the Assad regime .
 Belgian Defence Ministry denied allegations and gave assurances of its strict observance of the Chemical Weapons Convention .
This is not the first time Belgium has been targeted by Kremlin disinformation . This is not a first time the Kremlin has targeted the country .
 In October 2016, Moscow claimed that the country's fighter jets had opened fire on a village near Aleppo, killing multiple civilians .
 Brussels responded that no Belgian Air Force craft were present in Aleppo area at the time of the incident .
 No proof was ever given that the White Helmets were preparing a chemical strike in 2018 .
 Kremlin's repeated warnings of imminent chemical attacks to be carried out by Western actors . Available evidence stubbornly continues to link such incidents to the Syrian regime .
 By September 2018, UN human rights investigators had identified 39 chemical attacks perpetrated in Syria since 2013 . 33 of the attacks were attributed to Damascus, according to the UN .
 The United States made the decision and Europe followed to isolate Russia . The U.S. and Europe made the decisions .
 Recurring pro-Kremlin disinformation narrative on Western belligerence towards Russia . West attempting to weaken and isolate Russia, the West says .
 The West is trying to keep open channels of communications with Russia . While aware of pro-Kremlin disinformation campaigns, the West is aware of anti-Russian disinformation campaigns .
 NATO as the Western organisation created cooperation bodies – the Joint Council and the NATO-Russia Council – to embody its relationship with Russia .
 The EU and its member states have maintained a clear policy of reaching out to Russian society and youth, mainly through the Erasmus+ student exchange programme and other people .
 Observers of the organisation ""Uspishna varta" claim that one of the most frequent situations during elections were the presence of “dead souls’s” in voters' lists .
 The "Committee of voters of Ukraine" claims that among the most typical violations are mistakes in the work of district election commissions .
 The most frequent violations recorded by OPORA observers on election day were attempts to give ballot papers to voters without proper documents . Most frequent violations were attempts.
 Some shortcomings were noted by the OSCE/ODIHR, such as misuse of state resources and vote-buying .
 US, Germany, Poland and the Baltic countries are most active in this regard . The U.S., Germany, Germany and Poland are the most active countries .
 Over the last years, the West has been using Ukraine to pressure Belarus more often than before . The West has used Ukraine to Pressure Belarus more frequently than before.
 Ukraine's role within the broader Western strategy against Belarus is to organise information provocations, to give military training to Belarusian radicals . Ukraine is to support public protests with arms, and to organize breakthroughs to Belarus by Ukrainian militants .
 The article follows another disinformation narrative about the Ukrainian UATV channel which was allowed to broadcast on Belarus' cable networks . The article also follows a disinformation narrative.
 No proof of organized arms trafficking from Ukraine to Belarus to Belarus or of border violations by Ukrainian militants . No evidence of any violations by Ukraine militants .
 After 2014, the West started using Ukraine more actively than before . In its attempts to organize a colour revolution in Belarus, the west started using the country more actively .
 Belarusian radical nationals attempted to organise mass disorders in Minsk thanks to Ukraine-originated arms and Ukrainian supporters . In March 2017 Belarusian radicals attempted to organised mass disorders.
 Repeating disinformation spread in 2017 in Belarus during the street protests in the spring .
 Belarus' state-owned mass media published an article “Militants staging a provocation detained in Belarus’s Belarus” in 2017 . Other publications reported about weapons allegedly confiscated from the accused .
 Investigators found no evidence to confirm accusations and criminal prosecution of all those arrested in relation to the case was closed in late November 2017 .
 Belarusian state-owned media report alleged attempt by people with weapons in an SUV to break through the Ukrainian-Belarusian border on March 20, 2017 .
 Ukrainian border control did not confirm this information . Belarusian officials never revealed any further details, including the names of detainees .
 In New Zealand, the terrorist attack was targeted at Muslims, specifically on religious grounds . The terrorist attack in New Zealand was aimed at Muslims .
 If an immoral event is committed by a non-Muslim, it is merely a crime, but if the same incident is committed in a Muslim, then the whole world is upset and claims Muslims are terrorists .
 New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern met with members of the Muslim community affected by the attack . He stated, 'He is a terrorist, he is a criminal; he is an extremist. He was an extremist'
 The attacker will not give fame and respect to the attacker. But he will, when I speak, be nameless' as a method of not giving fame . He will be 'nameless' when he speaks, but he will be neless'
 She focussed on victims and their families, showing solidarity and empathy . Instead she focused on victims.
 The New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs released a message that said 'people who share video of the mosque shooting online “are likely to be committing an offence’ The department worked hard with 'social media platforms to remove the clips' in order to show respect to the victims and their
 The majority of major Western media companies followed this request and did not show the footage from the massacre .
 There are numerous articles from major Western media depicting the incident as a terrorist attack . People across the world are upset and express their condolences .
 Russian state TV exploits the terror attack in New Zealand to spread disinformation. See video on how Russian state television exploits terror attack .