 Tensions between Russia and Ukraine may further increase Russia’s isolation after the November 25 incident in Kerch Strait .
 The incident will allow Russia to solve some internal issues, as well as create a certain chaos in Ukraine in relation to the upcoming spring elections in the country .
After annexation of Crimea, Russia initiated the construction of a bridge connecting the peninsula with the continental part of Russia and passing through the Kerch Strait . The bridge was built after Crimea was annexed .
 The already limited water area which Ukraine could use for its ship traffic from its Black Sea ports to the ports of Azov Sea, became narrower and in practice fully appeared under Russian control .
 The Russian side closed the sea route joining the Black and the Azov seas during the incident .
 Ukrainian side had informed the Russian side about the movement of the ships in advance . They had stated that they have the right to do so under the UN Law of the Sea .
 The Russian side stated that Ukrainian ships violated its maritime boundaries . However, the Russian side said that Ukraine ships violated their maritime boundaries.
 One of the Russian ships struck one of the Ukrainian ships, then opened fire on the others and captured them . The Ukrainian ships were captured by the Russian vessels .
 Six crew members of the Ukrainian ships were injured . The ships and crew were transported to the Kerch port .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed a decree on declaring a 30-day martial law in the country on November 26 . On November 26, the president signed the decree, which includes partial mobilization and intensification of security services .
 In the evening of November 26, an extraordinary session of the UN Security Council was also convened . The session was also held on the same day .
 EU Spokesperson for EU Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Maja Kocijancic announced that Russia should restore freedom of passage at the Kerch Strait . She urged all to act with restraint to deescalate the situation .
 NATO urges Russia not to hamper entry of Ukrainian ships into ports in the Azov Sea . NATO says it supports the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine .
 The French Foreign Ministry said that the incident at Kerch Strait is a result of annexation of Crimea . German Foreign Minister stated that the ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine and Crimea threatens the security of Europe .
 The United States President Donald Trump responded to the incident on November 26 . He said that they do not like what is happening and that they are working in that direction with their European counterparts .
 The agenda introduced by Russia, according to which Ukraine violated the Russian maritime boundary, failed at the session of the UN Security Council . The agenda was introduced by the Russian government .
 23 Ukrainian sailors are being kept by the Russian side . Representatives of the US, UK, France, Poland and Sweden expressed concern .
 Three of the crew members were representatives of Ukrainian special services and were going to do special provocations . Deputy to Russia’s Permanent Representative in the UN Security Council Dmitry Polyanski insisted that three of the Crew members were representative of Ukraine special services .
 Ukraine has always needed to reinstate its territorial integrity. Crimea's annexation was the first step in Ukraine’s history to restore its sovereignty .
 Ukraine wanted to show that despite Russian control of Kerch Strait, it has the right to access its own harbors . The movement of ships from Odessa to Mariupol simply means that Ukraine wants to show its own rights to the sea .
 Blocking access to the Sea of Azov, Russia, in its turn, establishes total hegemony on the Azov Sea and makes Ukrainian side dependent on itself . The Ukrainian side is dependent on its own side .
 The issue is important for Russia in terms of internal political situation. Besides, the issue is also important for the country's political situation .
 Russia's President Vladimir Putin's approval rating started to fall after the pension reform in Russia .
 Putin's approval rating as of June-July was 48 percent, according to a survey by “Public Opinion Foundation’s” Foundation .
 Putin's approval rating started to rise against the backdrop of the Russian-Ukrainian conflict and was consolidated after Crimea annexation .
 The Kerch Strait clashes will be used to bring Putin’s approval rating up, representing the events as heroic and historic actions . Russia's dissatisfaction with the pension system has grown.
 Ukraine's declared martial law can lead to political crises in Ukraine and weaken Kyiv's positions in the settlement of Donbass and Crimea issues . Ukraine's presidential elections are expected in spring, and such an incident could lead to a crisis .