 A1 ♦ ShelPs oil spills have contributed to high levels of pollution in a Nigerian community, according to a consultant .
 Britain's FCA has reopened a probe into how Barclays persuaded Qatar's sovereign-wealth fund to bail out during the financial crisis .
 Akzo's largest shareholder is the latest investor to urge the Dutch firm to start talks with PPG over a $24 billion takeover offer . B5 ♦ Akzo is the largest shareholder in the company .
Ford said higher rates and a decline in used-car values will hurt affordability . B3 ♦ Ford said higher rate rates and decline inUsed-Car values will hit affordability .
 The market for sand, an ingredient in fracking, is surging again as U.S. oil output rebounds, threatening energy-firm profits .
 Apple will soon start assembling iPhones in India, aiding the company's efforts to gain a foothold in the fast-growing market .
 Khalid Masood, a 52-year-old British-born man who had previous convictions, has been identified as the suspected Islamist terrorist .
 Governments are increasingly having to balance tight security with public access to some of their most politically sensitive sites .
 Republicans postponed the planned vote on their health plan after last-minute talks and lobbying by Trump failed to secure majority support for the bill .
 An ex-Russian lawmaker who fled to Ukraine and received citizenship was gunned down in Kiev . Ukraine's president called it an act of state terrorism by the Kremlin .
 The House intelligence committee chairman apologized for not consulting with Democrats before his surprise announcement about information intercepted by U.S. intelligence agencies .
 The U.S. Senate's top Democrat will oppose the Supreme Court nomination . He urged his Democratic colleagues to block the nomination .
 The U.N.'s air-safety arm is pushing for video recorders to be installed in airliner cockpits to assist investigations of serious incidents .
 Israeli police arrested a teenager suspected of making security-related threats to Jewish institutions in the U.S. and elsewhere .
 Masood was born in Kent, southeast of London, and had most recently been living in the Birmingham area .
 U.K. authorities had no prior intelligence about his intent to mount a terrorist attack . He wasn't the subject of any current investigations, and U.S. authorities weren't aware of his intentions .
 He had a range of convictions unrelated to terror offenses, police say . The most recent one was for the possession of a knife in 2003 . He had been known to police, but had a number of previous convictions, police said .
 Police say Masood mowed down pedestrians on a crowded bridge before crashing his car near the gates of Parliament . He stabbed a policeman, leaving three dead, police say .
 A minute of silence was held in Trafalgar Square in London on Thursday . The U.K. since 2005, when coordinated bombings by Islamist extremists on buses and subway trains claimed 52 lives .
 The day after the deadliest act of terror in the U.K. in more than a decade, Mrs. Obeidallah spoke to Parliament .
 The source of the roughly 30-page dossier, intercepted by Bulgaria's security service, was a think tank connected to the Kremlin, officials say .
 It was delivered by a former Russian spy on a U.S. sanctions list, three of them said .
 Rumen Radev, the Socialists' candidate, emerged victorious in November . In November, the candidate won the election in a landslide .
 The party wants to end European Union sanctions against Russia and limit North Atlantic Treaty Organization operations around the Black Sea . Now, it's a front-runner in parliamentary elections to be held Sunday .
 House Republicans Postpone Health Vote postponed the vote on their legislation to overhaul the Affordable Care Act . President Donald Trump failed to secure majority support for the bill only hours ahead of the planned vote .
 House GOP leaders had planned to put the bill to a floor vote Thursday . They spent hours jockeying over possible changes being sought by competing factions .
 The vote will now take place Friday morning, White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders says .
 She said she was confident the votes would be there to pass it then . She said the delay was arranged to avoid members voting at 3m after a lengthy debate .
 The delay left the first major legislative effort by House Speaker Paul Ryan and Mr Trump in doubt .
 A conservative group, the House Freedom Caucus, sought to rework the bill so it more aggressively upended the ACA . The bill was championed by Obama and Democrats .
 White House meeting with Mr Trump on Thursday said no deal had been struck . But they left the White House saying no deal was struck .
 Mark Meadows, chairman of the group, said after the meeting that the bill still didn't have enough votes to pass .
 At the same time, some centrist Republicans were walking away from the bill .
 Sean Spicer was asked if the White House had a backup plan .
 Kentucky bourbon has always been considered kosher, in line with Jewish dietary laws . The first distillers started bottling on the banks of the Ohio River here .
 The bourbon industry has exploded over the last several years, and that growth has brought new complications for Jews who like American whiskey .
 Bourbon still comes out of the barrel as kosher, if not necessarily as healthful as mountain spring water . Bourbon is still not as kosher as mountain springs water .
 Mr Mindich launched his fund in 2004 amid frenzied investor interest . He became the youngest partner in Goldman Sachs Group Inc.'s history .
 The firm's $3. billion launch was believed to be the largest in hedge-fund history . The launch was seen as sign of surging interest in the industry .
 The firm has run into troubles recently, with disappointing returns and investor withdrawals resulting in a 50% plunge for its assets from their 2011 peak .
 The firm received about $400 million of withdrawal requests from investors for the first quarter, a person familiar with the matter says .
 Executives were concerned the declining assets would make it harder to retain employees . Mr Mindich moved to close the firm.
 Many hedge funds have performed poorly compared compared to other hedge funds . Many hedge fund funds have done poorly compared .
 A billboard in Istanbul exhorts a 'yes' vote in the referendum . Turkey's Referendum could backfire on Erdogan .
Only one campaign is in sight less than a month before the April 16 referendum . The referendum would give Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan vast new powers .
 Government officials brand those opposing this executive presidency plan as traitors or supporters of terrorism . On TV networks, government officials say those opposing the plan are "traitors"
Despite such a charged environment, Mr Erdogan looks surprisingly uncertain .
 referendum campaign unfolds under state of emergency imposed following July's failed coup attempt against Mr Erdogan . Turkey's voting process makes outright ballot-stuffing difficult .
 Turkey's opposition to Turkey's leader has re-energized the opposition to the country's leader . The July putsch attempt seemed beyond any challenge, but the outcome is now in doubt .
 If Erdogan loses, that would be his most dramatic setback since coming to power in 2003 . If he loses, it would be a major setback for the Turkish president .
 A referendum defeat could also change the trajectory of one of America's most important partners in the Middle East and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance . Mr Erdogan is steering Turkey further and further from its traditional bonds with the West .
"They see this as a matter of life or death," says Sezgin Tanrikulu, a lawmaker for the opposition CHP party .
 A referendum defeat wouldn't force Mr Erdogan, whose mandate runs until 2019, to step down . It wouldn't necessarily prompt new elections in the immediate future .
 Mr Erdogan struggles to regain momentum against emboldened foes . But it would almost certainly usher a period of new political instability .
 Mr Erdogan's strategy in the past has been to escalate crises and create new ones, at home and abroad . Mr Erdogan has been faced with challenges to his authority.
 Turkey and Western capitals fear that some voters may reject his proposals on April 16 . Many, in Turkey and West capitals, fear that they may happen in coming weeks .
 In the summer of 2015, AKP failed to secure absolute parliamentary majority for the first time . Mr Erdogan unleashed all-out war against Kurdish militants and then called snap elections within months .
 MHP party is one of four represented in Turkey's parliament . It is indispensable for Mr Erdogan's referendum plans .
MHP's new alliance with the MHP's leadership. He managed to pass the referendum legislation, which required the support of threefifths of lawmakers .
 Former MHP lawmaker Sinan Ogan is opposed to the proposals . That parliamentary support has yet to translate into backing by actual MHP voters, he says .
 The MHP secured 11.9% of votes in Turkey's most recent elections, in November 2015, and represents a critical swing constituency . The M HP secured 11,000 votes.
 The losing streak has led pension funds, endowments and other institutional investors to pull money . It has led to a losing streak in the stock and bond markets.
 The Eton Park closure follows a year when 1,057 hedge funds were liquidated . It is the highest number since the 2008 financial crisis .
 At the end of 2016, there were 8,326 hedge funds, the lowest since 2013 . The lowest hedge funds since 2013 were at the lowest in the past year .
 Some hedge funds have blamed placid global markets stemming from low interest rates for their problems . But investors are starting to lose patience .
 Investors yanked $70. billion from funds last year, even accounting for new investments . investors yanked more than $70 million from funds .
 Some hedge-fund investors have predicted widespread closures given poor returns and investor outflows . Some have privately predicted widespread closure given poor return and outflows.
 Some managers told clients they believed some losses were attributable to other hedge funds bailing out of positions . Daniel Loeb of Third Point LLC last year wrote to clients, “There is no doubt that we are in the first innings of a washout"
 Mr Mindich said the firm could no longer sustain its approach to investing in complex strategies across global markets .
 The firm had posted losses and Mr Perry concluded he was out of step with today's market . Mr Perry said he was 'out of step'
 He was mentored by Robert Rubin of the firm's famed riskarbitrage trading desk . At Goldman, he was a member of the Goldman riskar Bitrage trading team .
 Investors agreed to a higherthan-usual minimum investment of $5 million, and to tie up their cash for as long as 4% years or pay a big penalty . The excitement surrounding Eton Park's launch was such that investors agreed to higher than the minimum investment .
 In the years that followed, high-net worth individuals and large institutions poured into hedge funds, viewing them as packed with skilled investors capable of navigating any kind of market .
 Hedge funds did better than mutual funds and the overall market, but the industry's 19% loss surprised many investors .
 The firm lost only 7% in 2008, after soaring 41% in 2007 . It managed a peak of $14 billion as recently as 2011 .
Over the next four years, Eton Park's annual gains slipped to 13%, 22%, 6% and 6% . The more disappointing returns were more recently, with the most disappointing returns recently .
 The firm's performance figures don't include about $1 billion invested in private equity and other hard-to-trade investments that aren't part of the firm's main portfolio .
 It laid off some staffers in its London office, and stopped trading out of London last year .
 In Thursday's letter, firm said it expected to return 40% of investors' money by the end of April .
 The liquors can contaminate the bourbon, Rabbi Litvin said, if they are run through the same pipes or tanks . They can contaminated the bourbon.
 The Litvins, a family of seven orthodox rabbis based in Louisville, have taken it upon themselves to keep bourbon kosher . The family is based on seven rabbis.
 He now certifies liquors as kosher along with four sons and two sons-in-law . All of them rabbis with ChabadLubavitch, a movement of orthodox Judaism .
 When a couple decides to get married, "we need to certify a kosher caterer," he says .
 He began making sure there was kosher bourbon for them to do it with . So he made sure there were kosher bourbon to make sure it was kosher .
 Jewish laws about dietary rules can be complex . Most spirits that didn't include wine were generally kosher .
 Two decades ago, vodka companies began introducing a smorgasbord of different flavors . About two decades ago.
For a while, bourbon was immune to all this upheaval, because its production is strictly regulated by the government . The government is strictly regulating its production .
 Contrary to popular myth, it doesn't have to be made in Bourbon County, Kentucky .
 To be sold as bourbon, it can be made only from corn, grain and water, and aged in new oak casks, all of which are kosher .
 Bourbon is now encountering kosher issues of its own, as it has expanded to an $8. billion industry in the state .
 Chaim Litvin has been churning out bourbon since shortly after prohibition . The company is one of the largest liquor companies in the world .
 Evan Williams, the company's largest brand, is owned by a Jewish family . Only a few of the bourbons are kosher .
 The others are run through the same pipes and storage tanks as other products, including vodka, spiced rum and mint whiskey . The other products include vodka and spiced Rum, mint whiskey.
 Rabbi Litvin, with a sanitary net covering only a portion of his thick beard, checked to make sure Evan Williams was still on his own dedicated line .
 Rabbi Litvin will oversee specialty runs of bourbon that will be used in a kosher barbecue sauce . The sauce requires heating equipment to sanitize it, according to kosher rules .
 The Litvins' Kosher certification, like bourbon, is growing 10% a year . The nonprofit organization, Kosher Liquor and Spirits, charges a fee for the certification .
 Rabbi Litvin doesn't have much of a taste for kosher bourbon, nor does his father . Despite the family's devotion to kosher bourbon he doesn't like it himself .
 The National Institutes of Health doesn't fund the creation or destruction of human embryos for research purposes . It doesn't pay for the creation and destruction of the embryos .
 Not all Jews who are very devoted to keeping kosher are so exacting about the equipment liquor is produced .
 Kosher certification, like bourbon, is growing by roughly 10% a year since 2005, according to Kosher Network International .
 The Orthodox Union says the NIH endorsed research guidelines that limit research on human embryos past 14 days of development . rabbis incorrectly said that the NIH endorse research guidelines on human embryo development .
 The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act was incorrectly called the Individuals with Education Disabilities Act in a U.S. News article . The act has taken off in recent years, in part because it appeals not only to Jews, but to many gentiles .
Growing interest in kosher certification for alcohol likely has as much to do with cultural changes as religious practice . Marni Davis, author of “Jews and Booze," said the growing interest is likely to be due to cultural changes .
 Single-barrel bourbons, she noted, are always kosher, while those siloed in huge vats may not be . She noted that single-barre bourbons were always kosher .
 Newsprinters Limited, Great Cambridge Road, Waltham Cross, EN8 8DY Registered as a newspaper at the Post Office .
 Trademarks appearing herein are used under license from Dow Jones & Co. The company is owned by Dow Jones and Co. Trademark is used under the license of Dow Jones.
 Readers can alert The Wall Street Journal to any errors in news articles by emailing wsjcontact@wsj.com.com .
 Former Russian lawmaker Denis Voronenkov was a member of the Ukrainian parliament .
 Denis Voronenkov fled to Kiev last fall and had become a strident critic of Vladimir Putin . The former Russian lawmaker who fled to Ukraine and received citizenship there was gunned down in central Kiev on Thursday .
 Denis Voronenkov, an ex-policeman and prosecutor, was wanted in Russia on fraud charges . The slaying comes amid heightened tensions between the two neighboring countries over Russia's support for a three-year insurgency .
 The bodyguard was wounded but managed to injure the attacker . Both were taken to the hospital, police said .
Mr Voronenkov's defection to Kiev was a potential embarrassment to Moscow . Mr Voronenk's defector to Kiev is a potential embarrassing to Moscow.
 A former high-ranking official in Russia's now-defunct Federal Drug Control Service had intimate knowledge of corruption schemes of Kremlin-connected elites .
 In an interview last month, he said he had retained bodyguards because he feared for his life .
 Alexander Litvinenko was a personal acquaintance of security-service veteran. He was killed in London when British police say undercover Russian agents slipped a fatal dose of radioactive polonium into his tea .
 Mr Litvinenko was helping British authorities investigate Russian mafia networks in Spain . The Kremlin ordered his killing, Mr Voronenkov said .
 Opponents of the Kremlin say they are targets of Russian security services . Opponents say they're targets of Russia's security services.
 A lawyer representing the family of a dead Russian whistleblower fell from a window late Tuesday . Under unclear circumstances, the lawyer says .
 Vladimir Kara-Murza, an opposition activist, says he has been poisoned twice in recent years . He says he's been poisoned two times.
 His ally Boris Nemtsov, an opposition leader, was gunned down near the Kremlin in 2015 . He was shot dead near the Russian capital in the past .
 Mr Voronenkov, 45, left Russia for Kiev last fall with his wife, an opera singer and former lawmaker .
 Russia's Investigative Committee announced fraud charges against Mr Voronenkov in February . He was charged over alleged misappropriation of a Moscow building in 2011 .
 Mr Voronenkov received Ukrainian citizenship and gave evidence to Ukrainian authorities in the treason case against former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych . He fled to Russia in February 2014 amid street protests against his rule .
 Mr Voronenkov voted for the annexation of Crimea in March 2014 . He wrote legislation that restricted foreign ownership of Russian media .
After moving to Ukraine, he became a strident critic of Mr Putin . He called the annexation of Crimea a mistake and decried Russia's Federal Security Service, or FSB .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko called a meeting with his security chiefs over the murder of his country's president .
 Ukrainian General Prosecutor Yuriy Lutsenko told reporters that the attack was a contract killing by a professional .
 Mr Voronenkov was hit by two bullets in the neck, one in the face and one in his stomach .
 A Kremlin spokesman described the accusations of Russia's involvement as absurd .
 U.N. airsafety arm pushing for video recorders to be installed in future airliner cockpits . Move puts safety gains above privacy drawbacks, according to agency documents and people .
 Such a step has been opposed by pilots for decades amid concerns that such filming could potentially capture their images during a fatal accident . Such filming could be used by airlines to monitor crews in nonemergency situations .
 The International Civil Aviation Organization is the world's leading advocate of air safety and technical standards . New technology would avoid recording the faces or bodies of aviators, it says .
 The ICAO envisions systems designed to capture only images of flight instruments and the positions of switches . The system is designed to take images of instruments and switches .
 The goal is to re-create what flight crews saw during emergency situations, and to determine whether cockpit displays were consistent with crew commands and actual flight conditions .
 Agency spokesman said pilots would be able to erase images at the end of flights .
 The ICAO spelled out its proposal in letters this year seeking comments from national aviation regulators by April 20 . The proposal hasn't been reported before .
 The agency wants airliners built in the next decade to adopt the technology . The agency is hoping to use the technology to improve airliners .
 The ICAO is the first major regulatory authority or standard-setting organization to formally call for using such technology to help unravel accidents . The I CAO is first major Regulatory authority to call for such technology .
 If adopted, the phasing-in of cameras would likely take at least several years . If adopted.
 Accident investigators have long advocated cockpit -video cameras as important supplements to traditional cockpit -voice recorders and flight-data recorders .
 ICAO experts have determined that video images would have provided a significant aid to investigators in various crashes in which terrorism or pilot suicide were suspected .
 National regulatory bodies, industry trade associations and airline managers typically embrace its standards . But national regulatory bodies and industry groups typically embrace their standards .
 International treaty obligations and ICAO's ability to publicly identify countries that balk also give the agency's pronouncements substantial clout . The agency is also able to identify nations that balk, which gives it substantial clout.
 Mr Quinn said public expectations demand trade-offs between pilot privacy and pilot privacy . He said there was a "very clear and overdue need" to determine what occurred each time a commercial aircraft goes down .
 ICAO working document prepared by Russian representatives to support proposal . Video images could accelerate future probes to determine explicitly causes of crash and increase public trust .
Once British Prime Minister Theresa May sets the clock ticking on Wednesday on two years of negotiations over Britain leaving the European Union .
 The other BEAT 27 EU governLAURENCE ments will take about two months to formulate their response before negotiations can start in earnest .
 If the 27 can remain united, their response could help them define the issues and order they will be discussed . They have managed during the nine months of phony war but can't be taken for granted .
 European Council President Donald Tusk will send draft guidelines to the 27 capitals framing the talks from the EU's side . W ithin 48 hours of Britain triggering Article 50.
 guidelines should be agreed at a Brussels summit of the 27 on April 29 . The summit will take place at the end of the month .
 EU governments and the European Commission will take several weeks to set a detailed negotiating mandate for Michel Barnier, the bloc's chief negotiator .
Only then, possibly in late May, will substantive negotiations with Britain begin . Only then will substantive talks with Britain start .
 EU officials say the guidelines will set out the principles with which the 27 will approach the talks . The 27 will be able to reach the talks.
 U.K. participation in the EU's single market of goods and services after Brexit is unlikely unless London accepts other members do, including further EU budget contributions .
 The guidelines are expected to adopt positive language about the options for a close future EU-U.K. partnership .
 Discussions on the future will begin only once these legacy issues have been dealt with. Discussions will only begin once these issues are dealt with, say experts .
 Those principles will be converted into clearer red lines in the detailed negotiating mandate . Those principles are expected to be converted to clear red lines for negotiations .
 Such a demanding approach could also risk undercutting the chances of a deal, an outcome neither side wants . But such a demanding approaches could alsorisk undercutting a deal .
 Take the legally complex issue of a reciprocal deal on future citizens' rights. Take the legal complex issue on future citizen's rights . The issue is a legal issue that could be resolved in the future .
 EU could simply instruct Mr Barnier to make an agreement a priority. The EU could just instruct him to make a priority .
 More likely, members states will set basic conditions for a settlement, like whether rights should be time-limited . More likely.
 EU officials are con% fident the 27 can hang to£ gether, having broadly kept I to the principle so far of not 2 entering into negotiations with the British until they g trigger Article 50 .
 Spain, with a large expatriate community of aging Britons, might be happy to agree on strict time limits on future rights of U.K. and EU citizens .
 Poland or Romania, with hundreds of thousands of citizens living in the U.K., might not. On the other hand, Poland and Romania might not .
 Officials expect the U.K. to do its utmost to challenge it. For that reason, officials expect the United States to do their utmost .
 Taliban forces have again retaken the district of Sangin in Afghanistan's Helmand province, officials say . A surge in fighting threatens government control over swaths of southern Afghanistan .
 The Taliban said a month of sustained attacks on Sangin helped the group dislodge the government there .
 Taliban forces have ramped up pressure on the government ahead of their annual summer offensive . Taliban forces are attacking district centers in neighboring Kandahar and Uruzgan provinces .
 The offensive, which usually begins in April, is expected to pose a particularly stiff challenge this year to an Afghan government that is grappling with rampant corruption and high rates of attrition among its forces . Officials worked to stop the bleeding and economists tried to gauge the damage .
 Brazil's top meat producers were hit as their main export markets continued to close . Officials rushed to convince buyers that sanitation oversight is sound and the meat is good .
 Nineteen countries including China, Brazil's largest meat importer, have issued temporary bans or increased scrutiny on shipments . Exports to Brazil dropped to $74,000 from a previous daily average of $63 million .
 Brazilian officials say they expect Chile to reverse its temporary ban on its market . They continue to talk to Chinese authorities about reopening their market .
 Economists fear the crisis could have lasting consequences on a sector that has been a rare bright spot in a troubled economy . South Korea's national soccer team stunned South Korea in a slim but spirited victory .
 China's hopes of reaching the 2018 World Cup are at stake . Thursday's match was a must-win for China, with its hopes of making it to the World Cup .
 China's third-ever victory over South Korean team . Jubilant scenes in the heart of Changsha, under the watchful eyes of 10,000-strong security force .
 China's relationship with South Korea has frayed over Seoul's deployment of a U.S.-made missiledefense system . Beijing says Seoul's system undermines its own security .
 Many Chinese soccer fans had expressed anger over the issue ahead of the match . Changsha has been put in a state of lockdown to prevent any incidents .
 Governments are increasingly having to balance tight security with public access to some of their most politically sensitive sites . Big Cities’ Challenge Cities have erected barriers at government and tourist sites .
 Khalid Masood's deadly attack on Wednesday at the seat of the U.K. government follows assaults on popular sites across Europe .
 Cities from Washington to Jerusalem have erected increasingly tight security around government and tourist districts . Cities are working within the constraints of crowded centers that make it difficult to erect things like blast walls .
 Some governments have proved better than others at protecting such sites, learning lessons from past attacks .
Experts say security will continue to be tightened, but there is only so much that can be done without closing off public access and the often lucrative flow of tourists .
 Mr Masood breached just one layer of a sophisticated security system, says Will Geddes, co-founder of ICP Group .
 That includes concrete barriers, armed police sentries and patrols, airport-style security scanners and cameras . That includes security cameras and security cameras .
 Former U.K. lawmaker David Mellor remembers his first years in Parliament in the late 1970s and early 1980s . Mellor was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from the UK .
 Mr Mellor was in Downing Street when the Irish Republican Army fired mortars at the building .
 In the late 1980s and early 1990s, fewer police officers in Parliament were armed, says Richard Walton . Those who were likely carried revolvers rather than automatic weapons, he says .
 In 2014, Canada's Parliament was stormed by an Islamist-inspired terrorist, who got into the building before he was shot and killed . The terrorist was killed in the attack .
 There is only so much security that can be imposed without closing public access. There is no way to close public access to the public, according to experts .
 A police review deemed the security apparatus “highly inadequate’ at the time of the attack . Four separate security forces were held responsible for safety .
 heavily armed police officers are a much more common sight. They have now been consolidated into one group and heavily armed officers are now more common .
 Canada's Parliament remains open to the public, with guided tours and visitors still allowed to stroll its grounds . Ottawa residents still gather for public yoga classes in the Parliament .
 Mr Geddes said authorities in Berlin were unprepared for a December 2016 truck attack on a Christmas market in which 12 people died . He said authorities were unprepared.
 The attacks spurred authorities to tighten security at these attractions . The attacks were the first to target the attractions .
 Birmingham had surrounded its Christmas market with concrete bollards . That year, the English city of Birmingham was surrounded by concrete.
 Police also mobilized in “high-risk areas’ for a faster response to such situations, Mr Rosenfeld said .
 concrete barriers were erected around the Washington Monument in September . After Sept.
 In London, Three Victims, Three Stories, Many Tears One was a police officer and dedicated soccer fan, guarding Parliament unarmed .
 American music maven celebrates his 25th wedding anniversary in London with his wife .
 One was a school administrator who worked just across the Thames from Big Ben .
 The three people killed in Wednesday's Westminster terrorist attack drew an array of tributes from those who knew them only through tragedy .
 Police Constable Keith Palmer, 48, was a military veteran and father of one who carried no weapon . He tackled the assailant as he rushed toward the gates of the Parliament .
 The attacker, named Thursday afternoon by police as Khalid Masood, was mortally stabbed Mr Palmer . Mr Palmer was stabbed in the head and neck .
 Charlton Athletic Football Club, a minor-league soccer team in south London, said Mr Palmer had been a longtime fan .
 The club said it has placed a red-and-white team scarf on his seat . It would leave it there until the next home game on April 4 . The club says it will leave the scarf there until April 4.
 Liam Morrow, a fellow supporter of the club, wrote on Twitter, “I went to games with him,’ he said .
 Police and members of Parliament held a minute's silence on Thursday to remember Mr Palmer .
 The Metropolitan Police Foundation set up a crowdfunding site for the benefit of Mr Palmer's family . It had raised more than £211,000 by Thursday evening .
 Kurt W Cochran was killed when the suspected terrorist mowed down pedestrians on Westminster Bridge . A family spokesman confirmed Thursday that he was killed .
Mr Cochran, 54, had been celebrating his wedding anniversary with his wife, Melissa, who was injured and remains hospitalized . Mr Cochran's wife was injured in the accident .
 The Cochrans had been scheduled to return to the U.S. on Thursday, Mormon Church says .
 Melissa's parents are serving as temple missionaries in London, the church said .
 Nate Kizerian, a friend and musician, said Mr Cochran pursued his passion for music by building Onion Street Studio with his wife .
 The couple scraped together money to build the studio in their basement . Jim Walton recorded two albums of Native American flute music there .
 Aysha Frade, 43, was a school administrator from the U.K. with close family links to Spain . She was run over by a double-decker bus after Masood's rented SUV went into the crowd .
 Frade worked as an administrator at DLD College, near the south end of Westminster Bridge .
 Frade had close family links to the small town of Betanzos in northwest Spain . Her mother, now living £ in London, was born, an office cial with the town.
 Her sisters own an English school in Betanzos but live in the nearby town of Sada . Her two sisters own a school in the town of Betanzo .
 Betanzos mayor Ramon Garcia: They took a midnight flight to London on Wednesday night .
 Frade was born in the U.K. and held dual British and Spanish nationality, a town council official says .
 Prime Minister Theresa May told Parliament that among the injured were 12 Britons, one American, three French children, two Romanians, four South Koreans, one German, one Pole, one Irish, one Chinese, one Italian and two Greeks .
 The group has often claimed responsibility for such attacks . The nature and scope of its involvement remains unclear .
 A Utah man visiting Europe was killed and his wife was seriously injured in the attack .
 Kurt Cochran and his wife, Melissa, are celebrating their 25th wedding anniversary . The Cochran family is celebrating their first anniversary .
 Police working to piece together the details of the attack at the heart of Britain's democracy .
 Police arrested and detained seven people at several locations in Birmingham and one in London .
 Detectives searching additional addresses in London, Birmingham and Wales, police said .
 The Houses of Parliament is a landmark that has endured for centuries . Lawmakers are returning to business, vowing to remain strong in the face of terrorist violence .
 "We are not afraid and our resolve will never waver in the face of terrorism," she says . "We're not afraid," she adds .
 Police gave a lower death toll Thursday, saying three people had died . The attacker rammed a vehicle into pedestrians and stabbed a police officer, police say .
 Twenty-nine people were in the hospital, seven of them in critical condition . Seven of them are in a critical condition.
 May spent 40 minutes speaking with some of the victims and staff at a London hospital, government spokesman says .
 In addition to 12 Britons admitted to the hospital, the victims of the attack included one American, three French children, two Romanians, four South Koreans, one German, one Pole, one Irish, one Chinese, one Italian and two Greeks .
 Hundreds of officers worked through the night, searching six addresses in London, Birmingham and elsewhere in the U.K. He didn't offer details on those who had been arrested .
 extremist suspects have been connected to Birmingham, Britain's second-largest city . Several extremist suspects in the past have been linked to Birmingham .
 The car used in the attack was rented in the Birmingham area, Enterprise Rent-A-Car said .
 The company said an employee identified the vehicle based on a license plate from an image of the attack . The company alerted authorities after running another check .
 Witnesses say the attacker drove a sport-utility vehicle into people on Westminster Bridge before hitting a fence surrounding Parliament . Witnesses to Wednesday's assault said the attacker hit a fence around Parliament .
 The assailant ran at a police officer guarding the complex and stabbed him, authorities say . He was shot and killed by police, before being shot by police .
 Keith Palmer, a 48-year-old husband and father, was stabbed to death as he rushed toward Parliament . He was identified as Keith Palmer. He was a police officer and father .
 Among the gravely injured was a 29-year-old Romanian architect visiting London to celebrate boyfriend's birthday .
 The threat level in the U.K. remained unchanged at “severe," meaning an attack is highly likely . The threat levels in the UK remain unchanged at "severe"
 The highest level, “critical," means authorities have specific intelligence that an attack is imminent . The highest, ‘critical," is the highest level of intelligence that authorities have .
 Lawmakers returned to work largely as usual, though it was slower than normal . Only one entrance open and the area still closed off to traffic .
 The surrounding area, typically bustling with tourists taking selfies, was quiet . The surrounding areas were quiet .
 Nick Thomas -Symonds, a U.K. lawmaker, said it was an important symbol that Parliament was in session as normal .
 Police said they had increased hours and canceled leave for officers in the capital . Around the capital, there was an increased security presence .
 The style of the attack, the third in less than a year in which a vehicle was used as a tool of terrorism, presents a special challenge .
 The U.K. said last year that it was sharply increasing the number of police officers trained to handle firearms . U.S. says it is sharply increasing number of officers trained for firearms .
 The vast majority of police officers are unarmed, with only specialist firearms teams permitted to carry submachine guns and pistols capable of killing a hostile suspect .
 Defense Secretary Michael Fallon said security would be reviewed to see whether arrangements at Parliament were adequate and whether police at the front gates should be armed .
 House Intelligence chief Devin Nunes left a meeting on Thursday .
 Nunes tells Democrats he should have talked to them on intercepts of Trump's transition team . Nunes told Democrats he was not consulting with them before his surprise announcement .
 Adam Schiff said Mr Nunes had shared the information with the media and with Mr Trump .
 Schiff also questioned Nunes's judgment in racing to the White House with information that could touch on the same group of people whom the panel may potentially look at as part of a probe into Russian election meddling .
 Schiff said Nunes's action cast doubt on his ability to lead the committee investigating the matter . He again called for an independent prosecutor to be appointed .
 Schiff said U.S. intelligence and law-enforcement officials have "more than circumstantial evidence" of collusion between the Russian government and associates of Mr Trump's 2016 campaign .
 Mr Nunes, a senior adviser to Mr Trump's transition team, offered an apology for not first consulting other members . He called the decision a ""judgment call," Democrats said .
Jackie Speier said after a closed-door meeting of members of the panel .
 Mr Nunes didn't immediately respond to a request for comment about the apology . A spokesman for Mr Nunes did not immediately respond.
 U.S. intelligence agencies had "incidentally" collected information about people connected to Mr Trump's campaign .
 The intelligence activities in question weren't related to Russia or to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's continuing probe into possible ties between the Trump campaign and foreign individuals, he said .
Speier said the committee expected to receive the same information that was shared with Mr Nunes .
 House Freedom Caucus Chairman Rep. Rep. John Sutter says he would like to change the law . Sutter is a member of the Freedom Caucus .
 Mark Meadows talks to reporters after meeting with President Donald Trump on Thursday .
 Mr Spicer said the president and Republican leaders had continued to emphasize to members that they had committed to repealing the 2010 health law in past votes that ultimately never made it into law .
 The House voted nearly 90 times to repeal the law while Mr Obama was in office . The law was repealed by a majority of the House .
 The bill would dismantle much of the ACA's taxes and subsidies . It would replace them with tax credits largely tied to age, aimed at helping people afford insurance if they don't get it through employers .
 Recent days have been punctuated by tense meetings at which various Republican groups have sought to move the bill in different directions .
 The party's most ideologically driven conservatives are calling for a more aggressive rollback of the health law . They want a repeal of an ACA requirement that most insurers provide a raft of specific benefits in health plans .
 The White House gave the Freedom Caucus a final offer Thursday to try to gain their support . Mr Spicer said the offer was a last offer to gain the Caucus's support .
 conservatives who huddled with Mr Trump emerged saying what they had heard wasn't enough . But conservatives said what they'd heard was not enough .
 Ted Yoho said his opposition to the bill had hardened since Wednesday night . Yoho says his opposition has hardened since last Wednesday night.
 The Freedom Caucus has enough votes to block the bill, but its membership appears splintered . The Freedom caucus has enough seats to block a bill .
 Some support the House leadership's bill, while others are seeking additional changes .
In addition to striking down the requirement that insurance plans include a set of prescribed coverage benefits, they also wanted to repeal a requirement that insurers price coverage equally rather than charging consumers with health problems more .
 The hard pitch deepened a rift between the conservative group and moderates, including some who had been wavering but decided Thursday to vote against the bill .
 Some have been concerned that older people would face higher costs under the proposal . Some are concerned that the proposal would raise costs for older people .
 Jaime Herrera Beutler said in a statement Thursday that she plans to vote against the bill . She said she will vote against it .
 The House Republican proposal to overhaul the Affordable Care Act would bring big changes to health care coverage and funding for many Americans .
 Individual Mandate Individuals would no longer have to pay a penalty if they didn't have coverage . The Individual Mandates Individuals would be able to avoid a penalty .
 People who go uninsured for more than two months and then buy coverage would be subject to a 30% price boost on their premiums . People who are uninsured for over two months would have to buy coverage .
 That surcharge, collected by insurers, is meant to discourage people from waiting until they become sick to purchase health coverage . The surcharge is collected by insurance companies .
 Older Americans could pay more than they do now. Insurers would be allowed to charge their oldest customers more than now .
 Under current law, older people can charge older people up to three times the amount they charge their youngest customers . The current law allows older people to charge their younger customers up to 3 times the rate .
 New Tax Credits replace ACA Subsidies . People who don't receive insurance through their employer would be able to get refundable tax credits based on their age .
 People under 30 would be eligible for a credit of $2,000 a year, increasing on a sliding scale to $4,000 for those over 60 . People over 60 would be able to get a credit for $1,000 per year, up to $2
 A tax credit would grow with the size of a family and be capped at $14,000 . The size of the credit would also grow with a family .
 Insurance companies are still required to sell health plans to people with pre-existing conditions . People could still keep their children on their health plans until age 26 .
Insurers selling plans on the individual and small group markets would no longer be required to cover a suite of 10 "essential health benefits" Such benefits include maternity care, mental health treatment and preventive services .
 Many of the ACA taxes and requirements would be eliminated, including a requirement that many larger employers offer health insurance to employees . For businesses, many of the requirements would also be eliminated .
 Tax Repeal would repeal most of the ACA's taxes, including taxes on high-income earners and levies on medical industries . The bill would repeal many of the Obamacare's taxes .
 Those taxes would be repealed starting in 2017, a year earlier than in the prior version . Those taxes will be repealed in 2017 .
 A tax on generous employer health plans would begin a year later, in 2026 . A tax would begin on generous employers health plans in 20 26 .
 Medicaid States that expanded Medicaid would still get federal funding for the program through the end of 2019 . Big changes to Medicaid States would still receive federal funding through 2019 .
Federal funding for the expansion would begin to diminish and cover only people who were in the program as of that deadline . But after that, the higher levels of federal funding would start to diminish . After that, only those who were part of the program would be covered .
 Sonny Perdue said during his confirmation hearing that he had "some concern" about Mr Trump's proposal to cut the USDA's discretionary budget by about one-fifth to its lowest level since 1988 .
Georgia's governor says the USDA should run efficiently . He says the agency should tackle issues from immigrant workers to rural internet availability and opioid addiction .
 The Trump administration last week proposed cutting the USDA's discretionary budget to $17. billion . The USDA is currently spending $17 billion .
 The budget proposal raised worries among some in the Farm Belt, a key bloc in propelling Mr Trump to the White House . It is a fourth consecutive year of falling farm incomes .
 A series of bumper crops in the U.S. and overseas has pressured prices for farmers' crops and contributed to supply of commodities ranging from wheat to beef and butter .
 U.S. net farm income is projected to fall this year to about half the record $123 billion farmers earned in 2013 .
 Mr Perdue said he could manage the USDA on fewer resources, even as he pledged to continue many initiatives . The USDA chief said he can manage the agency on less resources .
 Trump administration wants to boost broadband internet access in rural areas . He said he would maintain existing efforts to combat opioid addiction in rural regions .
 He also told senators that he would advocate for food exports overseas and within the Trump administration . The Trump administration has criticized trade pacts backed by many in the farm sector .
 The Senate's top Democrat will oppose the nomination to the Supreme Court . He urged his Democratic colleagues to block the nomination .
 Mr Schumer urged his Democratic colleagues to block the confirmation by using a procedural maneuver known as a filibuster . The filibuster takes 60 votes to overcome .
 Mr Schumer's decision sets up a quandary for Republicans in the Senate .
 Democrats will insist Judge Gorsuch meet the 60-vote threshold to end the filibuster . Republicans control only 52 seats in a body where Republicans control 52 seats .
 The party will need either to win eight Democratic votes or change the rules to eliminate the 60-vote threshold .
 The Democrats eliminated the 60-vote requirement on lower court judges and cabinet nominations in 2013 . They preserved it on Supreme Court nominees .
 Republicans have enough votes to change the Senate rules, but such a change is considered drastic . Republicans have a majority of votes to make changes to the rules .
 institutionalists in both parties concerned about the comity and working order of the Senate . It has drawn concerns from institutionalists.
 Some in the Democratic caucus have discussed cutting a deal with some Senate Republicans to preserve the 60-vote threshold on Supreme Court nominees .
 Democrats would give Republicans enough votes to confirm Judge Gorsuch in exchange for a commitment to vote against a rules change on future Supreme Court nominees .
 Such a deal would take at least eight Democrats and three Republicans . It could be cut independently of the Senate leadership of both parties . The Senate leadership could also be cut from both parties.
 Republicans in the Senate say he is unquestionably qualified for the Supreme Court .
 Rosen Plevneliev, a Kremlin critic, was Mr Radev's predecessor as president . He was a former president of Russia .
 There is no suggestion Mr Radev was aware of the document, and no comment on allegations of Russian meddling .
 Russia has long denied doing anything nefarious in Bulgaria and Eastern Europe . Russia says it is pursuing its legitimate interests in nations where it has deep economic and cultural links .
 Moscow sees NATO's eastward expansion as a threatening intrusion into an area it considers within its longstanding sphere of influence . Moscow sees it as a threat to an area within its long-held sphere.
 Russia is regaining influence and undermining the position of the EU and U.S.-led trans-Atlantic alliance . Less than 30 years ago populations rose up against Soviet domination and turned to embrace the West .
 Poland, Georgia, Ukraine and the Baltic states appeared before a Senate panel earlier this month . They were seeking American help to blunt Russian inroads .
 citizens from Sofia to Budapest. They once had high hopes for democracy and market economics . They have become disillusioned by financial and political crises and a big influx of migrants .
 Mr Putin is exploiting that dynamic across Europe's poorer eastern flank . He is deploying an arsenal of weapons old and new, according to Western diplomats and analysts .
 Authorities in the small Balkan nation of Montenegro have alleged that Russia orchestrated a coup attempt aimed at derailing its NATO membership .
 Critics say the Russian model is visible in its most advanced form in countries like Bulgaria . Bulgaria next year is scheduled to hold the EU's rotating presidency for the first time .
 Kremlin is using these states to establish beachheads inside critical Western institutions . That is prompting alarm that the Kremlin is trying to establish these states inside critical institutions .
 Bulgarian President-elect Rumen Radev is congratulated by well wishers during a handover ceremony in January .
 Bulgaria has for centuries shared deep historical and economic ties with Russia, including Orthodox Christian faith and Slavic culture . Bulgaria is the EU's poorest member state, and has a poor economy .
 Many in the country's aging population feel nostalgic for the communist past . Many are bruised by economic mismanagement and endemic corruption .
 The high-water mark for Bulgaria's EU embrace was 2009, when a new pro-European party won a landslide victory . The country's pro-Western orientation was cemented by market liberalizations .
 years of weak growth and corruption stifled that momentum, creating a vacuum Russia was well-positioned to fill . But years of corruption and corruption have stifled the momentum .
 Bulgarian security officials have alleged that Moscow bankrolled protests in 2012 and 2013 that helped topple a pro-Western government . Bulgaria's security officials say Moscow bankrolled protests in the past two years .
 Russian hackers have attacked numerous sensitive targets in the country, Bulgaria's former president says . Russian hackers also interfered in the 2015 municipal elections, he says .
 Mr Reshetnikov was a fluent Bulgarian speaker and Balkan specialist . He once headed the analysis section of the Kremlin's Foreign Intelligence Service .
 Mr Reshetnikov attained the rank of lieutenant general in the SVR before retiring in 2009 . He was the first Russian to become a lieutenant general.
 Ninova says they spoke for 30 minutes and that he was mainly on holiday in Bulgaria .
 Mr Reshetnikov is a self-styled commentator who has long predicted the demise of the West . The precise relationship with the Kremlin is murky .
 Some analysts argue he is but one of a handful of political actors competing to spearhead Moscow's regional operations . Some analysts say he is not a political actor, but a few political actors .
 Mr Reshetnikov told Russian and Bulgarian media that he and Ms. Ms. Rhetnikov have been together for a year .
 Ninova had discussed a possible presidential bid by Mr Radev weeks before he was publicly anointed as the Socialists' candidate .
 She later acknowledged meeting Mr Reshetnikov, but said that they didn't discuss Mr Radev . She later admitted meeting him but said she didn't talk to him .
 Mr Reshetnikov's purported hand delivery of the detailed election-campaign game plan from Moscow . The game plan is said to have been delivered by Moscow's government .
 Bulgaria's State Agency for National Security obtained a copy of the document, people familiar with the matter said . The document is the country's equivalent of the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation .
Security services allowed only a handful of the country's top officials to read or receive a briefing on the document, according to people .
 The document included recommendations to commission weekly surveys that would exaggerate the Socialists' support . Senior officials who read the document say they will commission the surveys .
 The document offered advice on how to burnish the candidate's image by planting stories with Moscow-friendly news outlets .
 The stories were to be closely coordinated, publishing first in fringe blogs before entering mainstream media en masse to create maximum impact and ultimately become election talking points for the party . The stories are to be carefully coordinated, with the stories to be published first.
 The Wall Street Journal couldn't verify to what extent any such proposals were implemented or whether they helped Mr Radev .
 Mr Reshetnikov stepped down as head of the Russian institute . Montenegrin authorities said they had foiled an allegedly Russianbacked coup attempt in November .
 In December, he was sanctioned by the U.S. government for his role as a board member at Tempbank . Tempbank is a Russian lender that has financed the government of Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad .
 Montenegro hopes to become part of NATO this year . Srdjan Darmanovic, foreign minister of Montenegro, said Mr Reshetnikov has acted as a propaganda fist .
 Mr Radev's first stop on the campaign trail was a visit to the annual gathering of Bulgaria's National Russophile Movement .
 In the weeks before the vote, the number of pro-Russian and anti-Western news items mushroomed, according to media monitors and political analysts .
 Hundreds of social-media accounts, often with variations of the same name, amplified the message, posting and retweeting thousands of times .
 Vassil Velichkov, a tech entrepreneur and former government adviser, says a media-monitoring algorithm he developed detected a surge in anti-West . He met with Mikhail Fradkov and Vladimir Putin in January .
 A Bulgarian polling company accurately predicted Mr. Radev's victory . Gallup International isn't related to Gallup Inc.
 Gallup Inc. also co-published a February poll that said citizens of four NATO members, including Bulgaria, would choose Russia, rather than NATO, to defend them if they were attacked . The company is being sued by Gallup Inc for using its name without authorization .
 Most NATO members in Eastern Europe, including Bulgaria, see the alliance as protection . Those results were at odds with a similar poll by Gallup Inc., published a few days earlier .
 Bulgaria has repeatedly argued that sanctions against Russia should be lifted . He has also reaffirmed Bulgaria's commitment to the EU and NATO, playing down his ties to Moscow .
 Nikolay Nenchev was charged with violating a contract with Russia . He planned to shift maintenance work on the Bulgarian air force's Russianmade MiG-29 fighters away from Russia to Poland .
 Mr Nenchev says he has done nothing wrong and blames his prosecution on "Russian proxies" in Bulgaria .
 Mr Radev told national television last week that he expects to welcome Mr Putin in Sofia next March .
 Bulgarian president could be patrons of Bulgaria's national holiday marking 140th anniversary . Russian troops helped the country's liberation from Ottoman rule .
 Socialists call on EU to lift international sanctions against Russia over Crimea annexation . They argue that they hurt the Bulgarian economy and its trade with Russia . They have promised to restart construction of a major Russia-backed gas pipeline .
 The Socialists and center-right GERB are each poised to capture around 30% of the vote, according to the latest polls .
Nathan Hodge in Moscow and Julian E Barnes in Brussels contributed to this article. IS.
 Israeli police on Thursday arrested a teenager suspected of making dozens of security-related threats to Jewish institutions in the U.S. and elsewhere that put the communities on edge .
 The 19-year-old man is Jewish and holds dual Israeli and American citizenship . He was arrested in southern Israel as part of a monthslong investigation . The investigation involved the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other security agencies .
 The suspect will remain in police custody for questioning until March 30, a local judge ruled . The suspect is being questioned by police, police say .
 The judge asked that the suspect not be identified at this stage, a spokesman added .
 The suspect, who is from the city of Ashkelon, suffers from a nonmalignant brain tumor that affects his behavior, his attorney says .
 Israeli police say the suspect's father also was arrested, though it wasn't immediately clear on what charges . Israeli police: Suspect's father was also arrested .
 Dozens of threats had prompted evacuations of Jewish community centers around the country . Officials at some U.S. Jewish organizations greeted news of arrest with a mix of relief and dismay .
 A 19-year-old covered his face as he was brought to court in Rishon Lezion, Israel, on Thursday . Doron Krakow, president and chief executive of the JCC Association of North America, said the group is gratified by progress in the
 The investigation began at the same time in several countries, police say . Dozens of threatening calls were received at public places, events, synagogues and community buildings, police said .
 The suspect used advanced digital camouflage technologies when contacting other countries, such as Australia and New Zealand, police say .
 Mr Rosenberg said he worried some people would use the arrest to question the legitimacy of recent anti-Semitic acts in the U.S. He said he was worried that some people might use the arrests to question legitimacy of the acts .
 Mr Rosenberg added that it wouldn't make the bomb threats any less serious if the perpetrator were Jewish .
 Brookings Institution releases new analysis of nation's largest-population group . It paints an even bleaker picture of the country's largest population .
 Death rates for white non-Hispanics with a high-school education or less now exceed those of blacks overall . They are 30% higher for whites age 50 to 54 than for blacks overall of that age .
 Blacks have long had a much higher death rate than whites, but that rate has dropped since the beginning of this century . The rate for whites has crept up, while the rate for blacks has also crept up .
 A Rising Toll New research shows the increasing mortality rate among white Americans spans age groups and is most acute among the less-educated . The increase in “deaths of despair'' from drugs, alcoholrelated liver diseases and suicide, the study says .
 The analysis paints a portrait of a gradual “collapse of the white, high-school-educated working class after its heyday in the early 1970s. Health, mental well-being, and attachment to the labor force have become successively worse for people born after 1945,
 The opioid epidemic has only heightened a trend that was already under way before those drugs hit the market, they said .
 The mortality rate has continued to decline this century for whites with a college degree, but more slowly than before. Case and Mr Deaton noted, the mortality rate is still declining .
 The increase in mortality rate for working-class whites can't be explained by declining income prospects alone . The rise in mortality rates for working class whites is not the reason for the increase .
 Blacks and Hispanics face many of the same income struggles but have experienced declines in mortality over the same period . The two economists argued that their findings reveal more recent troubles for blacks .
 Wages aren't rising with age now as much as they once did for high-school-educated white men . Wages are not rising as fast as they did for white men, says Ms. Drexler .
 Case said that the composition of jobs available to them has changed and that there is less upward mobility . Case said there is more upward mobility than there was before .
 Social isolation has made life less stable, experts say . Those changes have come along with trends such as a decline in marriage, more temporary relationships and children out of wedlock .
 U.S. Lawmaker faces probe on Campaign Finance Federal investigators are probing suspected campaign-finance violations by Rep. Rep. John Boehner .
 The House Ethics Committee says it has been asked by the Justice Department to pause its own handling of the case .
 The Office of Congressional Ethics alleges the California Republican spent tens of thousands of dollars of congressional campaign funds on family travel, health care, school uniforms, jewelry, groceries and other personal expenses .
 The nonpartisan office has referred the matter to the House Ethics Committee for possible disciplinary action . It said Thursday that it had halted its inquiry in a unanimous vote in response to the Justice Department's request .
 The Justice Department generally asks congressional panels to defer action out of concern it could jeopardize their own investigation into the matter . The Department of Justice generally asks Congress to defer the action .
 The Justice Department declined to comment . New-home sales increased sharply for the second consecutive month in February . A pickup in construction activity could help propel a strong spring selling season .
 Purchases of newly built, single-family houses jumped 6.1% from January to a seasonally adjusted annual rate 592,000 last month . The Commerce Department says the increase is a small share of overall U.S. home sales .
 That marked the second-strongest month since the housing-market expansion began in 2012 . That's the second strongest month since housing- market expansion began.
 Utah's governor said he will sign legislation giving the predominantly Mormon state the strictest DUI threshold in the country . Economists surveyed by The Wall Street Journal expected new home sales to increase by 1.4% to 563,000 sales .
 Gary Herbert said he plans to approve the measure lowering the blood alcohol limit for most drivers to 0.05% from 0.08% . Herbert said it will save lives and save lives .
 Opponents had urged him to veto the bill, saying it would punish responsible drinkers and burnish Utah's reputation as a state that is unfriendly to those who drink alcohol .
 Mr Kolko's analysis shows the areas that stand to lose the most if immigration decreases .
Miami was followed closely by the San Jose metro area, where the population grew by 0.9% due to immigration . Miami was followed by San Jose.
 Orlando lost more people to domestic migration than they gained in the past few years . Orlando's big cities, including Orlando, lost more than any other city in the same time .
 The Cape Coral-Fort Myers area in Florida got the biggest boost from domestic migration . All of the top five beneficiaries of domestic migration were in Florida .
 In metro areas across the U.S., population growth had a nearly 70% correlation with home-price growth in 2016 . The second-strongest correlation over the past 30 years saw the strongest correlation .
 The 30-year average correlation is 25%, suggesting the current run up in home prices is on solid ground .
Immigration accounted for 1.1% of population growth in the metropolitan area . Immigration accounted for a quarter of the city's population growth .
 The librarian of Congress currently appoints the position, known officially as the register of copyrights .
Top Republicans and Democrats appear to be coming together quickly on legislation to change the appointment to a presidential nomination with Senate confirmation . The legislation would be part of a broader effort to modernize the copyright system .
 Carla Hayden, who took office last year, is intent on moving forward with her own appointment for the job, according to a recent letter .
 The struggle is potentially momentous, as technology has made reproduction and distribution of published works far easier and cheaper and has exacerbated tensions over copyright protections .
 Those protections are limited by exceptions and can sometimes be hard to enforce . But those protections are sometimes hard to enforcement .
 Lawmakers have been intensifying their focus on the issue in recent months . Lawmakers are intensifying the focus on issues such as immigration .
 A House panel has completed a multi-year review of copyright laws . It has started drafting overhaul legislation .
 A measure to make the head of the copyright office a presidential appointment is the first in what could be a series of bills .
 Hayden and lawmakers urged her to hold off on making the appointment, a person familiar with the matter says . Hayden and House and Senate committee leaders urged her not to make it .
 Hayden wrote to the lawmakers making it clear she was planning to go ahead with her appointment of the copyright chief . Hayden wrote.
 A House Judiciary Committee aide confirmed that Chairman Bob Goodlatte met with Ms. Ms. Goodlattte .
 Other people familiar with the matter have described the meeting as contentious . The meeting has been described as contentious.
 Content creators in recent years came to regard the copyright office as an ally in their policy duels with internet companies . Content creators want to boost its independence .
 Many technology firms want to keep the copyright office in the Library of Congress . They want to focus more on improving its outdated copyright record systems .
 Yitzhak Rabin The Hawk and the Dove RIVALS Shimon Peres were the first two Rabin brothers . The Hawk was the first Rabin family to be named as the Hawk .
 Rabin's primary concern throughout his life was Israeli security . Throughout his long career in the military he proved himself capable of carrying out extremely tough action .
 Rabin was born in Jerusalem in 1922 to parents who had emigrated from the Russian empire . He joined the preindependence Jewish security forces in 1941 after an interview with a young officer .
 Rabin rose through the ranks, working first with, and then against, the British who ruled Mandatory Palestine . He was even jailed by them for five months in 1946 .
 Rabin gave the order to fire on the Altalena, a ship carrying arms to the rival militia led by Menachem Begin . Rabin was a senior officer in the new Israeli Defense Forces in 1948 .
 Rabin signed an order to expel Arab residents from Lydda in what has become a deeply controversial episode in Israel's war of independence .
 Rabin put down the First Intifada, the violent Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule in the West Bank . Later, it was Rabin who, as minister of defense, put down it .
 As a military officer, he lacked charisma and was an excellent number two . He was an "excellent number two" and an "unusually efficient staff officer"
 He was "unusually shy and introverted, awkward with unfamiliar people," he said . He was hardly the makings of a successful politician .
 Rabin had been chief of staff during Israel's smashingly successful Six Day War of 1967 .
After serving as ambassador in Washington from 1968 to 1973, he returned home to Israel . He held no government or military position in 1973, when Israel was attacked by Egypt and Syria .
 Israel recovered from the surprise attack and went on to victory . The shock of the war and very large losses discredited those who had been in power .
 Rabin was remembered for the 1967 triumph and "untarnished by the October setback," as Mr Rabinovich puts it .
 Under the Accords, Israel recognized the PLO as the sole voice of the Palestinian people . Arafat was allowed to return from exile in Tunis and began negotiations on a Palestinian ""entity" that would eventually become a state .
 Rabin agreed to the Oslo Accords and, more, sought a deal with Hafez alAssad to give the Golan Heights back to Syria . The mystery of Rabin is why, given his decades of staunch defense of Israeli security, he agreed to that .
 As early as 1977, writes Mr Rabinovich, he had told President Carter that he desired no negotiations with the PLO, no Palestinian state and no talks with Syria .
 In a 1989 speech, he called for negotiating with local Palestinian leaders rather than the PLO . He reiterated his opposition to the establishment of a Palestinian state between Israel and Jordan .
 During his election campaign in 1992, he came out against giving back the Golan . He was elected to office in 1992 .
 According to Mr Rabinovich, the pivot point was the outbreak of the First Intifada in 1987 .
 Mr Rabinovich does not really explain why he didn't explain it to Israelis at the time, nor in 1993 during his secret negotiations with Assad .
 Rabin wanted a deal with Syria over the Golan Heights . But faced with the futility of dealing with Assad, he chose to go the Oslo route .
 He underestimated both Peres's determination and Arafat's desperation . But he underestimated both his determination and his desperation .
 By 1993, Mr Rabinovich said he could make a significant move on one track of the peace process . He preferred it to be the Syrian-Lebanese track, he says .
 Assad chose to go the Oslo route. But faced with the likely futility of negotiations with Assad, he decided to go to Oslo instead .
 Mr Rabinovich explains the steps by which the tough military leader came to abandon his promises to Israeli voters . He says his motivation was not his underlying motivation .
 Rabin collapsed in the lead-up to the 1967 war from nervous exhaustion . Rabin had been out of action for two days .
 In 2000 at Camp David, Arafat refused a generous peace offer from Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak . Arafat then encouraged the violence that became known as the Second Intifada .
 Rabin shook Arafat's hand on the White House lawn in 1993 showed Rabin's doubts about the treaty he had just signed . The new path it appeared to signify.
 Mr Rabinovich is a scholar with an abiding commitment to historical accuracy . In the end, even the warm esteem in which he holds Rabinovic does not prevent him from presenting his friend in full .
 Mr Abrams handled Middle East affairs at the National Security Council from 2001 to 2009 .
 Bourdin's exact motives for this crazy act were unknown . Bourdin died after his bomb prematurely exploded .
 The episode inspired Joseph Conrad's novel "The Secret Agent" But the episode inspired the novel's protagonist to attack the observatory .
 The story involved scientists and politicians setting aside national, ideological and even religious differences to reach an agreement for the global good .
 The prime meridian is a baseline used in the grid system of longitude and latitude . Map makers, mariners, astronomers and the Global Positioning System ""read"" locations on the globe and fix exact time .
Latitude, the north-south position in this grid, has a natural zero point in the equator . Latitude is the North-South position in the grid .
 No natural zero point exists for longitude, or eastwest position, so humans have had to take matters into their own hands .
 Ptolemy and many other ancient geographers thought an obvious zero point was the Canary Islands, which they regarded as the western end of the world .
 Some later geographers hoped that the North Pole and the magnetic pole line up so that a compass points true north might do . Some laterGeographers hope that the agonic line might do so .
 The Canary Islands turned out not to be the world's end . But the agonic line, which passes through parts of North and South America, is not straight and moves over time .
Without a natCandidates for the prime meridian included Paris, the manger at Bethlehem and the Great Pyramid of Giza .
 Greenwich won. ural zero point, geographers and astronomers often set the prime meridian at convenient landmarks in their home country . Greenwich won .
 By the 19th century, railway collisions, maritime accidents and growing international collaborations highlighted the need for a common world-wide system to fix precise geographical locations and standardize time .
 National scientific academies and observatories linked by telegraphic networks now provide the expertise and technology to make simultaneous time determinations . Astronomers, navigators and international merchants lobby for a common zero longitude point .
 The French wanted Paris, the Swedes Uppsala, the British someplace in London . The French also wanted the Swedish city of St. St. Louis .
Many politicians wanted to place the prime meridian in the middle of an ocean so as not to divide or favor particular countries . Many politicians wanted the meridian to be in the center of the ocean.
 Strong arguments existed for placing it instead at an observatory, to facilitate time determinations . Strong arguments exist for placing the observatory instead of a time observatory .
 Proposals with religious overtones included the manger at Bethlehem and the city of Jerusalem .
 One of the wackiest but most passionately advanced candidates was the Great Pyramid of Giza . Giza is the world's most famous place to live in .
 This was the favorite of a populist movement in the United States that used over-the-top rhetoric, conspiracy theories, fabricated "facts" and assertions of American superiority to promote the Pyramid . The Pyramid appears on every United States dollar bill.
 Other Americans criticized the "pomp and vanity" of insisting on an American prime meridian . The U.S. is participating in an honest international effort .
 It was only a recommendation, but it proved to be the key episode in consolidating a world-wide consensus . It was just a recommendation. It was a key episode of consolidating the world's consensus .
 Mr Withers's tale is about the deaf scientist and educator Frederick Barnard . Among them are Charles Daly, Charles Daly and Charles Piazzi Smyth .
 Mr Withers's telling focuses less on people than on arguments and the text of resolutions . But he says his telling focuses on people rather than arguments .
 Its dry and frequently repetitious account is in stylistic contrast to Dava Sobel's much-celebrated "Longitude" .
 Sobel breathlessly calls a "lone genius who solved the greatest scientific problem of his time" Sobel calls a "lone genius who solved the greatest scientific problem of his time," "the greatest scientific problem"
 The truth, Mr Withers notes, is "more complicated" for the background to that achievement . Geographers, scientists, instruments and observatories set up the problem and drew up an outline of a solution .
 The story that unfolds in "Zero Degrees" is about more than the scientific development that is its ostensible subject . The story is more than more than a scientific development .
 Scientists and politicians managed to set aside differences to reach agreement . It is about how an international community of scientists and politicians agreed to reach a deal .
 It shows how slow and difficult this can be in the face of resistance posed by ideologies, shortsighted interests and jingoistic nationalism . It shows just how fast and difficult it can be.
International cooperation can harness the power and authority of science to benefit human life all over the globe . This is the first time international cooperation can be used to help human life .
 Mr Withers's account of the poignancy of modern politicians gives his account of their courage . But it is virtually impossible to imagine modern politicians with the integrity and courage to make them .
 A group of Israeli fourth-graders pressed their noses to display cases, reading aloud from texts that were two millennia old .
 Mr Glinert's biography of Hebrew succeeds in representing the language not just as a vehicle of communication but as a crucible of national cohesion .
 Mr Glinert's narrative, related with impressive sweep, begins with the classical Hebrew of biblical literature .
 The Bible's sublime idiom is marked by stylistic suppleness and breadth, he says . He says it could encompass “narrative, prophecy, law, proverbs, philosophy, elegy, romance'' and much else .
 The spoken language survived the Jews' exile to Babylon, their return and their struggles under Roman rule .
 Spoken Hebrew seems to have died with little fanfare around A.D. 200, more than a century after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem .
 Jews used written Hebrew to scaffold elaborate edifices of religious and legal interpretation . But throughout the diaspora, Jews used writing Hebrew for religious andlegal interpretation .
 Hebrew would flourish as a written medium of cultural continuity . Though stateless, Hebrew would thrive as a writing medium of culture continuity .
 The Mishnah was compiled in the second and third centuries . The first of these edifices, the Mishnah, was written in the first and second centuries .
 The Babylonian Talmud is another great edifice of interpretation, setting out the authoritative commentary on rabbinic law . The Talmud expanded Hebrew's expressive possibilities by inflecting Hebrew with Aramaic .
 In the ensuing centuries those who standardized Hebrew's grammatical architecture and honed its philological precision saw the language as a fulcrum of Jewish life .
 While Hebrew commingled with Arabic in Islamic Spain, it preserved a separate reservoir of expression in the realms of law and liturgy .
 During the golden age of Hebrew literature, roughly the 10th to the 13th centuries, Andalusian poets like Judah Halevi and Solomon ibn Gabirol wielded a Hebrew of astonishing allusive density .
 Mr Glinert tells how Christians learned Hebrew both to access “hebraica veritas,'' or Hebrew truth, and to monitor the Jews in their midst .
 Martin Luther's call for “sola scriptura,'' or “only the Scriptures,'' led Protestants back to the original texts of the Hebrew Bible .
 In the 15th to 17th centuries, Christian Hebraists put Hebrew at the center of Western humanism . Hebrew is the most popular language in Europe .
 In 18th century, leaders of the Jewish Enlightenment sought to emancipate Jews from the confines of the ghetto . They hoped to make Hebrew an aesthetic equal to European languages .
 A small group of secular Eastern European writers in the following century to dig channels through which Hebrew's hidden vitality could course once more . Their efforts, while incomplete, prepared the ground for a small group, were incomplete .
 In its early stages, this revival didn't seem to have much prospect for success . In the early stages of this revival, it seemed to have little prospect of success .
For pragmatists, resurrecting a bookish tongue that lacked words for tomato, theater, microscope or fun seemed either ridiculous or inconceivable . For pragmatist, resurrects a booky tongue that didn't have words for Tomato, theater or microscope .
 Even the father of political Zionism, Theodor Herzl envisioned a Jewish state of German speakers . He envisioned a state of Jewish speakers .
 Eliezer BenYehuda is the author of a 16-volume dictionary of Hebrew usage . He is also the founder of the Hebrew language's first ever dictionary .
 BenYehuda arrived in Jerusalem in 1881, having first left his native Lithuania to study in Paris . He was unwavering in his commitment to restoring the Jewish language and the Jewish homeland together .
 He published a Hebrew newspaper, founded the forerunner of what became the Hebrew Language Academy . He advocated Hebrew as the language of instruction in the Jewish schools.
 In November 1922, the British mandate recognized Hebrew as the official language of the Jews in Palestine . In November 1923, Hebrew was recognized by the British government as an official language .
 A month later, BenYehuda succumbed to tuberculosis, having fulfilled his dream of relaunching Hebrew as a spoken language for the first time in nearly two millennia . He died a month later .
 In such a way was Hebrew “torn from biblical sleep,'' in the Israeli poet Yehuda Amichai's phrase . The phrase was used in the Hebrew language .
 Bialik was the poet who stood at the vanguard of the migration of Hebrew literature . His verses were emblazoned on banners, set to music, memorized by schoolchildren .
 Eastern Europe was a rousing call to self-defense in the land of Israel . They were a roused call toSelf-defense .
 Bialik reclaimed old sonorities to achieve an inventiveness never before seen . The collective is inimitably singular and self-consciously national .
 When he was 7, his destitute mother sent him to live with a pious grandfather . He was 7 when his father died, and he was sent to live in the care of his grandfather .
 Bialik arrived penniless in Odessa, then a hub of Hebrew culture on the shores of the Black Sea . Stealing away from his studies at a prestigious Lithuanian yeshiva, or religious academy, he left for Odessa .
 In syllables shaped by the collision of tradition and modernity, Bialik poured forth verses in a range of registers . The poet's work includes pastoral portraits and martial epics .
 Bialik fled from Odessa to Germany, before settling in Tel Aviv in 1924 . He would spend his final decade in Tel Tel Aviv .
 Though his muse waned, his efforts on behalf of Hebrew renewal did not . His efforts were unsuccessful .
 He served as president of the academy, founded by BenYehuda, that coined and vetted new words . He also served as head of the university's academy .
 He set up publishing houses, edited literary journals and made himself a ubiquitous and beloved presence in Palestine . He is also a beloved figure in Palestine.
 His verses were emblazoned on banners, set to music and memorized by schoolchildren . His verses are set toMusic and memorize by school children .
 The poet's 60th birthday, in 1933, was marked as a national holiday . It was a celebration of his part in fashioning a vernacular adequate to modern life .
 Mr Holtzman died the following year, 30 years to the day after the death of Herzl, as he wrote in his notes .
Despite millennia of fluctuations, Hebrew escaped extinction with its distinctiveness tenaciously intact . Glinert and Holtzman suggest that, despite millennia of fluctuation, Hebrew survived extinction .
 Hebrew is the grammar of a dynamic dialogue between claims of the ever-changing present and the imperatives of the past . To read these books is to appreciate Hebrew as the grammar.
 Mr Balint, a writer in Jerusalem, is the author of ‘Kafka’s Last Trial/’ forthcoming from Norton .
 The 85 essays defending the new Constitution were in fact written by Hamilton, James Madison and John Jay .
 Hamilton wrote the overwhelming majority of a note written shortly before his duel with Aaron Burr . Hamilton wrote that he made sure everyone knew in the note .
 Hamilton claimed credit for 63 essays; he said Jay penned five and Madison wrote 17 . Hamilton said Jay wrote five, Madison penned 17, and Jay penned 5 and Madison penned five .
 The 1963 breakthrough came when the statisticians realized that Hamilton used “while’s but never ‘whilst’ and Madison did the opposite . Hamilton used the word ‘while” but never’t “whilst.’
 Wallace and Mosteller's research became a foundation of what is called stylometry . The study of language based on recurring word patterns, expressions and punctuation .
 Such textual analysis has practical applications in law, politics, advertising and, perhaps most powerfully today, search engines . Such text analysis can be used in law and politics .
Every comma is one more tiny piece of Big Data that establishes an online identity as distinct as a fingerprint . Every comma is a small piece of data that establishes a new online identity .
 Many adverbs are in all the novels written by Ernest Hemingway, Stephen King and Mark Twain . It appears just once in many novels .
 Mr Blatt's goal is to release the hounds of stylometry into the fiction stacks and see what happens .
 Mr Blatt proves in his fitfully amusing but frequently maddening study . He did, as Mr Blat proves, as he does, in his humorous study .
 Mr Blatt is a diligent counter of adverbs and animal similes, but his idea of scientific rigor is to pose a question . Do English writers use “bloke,” ‘blimey’ and “brilliant’ more often than
 “bloke’s” is used 27 times more often in the British National Corpus than in the Corpus of Contemporary American English . He expands the search to the “Harry Potter” series, then online erotica, until he runs out of steam .
 The author's novels become longer as her books become more popular . His readers will have skipped ahead .
 Mr Blatt attempts to prove this by running some tests on Hemingway's adverb rate . He also tries to prove that Hemingways' adverb rates are accurate .
 Mr Blatt follows up with charts that show that the most acclaimed novels by Hemingway are by William Faulkner . John Updike (the Rabbit Angstrom tetralogy) is those with the lowest adverb rates .
 He downloads more than 9,000 novel-length fan-length stories . He concludes that amateur writers use -ly adverbs more than the pros do .
 The amateurs are wildly, gracelessly and spectacularly unsuccessful in their excess . The amateur is wildly,gracelessley and spectacularally unsuccessful in his excess .
 Tolkien uses the word “he” just under 1,900 times in “The Hobbit’s” The word ‘she’ only once in the book. Tolkien uses “she” only once.
 Elmore Leonard used “he’s more than ‘she’ in every one of his 45 novels . The author used ‘he” more than "she” in every single novel .
 Jane Austen is the only one among the unspecified number Mr Blatt surveyed who used “she’s more than ‘he’ in every one of her books .
 Elmore Leonard famously advanced a list of 10 rules for writing in 2001 . In 2001, he made the list.
 It included a prohibition on the word ‘suddenly’ and a restriction of two or three exclamation points per 100,000 words of prose .
 Leonard used ‘suddenly’ often in his early westerns but not once in the nine novels he wrote after 2001 .
 Mr Pynchon rarely uses the same word to begin two consecutive sentences . For one thing, he rarely use the same words to begin a sentence .
 In his novel, only 1.6% of the more than 10,000 sentences begin with the same word as the previous sentence . "Bleeding Edge" is the book's first novel .
 The results of a random set of Mr Blatt's experiments are enlightening . He would have thought that Nabokov's favorite word was ‘mauve?’ But not always in the way he imagines.
 Algorithms are fast and accurate, but it turns out that literature can hold its own against those who try to break it into pie charts .
 The President Fells a Demagogue COMMITTEE MEN Sen. Eisenhower .
 Joseph McCarthy and his chief counsel, Roy Cohn, during the Army-McCarthy hearings in April 1954 . McCarthy and Cohn attended the hearings .
 The complete budget was a miracle of thrift when one considers its efficacy in thwarting Sen. Sen. John McCain's efforts to win the Senate .
 McCarthy had gained control of the subcommittee, which would soon be investigating him . Republicans had ridden to on Eisenhower's coattails .
 The chairmanship allowed the Wisconsin senator to hire as the subcommittee's counsel the cunning Roy Cohn . G David Schine, the Tab Hunter-ish object of Cohn's affections, was also the counsel .
 As a fellow Republican, he couldn't openly lambaste Eisenhower . Eisenhower's detestation of him and his methods was quietly evident .
There was party unity to consider and the danger of a challenge from McCarthy for the 1956 presidential nomination . Nor would Ike "get down in the gutter" with him, as the senator wanted .
 Eisenhower also had to worry about what McCarthy ""had"" on him .
 During 1953, the two men fought a series of "small skirmishes" previews of the following year's showdown . The two men were involved in the first time they fought in 1953 .
 McCarthy went after the Voice of America's supposedly slack anti-communism and sent Cohn and Schine on a honeymoon hunt for subversive literature in U.S.run libraries abroad .
 McCarthy took almost fetishistic care not to use McCarthy's name, even when having to greet him on a public occasion . He took the same care when greeting him on public occasions .
 The author's praise for the president's strategy can border on the fulsome, but it is supported by facts and some new source material .
 Eisenhower continued to throw dust into the eyes of the historians who came after them . His administration's mobilization against McCarthy was a story that "most of the era's great reporters" were unable to see .
 Ralph Zwicker was a hero of D-Day for not giving him the answers he wanted about the promotion of an Army dentist with onetime leftist affiliations . He had been at war with the service for months .
 David Schine had been drafted in November 1953, and the thought of his golden boy peeling potatoes on KP inspired more fury in Cohn than any pinko with a security clearance .
 He repeatedly demanded that the secretary of the Army, Robert Stevens, and its legal counsel, John Adams, secure passes for Schine .
 The eventual investigation of all this, which exploded into the televised hearings, was a great human spectacle, full of pratfalls and tragedy . The eventual probe of the hearings was agreat human spectacle.
Army Secretary Stevens fell into spells of drink and delusions of heroism . Army Secretary Stevens, for one, fell into drinks and delusions.
 McCarthy indulged Cohn. The deepest personal mystery has always been why he indulged him .
 Mr Nichols's narrative is relentlessly chronological, but he does briefly consider "the strange hold Cohn had over the senator" without coming to any conclusions .
 On Jan. 1954, White House Chief of Staff Sherman Adams ordered Adams to "draw up a detailed chronological account" of the pressures applied to the Army on Schine's behalf . Adams was the White House chief of Staff .
 Eisenhower lied to the press about the report's origins, and he arranged for Stevens to lie about them, too .
 Nixon's "foot-in-the-other-camp status" allowed him to make the approach to the committee almost in the way he would later have political cover in China .
 The president wanted the ArmyMcCarthy hearings televised and quashed any efforts to cut them short . The president wants the hearings televised .
 The "friedchicken lunch" photograph spawned a core of buffs not dissimilar to those obsessed by the Kennedy assassination or Watergate . The photograph was taken in the early 1960s .
 The extravaganza's most quotable utterance appeared to have been ad-libbed by Army counsel Joseph Welch . Welch had diligently prepared to be outraged at just the right moment .
 McCarthy was censured six months after the hearings ended . The word used in this case was "condemned"
 Roger Mudd, then a young reporter, remembers having to duck out for a breath of air . Mudd's body was ceremonially brought into a Senate chamber so profusely packed with flowers that he had to duck to breathe .
For all that was commendable in Ike's efforts against McCarthy, he often fell short of full courage . For all that, Ike's effort against McCarthy was commended .
 The president and Attorney General both wobbled on the Fifth Amendment . The invocation of constitutional privilege before a congressional committee grounds for a federal ema ployee's investigation .
 Executive Order 10450 isg sued in 1953 to get rid of loyaltyS review boards that had helped spur McCarthy's rise to power . It was possible to fire employees deemed susceptible to blackmail .
 McCarthy's investigation claimed more victims than McCarthy's investigations ever did . The investigation was more brutal than McCarthy ever did.
 Mr Nichols's book would have gained additional power by deviating from its moment-by-moment timeline . It would appear diabolical to them when invoked by Richard Nixon in the 1970s .
 It remains for the reader to discern in this book a rough, inverted image of our own time, with the polarity reversed between the White House and Congress .
 Eisenhower's secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, saw European governments fearing "an American fascism" that seemed to be rising from the Capitol Hill office of a crowd-pleaser .
 President Trump will soon make the same gift to a half-dozen or so morally troubled Republican senators .
 Critics assigned demerits to Charlton Heston for his stoicism, lack of humor and insufficient flash . Marlon Brando, Montgomery Clift and James Dean were the rage at the time . Heston was earnest, hard-working and unfailingly decent .
 Heston was a stand-and-deliver actor, with a habit of grinding his teeth to indicate either passion or intent .
 Hollywood's Last Icon is a welcome event if only because it restores a sense of balance . Actor An Actor With Integrity whose belief system mitigated against a full appreciation of his worth .
 Heston was married for 64 years to his wife, Lydia, and seems to have been a deeply responsible father to his two children . Heston has two children with his wife .
 He approached his characters through voluminous research, which meant he found them intellectually, with emotion trailing behind. Professionally, he approached his character through volumous research .
John Charles Carter was born John Charles Carter in 1923 . He was raised in the backwoods of Michigan and raised in Michigan .
 His parents divorced when he was 10 years old, and he and his mother eventually moved to Chicago . He was born in Chicago .
 The name he used during his service as a radioman during World War II is Charlton Heston . His mother remarried Chet Heston, she peremptorily told her son he would now be known as Charlton.
 Heston's dignified demeanor and his loping, big cat walk gave him the majestic presence of a bom movie star . It's possible he was not a born actor .
 Conscientious is perhaps the defining adjective for Heston, who had as good a batting average as any movie star of the post-war generation .
 There is "The Greatest Show on Earth" and "The Ten Commandments" for DeMille . There is also "The Big Country" and the Agony and the Ecstasy .
 Heston's films are all great or even good films, but all united by the director's determination to tell epic stories . The film is based on the book, which is set in London .
 Heston suggested that Orson Welles direct "Touch of Evil" He kept insisting on it until Universal capitulated, in spite of Welles's inability to make films.
 Heston wrote a smashing part for himself as a malignant variation on Falstaff . Welles didn't bother to do anything equally distinguished for Heston .
 Heston always said Welles was the most talented man he ever worked with . Heston says Welles is the best man he has worked with. Heston: "He's the best person I've worked with"
 "Major Dundee" director Sam Peckinpah even tossed in between $100,000 and $300,000 out of his own salary to shoot some additional scenes .
 Heston fronted the money for Rod Serling to do a re-write on the script for "Planet of the Apes" Heston then recruited Franklin Schaffner to direct .
 He never took a dime for his activities with the NRA because he believed he was fighting for principle . The NRA says he never took any money from his activities .
 The blowback within Hollywood over Heston's alliance with the NRA was considerable . Heston has been criticized by some for his alliance with NRA .
 Jean Firstenberg told the head of the AFI that if she wanted to take his name off the masthead, he would understand . The AFI's masthead has been named by the British Association of Firefighters .
 Heston's son Fraser tells Mr Eliot he also thinks it cost his father acting jobs . Heston says he thinks his father's acting jobs cost him acting jobs.
 I interviewed Heston several times for one book project or another, and he was invariably helpful and forthcoming . I interviewed him several times, but he was always helpful.
 Unlike his son, he didn't think his politics hurt him professionally, and he had penetrating insights about directors . He didn't have a political agenda, but had penetrating insight about directors.
 William Wyler should have directed El Cid rather than Ben-Hur, says Wyler . Wyler also ventured the borderline brilliant idea that William Wylers should have Directed ElCid .
 Somewhere in the 1970s, the movies got smaller and so did Heston's ambition . The movies got bigger in the 70s, so did his ambition .
 In 2002, he was driving to Paramount, a studio he had worked at since 1950, when he got lost . He got lost in 2002 .
 Mr Eyman’s 15th book about the movies is due out in October .
 A 27-year-old student jumped to her death from her eighth-floor dorm residence in New York City .
 The school is considering significantly expanding access to mental-health specialists . It is also considering changing aspects of its grading system .
 Several months earlier, a medical resident, also female, committed suicide at the school's West Side campus .
 Jordyn Feingold, a first-year medical student, committed suicide in August . She lived next door to the woman who committed suicide last year .
 Feingold had arrived at Sinai only 10 days before the tragedy . She recalled how she and her peers were racked by ""cognitive dissonance’s”
 Dr. Feingold, 24, joined a task force Dr. Dr. Fingold has a master's in applied positive psychology . The task force is based in New York City .
 Muller charged with figuring out how to improve Sinai's academic culture and doctors' well-being . He is also charged with trying to improve the medical community .
Young doctors and medical students face high rates of burnout, depression and psychological strain . Young doctors and students face grueling academic pressures and are experiencing high rates.
 Individuals drawn to medicine are necessarily more prone to angst. But it isn't because individuals drawn to medical care are necessarily prone to anxiety .
 Kathryn Stascavage wrote a New England Journal essay about suicide . It isn't clear what drove her to suicide, nor what role pressures of medical school may have played .
 Singh, along with about 30 faculty members, medical students, fellows and residents, took part in the task force . The task force also proposed steps to remedy the academic culture .
 mental health, physician well-being and learning environment were split into three areas . The three areas were divided into mental health and physician well being . The learning environment was also split into the learning environment .
 Singh's group, which focused on mental health, grappled with making it easier to consult a therapist . The group's focus was on making it easy to consult therapist .
 The stigma of psychiatric care has been removed, and access to affordable practitioners . Many don't accept insurance, and many don't have access to insurance .
 One proposal calls for making more therapists in the institution available to students . Another calls for more therapists to be available for students .
 The school would like to ask students to have regular mental-health checkups . If they don't wish to have them, the school would also want to ask them to have mental health checks .
Jonathan Ripp, an internist on the faculty of the Icahn School, co-chaired the working group on well-being . He believes young doctors and trainees are suffering because medicine has changed dramatically .
 Ripp's group suggests dedicating space on campus to clearinghouse where young doctors and students could avail themselves of a "menu of well-being”
Group wants dedicated time built into schedules of medical students and trainees . Group wants to allow them to take a break, meet with peers and review stressful incidents .
 Sinai tackled a high-stakes grading system marked by quotas for thirdand fourth-year students that limited "honors" to 25% of the class . Sinai tackled one source of angst.
 The "high pass" distinction was limited to 25%, while the remaining half of the class would receive a ""pass’s grade .
 The school has rejiggered the distribution to allow one-third of students to receive "honors,” onethird ""high pass” and one- third ""pass,’ Dean Muller said . He said the system will drop the limits altogether .
Today's noon positions of weather systems and precipitation are today's midday positions . Weather # AccuWeather.com Shown is today's noon position .
 WSJ Pro Cybersecurity is designed to help executives monitor the everchanging landscape of cybersecurity through a business lens . The company's solution is called the "Puzzle's Solution"
 Pro journalists deliver unique, actionable insight on the wide-ranging challenges of cybercrime risk .
 WSJ Pro Cybersecurity membership includes a daily curated newsletter, along with panel discussions, interviews, webinars and white papers .
 For personal non-commercial use only. Start your FREE NEWSLETTER TRIAL TODAY wsj.com/procybersecurity .
 Hong Kong’s Unhappy Selection S unday is the day Hong Kong fought over in 2014, when student-led demonstrators massed on downtown streets for 75 days .
 Hong Kong's rule of law, media freedom and other liberal institutions demand China honor its promise to let the semiautonomous former British colony elect its leader democratically .
 Beijing refused, so on Sunday a new Chief Executive will be imposed on the city . The move is sure to inflame local politics .
 Despite televised debates, ads and other trappings of a democratic contest, this is no election. Despite the televised debates and ads, it's no election .
 As in Iran, or villages in mainland China, the government decides who can run and all but determines who will win .
 Of 7. million Hong Kong residents, only 1,200 can vote . Most of whom are business elites or other worthies loyal to Beijing .
 Hong Kong law says Beijing isn't allowed to intervene . But Chinese envoys make no secret of their preference as they pressure electors by phone and in person .
 Even some in the pro-Beijing camp complain about how aggressively the “invisible hand’s” has favored Ms. Beijing .
 Former Financial Secretary John Tsang is hardly a democrat but has a more common touch . He has cheered Hong Kong's soccer team over China's while Mr Leung remained comically neutral .
 Hong Kong Chief Executive is increasingly to serve Beijing's will while catching flak from the public . Losing could be a gift because of the role of Hong Kong's Chief Executive .
 When the city last had a real election, in September for the semidemocratic local legislature, 2. million voters turned out . Some 55% backed the democratic opposition .
 More than 20% backed candidates calling for greater self-determination or independence from Beijing . More than 30% backed candidate calling for self- determination or independence .
 These views were once marginal but have gained support in recent years amid crackdowns and illegal abductions of Hong Kongers by Chinese agents .
 September's election marked another rollback of Hong Kong's autonomy . Beijing barred two winning candidates from taking seats in the legislature for refusing to swear allegiance to China .
 Beijing did this even as local courts were set to rule on the case, and without a request from local authorities . It is an unprecedented intrusion in Hong Kong's legal system .
 The effect was to popularize pro-independence feeling even more, especially among young people . The effect is to popularized pro- independence feeling, especially in young people.
 This betrayal of Deng Xiaoping's promise of “one country, two systems’ is a tragedy for Hong Kong and China .
 The hope when Britain handed Hong Kong to China two decades ago was that the free and prosperous city would inspire the mainland to follow its political lead .
 Beijing has resisted liberalization at home and is gradually turning Hong Kong into another Chinese city . Instead Beijing is gradually becoming a city of its own .
 Denying free elections for Chief Executive and booting duly elected lawmakers from office invites more protest and dysfunction in China's financial center .
 Neil Gorsuch has had much more success in his role as a legal counterpuncher than a Supreme Court nominee .
 The nominee's response to Democratic hectoring over the First Amendment is a response to the president's criticism of the Constitution .
 Rhode Island limelighter Sheldon Whitehouse on Tuesday took to badgering Judge Gorsuch about some $10 million in “dark money’ that is being spent on advertising to support his confirmation .
 Progressives like Mr Whitehouse want to ban anonymous political spending, better to harass and intimidate opponents .
 Congress has the right to pass legislation requiring more disclosure in political spending . The bill would require more disclosure of political spending in the budget .
 The High Court has been too willing to tolerate mandated donor disclosure . The Supreme Court has used it to target and shut down political opponents .
 A return to the NAACP standard would be an enormous boon to free speech and political participation . A return would be a huge boon to political participation and free speech .
 Mr Whitehouse complained that Judge Gorsuch wouldn't recognize his “simple"" point that money in politics is corruption . Mr White House complained that he didn't recognize the point .
 France 2 TV channel broke broadcasting records last week . A weather report on the France 2 television channel breaks broadcasting records .
 Melanie Segard, a 21-year-old woman with Down syndrome, is a guest meteorologist on the network . Some 5 million viewers tuned in to watch her on Thursday night .
Wearing TV makeup and an irrepressible smile, she forecast clouds and rain for most of the country .
 Segard fulfilled a lifelong dream to show that "I can do a lot of things,” she put on Facebook .
 It clashed with a strand of cultural liberalism that treats the existence of people like Ms. Ms. Cupp .
 Her appearance was facilitated by disability-rights group ahead of World Down Syndrome Day on March 21 .
Previous efforts to bring visibility to people with disabilities in France have run afoul of broadcast regulations that restrict images of happy people with Down syndrome . It was all the more heartening because previous efforts to bringing visibility to those with disabilities have been unsuccessful .
 Such images are undesirable, regulators argue, since they could give second thoughts to women who have sought abortions . Such images would be undesirable, they say, if they were taken by women seeking abortions .
 At its best, liberalism revels in the hubbub of a crowded marketplace of ideas, says CNN's John Sutter .
 A dour, self-righteous and conformist model has now come to define the liberal idea across much of Europe . But it brooks no dissent from the latest progressive precepts .
 Those of us who worry about the fragility of the liberal order and growing populist sentiment would be welladvised to pay more attention to how people on the sharp end of such “liberalism’s” experience it .
 The Council of State, France's highest administrative court, upheld a ban last year on a World Down Syndrome Day TV ad . The ad showed DS young adults, like Ms. Ms. S. Siblings .
 The ad risked “disturbing the conscience’ of women who had aborted DS pregnancies, the Council of State held in a November ruling .
 Nine of 10 fetuses diagnosed with Down syndrome in France are aborted . As it is, nine of ten fetuses in France have Down syndrome .
 It is hard to see how any ads about contentious issues would survive the ruling's purely subjective standard . It's not clear if any ads would survive.
 The French National Assembly last month followed the Council of State ruling with a sweeping new measure targeting online antiabortion advocacy .
 Sometimes the overreach violates even the norms set down by cherished liberal institutions . Sometimes theOverreach violates the norms sets down by liberal institutions.
 Ellinor Grimmark, a midwife, has been denied employment by several hospitals over her refusal to take part in late-term abortion procedures .
 Sweden is facing a severe midwife shortage . Such procedures are always planned in advance, meaning there would be no situation in which her refusal to participate would endanger patients .
 A dour, self-righteous and conformist version has come to define the liberal idea across much of Europe . The liberal idea has been defined as a liberal idea in many countries .
 Grimmark's freedom-of-conscience and discrimination suit and ordered her to pay the defendants' court costs . Grimmark was ordered to pay court costs. Grimmark is accused of discrimination and discrimination .
 The case is now before an appellate employment tribunal, and a ruling is expected Wednesday . The case will be heard in an appellate tribunal .
 The outcome would likely also determine the fate of Linda Steen, a similarly situated midwife .
 Norway welcomes health workers who object to abortion on conscience grounds . Both women have been forced to find work in Norway, which welcomes the right to abortion .
 The real danger is that this type of liberalism will cast doubt on the basic fairness of the open society, says John Sutter .
 The promise of liberalism used to be that you could always have your day in the democratic public square, even if you lost this or that legislative battle .
 Marine Le Pen and the hard-right Sweden Democrats can cast votes for the likes of Le Pen. What they can do is cast votes in Sweden?
 Spinning off air-traffic control from the Federal Aviation Administration .
 A new report explains how this could bring innovation and efficiency to airspace that the federal government is struggling to manage . The report was published by the National Transportation Agency .
 Mr Trump's budget proposes converting the FAA's air-traffic outfit into “an independent, non-governmental organization" as Canada has done, and dozens of other countries have similar models .
 House Transportation Chairman Bill Shuster introduced a bill to turn airtraffic control over to a nonprofit corporation run by a board with seats for airlines, the pilots union, hobbyist aviators and more . It stalled without presidential support .
 Pilots currently bounce from one radio point to the next, which can result in roundabout routes and wasted fuel . Pilots are currently bouncing from oneRadio point to one Radio point .
 The Transportation Department's Inspector General airdrops the occasional damning report on FAA's NextGen modernization program . "Total costs and timelines remain unclear," according to the November installment .
 FAA may finish the project a decade after the 2025 deadline, or 20 years after its technology is obsolete . FAA may end the project in 20 years, or a decade, after 2025, after the deadline .
 Laws in the 1990s freed the FAA from personnel and procurement rules and introduced performance-based compensation .
 According to the IG, the agency's budget increased 95% between 1996 and 2012 .
 A February report from the Eno Center for Transportation endorsed a governmentchartered or nonprofit corporation . One chairman of the working group is former Sen. Sen. John McCain .
 The Eno report details how Nav Canada and other nations collect user fees, not taxes, which forces management to be more cost-effective . Nav Canada is one of the most popular countries in the world .
 The U.S. air-traffic trust fund rakes in money from the domestic-passenger ticket tax . The commercial-fuel tax and other fees are also included .
 FAA also receives money from Congress, and so funding is a political football in fights like the 2013 government shutdown . The 2013 shutdown furloughed controllers.
 Fears that fees would increase without government oversight haven't panned out . Fears in Canada that fees will increase without oversight haven’t pannedout .
 Consumer charges have dropped by onethird compared with the previous tax scheme . Consumer charges are on the same level as the previous scheme .
 Canada handles 50% more traffic with 30% fewer employees, according to a 2015 Brookings Institution report .
 Nav Canada even sells some of its new technology and reinvests the proceeds . Nav Canada also sells some new technology .
 No one credible argues that a corporate airtraffic system would undermine safety . installing GPS in the cockpit and other updates would make flying safer .
 A private air-traffic outfit would allow FAA to devote its limited resources to overseeing safety and certification .
 A plan would result in 30,000 fewer federal employees. This is a strange objection on the right to a plan that would mean more federal employees .
 The Shuster legislation extended current law that prohibits strikes or slowdowns . The law was passed by the House of Representatives .
 The bill would hand too much power to the airline industry, which largely supports change . Under the Shuster proposal had four seats on the 13-member board .
 Two representatives from the Transportation Department will have to wrangle for influence . One from the airline pilots union, one from the air-traffic controllers union, and others from others .
 The most significant feat will be convincing appropriators in Congress to relinquish their power .
 President Trump has noted his intention to make America's roads and bridges “the best in the world" and unleashing innovation in airspace is a golden opportunity .
 Henry Miller recognizes that the FDA needs drastic reform of its requirements, procedures and attitudes . Miller's hesitance on right-totry is disappointing, he says .
 Miller supports paying healthy volunteers to test medicines that could be fatal to patients . Miller takes issue with allowing dying patients to try medicines that are safe enough for human testing but may have unknown side effects .
 The former might have more to lose, but the former has everything to gain . The chances of success are slight, even in cases where the chances are slight .
 Right-to-try simply allows all terminally ill patients to try the medicines that the FDA has deemed safe enough for testing on the lucky few who make it into a trial .
 Miller's mistaken claim to the contrary, right-to-try requires patients to be provided with the same information regarding risk . Miller: Patients must give the same informed consent to the treatment that patients receive and give in clinical trials .
 Christina Sandefur Executive Vice President Goldwater Institute Phoenix Dr. Dr. Christina Sandecur is the CEO of the Goldwater institute . The institute is based in Phoenix, Arizona .
 society does not have a role in telling terminally ill patients that it knows better about analyzing risks and benefits and denying them choice .
 Scott Gottlieb has vowed to reverse this perverse, un-American nonsense . I look forward to his tenure at the FDA, he has vowed.
 Current United States policy is that human clinical-trial volunteers receive no care if they have a research-related injury in a clinical trial . Current U.S. policy is to not care if the volunteers are injured in a trial .
 For example, I underwent 11 hours of brain surgery in an N.H. clinical trial without a safety net . The trial was conducted without safety net.
 If I had suffered a stroke during the surgery, I would not have received long-term care or any promise of medical care beyond 30 days in the NIH clinic .
As a person living with an incurable disease, I support the notion of rightto-try . As a person who has taken part in many studies and trials, he supports the notion.
 All letters are subject to editing, and unpublished letters can be neither acknowledged nor returned . All letters can't be returned or acknowledged .
 We can immediately halt the leftward drift of American social policy while renewing prosperity through market-based, state-driven solutions that empower people instead of bureaucrats .
 GOP promises will become reality only if Republicans keep promises they have made. But it will become true only if they keep the promises we have made .
 The bill is the boldest and most conservative health-care legislation to come before Congress in decades . It is the most conservative bill in decades to be passed by Congress .
 Bold because it dismantles the progressive health-care experiment and replaces it with a dynamic, patient-centered system . Bold. Bold is a bold move because it replaces the progressive care experiment .
 Our bill guts the failing law and enacts conservative reform without pulling the rug out from under anyone . Our bill is designed to make conservative reform more effective .
 Conservative because it applies America's founding principles to the problems of the day . Conservative because of its principles: freedom, free enterprise and federalism .
 American families are already paying the price of the law's collapse . Repeal of ObamaCare must happen, and urgently, according to the author .
 The average premium for a midlevel ObamaCare policy rose 25% this year . The average premiums for the midlevel policy rose by 25% .
 One out of three counties now have only a single insurance provider to choose from . One in three counties have only one insurance provider.
 Humana has announced it will not offer coverage in the ObamaCare marketplace for 2018 . Humana will not provide coverage for 2018.
 Aetna CEO said last month that the individual market is in a death spiral . The individual market was in a "death spiral"
 Instead of imposing arrogant and paternalistic mandates, it would increase choice and competition . "It would create a vibrant market where every American will have access to quality, affordable coverage," he says .
 Use the budget reconciliation process to repeal ObamaCare and replace it with the foundation for a patient-centered system . Use the reconciliation process for a repeal of ObamaCare .
 Take administrative action through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to further deregulate the market . The market will be deregulated by the government .
 And draft additional legislation that we cannot pass through the reconciliation process. And draft more legislation that can't be passed through reconciliation process .
 It is modeled on legislation introduced during numerous Congresses by Tom Price, now the secretary of health and human services .
 It reflects decades of policy making by conservative scholars and organizations . It reflects years of policymaking by conservative scholar and organizations.
 The bill effectively guts ObamaCare, all its taxes, mandates and spending . The bill also effectively guts the government's mandate to spend more money .
 It initiates a stable transition, without pulling the rug from under anyone . It is the first time a transition has taken place without pulling a rug from anyone under anyone.
 This is the biggest entitlement reform in generations . This is without question. This is, without question, the big entitlement reform .
 ObamaCare threw more money at Medicaid and set it on an unsustainable course of growth. Far from modernizing the program, the program was set on a unsustainable course.
With all the bureaucracy and strings attached, too many doctors won't take Medicaid patients, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Under our plan, for the first time, Medicaid spending will be capped . States will have the option to receive a pure block grant .
 If governors tailor benefits to their most vulnerable constituents, those people will get better care and Medicaid . No two states are the same, and we believe The United States Capitol in Washington is the same .
 Our bill equips state insurance markets to take care of people with pre-existing conditions without driving up costs for everyone else . Second, our bill equates state insurance market to taking care of those who have pre- existing conditions .
 For decades, many states successfully served high-risk populations by segmenting them from the market into "risk pools" and directly subsidizing their coverage . Many states have been successful in segmenting high- risk populations into risk pools .
 This gave the most vulnerable Americans access to affordable coverage and stabilized markets, but without requiring higher premiums on healthier individuals to offset the costs . This gave them access to Affordable Care Act coverage and stabilize markets .
 Wisconsin's program had the second-highest participation rate in the nation . It featured strong consumer protections and relatively low premiums .
 The law relied on mandates to cross-subsidize care, with disastrous results . Instead, the law used mandates to Cross- Subsidize Care .
 The bill establishes a stability fund to help states set up their own risk pools and reinsurance mechanisms . The bill also establishes a funding for states to set up risk pools.
 The programs would provide direct support for people with pre-existing conditions . These programs would give states more power to create dynamic markets for consumers .
 This would lower costs for everyone else, so that more people can purchase a plan that meets their needs . Ultimately this would lower cost for everyone other, and more people would be able to buy a plan .
 Third, our legislation expands health savings accounts, which was established during George W Bush's presidency in 2003 . The legislation was passed by a Republican Congress.
 ObamaCare imposes strict limits on how you can spend your healthcare dollars .
 This bill nearly doubles the allowable contributions to HSAs, making it easier to pay out-of-pocket costs . This bill almost doubles the amount of contributions to the agency .
 Giving people more purchasing power will create incentives to shop around, look for the best services and demand more transparent prices . All of which helps lower costs and lower costs .
 The bill equalizes the tax treatment of health care, addressing an unfairness conservatives have long sought to rectify . The bill is the fourth in a row to equalize health care tax treatment .
Right now, the tax code discriminates against people who don't get health care from their jobs . Right now, it's not a problem, but it's a problem.
 Those who have insurance through work see a tax benefit, while those who don't, get nothing . It makes no sense that those who have coverage through work get a tax benefits .
 Our bill would level the playing field by creating an age-based refundable tax credit . The bill would also create a tax credit.
 People who don't get coverage through work or a government program will be able to use this tax credit to buy coverage they want . The credit will be available to those who don’t get coverage.
 Taken together, these ideas put the patient, not some bureaucrat, at the center of America's healthcare system .
 Health insurers and providers compete against each other for customers, instead of jockeying for favoritism in Washington .
 Congress can put it to work by sending our bill to President Trump's desk . This is American free enterprise at its finest, and Congress can send it to the president's desk.
Republicans have been waiting for this day, and working toward it, for seven years . Republicans have been working toward this day for 7 years .
 In election after election, we promised to repeal and replace ObamaCare . We promised to replace and repeal the law .
 When I became speaker, we pledged to turn platitudes into bold ideas . When I was speaker, I promised to turn those platitudes to bold ideas.
 A governing party has a responsibility to follow through on promises it has made. But a governing party must follow through to the promises it made .
 By passing the American Health Care Act, we will deliver on our promise to repeal and replace ObamaCare . By passing, we'll deliver on the promise to replace ObamaCare.
 By applying conservative ideas and principles, we will remake our health-care system for generations . We will remake the health- care system.
 Trump is eager to promote his domestic agenda, but lingering questions about his Russia connections are getting in the way .
 To put an end to the speculation and move past this debacle, his administration must articulate a clearer policy on Russia .
 The easiest way is by devoting greater effort to solving the Moscow-fueled war in Ukraine, according to CNN.com .
 U.S.-Russia relations may need to get worse before they can get better. U. S. and Russia's relations need to be better.
 Shifting to a harder line is the only way for Washington to gain leverage on Moscow, change the dynamics in Ukraine, and gain congressional support for the Trump foreign policy .
 President Ronald Reagan beefed up the U.S. military presence in Europe as the Cold War raged .
 The East-West division is symbolized not by a wall but by the dangerous status quo taking hold in Ukraine . Today the East- West division is symbols of the Ukraine crisis .
 The Minsk agreements, negotiated in 2014-15, were designed to deliver a cease-fire and alleviate the war in the country's eastern Donbas region .
 The blame largely goes to Russia, which continues to foment instability in the Donbas . Russia continues to deny any responsibility for the crisis .
 Kiev needs to see imReagan demonstrated how a show of strength can reframe the terms of engagement in the east . ImReagan has shown how he can show how he is capable of dealing with security issues .
 This must include withdrawal of Russian troops and proxy forces and restoration of Ukrainian control over its sovereign border . This must also include the withdrawal of Russia troops and proxies and the restoration of Ukraine's sovereign border.
 The U.S. can demonstrate Western resolve by ramping up sanctions on Moscow . The United States can increase the cost of Russian interference by supplying defensive weapons to Ukraine .
 Kiev could then hold elections in the country's east free from the threat of violence that shrouded the referendum on Crimea's status in 2014 . Crimea's referendum in 2014 was shrouded in a shroud of violence over the issue .
 Mr Trump should also consider appointing a special envoy to oversee the sanctions on Russia and help negotiate a settlement in the Donbas .
 Some will say it is politically impossible for Mr Trump to stand up to Russia, given everything that went on during campaign .
 Reagan demonstrated how a show of strength can reframe the terms of engagement . But Reagan showed how he was able to show how he could change the way people are engaged .
 The U.S. public would welcome a return to normal relations with Russia . Most members of Congress would welcome the return .
 It is in everyone's interest to defuse the ticking time bomb in eastern Ukraine and find a new formula for engagement . It is also in the interest to find a way to get engaged .
 For Kiev it could lead to greater security, for Moscow it could mean the end of economic sanctions . For President Trump it could be the gambit that puts his Russia demons to bed and shows him as Reaganesque leader he longs to be .
 He served as prime minister of Denmark from 2001 to 2009 and secretary general of NATO from 2009 to 2014 . He was Denmark's prime minister from 2001-2009 .
 Vladimir Putin must be agog in Moscow at how easy it is to make America subvert itself . Putin must also be agogs in Moscow.
 The first mirror reflects the face of former President Barack Obama . But let's walk through the funhouse door and stare at the mirror .
 U.S. Attorney General Loretta Lynch signed rules that let the National Security Agency disseminate "raw signals intelligence information" to 16 other intelligence agencies .
 In 2011 the Obama White House leaked details of SEAL Team Six's assassination of Osama bin Laden within hours of the operation . In 2011, the White House released details of bin Laden's assassination .
 The SEALs politicized the SEALs and commoditized leaking, according to the Navy SEALs . They now have politicized and undermined public confidence in the U.S. intelligence agencies .
 Mr Trump brought on Paulafort and Roger Stone, who've built mansions on the foreign-connections swamp, and former Defense Intelligence Agency director Mike Flynn, who fantastically sat at a table in 2015 with Mr Putin .
 The 2016 campaign is a subset of the Russian investigation into the 2016 campaign .
 The FBI investigation is a hall of mirrors that diminishes everyone near it . The FBI is aHall of mirrors.
 America's politics wallows in the Trump vs. Putin effort, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: America's political wallows against Putin's Putin subversion effort .
 FBI Director James Comey is the biggest distorting mirror of the FBI Director . He is the most distorting director of all .
President Obama would have had to suffer the humiliation of watching stocks decline yesterday .
 Even a large market correction now wouldn't allow Mr Obama to claim vindication .
 The trigger would likely be a judgment that despite the promise of reform, Mr Trump simply won't be able to dismantle enough of the Obama policy legacy . That's because the trigger would probably be a judgement that Mr Trump just won't have to do so .
Not to Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who, like Loretta Lynch before him, is out of the picture . Not to Attorney Secretary Jeff Sessions.
 It is difficult to see how any of the 17 agencies implicated in this Russian investigation are accountable to anyone beyond their nominal chain of command .
 The Nunes-Schiff hearing essentially consists of cops walking the beat and knocking on doors for clues . Mr Comey identified at the hearing as the "investigation" Mr Comey.
 The 17 agencies set loose in January by the Obama administration are an unfocused perpetual-motion machine .
 This uncapped Beltway hydrant likely will do little about the real Putin propaganda threat . It will gush raw, unverified anecdotes to animate media melodramas about the current presidency and private U.S. citizens .
 The spectacle is damaging public confidence in both the intelligence agencies and the U.S. media, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Staffers from the Senate Intelligence Committee have been to the CIA headquarters to look at what it's got .
 Deputy AG Rosenstein should scrub through what the Obama NSA distributed, and make a call, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Someone with authority and judgment, such as Rosenstein, should scrub the NSA distributed .
 What this Washington Russia House has produced for the American people is an open-ended fiasco, says CNN's John Sutter .
 ""tan t For personal non-commercial use only. For personal use only .
 Shell admitted liability for two large oil spills from a broken pipeline in 2008 in Bodo, a Niger Delta fishing community . More than 500,000 barrels of oil spilled when the Exxon Valdez ran aground in Alaska in 1989 .
 Shell disputed the volume of the spills but reached an outof-court settlement with the community in 2015 for £55 million . The settlement was worth around $80 million at the time, Shell said .
 An environmental damage study was also conducted that year as part of efforts to clean up the area . The Bodo Mediation Initiative included Shell's Nigerian subsidiary, civil society groups, and members of the local community and government .
 The study found that "astonishingly high" levels of pollution remained in Bodo's mangroves and creeks years after the spill . The former director of the cleanup project, Kay Holtz mann, was the former director.
 A resident with his oil-soaked fishing net on the polluted shoreline in Bodo, Nigeria, last year .
 Markets Won't Stop Changing Their Story. Markets won't stop changing their story .
Donald Trump's approval ratings fell and investors became more concerned about how much hope was priced in to stocks . A more nuanced tale involves a fragile rally increasingly reliant on share buying by private investors .
 A deeper analysis goes to the next level, trying to detect when the story itself is changing . The next level is trying to find out when the stories are changing .
 Last summer, U.S. stocks flipped from moving in the opposite way of the dollar to moving in same direction as deflation fears faded .
 Mr Trump's election turbocharged the rally because a growth narrative took firm hold . Investors started to like higher inflation-adjusted yields .
 This year a subplot of global growth was added, helping U.S. stocks rise in January even as the dollar weakened .
 The most obvious Trump trade, betting against Mexico, went into a stunning reverse . The peso became one of the world's best-performing currencies .
 The explanatory power of macroeconomic influences fell close to zero at the start of this week, according to Quant Insight . United States stocks have become less sensitive to economic factors as the year has gone on .
 QI aims to model how the macroeconomic drivers of asset prices shift as market narratives change . QI uses a variation on a statistical tool known as principal component analysis .
 It found previously tight links between U.S. stocks, inflationlinked bond yields and the dollar weakened recently .
 The cost of sand used by shale-oil drillers has rebounded along with the price of oil, putting pressure on energy companies' profits .
 The market for sand, a key ingredient in fracking, is surging once again as United States oil production rebounds . The rising price of the tiny grains threatens to cut into energy companies' profits .
 U.S. shale companies are using more sand to help supersize their wells . crude oil is selling for about $50 a barrel .
 Sand props open underground fissures, which allow oil and gas to escape to the surface . Sand props are used to create underground gas and oil fissure .
 Millions of pounds of sand being poured down wells is pushing up sand prices . Energy companies have managed to regain some of the profits they have regained since the oil bust ended .
 Some are concerned sand supplies, diminished during a two-year oil-price downturn, could stall drilling renaissance .
 The tightening market has already sent prices marching toward $40 a ton or above . Some estimates say prices are up from $15 to $20 a ton in the second half of 2016 .
 Increasing sand orders are also raising demand for railcars and trucks to transport it from mines in Wisconsin to shale fields in Texas and Oklahoma .
 Some predict that demand for sand may outstrip supply by next year, creating a shortage that could linger for most of 2018 .
 Demand for sand has already returned to pre-bust levels, says George O'Leary, director of oil-field services research .
Sand accounted for between 5% and 7% of the cost of a well last fall . Mr O'Leary expects that percentage to rise as exploration and production companies use more of it this year .
 The price of sand could hit $50 a ton before year end, but that is still below the $60 to $70 a ton paid in the third quarter of 2014 .
 The United States ban on many carry-on electronics aboard Middle East flights is another powerful headwind for Persian Gulf airlines . To achieve efficiencies of scale during the two-year ban, B2 Gulf Carriers are Buffeted by United States Laptop Ban .
 Most electronics bigger than a phone to be checked in on direct flights from a handful of Middle East and North African airports . The United States and Britain disclosed tough new restrictions this week .
 The U.S. ban included Dubai, the Middle East business hub and home of Emirates Airline . The United States ban includes Dubai and the Middle Eastern business hub .
 It also included the Abu Dhabi hub of Etihad Airways and Qatar Airways' home airport in Doha, Qatar .
 The U.K. ban exempted all of those airports from its rules without explaining why . The ban was lifted without explanation .
 France, Germany and the Netherlands aren't enforcing the new rules, but their airlines offer plenty of connections from the Middle East to the United States .
Houstonbound passengers from Abu Dhabi can fly KLM via Schiphol airport in Amsterdam . Houstonbound passengers can fly via Schipshol airport, Amsterdam . KLM is a Dutch carrier .
Being able to work on a laptop the whole way is likely an acceptable trade-off . The Gulf carriers are known for their long-haul flights .
 Emirates has been connecting tech executives traveling between India and the U.S. via Dubai . One popular, and lucrative, route for Emirates is one of the most popular .
 The Ascent Emirates has grown quickly to become the world's biggest airline by international traffic . That will now require checking in lapSteep Ascent. The airline is now the biggest airline in the world .
 Many passengers don't even check bags to save time on short visits to Dubai .
Laptop laptops can take half the day to work during flights, but not all of them do .
 United Continental Holdings Inc. flies between Newark, N.J., and India's tech hub Mumbai, via New Delhi . The company is based in the United States .
 Delta Air Lines Inc. offers travel alternatives through its international partner Air FranceKLM SA, as does India's Jet Airways Ltd. The company also has a partner in India, Air France KLM SA .
 Most defense companies are aggressively courting arms sales to the Middle East . Most companies ban executives from checking in laptops .
 AT&T and Johnson & Johnson cancel some of their advertising on Google or its YouTube video platform . Some of those ads have appeared on videos supporting terrorism .
 Google announced changes this week to strengthen its policies and enforcement to pull ads from controversial sites and videos . Google says it will increase its use of technology, in addition to thousands of reviewers .
 Google has allowed ads on many controversial videos, removed them from innocuous ones, and mistakenly censored other videos . Technology it has used in the past has allowed adverts to be removed from innocuous videos .
 Google apologized Monday after the software improperly blocked some popular videos . The software was designed for schools . Google is a unit of Alphabet Inc., which owns Google .
 The incident sparked an outcry among YouTube video creators who speculated Google was blocking gay and lesbian content in the restricted version of the site .
 Google and Facebook Inc. have been reluctant policemen of the internet . They have portrayed themselves as neutral platforms .
 Pressure is mounting on tech giants to confront their gatekeeping role . Users spend more time and advertisers spend more money on their platforms .
 indexes cite notable references to most parent companies and businesspeople in today's edition of the index .
 Shin Dong-bin has been shown in December in China . 'We definitely want to continue our business in China/ says Shin Shin. Weighs in on China/ say Shin Shin is looking to continue its business in the country .
 The Wall Street Journal has seen a letter from the Bodo Mediation Initiative . The first page 26 letter to the Initiative was seen by the Journal .
 Mr Holtzmann wrote that the study dictated a need for health screenings and should be widely publicized .
 Shell has denied him permission to publish the study's results in a scientific journal . The study has exposed Bodo, an expanse of Niger Delta swamp and mangroves, to dangerous levels of toxins .
 Shell said the analysis didn't reveal any information that hadn't been previously established by a U.N. Environment Program report on pollution levels in Ogoniland . Bodo is located in the part of the Niger Delta where Bodo was located .
 2011 report revealed high levels of contamination that could take as long as 30 years to fully clean up . The 2011 report said contamination could take up to 30 years .
 complex disputes between the company and the local community have stalled cleanup efforts in Bodo . People familiar with the matter say they were shared with local representatives and government agencies .
 The environmental damage caused by 2008 spills has also been compounded by illegal refining in the area, people said .
 The Niger Delta has been a center for Shell's oil production for decades . Aging infrastructure and widespread sabotage and theft have resulted in regular oil spills that ravaged the local environment .
 Shell maintains that the bulk of the oil spills in the Niger Delta are caused by sabotage, theft and illegal refining .
 Efforts to improve the situation in Bodo have been plagued by mistrust, local power struggles, and disputes over how money for the work would be distributed .
 In late 2015, the camp where contractors were staying was attacked, people said . The camp was effectively halted until now, they said .
Law firm that represented the Bodo community wrote to Shell in January to request clarification . Leigh Day, the law firm that represents the community, asked Shell to clarify its letter .
 Lotte Chairman bemoans South Korean firm getting swept up in missile-defense dispute . Shin Dong-bin, chairman of South Korea's Lotte Group, says he loves China .
 The South Korean government identified last year a golf course owned by Lotte as a site for a U.S.-built missile-defense system . It put the company in the crosshairs of one of the world's most fraught geopolitical disputes .
 Lotte, South Korea's fifth largest conglomerate, has interests that include luxury hotels, chemicals, chewing gum and duty-free stores . Lotte is a test case of China's ability to wage economic warfare against its neighbors to further its objectives .
 Beijing opposes deployment of a missile-defense shield in South Korea . Beijing says its radar's ability to reach into Chinese territory is a threat .
 Seoul and Washington say the system, known as Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense, is needed to defend South Korea . South Korea and the United States are based there from North Korean leader Kim Jong Un's expanding weapons program .
 Beijing began to ramp up pressure on the Lotte conglomerate in February . Lotte won approval at a Lotte board meeting in late February .
 producers drilled megawells, which run underground for more than a mile horizontally, blasting larger quantities of sand down them to unleash more fossil fuels .
 The biggest U.S. shale fields get tracked with about 30% more sand every year, says Phillip Dunning, a technical adviser .
 Frack sand use in the Delaware, one of the hottest parts of the Permian Basin in West Texas, has more than tripled since the start of 2012 . The state's sand use is one of its hottest parts .
 Lotte is "playing with fire" in allowing its golf course in Seongju, South Korea, to host the facility . By the end of 2016, producers were putting an average 1,919 pounds per foot down wells .
 Chinese officials began suspending operations at Lotte's retail stores in the country . Lotte is one of the largest stores in China .
 Lotte halted construction on new Lotte projects, citing violations of fire and safety codes . Lotte officials cited violations of safety codes and fire and fire regulations .
 Lotte Mart hypermarts in China have been temporarily closed . Lotte's 94 affiliates earn about $80 billion in annual revenue . At least 76 of its 99 LotteMart hypermars in China are temporarily closed.
 A confectionery joint venture in Shanghai with Hershey Co. was forced to halt production this month . The joint venture was a joint venture with the company .
 China's Foreign Ministry says China welcomes foreign companies as long as they follow the law . A spokesman for the Foreign Ministry said there was no backlash against Lotte .
 Chesapeake Energy Corp. recently pumped a record 50. million pounds of sand into a horizontal well roughly 1. miles long . Some rivals are now weighing whether they can do the same .
 A handful of oil producers have purchased their own sand mines to insulate themselves from bottlenecks .
 Pioneer, a prolific driller in the Permian Basin, plans to nearly triple its sand production by the end of 2019 . Pioneer plans to almost triple its Texas sand production.
 Lotte chairman Mr Shin said he was surprised by the Chinese response .
 Lotte has invested some $5 billion in China, where it has 25,000 employees . The expense is compounded by the logistics of moving sand from mines to well sites thousands of miles away .
Much of it is found in northern Midwest states . They prefer fine white silica .
 Halliburton Co.'s well completion and production division said sand costs break down into thirds . David Adams, the head of the company's well completion division, says sand costs are equally disaid .
 The country accounts for about 10% of the conglomerate's overall sales . The country is responsible for about ten per cent of its overall sales.
 Lotte had begun diversifying away from China by the time tensions started to rise last year . Mr Shin said it is too important a market to give up .
 Lotte isn't the only South Korean business empire whipsawed by the geopolitical dispute . Lotte is one of the largest South Korean businesses in the world .
 Amorepacific Corp. has since lost more than a third of its value as the Chinese consumers it relies on steered clear of its products . The cosmetics giant is valued at about $22 billion in July .
 A report from the Korea Development Bank said China's economic retaliation over Thaad could cost Korean businesses up to $20 billion . Tourism industry and duty-free stores could be bearing the brunt .
 In January, Mr Shin planned a trip to China to defuse the rising geopolitical standoff . He planned to visit China in January .
 South Korean authorities blocked him from leaving the country, citing his alleged involvement in a corruption scandal . Park Geun-hye was forced to cancel when he was blocked by authorities . The president was ousted after the scandal toppled him .
 Mr Shin said he is confident he could have lowered tensions with China if he had been permitted to visit in January . Mr Shin is confident the visit would have lowered the tensions .
 Mr Shin admits he doesn't have a plan to solve the quandary . South Korean elections on May 9 will deliver a new president who can help smooth over relations with China .
During the downturn, sand-mining companies slowed production and some canceled plans to open new mines . He expects a shortterm bottleneck because during the protracted downturn, Sand-mining firms slowed production .
 Many sand producers are ramping back up, but expanding operations take time . Many sand producer's operations are taking time to ramp up .
 Silica Holdings Inc. plans to double its mining capacity to more than 20 million tons in 2018 . The company is fetching 20% more for its sand today than it did in October .
 Halliburton is trying to keep costs down by investing in its own train depots and storage facilities in major shale basins from Colorado to North Dakota .
 BAN Continued from the prior page laptops around the world, one senior U.S. defense executive said .
 The airline is "closely monitoring the business impact of this new security measure,’ he said .
 The airline is allowing United States -bound passengers to hold on to their laptop or tablet until just before boarding .
 The carriers are already struggling with a big drop in bookings stemming from uncertainty over the Trump administration's attempts to restrict travel by people from a separate group of Muslimmajority countries in the Middle East.
 The sharp drop in commodity prices since mid-2014 has hit premium bookings in the oil-rich region hard, as energy and related industries cut back on expensive tickets .
 Middle East carriers rely more than others on the laptop -toting business traveler . Rapid fleet growth at Emirates and its rivals has also led to a glut of seats for sale in the region .
 Emirates bookings at Emirates for United States routes plunged 35% instantaneously .
 The carriers are also being buffeted by other problems Businesses For Sale are also buffeting by problems .
 Emirates and Etihad have slowed down taking some new planes . The two airlines have also slow down taking new planes.
 Both companies cut staff after years of eye-popping expansion . Both companies have also cut staff .
 Turbulence for Gulf carriers also comes amid a long-running standoff with European legacy airlines . American Airlines Group Inc., United and Delta are the three biggest United States airlines .
 The Middle East carriers deny they benefit from any unfair government support . They accuse the Middle East airlines of benefiting from unfair state subsidies .
 GOP splits over health care have been clear for weeks . Even the narrative of disappointment about Republican splits can't explain why it would have suddenly come to a head .
 Markets can be driven by stories about fundamental factors or by pure supply and demand . Markets are driven by fundamental factors, such as demand and supply .
 Knowing that the narrative about fundamentals has stopped working is useful for investors, particularly those who spent a lot of time trying to predict what markets will do .
 What the new narrative will focus on can't be predicted from the statistics. Unfortunately, what the new narratives will focus in the new story will be based on statistics .
 The link between shares, bond yields and the dollar was strong until late December, but has weakened since . Congressional politics is a natural part of the next chapter of the market story .
 Trumpcare could be quickly forgotten if Republicans pull together, allowing investors to return to their favorite bullish story of tax cuts and growth . Alternatively, fights about Trumpcare may be quick forgotten if the GOP pulls together .
 China and commodities could come back on to the market's reading list at any time . It is worth bearing in mind that debt problems in China haven't gone away, says Mr Trump and United States politics are likely to dominate the narrative .
Whichever story eventually dominates, expect choppy markets until the next narrative emerges . Whichever story will dominate the market for the first time .
 For personal non-commercial use only. CJ GUNTHER/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY for personal use.
 B3 Ford Motor forecast leaner results for the first quarter of 2017 .
 The outlook comes amid a broader view that car sales in the world's two largest markets have peaked . The U.S. auto industry has made record profits and sales for the United States .
Ford estimates volumes will fall in the United States and China in 2017 and again in 2018 . Ford estimates volumes in the U.S. and China will fall again in 2019 and 2018 .
 The United States market has been buoyed by customer access to cheap leases and long-term loans that come with low interest rates . The U.S. market is buoyed.
 The Federal Reserve is pushing interest rates higher, potentially crimping retailers' appetites to dole out the 0% loans that have fueled demand .
 A flood of preowned vehicles going on sale is heightening concern. A leasing boom that has accelerated in recent years has accelerated.
 Leasing has become a popular way to finance vehicle purchases . Buyers can borrow a car for two or three years at a subsidized rate and return it at the end of the term . Many of which are expiring this year .
 As more preowned cars become available, the price of a gently used vehicle is falling . The price of the gently used car is falling.
 leases are often cheaper on vehicles that are expected to have strong resale values . While that could force auto makers to ramp up sales incentives, it could also make leasing less attractive .
 Rising interest rates and tightening credit will further inflate car prices . Some may find better value in online classifieds or on used-car lots .
 Toyota Motor Co. and BMW AG have voiced concern about the impact the used market is having on car prices and the performance of their internal credit arms .
About 25% of Ford Credit's balance sheet is made up of leasing assets . About 25% are leasing assets, for instance .
 Car makers pay a subsidy that is based on the forecast value of the car at the end of the lease .
 Mr Shanks said Thursday the auto maker had to change those residual-value calculations recently based on data furnished by the National Automobile Dealers Association and other third parties .
 Car buyers tend to make buying decisions based on monthly payments instead of sticker price . Car buyers make decisions based upon monthly payments.
 Edmunds.com estimates the average monthly car payment for a vehicle purchased in February was $515 . That's up only 6% from the $487 buyers paid in February 2007 . The average monthly payment is $515.
 The amount financed by new car buyers has skyrocketed 23%, from $25,003 to $30,753, firm says .
 The disparity between car payments and purchase prices over the period has been low borrowing costs . In addition to subsidized leases, the disparity has been lower borrowing costs.
The average loan was written with a 4.9% interest rate, more than 2 percentage points less than the 2007 loans . The average loan is written with an interest rate of more than 4% .
 Ford also expects full-year adjusted operating profit of $9 billion this year, a 14% decline over 2016 . Ford also said Thursday it expects full year adjusted operating profits of $ 9 billion .
 The company also guided to firstquarter earnings per share of between 30 cents and 35 cents, lower than the same period a year earlier . The company is far below analysts' expectations of 47 cents .
 Higher engineering costs, the strong dollar, rising warranty costs and commodityprice increases are reasons for the weaker performance .
 Lower-than-anticipated quarterly guidance further confirms Wall Street's view that auto makers are too exposed to cyclical swings in the car business .
 Mr Iger has led Disney through a period of sustained growth . Since taking the helm in 2005, he has led the company through a year of growth .
 Robert Iger's contract now runs to mid-2019, as succession issue dogs the media giant . Walt Disney Co. has given itself an extra year to solve its succession challenge .
 Robert Iger will stay on at least one additional year as chairman and chief executive . Iger has no clear candidate to inherit the helm at the world's largest media company .
 Mr Iger's new contract runs through July 2, 2019 . The previous expiration was June 30, 2018 .
 Mr Iger said when his contract was extended to 2018 that “this time I really mean" to retire . Initially set to retire in 2015 and then in 2016, he said he would retire in 2018 .
 The Wall Street Journal reported last month that Disney's board was considering extending Mr Iger's contract . The WallStreet Journal reported that Disney is considering extending his contract .
 An earlier succession plan was thrown into disarray in March 2016 when the company announced the abrupt departure of a senior executive widely viewed as Mr Iger's heir apparent . The company has now announced the departure of an executive widely seen as the heir apparent.
 Tom Staggs, a veteran executive who was named chief operating officer in 2015, quit after realizing that the board, including Mr Iger, had lost confidence .
 The company had never publicly said Mr Staggs was on track to succeed Mr Iger . But numerous people close to the company believed that was the case .
 He will also receive a $5 million bonus if he stays until July 2, 2019 . However, he will also get a $4 million bonus.
 The extension also calls for Mr Iger to serve as a consultant to Disney for three additional years . He will earn $2 million for each of the first two years and $1 million for the third .
 Mr Iger has led Disney through a period of sustained growth, including acquisitions of Pixar Animation Studios, Marvel Entertainment and Lucasfilm .
 Disney has provided material for its theme parks around the world . Those deals have helped make Disney's movie studio the most successful in Hollywood .
Businesses are closely watching a case to be argued in the Supreme Court next week . Case Targets Patent Venue Venue Shopping .
 The companies, often defendants in a patent-litigation boom of the last decade, are looking to the high court to curb what they say is ‘pervasive and pernicious forum shopping’ by plaintiffs who claim to own the patents .
 Dozens of tech firms and groups have filed friendof-the-court briefs in the case . Kraft Foods Group Brands is urging the Supreme Court to tighten the rules on where patent suits can be brought .
 In recent years, the largely rural and sparsely populated Eastern District of Texas has attracted as much as 44% of all new patent-infringement lawsuits in the U.S., aided by its reputation for plaintifffriendly rules and juries .
 The Texas jurisdiction has some defenders, including big firms such as Ericsson Inc. and Allergan Inc. Despite the criticism, the Texas jurisdiction is still under fire .
 Jeff Flake has sponsored legislation to tighten rules governing where a patent case can be brought . The Eastern District of Texas isn't the renegade that many make it out to be, he says .
Current rules have resulted in “an extraordinary concentration of patent cases in a handful of districts," says Peter Brann . Brann helped write a friend-of-the-court brief filed by numerous internet companies and other businesses and associations in this case .
Suits by these firms represent a disproportionately large share of cases in the Eastern District of Texas . Suits by some of these firms have grown large enough to be publicly traded .
 A coalition of inventors and patent owners said in its own Supreme Court brief that concerns about the Texas district are “greatly overblown" The group said that tightening the rules could be harmful to innovators .
 The concentration of patent-infringement cases in the Texas district “is certainly an indication that something is amiss," says Sen. Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Jeff Flake (R., Ariz.) has sponsored legislation in the past to tighten patent venue rules governing where a case can be brought . Jeff Flake has also sponsored legislation to tighten venue rules .
 TC Heartland, an Indianabased maker of low-calorie sweeteners, was sued for patent infringement by Kraft .
 TC Heartland sought unsuccessfully to have the case transferred to Indiana . The case was not moved to Indiana.
 TC Heartland is asking the Supreme Court to overrule the venue rules used by federal courts since 1990 .
 TC Heartland wants the high court to reinstate an older, more restrictive standard .
 Congress didn't intend for more recent changes in general venue rules to apply to patent cases, Kraft argues . Kraft argues that the later changes do apply .
 The number of new patent-infringement cases has soared from a few hundred annually a decade ago to a peak of more than 2,500 in 2015 . The Eastern District of Texas has the highest total for any district, according to Lex Machina .
 The Texas district became a hotbed for patent litigation after judges adopted procedural rules that were perceived by defendants as friendly to patent-infringement plaintiffs .
 The district was attractive to plaintiffs because of its relatively low caseloads and fast-moving dockets . The district also was attractive for plaintiffs due to its small cities such as Marshall and Beaumont .
 Critics contend that the current federal standard for venue in patent litigation also contributed by allowing plaintiffs to seek out friendly districts almost anywhere in the country .
 Many lawyers in the area are worried about the potential impacts of the case . Many lawyers are concerned about the possible impact of the court case .
 Valeant CEO Pay Disclosed Akzo Nobel Gets Big Push Toward Talks With Suitor . Valeant's CEO PaydisclosedAkzo Nobel gets Big Push. Valeant Pharmaceuticals International Inc. CEO pay Disclosed.
 Chief Executive Joseph Papa took in $62. million in pay last year as he navigated fallout from company's accounting problems . Papa's pay comes amid near debt default and investigations by Congress .
 The drug-industry veteran was tapped to take over the embattled Canadian company in May . He sought to rebuild investor confidence and remake the business after a series of missteps .
 The bulk of Mr Papa's pay, $42 million, came from stock awards, while $9 million came from bonuses . Mr Papa was paid $40 million.
 Mr Papa received an $8 million signing bonus, and a $1. million “individual performance’s” bonus . Mr Papa also received $1 million ‘individual performance' bonus .
 Valeant said the financial goals it had established at the beginning of the year weren't “sufficiently achieved" in 2016 . Valeant paid the new CEO half of the additional cash bonus to recognize “the significance and quality of the contributions’ he made.
Under the compensation package Valeant offered, the board could have paid Mr Papa as much as $2.25 million for his performance.
 Mr Papa's pay was more than five times higher than what he had earned in 2015 . But less than half of the $141. million Valeant's former CEO Michael Pearson was paid at Valeant in 2015.
 Valeant's stock has dropped 96% from its August 2015 peak of $262.52 . Valeant has dropped 68% over the past 12 months through Wednesday.
 Investors have been watching for signs on how Valeant can boost profitability outside of big acquisitions and large price increases for its drugs . Valeant has been seen as a major player in the pharmaceutical industry .
 Analysts remain concerned about the company's debt burden . They questioned the strength of its drug pipeline .
 During 2016, Valeant lost $2.41 billion, compared with a loss of $292 million the year before . Valeant also lost $1.2 billion in 2016, compared to $292 billion in 2015 .
 Valeant has been working to sell off assets to sharpen the company's focus on its key franchises in skin drugs, stomach treatments, eye care and consumer health . Valeant is paring down roughly $30 billion in debt while the company is in debt .
 Valeant came close but failed to seal a deal to sell stomach-drug maker Salix Pharmaceuticals Ltd. to Japan's Takeda Pharmaceutical Co. for $10 billion .
 In January, L’Oreal SA reached deals to sell $2. billion in assets . The company's CeraVe line and Dendreon cancer business were sold to China's Sanpower for $820 million .
 Valeant said all of its announced transactions will generate asset-sale proceeds of about $2.35 billion up front and $350 million in future milestone payments . In a February investor presentation, Valeant says all of the announced deals will generate about $1.5 billion .
 Akzo Nobel NV's largest shareholder is the latest investor to urge the Dutch paint-and-chemicals maker to start negotiations with U.S. rival PPG Industries Inc. over $24 billion takeover offer .
 Amsterdam-based Akzo rejected a second, sweetened offer by PPG . PPG said it didn't warrant discussions .
 Causeway Capital Management LLC. said it was high enough for Akzo's management to begin negotiations . PPG's latest offer was “inadequate," the company said .
 Akzo's board and management oppose a takeover, but investors still see the deal as unlikely .
 Akzo rejected PPG's initial offer of €83 a share. It came just weeks after PPG rejected Akzo's initial bid of € 83 a share . PPG is the second approach to Akzo, which has been rejected twice .
 Akzo shares on Thursday rose 2.9% to €77.94, but remained well below the latest offer price of €88.72 . The latest offer for Akzo is €88%.
 Causeway's letter added to calls for talks coming from other investors, including Elliott Management Corp. Causeway.
 Elliott, which owns 3% of Akzo, said it would need 10% shareholder support . To achieve that goal, Elliott would need 3% support .
 Causeway is Akzo's largest shareholder with a stake of around 6.8%, according to FactSet . Akzo has a share of around 7.8% of the company's shareholders .
 Amazon's Echo with Alexa is a fairly effective way to turn on a connected light . Amazon's Alexa with Alexa can also be used as a remote control .
 On movie night, you could peel yourself off the couch to turn off the lights . You can turn off your couch to watch a movie .
 The future involves talking to your tech, and the lights in your home are ready to make the leap .
 Bulbs and outlets were connected to apps, so you had to flip on a light . You had to fiddle with your phone just to flip the light .
 Amazon changed that with Alexa, the voice assistant in its $180 Echo speaker . Amazon's $180 speaker is learning to operate a house full of connected appliances .
 Last year, Google got into the game with Home, its $130 talking speaker . Google's $130 speaker is the company's first home speaker .
 Apple upped Siri's domestic competence in domestic affairs with the Home app in the latest iPhones and iPads . The Home app was added to the iPhone and iPad apps .
 Connected lights can do all kinds of things to make your house more beautiful and useful .
Mine dim with a warmer tone near bedtime, and gently wake me up with cooler light on dark winter mornings . Mine dim with the warmer tone, and a warmertone near bed time, andgently wake us up with warmer light .
 There are right ways and wrong ways to attempt smart lighting, and I've lived through both . But I made a plan of attack, so I made an attack .
 The low-effort, low-commitment way to get started is with smart bulbs. Smart bulbs are more effective than dumb switches, say experts .
 The fanciest can change color to make your house look like the "Trolls" movie . They are mostly low-power LEDs but come in different flavors .
 The $15 white variety is all you'll need at first, but many have become inexpensive and dependable .
 pageBl videos can cut off their funding, but it also examines whether controversial videos can remain on its YouTube site at all . It's all GOOGLE Continued.
 Google helped pioneer the automated ad-buying system, called programmatic advertising, that gives marketers the reach and accuracy to target specific audiences on far corners of the internet .
 Ad and tech executives say the nature of the police system makes it hard to police . But ad and tech execs say the system makes police harder to police.
 The disadvantage is you have access to a million publishers and a billion articles," says David Rodnitzky, chief executive of ad agency 3Q Digital .
 You screw these bulbs into regular sockets on regular lamps . They connect to a wireless hub or directly to your home's Wi-Fi . You can turn them on and off using your phone .
 You can have the same effect using regular bulbs by plugging into connected outlet adapters . Lutron, Belkin, Insteon and Insteon bulbs can be used to plug into connected outlets .
 It's like the old clackety Christmas tree timer, only now the timers are in apps, and it's easier to experiment . The timer timer is like a Christmas tree timers, and the timer is now in apps .
Start with accent lamps and ambient lights on bookshelves and in corners . Start with accent lamp and ambient light on booksheets .
 Don't do this to frequently used lights, or any you're in the habit of turning on and off manually . Do this to often used lights.
Don't put smart bulbs in lights operated by a dumb wall switch . If you can help it, don't put bulbs in smart bulbs operated by dumb wall switches .
 Google software automatically scans YouTube videos' titles, descriptions, images and other signals for signs that it shouldn't include ads . Ads can include nudity, references to terrorist attacks and references to terrorism .
 Put a piece of tape over it to remind people not to touch, if you must . If you must, put it over it.
 Alexa and Siri will be used to control a smart light in your home . It's not the first time Alexa has been used in a home .
 Amazon's Alexa app can automatically find and control bulbs and connected plugs from Philips Hue, Lutron Caseta, Belkin Wemo and other plugs .
 You can group them and command Alexa to turn them on and off, or dim them . You can also dim them or turn them off or group them .
 You don't have to have an Echo in the same room with the lights you want to control . It makes life easier, but it makes it easier .
 I could start a Twitter feed for all the hilarious ways she mishears people, or thinks you're calling her name when you aren't calling her.
 The Echo has fancy far-field mithe software that can block advertising without human review . Still, I find the Echo, which has fancyfar-fieldMithe software, can block adverts without review .
 The company has placed ads on many sites peddling fabricated news stories . The ads are next to a story that falsely claimed Yoko Ono had an affair with Hillary Clinton .
 Google's new crophones will be the fastest and most accurate way to turn on a light . It's also the fastest way to get to the bathroom in the middle of the night, for instance .
 Siri would be the iPhone and iPad's Siri, which connects to Apple's home-operation software HomeKit . That would be Apple's HomeKit software .
 The latest iOS update has a Home app you can use to program lighting scenes and set automated programs . It's a skill Alexa has yet to acquire, but it's not a skill she's yet to acquired .
Until Apple makes a home speaker of its own, Siri lives on your iPhone, iPad, Apple Watch and Apple TV . Mac Siri can't do this. Until Apple makes an Apple home speaker, Siri will only live on the iPhone and iPad .
 My advice is to invest in lights that work with as many systems as possible, especially in Amazon, Apple and Google household .
 Google's plan to expand its ad ban on any content that advocates harm to certain groups of people is likely to force exa and Siri . For instance, Google's ad ban will be based on religion, gender or race .
 Replace your built-in light switches with smart switches that still look and work like regular ones . Lutron's $55 Caseta dimmers are among those that still work.
 Alexa is now used in the home and on the street . We use Alexa even more .
 To confuse burglars, I can turn lights on and off at random times when I'm away from home . I can also turn lights off and off when I am away from the house .
 Installing smart switches meant I could now use all my lights to create scenes . I can now use the lights to make scenes .
 Google removed ads from several videos by Felix Kj ellberg, who goes by PewDiePie, that included anti-Semitic jokes or Nazi imagery . The ads were removed by Google .
 Mr Kjellberg said reports on those videos by The Wall Street Journal and others took his humor out of context .
 Apple Inc. will soon start assembling iPhones in India, officials say . The move will aid the company's efforts to gain a foothold in the fast-growing market .
 Taiwanese contract manufacturer Wistron Corp. will likely start making iPhone 6 and 6S models in the next four to six weeks at its plant in Bangalore .
 Apple's cheapest iPhone model, the SE, will be added to its assembly line in about three months, official says . It will add Apple's cheaper iPhone model to the assembly line .
 Smartphone shipments in India grew 18% last year, compared with 3% globally, according to Counterpoint Research . Most phones sold here cost less than $150 .
 The iPhone SE is still out of reach of most Indian consumers . Some online retailers now sell for as little as $330 .
 Apple is negotiating with New Delhi for its next level of production in India . Apple is also negotiating with the Indian capital for a new level of manufacturing in India.
 India wants to bring its component manufacturers to India to make parts and export finished phones . The state official says the government wants to make its parts and finished phones.
 Apple had sought tax concessions on the import of key components . The Indian government hasn't yet "accepted most of the demands," Trade Minister Nirmala Sitharaman says .
 The Cupertino, Calif., company has less than a 5% share of the smartphone market in South Asian nation .
 Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook in a call with analysts last month said the company is also ""in discussions" to open retail stores in India .
 Advertisers generally want their ads to reach certain types of people . The agencies they hire generally want to reach those people . Google's ads are often used by agencies to target certain people .
 Internet users can't control where on the web that target audience spends its time . But they can also control where they spend their time, say experts .
 YouTube YouTube runs ads alongside a huge number of videos uploaded by users or media companies .
 Staff reports V ... even though the sites' viewers match the profile of the advertiser's desired audience .
 The average ticket price in 2016 was $8.65, up 22 cents, or 2.6%, from the previous year . The average price of the ticket was $7.5, up from $6.5 in 2013 .
 U.S. and Canada overshadows performance in the United States and Canada . Years of rising ticket sales in international markets have become a crutch for studios .
 The bailout is the latest example of the global shipbuilding industry's difficulties, as a glut of vessels and low freight rates put many shipyards in financial trouble .
An economic slowdown in China has made things worse for the world's three biggest shipyards, which are all in South Korea .
 Korea Development Bank and Export-Import Bank of Korea said they would provide funds to improve Daewoo's cash flow and convert its liabilities into equity .
 The two state-run banks had already provided a combined 4. trillion won in aid to the cashstrapped shipyard in 2015 . The two banks had provided a total of 4.4 trillion in aid in 2015.
 A spokesman for the prosecutor declined to detail the specific allegations against the Daimler employees . The prosecutor has declined to details the allegations .
 He would say only that the individuals are suspected of committing fraud in connection with the sale of diesel vehicles with false emissions documentation . He would only say that the people are suspected to have committed fraud .
 The maker of Mercedes-Benz cars dismissed the allegation that it manipulated diesel engines to cheat on emissions tests .
 The U.S. Tax Court ruled Thursday that the IRS made arbitrary determinations and abused its discretion in several instances . The court also ruled that the government made arbitrary decisions .
 It wasn't immediately clear from the ruling what Amazon's ultimate tax bill would be . For personal non-commercial use only .
 MF Global and PwC Settle Malpractice Suit Jay Clayton said regulators could help the economy by making it less costly for firms to go public .
 MF Global Holdings Ltd. and PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP settled an accounting-malpractice lawsuit . The brokerage contended bad advice from PwC contributed to its 2011 collapse .
 Both sides said the case has been settled to "the mutual satisfaction of the parties" Both sides declined to discuss the agreement further .
 MF Global contended that PwC had advised it to treat its "repo-to-maturity" trades as sales rather than borrowings . MF Global contends that PWC had told it to Treat its repo to maturity  trades involving European sovereign debt
 MF Global to record $100 million in immediate profit and take $6. billion in securities off its balance sheet . This move made the firm look less risky, reducing its leverage .
 MF Global says confusion about MF Global later led to confusion and concern about the brokerage . The brokerage says it is concerned about the situation .
 MF Global said it wouldn't have bet so heavily on European debt that led to ratings downgrades and investor withdrawals . MF Global sought bankruptcy protection in October 2011 .
 PwC insisted it had given MF Global the correct accounting advice . MF Global collapsed because of its own faulty strategy and bad decision to bet on the risky European debt .
 Mr Corzine testified he relied on PwC's judgment about the proper accounting for the European-debt trades . He acknowledged he had never been given any reason to think the accounting might be incorrect .
 The brokerage was close to resting its case, after which PwC would have presented its case if the settlement hadn't resolved the lawsuit . The settlement would have been resolved if the lawsuit hadn't been resolved .
 PwC previously paid $65 million in 2015 to settle separate litigation from investors in MF Global's securities . Investors had alleged the firm failed to properly audit its internal controls .
This is the second time in the past year that PwC has settled a major lawsuit midtrial with the terms kept confidential . This is the first time in a year that the terms of the lawsuit have been settled .
 Taylor Bean & Whitaker Mortgage Corp. alleged PwC was negligent for not detecting a fraud scheme . Colonial Bank collapse was one of the most expensive bank failures in United States history .
 The Taylor Bean trustee had sought $5. billion from PwC . Terms of the settlement weren't disclosed .
 MF Global's allegations against PwC were unrelated to a $1. billion shortfall in the brokerage's customer funds when it collapsed . The brokerage's allegations were not related to the collapse of its customer funds .
 Prosecutors investigated Mr Corzine and other MF Global executives but didn't bring any criminal charges .
 Nominee for chairman testifies in Senate, questions value of corporate penalties . Jay Clayton, President Donald Trump's choice to lead the Securities and Exchange Commission, called for scaling back regulations .
 Mr Clayton also said his past work as a Wall Street lawyer at Sullivan & Cromwell LLP ""is a strength" He promised any conflicts of interest wouldn't harm his ability to be the nation's top markets regulator .
 Mr Clayton wrote that he couldn't vote for one year on matters that directly affect his former clients or involve Sullivan & Cromwell . Mr Clayton said that he can't vote on matters directly affect former clients .
 U.S. stock markets have become a less attractive place for companies to raise money, Mr Clayton said .
Regulators could help spur economic growth by making it less costly for companies to go public, he said . Regulators could also help spur growth, he says .
In prepared testimony, Mr Clayton lamented the drop in the number of initial public offerings in recent years .
 Buyout firms and consolidation have also reduced the number of public firms . Buyout companies and consolidation are also reducing the numbers of public companies .
 Mr Clayton didn't detail how he might seek to pare back the rules that govern public stock offerings .
 The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act made it easier for companies with less than $1 billion in annual revenue to go public . But he praised a 2012 law, the Jumpstart our Businessstartups Act, that he praised .
 Mr Clayton has a long history advising banks and companies on stock offerings and mergers and acquisitions . He has also advised banks on stock offering and merger and acquisitions.
 He has worked on key cases, including the cataclysmic failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. in 2008 . He has also worked on the 2014 initial public offering of Alibaba Group Holding Ltd.
 Mr Clayton would succeed Mary Jo White, who led the SEC for nearly four years during the Obama administration .
 The agency is currently being managed by an acting chairman, Republican Michael Piwowar . Mr Clayton would resume being commissioner if Mr Clayton is confirmed .
 SEC chairman could pare back the commission's enforcement arm by moderating the size of financial penalties it seeks .
 Mr Clayton said regulators could achieve more by suing individuals rather than pressuring companies to cough up more money for fines . He said regulators can achieve more with suing individuals instead of pressuring companies .
 Mr Clayton said he has no specific plans for attack against the law . President Trump has called for dismantling the Dodd-Frank financial overhaul .
 He said he is willing to review existing rules to determine their effectiveness . But he said he would be willing toreview existing rules.
 Barclays was bailed out by Qatar's wealth fund in the financial crisis . Barclays’s Qatari Deal in ’08 Barclays was bail-out by Qatar’S.
 The FCA fined Barclays £50 million over advisory services agreements it struck with Qatar Holding LLC as it pumped money into bank in 2008 .
 Barclays didn't fully disclose to shareholders at the time that it agreed to pay the Qatari group £322 million over five years . Barclays may have broken disclosure rules if it didn't disclose the amount .
 The FCA also alleged the primary purpose of the £322 million payment was to get Qatar to buy Barclays shares .
 The Financial Times reported Thursday that the FCA had reopened its case . The FCA has re-opened its case.
 David Green says it will decide soon whether to REGULATION ECB's Nouy Argues Against Rollback . The head of the SFO, David Green, told The Wall Street Journal on Tuesday that it would decide soon .
 The long-running review picked up speed last year when Barclays released thousands of emails and documents that it previously had said were protected by attorney-client confidentiality .
 Several former Barclays executives have been questioned by the SFO, according to people familiar with the matter .
 The fraud office must now decide whether to press charges against the individuals involved, or both .
 The United States Department of Justice and Securities and Exchange Commission also are investigating the agreements . Barclays has disclosed in regulatory filings .
 U.K. banks including Royal Bank of Scotland Group PLC tapped taxpayers to supervisor's annual report . Other U.S. banks include Lloyds Banking Group P LC and RBS PLC .
 Any public sanction could shine further light on how Barclays executives got Middle Eastern investors to prop it up during a period of intense market turbulence .
 All of the executives and board members at the bank during this capital-raising have since left .
 The suit alleges the advisory agreements Barclays struck with Qatar Holding were a sham and gave the wealth fund more favorable treatment than Abu Dhabi investors who also invested .
 In February, a U.K. judge ordered Barclays to hand over emails related to the capital raising . The emails were ordered by the judge .
 Bats said it plans to petition the commission to take up the matter . The commission had been delegated to its staff .
 The Bats letter was dated March 17 but not posted publicly until this week . The letter was posted on March 17 .
 SEC spokeswoman had no comment on the matter . The SEC has no comment .
 Private-equity funds raised in 2008, 2010 and 2011 to lend money to small and midsize companies have scored annual returns of 14%, 10% and 12% respectively, according to Preqin .
 The impressive results are part of the reason many pension funds, endowments and other institutions have increased allocations to private equity in recent years .
 Industry executives say more funds are chasing the strategy . But profit from direct lending, as the business is called, is declining, they say .
 Funds launched in 2012, 2013 and 2014 have seen annual returns of 9.9%, 7.8% and 8.2%, respectively . Funds launched on the same day in 2012 and 2013 .
 Some investors say the slowdown raises questions about future returns . The slowdown remains respectable.
 It is too soon to judge results from funds raised more recently, analysts said . It often takes some time to invest all the money raised for a fund .
 Big-name private-equity funds have focused on the corporate-lending market in the years following the credit crisis .
 Over $117 billion was raised for these lending funds in the four years ended in 2016, up from $22 billion in the previous four years .
 Some funds borrow money to amplify the size of their funds, suggesting that the pool of available cash likely is even greater . Some of these funds borrow funds to amplify their funds .
 Last year, Bain Capital LP, Angelo Gordon & Co. and Neuberger Berman Group LLC Trickling Down Funds posted solid, but declining, returns .
 Preqin the wall street journal raised funds to do this kind of direct lending . The fund was raised to help fund the project .
 KKR & Co., Carlyle Group LP, Apollo Global Management LLC and Blackstone Group LP's GSO credit unit are also in the business . KKR and Co. Carlyle group LP's credit unit is also in business .
 Commercial loans increased at double-digit-percentage annual rates after the crisis . Many banks became more reluctant to lend to some midsize and smaller companies .
 Some firms are adjusting to deal with mounting competition. Now, some firms are dealing with rising competition .
Borrowers can get "covenant-lite" financing at rates below 10%, or financing without those safeguards . Maria Boyazny, the firm's founder, says borrowers can get financing at below 10% .
 Lately, companies with about $25 million in earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, are getting loans at rates equivalent to about 5 percentage points above the London interbank offered rate .
 Bain Capital is increasingly active in lending to middlemarket companies in Europe and Australia . It has opened an office in Dublin, where executives see more limited new lending from banks and rival funds .
 Funds shown aren't registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and aren't available for sale to U.S. citizens and/or residents .
 All performance figures are calculated using the most recent prices available . All figures are based on the most recently available prices available.
 Freda Fung tel: +852 2831 2831 2504; email: freda.fung (8wsj.com)
 All-time h| 9 h 38915.87 12/29/89 STOXX600 Index 377.20 A3.17, or 0.85% High, low, open and close for each trading day of the past three months . All- time h: 9
 South Africa Johannesburg All Share 52027.98 -68.73 -0.131 48935.90.90 • 54704.22 2.22 .
Asia-Pacific DJ Asia-Pacific TSM 1553.64 2.71 10.17 1308.52 - 1570.38 9.38.38 .
U.S. dollar vs. major United States trading partners 20 % 2016 Country/currency US$ vs. U.S.-based currencies . China yuan yuan 0.0640 0.3190 0.7500 0.001510 0.0001510
 Hong Kong dollar India rupee Indonesia rupiah Japan yen Kazakhstan tenge Macau pataca Malaysia ringgit-c New Zealand dollar Pakistan rupee Philippines peso Singapore dollar South Korea won Sri Lanka rupee Taiwan dollar Taiwan dollar Thailand baht .
 T ullett Prebon, WSJ Market Data Group Global government bonds Latest, month-ago and year-ago yields and spreads over or under United States T reasurys on benchmark two-year and 10-year government bonds .
 Previous Yield Month ago 5.250 Australia 2 1.777 52.777. ET Coupon Country/ Maturity, in years Yield Latest Spread OverTreasurys, in terms of basis points .
 Price-to-earnings ratios are for trailing 12 months Sources: WSJ Market Data Group; Birinyi Associates for personal non-commercial use only .
 Markets have become increasingly sanguine about terror events . The terror attacks have been blamed for some of the world's worst terror attacks .
 Stocks, bonds and the pound showed little impact from terrorism Wednesday in London . Riva Gold Financial markets barely budged following Wednesday's deadly attack .
Terror attacks on Western targets have spurred investors to dump stocks and regional currencies while rushing into haven investments such as government bonds .
 Such reactions have decreased as the incidents have become more regular . But such reactions have been decreased as such incidents are more frequent .
 The British pound continued to strengthen Thursday, driven largely by economic data . The pound has been battered this year by uncertainty surrounding the EU .
 There was no discernible impact on U.K. and global stocks, government bonds or gold . There also was no indication of a negative impact on the U.S. economy .
Investors have sold local shares and currencies on the assumption such attacks could hurt tourism and damage consumer confidence .
 Investors jumped into haven assets such as government debt and gold, with that metal gaining by 6.5% its first postattack trading day .
 Investors have become increasingly sanguine about the impact of such events on financial markets, even as their human and political toll has lived on . More recent attacks have demonstrated that over time, investors have become more sanguined about such events .
 European airline shares have continued to see setbacks in the immediate aftermath of such attacks . European airlines are traditionally sensitive to terror attacks .
 Wednesday's declines were largely attributed to a regulatory debate around the airline industry . But the bulk of Wednesday's decline came ahead of the attack .
 Investors' muted response to this week's London attacks could be a factor. There could be other factors influencing investors' muted reaction to the attacks .
 The assault on Britain's Parliament was dramatic and brutal . There were fewer fatalities than many recent terror incidents .
 Technical factors involved in sterling and the euro's resilience to recent shock events . There are also technical factors involved.
 Both are highly liquid, haven currencies that tend to do well in times of uncertainty, says ING's Mr Patel . U.K. government bonds are typically held in global portfolios as a stable asset .
 London appeared to be operating as usual despite the attack, limiting the perceived impact on U.K. businesses .
 The charges, if filed, would target alleged Chinese middlemen who helped North Korea orchestrate the theft .
 The current cases being pursued may not include charges against North Koreans, people close to the process said . North Korea would likely implicate North Korea.
 Richard Ledgett, the deputy director of the National Security Agency, said he was “optimistic about the truth of that" when asked about reports of a connection between cybercrimes .
"That is a big deal; it's different," he said on Tuesday during a panel discussion at the Aspen Institute .
 Federal investigators are focusing on Chinese individuals or businesses, according to people familiar with the matter .
 Treasury authorities are considering sanctions against the alleged middlemen, people said . The government is using the approach to go after suspected lawbreakers who are unlikely to land in United States custody .
 Los Angeles took the leading role in the past year, according to people familiar with the matter . The United States attorney's offices and FBI field offices in Los Angeles and Manhattan had both been investigating the Bangladesh theft .
Authorities in Los Angeles had been investigating the Sony hack . That shift occurred because government investigators linked the code used to perpetrate the cyberheist with the hack .
 In 2014, the FBI blamed North Korea for the Sony breach, which exposed embarrassing emails and led the studio to pull from theaters a comedy that involved a plot to kill North Korean leader Kim Jong Un .
 Prosecutors haven't publicly filed any charges stemming from the Sony hack . They haven't yet been charged with any crimes related to the hack .
 There remains a minority view among some federal officials that evidence doesn't prove that North Korea was behind the Bangladesh theft, sources say .
 Some officials believe the hackers who carried out the theft may have appropriated or repurposed the malicious code . The Sony hack wouldn't necessarily indicate they are linked to North Korea, people familiar with the discussions said .
 If middlemen in Bangladesh theft are prosecuted, the approach is expected to be similar to that used in September against a Chinese businesswoman, Ma Xiaohong .
 Ma and her trading company were also accused of helping North Korea . They were also targeted by parallel Treasury Department sanctions .
 North Korea accused of helping blacklisted North Korean companies evade U.S. sanctions . They were accused of moving hundreds of millions of dollars and procure raw materials . The materials could be used in Pyongyang's nuclear-weapons program .
 Federal prosecutors in Manhattan continue to investigate breaches of overseas financial institutions . They may have been carried out by the same hackers, people familiar with the matter said .
 Swift, the moneytransfer network, disclosed another against a bank in Vietnam . The money transfer network, Swift, also disclosed another in Vietnam.
 The defendants aren't in U.S. custody, but the case hasn't progressed . China pulled back from cyberespionage activities in the wake of the charges, officials say .
 Last week, the Justice Department announced an indictment against four men, including two Russian spies . The indictment accuses them of being behind Yahoo Inc.'s 2014 security breach and stealing information about more than a half billion online accounts .
 Prosecutors alleged the hackers sought information for intelligence purposes and for criminal schemes to steal money .
 The audacity and size of the theft, conducted through odd orders seeking millions of dollars, sent shock waves through the global money-transfer system .
 A bank executive in Colombo noticed that the name of the beneficiary had been misspelled . The thieves also transferred $20 million to the account of a nonprofit in Sri Lanka .
 Philippine authorities returned $15 million of the $81 million in November . A Chinese casino operator turned over the money to authorities .
 Nearly $60 million was paid to two other casinos and another gambling junket operator in Manila . The Anti-Money Laundering Council of the Philippines said it was unable to trace it further .
 House Republicans postponed Thursday's planned vote on a health-care bill . Many investors say the bill could test the viability of the Trump administration's agenda .
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 4.72 points, or less THURSDAY'S than 0.1%, to 20656.58, its sixth consecutive decline . It was its sixth straight decline .
 In the U.S., major indexes were higher through most of the session, then erased their gains in the afternoon . prospects of Republicans passing a plan to dismantle the Affordable Care Act appeared to dim .
 Many investors and analysts have said the vote will be a key test of whether President Donald Trump will be able to push through potential policy changes like tax cuts, fiscal stimulus and deregulation-hopes .
 As of Thursday afternoon, Republican lawmakers remained short of the votes needed to pass their health plan in the House .
 Industrial stocks fell 0.3% by late afternoon . Mr Trump's plans to boost infrastructure spending are expected to boost the economy .
 Financial stocks were near unchanged after rallying earlier in the session . Financial stocks, another popular postelection trade, were also rallying .
 Government bonds weakened, with the yield on the 10-year U.S. Treasury note rising to 2.418%, according to Tradeweb .
 The dollar stabilized after falling to its lowest level since November on Wednesday . The dollar was at its lowest levels since November .
 Some see the health vote as a key test of Mr Trump's ability to pass his agenda .
 Some analysts and investors cautioned that the risks of profit-taking over the next few weeks are heightened .
 Stock valuations are at historically high levels and major indexes remain close to records . Major indexes are still close to record highs .
 Japan's Nikkei Stock Average rose 0.2%, snapping a three-session losing streak . Japan's stock market has been down for three days .
 Lenders Fill Up on ECB Loans as Program Is Retired as Program is Retired . Lenders in the eurozone snapped up €233. billion in four-year loans from the European Central Bank on Thursday .
 The borrowing by banks was the highest since June of last year . The borrowing was roughly double the amount economists had anticipated .
 The expiration of the fouryear loan offering underlines the ECB's rising confidence in the region's economic recovery . The ECB's growing confidence is seen as a sign of confidence in Europe's recovery .
 Inflation in the 19-nation eurozone jumped to 2% last month from about zero a year ago . ECB announced the long-term loans as part of an aggressive stimulus package .
 ECB is set to reduce its monthly bond purchases to €60 billion a month from €80 billion starting next week . In another sign of confidence in the economy, the ECB will cut its monthly purchases from €60billion a month .
 He said the decision reflected policy makers' rosier perception of the economic outlook . He said that decision reflectedPolicy makers' views of the economy .
 The European Central Bank left most of its stimulus intact this month . The bank's top officials have stressed that they haven't reached a turning point in the policy cycle .
 underlying inflation in the eurozone has been stuck at or below 1% for three years . Crucially, underlying inflation is still below 1%, excluding volatile energy prices .
General Motors has long provided 0% financing on many new models, and expects to keep doing so . By Serena Ng and Vipal Monga General Motors have long provided0% financing for many models .
Don't tell that to people who have become accustomed to buying everything at 0% financing. Don't tell you that to those who have been accustomed to buy everything at0% financing .
 Years of rock-bottom interest rates have led to a proliferation of no-interest financing offers for people looking to buy everything from cars to lawn mowers to jewelry .
 Manufacturers and re^ tailers have come to lean S heavily on these deals . 1 is an inducement for shop§ pers considering large or dis§ cretionary purchases .
 Most retailers will likely absorb the higher costs to stay competitive . Customers may turn elsewhere if they are asked to pony up interest charges .
 The cost of providing 0% financing varies from company to company, but generally retailers pay a middleman . A few percentage points of a product's purchase price upfront.
 The practice is known as "buying down the rate to zero" because retailers are in effect footing the financing costs for their customers .
 The retailer pays a bank or finance company around $1,000 upfront, or around 10% of the purchase price . For a shopper buying a $10,000 hot tub with 0% financing over three years, that may translate into the retailer paying a bank.
 The upfront fees retailers pay are often tied to a shortterm London interbank offered rate, which tends to rise in tandem with the Fed-guided federal-funds rate .
 The sixmonth Libor has risen to 1.43% from 0.9% a year ago, Bankrate.com says . The fed-funds rate has risen by half a percentage point .
 TD Bank provides nointerest financing to customers of 25 U.S. retailers . The 0% deals will get more expensive, says Mike Rittler.
 Retailers could limit their costs by providing no-interest financing for shorter terms, he notes . Retailer could limit costs by offering no- interest financing for short terms, the author says .
 Companies in many cases say they don't plan to ditch the offers . The offers have become a cornerstone of their marketing efforts since the financial crisis .
 Analysts say companies may be forced to act if profit margins get compressed . But if profit margin gets compressed, companies may have to act .
 In general, the longer the no-interest payment term, the higher the cost to the seller . The longer the term is, the more expensive it is for the seller.
 interest rates, and most companies' funding costs, remain relatively low . After all, interest rates remain low .
 General Motors Co. has long provided 0% financing for up to 72 months on many new car and truck models . The company expects to continue to continue the deals .
 GM and other auto makers did away with 0% financing deals and moved to other types of sales incentives to woo customers . In 2002, GM and others did away from 0% deals and went to other sales incentives .
 A year later, they brought back the deals to counter sluggish sales . Roughly a year after they did, the deals were brought back .
 QVC last year started selling a $399 Dyson highspeed hair dryer . Many people purchased using a sixBehind Zero Rates hair dryers . A customer who qualifies on purchases, backed by a credit card and uses it to a credit-card company .
 The retailer pays the card company 10% of the price of the hot tub at the time of the sale . For a 36-month no-interest financing arrangement, the retailer pays a card company.
 The customer pays the credit-card company in monthly installments over three years .
 The retailer has no plans to change its offers for no-interest financing . The retailer is not changing its offer for no interest financing .
 One-third of shoppers' purchases are made with store-branded credit cards, says Chief Financial Officer Tom Pohmer . The cards automatically let customers pay in interest-free installments .
 Shoppers can get 12 to 60 months' financing on expensive items such as $2,000 mattresses . Shoppers are able to buy mattresses for up to 30 months .
 Many retailers are hoping the Fed's rate increase is a sign of an improving economy, which should help their sales grow .
 Consumers, meanwhile, can be very sensitive to changes in interest rates . Consumers can also be sensitive to change in interest rate changes .
 Jacuzzi Group Worldwide is a maker of hot tubs and other bath products . The company has in the past experimented with 1.99% and 2. 99% financing offers, with mixed results .
 credit-card issuers have aggressively used 0% offers to persuade people to transfer their card balances over from rivals . In recent years, credit- card issuers also have used 0%.
 A proposal for a continentwide bad bank seems unlikely to be the solution for the continentwide bank crisis . But a proposal for an international bad bank would be unlikely to succeed .
 Europe's banks still hold almost €1 trillion ($1.08 trillion) of bad debts . Investors are wary of putting money into banks and hampers the spread of new loans .
 The ECB launched new guidelines on bad loans this week . It says banks need to come up with ambitious plans and management incentives to work out .
Daniele Nouy, head of the ECB's single banking regulator, was asked about the badbank idea .
 She said every option could be useful, but she couldn't agree with its plan to buy bad loans at above-market values . She said all options could be helpful, but said she could not agree with the plan .
 Europe's market for selling bad loans is very thin, according to analysts . Europe's markets for bad loans are very low, they say . Europe has a very low rate of bad loans.
 UniCredit shares overtook other banks' after it announced a recapitalization plan in December . European Banking Authority, a standardsetting body, is meant to get around this by adding a big buyer to the market .
 It is an echo of the original strategy of the U.S.'s financial crisis Troubled Asset Relief Program . The original strategy was later abandoned as unworkable .
 It would be set up with equity from national governments whose banks were going to use it and funding from bonds sold to investors . The idea would be based on banks' use of the equity from their banks .
 Lenders would buy loans at real economic value rather than the prevailing market price . It would then buy them at a so-called real value, making the sale less painful for the lender .
 The idea is that it could resell the loans when market prices had risen . It could be used as a way to sell loans when prices have risen .
 There are protections involved to ensure one country doesn't end up wearing losses from another country's banks . If this isn't possible, there are safeguards involved .
 The trouble with this plan is the steps required to improve bad-loan prices look really hard . The problem is that the steps needed to improve the prices look hard .
Some countries would have to include dramatic improvements in bankruptcy laws in some countries . Some countries would also have to improve their bankruptcy laws .
 Italy for one has already had a recent shot at doing this and failed at the last minute to make changes that would make it quicker and easier to deal with existing bad debts . Italy has failed to make a change that would have made it easier and quicker to tackle the problem .
 There are many bad loans to small businesses where there is little of value to seize . The business might not survive without the owner of the business .
 Banks must work out problems more quickly where they can, and take the hit where they are . Banks need to work out more quickly to fix the problems they can .
 UniCredit has shown that a bank with a cleaned slate and a business plan can raise funds . Italy's UniCredit says a bank has a clean slate and business plan.
Banks that drag their feet will likely face higher capital charges through supervisory add-ons . Banks that drag its feet will probably face higher charges through the add-on .
 As the sun starts to come out, it is time for banks to make repairs on their own . Whether or not it is one in the White House's good graces, owning a cable-news network is good business .
 Major U.S. cable-news networks finished 2016 at record viewership levels, despite subscriber losses .
 The three networks accounted for about 10% of prime-time cable viewership in the fourth quarter, up from 6.9% in 2012 .
 CNN and MSNBC would be valued at $9. billion and $7. billion, respectively, according to Evercore ISI . Using a multiple of nine times estimates for 2017 earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, they would be worth $9 billion .
 A major meat scandal in Brazil could open up opportunities for U.S. producers to feed China . Brazil is the world's most populous country .
 The Brazilian meat industry has ground to a halt following a police investigation . It is the globe's biggest exporter of beef and poultry . Police investigation dubbed "Weak Flesh" into allegations that meatpackers bribed inspectors to give health certificates .
 The meat producers and the government deny the charge, but the damage is done . The government denies the charge and says the damage was done .
 Brazil's meat exports were Pigs Can Fly United States pork exports to China and Hong Kong $10 billion 0.0 billion . The U.S. pork exports were Pork exports of $10billion .
 17 countries have imposed restrictions on Brazilian meat imports . The United States Meat Export Federation is worth a mere $74,000 on Tuesday, compared with $60. million on Monday .
 These countries include China, which together with the semiautonomous territory of Hong Kong is the biggest buyer of meat from Brazil . China, along with Hong Kong, is the largest buyer of Brazilian meat .
 Tyson Foods and Cargill could be positive news for U.S. meat producers . That could be good news for the United States meat producers.
 The companies are waiting to sell more meat to China, which lifted a 13-year ban on United States beef in 2016 . The ban was imposed due to fears over madcow disease .
 The beef trade has yet to resume, due to administrative issues . The incident could speed things up, but the beef trade could speed up .
 Hong Kong is the fifth-biggest importer of U.S. beef . The establishment of an official channel would likely boost demand .
 Eat more pork, which is way more popular than beef, than beef in the country anyway .
 Brazil also exports pork, though not as much as it does beef and poultry . Brazil also produces pork, but not as many as it did beef andoultry .
 China's WH Group, which bought America's Smithfield Foods in 2013, stands to be a beneficiary . The WH Group bought Smithfield foods in 2013 .
 The whole rationale of the Smithfield purchase was to take advantage of lower hog prices in the U.S. and higher pork prices in China .
 WH reported better-than-expected earnings for 2016 for 2016 . Operating profit for its United States fresh pork business nearly tripled, partly due to more exports .
 The company's Hong Kong-listed stock advanced 10% in a reaction to the results . The results were not the results out of Brazil .
 Nike wants to maintain its status as most valuable player . It is time for the competition to feast on Brazil's "weak flesh"
 Investors shouldn't underestimate the importance of its size in that feat. Investors should not underestimate the size of the company .
 The sportswear company's fiscal third-quarter sales fell short of analysts' expectations . The company reported late Tuesday night that it had not met expectations .
 Nike says futures orders were down 4% year over year or 1% after adjusting for currency fluctuations . Nike said futures orders, which many investors consider a indicator of coming sales results, were down .
 The company said it is limiting supply amid surprisingly strong promotional activity from competitors . It is expecting gross margins to contract in the fourth quarter .
 Nike's investment should allow it to win back market share. Nike hasn't stopped playing offense, and its investment should let it do it, says the company .
 Nike's sales growth has suffered amid a comeback by competitor Adidas in North America . Nike has the advantage of scale.
 Marketing and research and development are two of the biggest factors driving sales . That allows it to outspend competitors on marketing and research . That's why it's outspending competitors on market and research, which is key to sales .
 Nike can't retake the share lost to Adidas is to believe its long-term competitive advantage has disappeared . Adidas has lost its competitive advantage to Adidas in the past .
 Investors may continue to point to negative futures as a sign that things have changed, but futures have become less reliable .
 Actual results have been closer to management's guidance than to reported futures in all but two quarters since the beginning of fiscal 2015 .
Small, idiosyncratic pleasure boats are the new ticket by CHRISTIAN L WRIGHT MY FATHER .
 The bow of a mega-cruise ship pierced the painterly scene and slowly cast its enormous shadow over the lagoon . Then, from behind Santa Maria della Salute, the ship's bow pierced the scene .
 More than 25 million people will take a cruise in 2017, and ships just keep bloating to accommodate them . The cruise ships will be able to accommodate 25 million passengers .
Royal Caribbean's Oasis-class ships each carry more than 5,400 passengers and weigh some 225,200 tons . Royal Caribbean's ships, for instance, each carry over 5,000 passengers . The ships weigh more than 225,000 tons .
 At this size, the ship's destination is the destination, where it's going matters less .
 Others prefer their vessels more modestly proportioned. While many tourists relish these floating cities, others prefer their boats .
 A retired U.S. Navy officer, his father, is a retired Navy officer . Please turn to page W2 RYO TAKEMASA for personal non-commercial use only .
 W1 cruises in watercraft of varying shapes and sizes . Now among the anti-megaship contingent .
Last spring, Pd booked a nine-day cruise from Venice to Athens aboard a smallish ship . Pd had to go with him .
 The itinerary, "Odyssey of Ancient Civilizations," was organized by National Trust Tours . It was a division of the National Trust for Historic Preservation .
 A bit cruisephobic himself, I gritted my teeth as we donned our nametags and ascended the gangplank . A bit cruisphobic himself.
 There were no hordes, no mad dash to claim a deck chair, no sharp elbows in the queue for crab cakes, no boozy pool parties . There were also no mad Dash to claim the deck chair .
 The only time I stood in line was to wait for the oysters on the half shell at the buffet .
 Instead of Broadway medleys and napkin-folding classes, onboard diversions were mostly limited to daily lectures and evening piano serenades .
 Admiral James Stavridis is the 16th Supreme Allied Commander of NATO . He is now the dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts . He enlightened passengers on 21st-century security challenges .
 Yo-Yo Ma and LeBron James got the kind of applause that even LeBron James might envy .
 Though our cruise was atypical, it's hardly the only such sea excursion these days, it was not .
 You can ply the Amazon in a posh riverboat or the Aegean in a traditional Turkish sailboat, island-hop in the Caribbean on a catamaran or venture into the Arctic aboard expedition ships stocked with French wine . You can also ply theAmazon in aposh
 Viking Cruises, marking its 20th anniversary this year, was the game-changer, says Ms. Ms. Viggers. Viking Cruise is a British-based cruise company .
 The largest purveyor of European river cruises launched its first ocean cruise in 2015 . The largest cruise line in the world launched the first cruise in 2014 .
 Viking's ships also tend to spend more time in port than those of many bigger cruise lines . Passengers can take advantage of local culture and shore programs .
 Expedition cruises, where passengers kayak around icebergs and gawk at blue-footed boobies, are gaining favor too .
 Even a few luxury lines, such as Crystal Cruises and Silversea Cruises, are getting in on the action .
 Expedition-style cruises "will explode in '18 and '19," says Sven Lindblad, CEO and founder of Lindblads Expeditions . The four-hour trip through Finland's Gulf of Bothnia costs less than $400 .
 M/Y Legend is a 1974 Cold War icebreaker that's been retrofitted into a 26-passenger superyacht . The thrill of blasting through frozen waters to get to the untouched reaches of Norway and Antarctica .
 The MV Parry is a 1941 wooden tugboat that travels with up to 14 passengers along the Inside Passage into the wilds of British Columbia .
 The onboard chef will prep the fish you catch along the way . Accommodations are modest and space is tight, but in springtime, you might see pods of humpback whales or a grizzly bear with cubs .
Tugboatcruise is a luxury version of the Bugis ships that sailed those waters in the 17th century . Several gussied-up phinisis, traditional sailboats, glide around Indonesia's thousands of islands .
 From $14,500 per person for a 6-night trip, ultimate-indonesianyachts.com.com will offer a $15,000-a-day trip .
 The Aranui 5 is a working freighter that delivers cargo to the remote, remote Marquesas Islands, north of Tahiti . It is the first freighter to be launched in 2015 .
Passengers can set off to explore unspoiled landscapes where horses roam wild and Paul Gauguin is buried .
 From $6,827 per person for a 14-day trip, freigh tercruises are available for a total of $6.827 .
 Legacy is an 88-passenger vessel with the feel of an old coastal steamer . The vessel is a former steamer.
 The Pesky Barnacle Saloon is a Lewis & Clark-themed cruises . The crew may turn up in historic costume .
 Wine-themed journeys include stops at Washington and Oregon wineries and plenty of tastings on land and water .
 Brooklyn-based Sailing Collective brings an urban boho vibe to the sea .
 Cabins tend to be simple and passengers might be asked to help trim the sail or crank a winch .
 Weeklong group and private charters accommodate up to eight passengers per sailboat . The charters can be booked by a group of eight passengers .
 Destinations range from classic [Maine and Greece) to surprising destinations .
Family-style meals and sunset Dark 'n' Stormys are a family-style meal .
 The sailboat used for the Adventure Flow cruises in Alaska is called Adventure Flow . Alila Purnama in Indonesia's Raja Ampat is a cabin on the MV Parry tugboat .
 Captain Louis Hoock shows passengers the nooks and crannies of Glacial Bay National Park aboard a 54-foot sailboat .
 Excursions might include stand-up paddle boarding past glaciers, kayaking tidal bores and hiking to waterfalls .
 Your guides, who double as chefs, can arrange onboard activities like yoga on the bow or a latenight dance party below deck .
Christian L Wright and Jen Murphy A Sailing Collective took tourists to the Galapagos and Antarctica in the 1960s . Only scientists had gone before .
 To some degree, "unconventional" means expensive and can also mean exclusive . "Unconventional"" means expensive .
 Windstar Cruises' fleet of just six ships, three sailboats and three yachts, sail the globe from New England to Tahiti . The fleet is based in New England and Tahiti.
 An 11-day cruise to Alaska runs about $9,000 per person, as opposed to about $1,500 on some of the larger ships .
All of Ponant's vessels are nimble enough to veer off the beaten path . Like Windstar's fleet, all of the vessels are more nimble.
 The Corinth Canal is a short cut from the Adriatic to the Aegean Sea . A tugboat flying a Greek flag arrived to take Le Lyrial through the Corinth Canal .
 The canal is just 70-feet wide at its narrowest point, precluding the passage of megaships and most tourist boats .
 When all of us gathered on the port side started snapping pictures of a herder and his goats, he opened his flip phone and snapped back .
 For personal non-commercial use only . WESTWIND TUGBOAT ADVENTURES .
Portugal is home to one of the most famous wines in the world . The DOURO VALLEY in Portugal is the home to the Port of Port of Portugal .
Great fortified wine has put the region on the map, but its vintners also turn out first-rate dry reds and whites . The wine-drinking world is indifferent to the seeming indifference of the world .
 I had tasted some very good wines during my trip. I was looking forward to drinking them at home . I had tasteed some of the best wines during the trip .
 In every wine shop in Newark, N.J., I found only a few of the bottles I had tasted . The Portuguese Ironbound section of Newark is heavily Portuguese .
 Douro dry reds and whites have only been around for a short time . The best Douro reds have been around in a few years .
 quality dry wines in the Douro are a much more recent endeavor . Port has a long, illustrious history dating back centuries . The Douro is a quality dry wine .
 A few decades ago, it was only a couple of decades ago that a sizable number of producers began making dry wines alongside their Ports .
 These wines didn't even have an official government designation until 1982 . They didn't have a government designation before 1982 .
 Douro received its official classification for Port in 1756 . By contrast, Douro got its official designation for Port for 1756.
 The first dry Douro wine to win wide acclaim was Fernando Nicolau de Almeida's 1952 Casa Ferreirinha Barca Velha . It was the first dryDouro wine in the world.
 Joao Nicolau de Almeida's son, Joao, created Duas Quintas in 1990 at Ramos Pinto . His son Joao was the visionary leader of the Quintas .
 Today, Barca Velha is as elusive as it is expensive . It has been produced fewer than 20 times since its inaugural vintage . Today, it is produced less than 20 years ago .
 Quinta do Crasto is one of the most famous dry wines in the world . The wine was produced by the same company as the Italian wine company that made the wine .
 Mr Lobo de Vasconcellos produces both red and white wines . Two decades later, he produces both wines .
 His 2015 whites were fresh and vibrant, made from a blend of several varieties .
 The vast majority of Douro wines are field blends of different grapes . No one knows which varieties were originally planted in vineyards .
 The 2013 Xisto was produced in "exceptional years" in conjunction with Chateau Lynch-Bages of Bordeaux . It was perhaps my least favorite .
 Mr Lobo de Vasconcellos says it has been a great success . But, he says, it has not been a good success .
 Rupert Symington is joint managing director of Symington Family Estates . Symington has a Bordeaux connection of his own .
 He teamed up with Bruno Prats, the former owner of Chateau Cos d'Estournel, to produce Chryseia, a supple, elegant red .
 The wine is one of many dry Douro reds produced by the Symington family . Warre's, Cockburn's, Graham's, Dow's and Dow's are among the largest Port holdings in the region .
 The wines are produced under the labels Altano, Quinta do Vesuvio and Prats & Symington . They are produced by the same labels as Altano and Quinta.
 Mr Symington had only a few hours to spare before leaving for vacation . He offered me an extensive tasting of his wines, including those from his newest estate, Quinta do Ataide .
 He said his best opportunity to expand the market was in the $15-$20 range . He said he thought his best chance to expand was in a $15-20 price range .
 Bottles at these prices aren't considered value wines, he says . But rather "interesting" ones, he adds .
 Jorge Rosas, general manager of the famed Ramos Pinto estate, talked about the difficulty of selling Douro wines in the U.S. He also talked about how difficult to sell Douro wine in the States .
 Duas Quintas wines with his winemaker Teresa Ameztoy in the dining room of the estate . "I did not know Douro was an obscure region," he said .
Mr Rosas included current vintages of Ramos Pinto reds and whites, as well as bottles of 1994 and 1997 Reserva . For our tasting, Mr Rosas also included bottles of the 1994 and1997 Reserva.
 The 1997 was still impressively youthful and vibrant. While the 1994 was showing its age, the 1997 was impressively young and vibrant .
 The wine would be bottled in the spring, says Ms. Ms. Cevallos . It would be concentrated and vibrant .
 The current vintage, the 2014 Duas Quintas Reserva, was truly impressive . At $30 a bottle, it was a remarkable buy .
 Mr Rosas said he found Portuguese and Spanish wines grouped together in a store in the U.S. He regarded the store as a positive development .
 The Douro has a full gamut of treasures to be found in the Douro right now .
 It's similarly refreshing and light-to-medium-bodied with good acidity and pretty red-fruit aromas . It's similar to a red-fruit aromas, but it's also light- to-medium.
 It's produced at the Quinta de Roriz estate in the Douro . It's been produced in the past by the estate's owners .
 The 2015, made from a blend of indigenous varieties, is a medium-to-full-bodied wine with a lush texture and a firm mineral note .
 The Chef Edouardo Jordan His Restaurant Salare, in Seattle, Wash, is the chef at the restaurant .
 The Italian chef is known for big-hearted Italian cooking, classical French rigor and Southern hospitality . He is also known for a splash of Parmesan broth .
 Edouardo Jordan is the first Slow Food Fast contribution from the chef . Look closer at the recipe, and you'll see traces of Jordan's impressive resume .
 At Bar Sajor he found his way to the epicenter of Seattle's dining renaissance . The bar is located in downtown Seattle .
 By the time he opened Salare in Seattle, almost two years ago, he'd been plotting the menu for years .
 This dish debuted on the regular menu, but with so many children snatching bites, it soon found its way onto the kids' menu .
 In a medium pot, combine Parmesan rinds, 1 cup grated Parmesan, bay leaves, shallot halves, 2 cups water, 2 tablespoons oil and a pinch each of salt and pepper .
 reduce heat to medium and simmer until reduced by half, about 15 minutes . Reduce heat toMedium and simmer to medium. Reduce heat and simmer by half .
 Set pot over a low flame and keep brodo at a low simmer until ready to serve . Keep brodo in a simmer until it's ready for serving .
 In a large bowl mix ground beef with soy sauce, chopped parsley, egg and spices until well combined . Meanwhile, in a large Bowl mix, ground beef and soy sauce.
Cook polenta, stirring often, until tender and creamy, about 10 minutes . Cook polenta is a popular way to cook polenta .
 Stir in 4 tablespoons butter, remaining grated Parmesan and season to taste with salt . Stir in four tablespoons of butter and remaining grate Parmesan .
 Parmesan rinds along with the grated cheese gives the rich broth a deep umami flavor .
 For personal non-commercial use only. For personal use only . The WALL STREET JOURNAL is the Wall STREet Journal .
 A designer invests a previously unremarkable apartment with quiet panache . The Lower East Side apartment is located on Manhattan's Upper East Side .
Like the brass tables, their weathered silver combines shine with the tarnish of time . Like the brass table, they combine shine with time .
 Pair of Silver Neoclassical Revival Candlesticks from High Style Deco, $7,245.com Play with the Palette .
 The towering, noble pair of cabinets allows the living room to look taller and bigger than it is, he said .
 The decor exudes handsome glamour, using white walls and pale, contemplative artwork to ground a palette of moody blues, warm gold tones and sparks of red .
 A few of the elements that create a dramatic living room minus the flash are among the elements .
 De-Lux the Sofa has a plucky sapphire color . The Chesterfield sofa by Soane Britain has a stuffy tufted-leather opulence . "If I'd stopped there the room would still feel perfectly full"
 Simplified Bear Sofa, from about $9,672, soane.com Tone Down the Gold Unlacquered brass cubes, have a mutable patina .
 They change color depending on how the sunlight strikes them over time . They change colors depending on the color of the sun .
 Gubi, $899, dwr.com Erect Towers As in fashion, scale and bold lines create a strong, self-assured allure .
 Two cornflower blue custom cabinets with crisscross wire screens stand on longlegged brass frames .
 Graydon Shagreen Double-Door Cabinet, from $2,995, rh.com Gall in the Hounds, comes from $1,995 . The two chairs combine imposing scale and relaxed attitude .
 Mr Campbell reupholstered a reclined 1960s armchair in a smart blue houndstooth wool blend . The wool blend was made out of blue and white.
 Its deep-blue figuring picks up on those hues in the rest of the room, and its gold connects with the brass finishes . The gold is the best of the gold in the room .
 The persistent chilliness of March meets its match with artist-designed throws from Los Angeles's Slowdown Studio . Vintage Turkish Oushak, about 6 feet by 9 feet, is about 6ft by 9ft .
 Marc Hendrick, who helms the year-old home wares company, teams up with contemporary artists from all over the world . Atelier Bingo and Berlin-based illustrator Milena Bucholz.
 Mr Hendrick prudently executes the "quirky, weird designs that you never see on a blanket" in a palette restrained enough to suit a range of decor schemes .
 At 54 by 70 inches of 100% cotton, the woven throws give a satisfyingly non-scratchy cover for legs bared by anticipatory shorts .
 Ziperstein cuts out slabs of sun-dried clay to meticulously assemble the vessels . The vessels rise to 15 to 21 inches tall .
 Post-firing effects include a silvery finish, for which she applies a blue-tinted white glaze to a red terra cotta body .
 Kelly Wearstler recently bought a number of gray iterations with deliberate drips for the new Hollywood Proper Residences rooftop lounge .
 Glazed Terracotta Small Hex Planter, $7,200, bzippyandcompany.com — Mimi Faucett MARTIN RAMIN/the Wall STREET JOURNAL . For personal non-commercial use only.
 The Clarks Wallabees are a pair of suede shoes popularized by male style icons from David Bowie to Wes Anderson . The shoes are available at a luxury department store in Beverly Hills .
 As a woman wearing the most sensible of sensible shoes, you couldn't get their attention unless you burst spontaneously into flames .
 Originally made by Lance Clark in Kilkenny, Ireland, the moccasinstyle shoe made its debut in the 1960s .
 The brand's ethos was rooted in the Clark family's egalitarian philosophy and religious beliefs . The brand was inspired by the family's religious beliefs and egalitarian philosophy .
 Streetwear label Supreme recast the shoe's vamp in woven suede and offered it in navy and pink .
 John F Kennedy Jr. and Walter White on "Breaking Bad" both wore Wallabees . John F. Kennedy Jr., Walter White both wore the Wallabee .
In the brand's massive archive, one of the largest in the world for a shoe company, remains scarce .
 Small and fierce, the devoted army of female Wallabee lovers likely bewilders many, I suppose .
 Patagonia jackets Rugged on apple-cheeked men; a sign of resignation on Apple-Cheeked ladies . Patagonian jackets Ruged on apple.
 The ungainly sandals do not excel at emphasizing the delicacy of feet. Birkenstocks are a good choice of sandals .
 Baseball caps typically telegraph dirty hair on the fairer sex on men .
 Whenever I notice a woman wearing them, I know I've met a kindred soul, says Karen Kimmel .
 The 1997 cover photo was shot at an angle that magnified and glorified lead singer Richard Ashcroft's Wallabee-clad feet .
 My obsession with Wallabees began well before that, in the late '70s, in Shawnee, Kan.
 I begged my mother for a pair of knockoffs, the closest approximation I could find, sold at Kinney Shoes .
 A 9-year-old girl is an unlikely style icon for a girl . Maybe I'd seen them on President Jimmy Carter, a man of distinction and a Wallabee loyalist .
 I fetishized accessories that I saw as emblems of a more legitimate, buttoned-up New England experience . I fetishize accessories that he saw as emblem of the more legitimate New England experiences .
Wallabees were on the approved footwear list of Eastern schools with strict uniform guidelines . Wallabees' tomboyish tastes are more than anything sold at the Limited .
 Bean backpack, I was in Gainesville, Fla., adrift in a sea of Reef flipflops .
 I'd had the backpack shipped from Maine, but inside, I carried a Frisbee . The backpack was shipped from the Maine state .
 The writer worked at fashion magazines, where it was practically a job requirement to blow your meager income on . She always felt like an impostor in precious footwear .
 I remember getting my first invitation into the fashion closet at Harper's Bazaar, where they were giving away leftovers .
 One pair of Wallabees slumped, forlorn. The pair of heels are all in her size .
 My fashion heroines, from Katharine Hepburn to Lauren Hutton, borrowed their best moves from the boys . I craved the self-assurance they telegraphed with their mannish, casual clothes .
 The men I wanted to be around didn't want women to be uncomfortable or objectified, she says . Plus, she said, the men she wanted to have around did not want women being objectified .
 Mr Beckley, who arrived two years ago, said the company is "genderagnostic" thinking of most styles as neither strictly men's or women's .
 I'm going to use the invisibility cloak of that soft sole to keep a low profile as I shop . Meanwhile, I'm using the invisible cloak to keep an low profile .
 Writer Christine Lennon, who lives in Los Angeles, writes about fashion, fashion and fashion . She says she loves to dress up and wear everything from washed denim to floaty dresses .
 For personal non-commercial use only. For personal use only . KATRINA DICKSON.
 The Trump administration's effort to soften future fuel-economy regulations is a fairly straight-up exchange of regulatory relief for the promise of job repatriation in the domestic automotive sector . The Strong, Silent Type the Trump administration is a relatively straight-upset exchange of
 The United States has embraced Beijing-style central planning . It's sort of thrilling to watch the U.S. embrace Beijing's central planning.
 catalytic converters, airbags, anti-lock brakes, stability control. They always claim new technology will drive prices up and jobs out .
 The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, the industry's lobbying arm, wants more . But the industry wants more.
 The ultimate deliverable is what the Auto Alliance calls the One National Standard . The ultimate deliveryable is the one National Standard.
 The Environmental Protection Agency wants to end California's power to regulate vehicle emissions within its borders .
 It is the auto makers' job to make advanced-technology vehicles desirable .
 The figures do not include the on-paper fuel-cost savings of $2,500 over five years . The $7,500 federal tax credit is quite a thumb on the scales .
 This is an electric-enhanced premium-content minivan with a V6 engine, tipping the scales at 2. tons . The minivan hits mileage and emission standards as yet undreamt .
The Pacifica Hybrid reminds me of what General Patton said after he overran Trier, exceeding his orders from Eisenhower . The Pacifica hybrid reminds him of what he said of General Patton .
 These vehicles are engineered to run in EV mode first and foremost, as long as the battery charge holds out . Then if needed, the occupants will switch over to gasoline power for extended-range driving .
 The Pacifica Hybrid cannot leave you walking for want of battery charge . The hybrid can be used to charge a car or car .
 It's a naturally aspirated 3.6-liter V6 with stepless variable transmission . It has a gas engine, a big one, too, with a stepless transmission .
 The car has two high-torque electric motors sandwiched in the transmission . It also has a 16-kWh lithium-ion battery pack in the floor, under the floor .
 This Pacifica glides around town, delivering luxury levels of cabin quiet . The Pacifica is known for its quietness and quietness .
 The Pacifica Hybrid is a plug-in vehicle . The small charger port is located under a flap by the left A pillar .
 Chrysler says it exceeds the average American's daily driving miles . That range is significant because it is higher than average American driving miles, Chrysler says .
 Pacifica Hybrid could virtually zero out the household gas allowance . For many consumers the Pacifica hybrid could virtuallyzero out the house gas allowance.
 As a group, the first-gen PHEV's scant EV range was hardly worth the added mass, cost and technical lift . The first-generation PHEVs are the first to have a range of EVs .
 Once the battery is depleted, the vehicle's overall efficiency plummets due to the dead weight of the idle electrics . The other challenge for PHEVs is that once the battery has been depleted, it will be too much to use .
 Even if the battery is depleted, the Pacifica still gets a remarkable 32 mpg combined . But even if it's depleted, it still operates like a gigantic Toyota Prius .
 The test vehicle was optioned with the company's latest suite of driver aids . It includes 360degree cameras, active collisionavoidance braking and lane-keeping .
 The Pacifica Hybrid is a Tesla Model X with side doors that aren't crazy . It travels 33 miles in 33 miles . It's an EV with an EV's advantages in performance and refinement .
 The high-res instrument graphics swirl into view, but you don't hear anything except climate fans, if they are on . You don't see anything except the climate fans.
Foot on the brake, rotate the gear selector to D and step on the go pedal . Foot on the brakes, rotate a gear selector and go pedal on the pedal .
Highfrequency electrical noises, the howl and hum from motors and power electronics. What's not there is a lot of highfrequency electrical noise, says the author .
 Chrysler's tech notes invoke "active noise cancellation" in the cabin as one of the features . Chrysler says this is to deal with road noise .
 The Pacifica glides around town, almost incidentally delivering luxurypremium levels of cabin quiet .
In the same month the auto makers were asserting, in effect, it couldn't be done, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: In the same week, I was driving a vehicle that demonstrated it already had .
 Fiat Chrysler Automobiles would certainly not have built it had they not first been obliged to by the state of California .
Engineers and designers have built something remarkable, which is usually what happens when you give engineers a challenge .
 The Chrysler Pacifica Pacifica Hybridr'fne first plug-in hybrid electric jninivan can actually cost less than its gas-powered twin .
 These clever womens jackets can be liberating if you're looking for true disruption in the workplace . Look no further than smartphone's disastrous effect on the otherwise trim and tailored look of women's professional attire .
 These shallow pockets can easily allow ever thinner and slicker devices to slip out, sending them crashing to the floor . The pockets can also let ever thinner devices slip out .
 A few designers are adapting their garments to the new reality of fashion .
 The Argent Double-Breasted blazer C$328 has a zipped compartment on the inside for stashing a phone .
 This pocket is placed low on the garment to minimize the risk that the device's weight will compromise the way the blazer hangs .
 A semitransparent touch-screen-friendly mesh lets you quickly see who's calling and swipe away notifications . A small slit just above provides a handy route for your headphone cable .
 Traditional tailoring techniques can ensure equally effective camouflage . Traditional tailored techniques can be used to ensure equally successful camouflage .
 The exterior pockets of Rag & Bone's Howson Blazer are pleated to give them more volume . So nobody will notice the iPhone or small tablet you've slipped inside .
 The bold, British-inspired striped pattern further blinds the eye to the tech inside .
 You also get an interior breast pocket that's positioned a few inches higher than usual . Any phone bulge will be masked by the jacket's more generous cut up top .
 Uniqlo's lightweight-down quilted bomber jacket C$70 is equipped with two interior pockets large enough to accommodate an iPad Mini .
 For personal non-commercial use only, use only . For personal use only.
 On a 20-block stretch just off Manhattan's Central Park, some of the world's richest industry titans, business scions and hedge-fund moguls live . Some of the most expensive homes in the world are located just off Central Park .
 Four buildings along this corridor have homeowners whose collective net worth could finance a NASA shuttle mission . Four buildings in the corridor have homes that could be used to fund a shuttle mission.
 Some have seen record-breaking sales. Others have seen prices cut by millions of dollars in hopes of a sale .
 Last year, the number of signed contracts on apartments priced above $4 million fell 20% compared with 2015 . The number of apartments priced over $4million fell 20 percent compared to 2015 .
 Signed contracts on properties priced at $4 million and above are up 41% so far this year, Olshan Realty reports .
 Many purchases were made under limited-liability companies, which mask the identity of the owners . Many of the purchases are made underlimited-liable companies .
 Lighter components, motion monitors and other technological advances in elevators ensure a faster trip to greater heights with a smoother ride . Please turn to page W8 YOUR RIDE to the top of the world Lighter Components .
 elevators in Dubai's Al Fattan Marine Towers have glass fronts that offer panoramic views . The elevators have glass front windows that offer views of the sky .
 Technological advances in the industry are providing faster, smoother rides to building residents . They are adding a little glitz to their trip .
 Elevators are of top concern to architects, engineers and developers in the early stages of building design .
 This core essentially decides how the building will be constructed and floorplans of the surrounding apartments will be built . This core decides how to build the building and the floorplan of the building .
 High-rise residential towers have recently taken cues from elevator technology pioneered in office towers . The technology has been used in many office towers.
 Residents at a bank of elevators first select their desired floor, and are then directed to the elevator that will get them to there in the shortest time . The elevator system has “destination dispatch" systems .
 Such elevators can reach speeds upward of 1,600 feet per minute, according to Kone Corp. The company's director of the major projects unit, Americas, says such elevators are also capable of reaching speeds of more than 1,000 feet .
United Technologies Corp.'s Otis unit and Switzerland's Schindler Group have also deployed destination dispatch . United Technologies Corp.'s Otis units and Switzerland’s Schindlingler Group also deployed destinations dispatch .
 Super-tall towers are designed to sway in strong winds, but this can cause unintended movement for the elevator cars . The towers can be safely swayed in strong wind.
 Mr Schwarzman, CEO of private-equity firm Blackstone Group, purchased the unit from insurance mogul Saul Steinberg, who bought the unit for $285,000 in 1971 .
 Howard Marks co-founder of global asset-management firm Oaktree Capital paid $52 million for a 22,000-square-foot duplex in 2012 .
 Israel Englander set another record when he paid $71. million for an apartment there . Two years later, he set a record for paying $71 million for a home there .
Level Global Investors was raided in 2010 by the Federal Bureau of Investigation looking into allegations of insider trading . It's owned by hedgefund manager David Ganek, who was arrested in 2010 .
 Mr Ganek was never charged with any crime . He is currently suing the U.S. attorney's office and FBI agents involved in the investigation .
 A spokeswoman for Brown Harris Stevens, which manages the building, declined to comment . The building is located in the same building as the other building .
In April, a fire that started in the sauna of the sixth-floor apartment owned by hedge-fund manager J Ezra Merkin caused extensive water damage in the unit below, according to news reports .
 Construction started in early 2012 and was supposed to have been finished by September 2014 . But it was still going strong as of June 2016, causing "irreplaceable artwork" to fall off the walls .
 Tang to be "abruptly woken almost every morning before 9 a.m. by the sound of heavy machinery banging," the lawsuit contends .
 The judge ordered that work must comply with "structural alterations" rules . The judge said that work should comply with the rules .
 One Beacon Court, a 2005 development, is also known as Bloomberg Tower . Its first 25 floors are taken up by the media company .
 Le Cirque has a separate menu for en suite dining from the department store . Condo residents in this renovated department store get valet parking .
 Beyonce announced her marriage to Jay Z One Beacon Court in 2008 . The property is where Marc Dreier, an attorney found guilty of securities fraud, lived briefly in 2009 under house arrest .
 Mr Dreier's apartment sold to Ajit Jain, often referred to as Warren Buffett's successor at Berkshire Hathaway, in 2009 .
 Former attorney Scott Rothstein lived there in 2009 when he was charged with running a Ponzi scheme . He was charged in 2009 with running the scheme .
 One tenant was arrested and escorted out of the building . He was found guilty of selling faulty bulletproof vests to the military .
 The building is home to both former General Electric CEO Jack Welch and current CEO Jeff Immelt . Renaissance Technologies hedge-fund executives also live there .
 Since 2014, 10 units have sold at One Beacon Court with a median price of $7. million, according to PropertyShark . The median price is $7 million .
 Tracey Hejailan-Amon accused her ex-husband, Maurice Alain Amon, of taking artwork out of the apartment while she was away . The couple had been married for three years .
 1931 building currently holds the record for Manhattan's priciest co-op sale . The 1931 building is currently the world's most expensive building .
 Currently on the market is a 20room, 12,000-square-foot duplex asking $96 million . The duplex has a 20 room, 12 room duplex.
 Since 2014, 10 units in the building have sold with a median price of $30. million, according to PropertyShark .
 It opened just last year, and the sale of an $87 million penthouse holds the record for the most expensive condo sale in 2016 .
 Currently there are 18 apartments for sale, ranging from $6 million to $82 million . Currently, 18 apartments are available for sale .
 New law took effect in Manhattan last year . It's this building where owners might feel the greatest impact of the law .
 It requires purchases of $3 million or more made through limited-liability companies to disclose the identity of the buyer to government regulators .
 Many of the priciest sales here have come from foreign buyers . Many transactions have taken place under LLCs .
 For personal non-commercial use only. For personal use only . For personal uses only .
 The new concert hall, above, is the first in a series of concerts in the world .
 A rendering of a unit's prefabricated interior was planned by Bruckner Architekten . The interior was designed by the architect and architect of the unit .
Build the interior off-site and assemble it afterward in the apartment's shell . Build the interior of the apartment and assemble the interior afterward . assemble it in the shell .
 The Elbphilharmonie was built on the remnants of a 1960s redbrick warehouse . The construction ban was meant to prevent noise, as well as any dust and debris, from entering .
 The hall officially opened in January. It is more than $500 million over budget and six years behind schedule . The hall is expected to open in January .
 At least one concert is performed on most days, demanding a certain level of respectful silence . Now, at least a concert is held on most times, with a certain amount of silence .
 floor-to-ceiling walls offer a panoramic view of Europe's third-busiest commercial port and the Elbe river . The Elbe River is the world's third busiest commercial port .
 The 2,475-square-foot unit also will be one of the city's most expensive . When completed in autumn, the unit will be the most expensive in the city .
 The shell alone was marketed for about $8. million, or $3,457 per square foot . The shell was sold for $8 million, an unusually high price in the market .
 The buyer, who wishes to remain anonymous, commissioned architects Susanne and Laurent Bruckner to design a cavelike room . The room is designed to avoid straight edges or sharp corners .
 One large room, a bright amorphous space, will fill most of the penthouse . The penthouse will be one of the largest rooms in the building .
 Its rounded shapes will create a continuum of ceilings and walls without seams or edges . The shape of the walls will be seen in the next generation of ceilings .
 A staircase will lead to the sleeping area on the gallery and to the bathroom . The bathroom also features curved forms .
 The Bruckner firm teamed up with architects Schotten & Hansen to make the interior from lightweight, aerated concrete . The firm is based in Peiting in Bavaria state, Germany .
 Schotten & Hansen Co-Chief Executive Torben Hansen said technological advances in robotics and laser scanning allow him to prefabricate custom interiors with great complexity, yet with precision down to the millimeter .
 Some 1,000 separate modules will be cut small enough to travel up the Elbphilharmonie's elevators . The modules will have to be fitted over a wooden substructure with completed utilities .
 The pieces will be coated in fine-grain plaster to give all surfaces a homogenous appearance . Once they are assembled in the penthouse, they will be covered in fine grain plaster .
 Mr Bruckner said he doesn't know the owner's plans for the interior's final color scheme or furniture .
 The concert hall has received overwhelmingly positive reviews for its acoustics and for the aesthetics of its ethereal crystal top on the rugged brick pedestal . It has been largely caused by disputes between the city administration and construction company Hochtief over costs .
 The building is located at the western tip of HafenCity, a modern development on the grounds of Hamburg's former harbor .
 Many historic warehouses have been preserved and now sit alongside buildings designed by luminaries such as David Chipperfield and Hadi Teherani .
 Wasaga Beach, Ontario, Canada Elegant custom built gated home listed for $2,695,000 CAD is luxury.
 Miami Beach, FL Rare 10BR/1 1 BA/2HBA mansion on prestigious Pine Tree Dr., 125' of waterfront, no fixed bridges, 21,156 sq ft lot, tennis ct, pool pavilion .
 Sea Island, GA Cottage 75 is truly a rare opportunity . 3+ acres with approx. ft oceanfront, can be subdivided .
Mantoloking, NJ Quality & design comes together with the finest moteriols in this Boy Front Estote . The best moterios in the world are in the state of New Jersey .
 Custom designer kitchen, 9' ceiling, 6 BD with bolconies, 2 fireplaces, elevotor . The kitchen is a custom kitchen with 9' ceilings and 6 BD. The kitchen also has a fireplaces .
 Wasaga Beach, Ontario, Canada, Canada 80 ocre development site surrounded by residential development .
 Greot potentiol for low-to-medium density residential, seniors housing or leosed-lond housing . Greot can be used for low to medium density residential and seniors housing .
 Chicago, IL Absolutely breathtaking Loke Michigan ond city views from very rorely ovoiloble, beautifully renovated half floor residence .
 Cold Spring, NY One level living ot its finest, on estote-like property complete with woterfoll & pool, just minutes to village of Cold Spring .
 Robert A McCaffrey Realty, Bill Hussung, 845.265.41.41 1 3, bhussung@mccaffreyrealty.com.com .
 Bad Gastein, Austria, has a phenomenul view of the Gostein Valley and skiing slopes ond o golf course ot the doorstep .
 Charles Willerding, Johnston & Daniel Division, Royal LePage R.E.S. Ltd., 416.904.6644, cwillerdingl@gmail.com .
 Tamarin, Mauritius is one of the most prominent spots on the islond . This impressive 'Villa 74' is located on the Tamarina Golf resort .
 Chicago, IL Unobstructed panoramic views in all directions of loke, city, pork ond skyline .
 Spectoculor condominium recently completely finished from row spoce.55 North Astor #35 West .
 Holladay, UT One of America's truly magnificent estates nestled in privacy on nearly 4 acres in the heart of Salt Lake City . Holladay is one of the nation's most beautiful estates .
 Adjala-Tosorontio, Ontario, Canada, offers $1,200,000 CAD, custom, 4 BD, 4 BA home .
 Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Canada Stately executive home, rovine setting 150' wide lot, grond entertoining spaces, conservotory, mahogany library, 5 bedroom, home theatre, circular drive hidden double goroge .
 New Smyrna Beach, FL 180' oceonfront, 5 BD/4BA, 2 half BA home & guesthouse . The home is located in the town's largest city .
 Spectoculor 8 bedroom, 7. Both on nearly on ocre-story Georgian, well over 10,000 square feet of living spoce . Spectocuror 8 bedrooms, 7 bedrooms, and 7.5 bedrooms .
 Salt Lake City, UT Award-winning, architecturally brilliant custom designed 13,717 sq ft Estote nestled on over 50 secluded ocres with sweeping views of Solt Loke Valley .
 Creemore, Ontario, Canada Under 1 hour from Toronto oirport stunning 6 bed contemporary log home with guest house.-acre estote offers privacy, proximity ond mojestic 50-mile views .
 A 3-storey atrium, mossive wolls for art, 5 bedroom, infinity pool on rovine. Toronto, Ontario, Canada, is a contemporary design showpiece .
 Beachfront 4BR/4.5BA, incredible bench & city views, design & finishes, design and finishes .
 Cape Cod, MA Spectoculor 3,348 sq ft residence in Harwich with ponoromic oceon views and sondy bench .
 Woterfront homes ond estates on the Chesopeoke Boy or Atlontic Oceon from $250,000 to $ 250,000 . Woter front houses ond estate ond.
Squash court, fabulous conservotory ond wine cellar, topiory garden, river trails . Squash court. Squash Court, fabulous Conservotory. ond Wine cellar .
Toshiko Mori reimagined by Toshiko Mori, olong with the owners, to odhere to Breuer's design integrity . An important midcentury modern modern modernmodern modern modern .
 Barnardsville, NJ Goted Bernordsville Mountain Estote on 5+/ocres with 4 BD, 5. The town is located in the state of New Jersey .
 W7 elevators have built-in mechanisms to monitor the building's movement . In high winds, the elevator speed is automatically reduced in high winds .
 Kone set up a so-called sway detector to monitor the steel cables, also called ropes, that carry elevator cars up and down the building .
 The company has also developed what it calls "ultrarope" with a higher tensile strength than conventional steel cables . The company is also developing a new type of cable that is more powerful than conventional cables .
 Ultrarope has a super-light carbon-fiber core, allowing the elevators to move faster . It uses less energy than those with steel cables, company says .
 Dubai tower Burj Khalifa opened in 2010, it boasted the tallest elevator in the world . It reached 1,600 feet on a conventional steel rope system .
 Saudi Arabia's Jeddah Tower will hold double deck elevators that reach a record height of 2,165 feet . The building will be completed in 2018 .
 Mumbai's World One tower is scheduled to open this year . Also on the horizon is Mumbai's City Center tower, which will open in 2014 .
 At 1,450 feet, World One will have 25 elevators made by Switzerland's Schindler Group that will lift residents to their floors at speeds up to 1,560 feet per minute .
 Newer models now have technology that uses mobile-phone networks to connect a resident's phone to the elevators' operating system .
 When a resident enters the building, the technology alerts the elevator system . The elevator system sends an elevator to pick residents up and deliver them to their desired floor .
 Two buildings currently under construction will have Kone's phone-alert system . Grand Tower in Frankfurt and One Palm in Dubai will have the system .
 The Four Seasons Residences One Dalton Street, Boston, will have no more than six apartments per floor . Residents will never have more than two units sharing an elevator bank .
 Lower floors will have no more than three apartments per elevator bank, so cars will open into hallways that are "exclusive and private," says Izak Senbahar .
 German elevator manufacturer Thyssenkrupp is banking on increasing global demand for taller buildings and more efficient elevator systems .
 Dubai tower Burj Khalifa opened in 2010. It boasted the tallest elevator in the world, reaching 1,600 feet on a conventional steel rope system .
 In a typical elevator system, the ropes limit the number of cars that can operate in an elevator shaft .
 Thyssenkrupp is developing a ropeless elevator system driven by motors . It will allow cars to travel both vertically and horizontally .
 30 or more elevator cars can service a building in a loop, Mr Schollkopf said .
 Ellen DeGeneres' Tuscan-style villa in Montecito, Calif., might prove exception to her history of buying, fixing up and selling high-end properties .
 The 59-year-old host of "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" and her wife, Portia de Rossi, are putting their Montecito home on the market for $45 million .
 The nearly 17-acre property contains a roughly 10,500-square-foot, six-bedroom stone house the couple renovated . Located on a hilltop with views of the ocean, the property is located on the hilltop .
 The 1930s twostory house has nine woodburning fireplaces, a media room, and multiple libraries and reading areas . With a barrel-tiled roof and 18th-century Italian tiles, the 1930s house has eight fireplaces .
 The couple used stone excavated on the property to build an indoor-outdoor entertaining pavilion with a sun room, dining room and outdoor kitchen with a pizza oven .
 The grounds also include two swimming pools, a sunken tennis court and badminton court, as well as eucalyptus and olive trees, gardens and gardens .
 The couple bought the property in 2013 for $26. million, according to public records .
 The estate was expanded to its current size by buying two adjacent properties .
 Perkins said they live primarily in Los Angeles and used this property as a weekend home . Perkins said that they live mainly in LA and used it as a weekends home .
 DeGeneres and Ms. de Rossi are selling, but she noted their history of lucrative home flips . The two are selling.
 Napster co-founder Sean Parker bought the Los Angeles home for just under $40 million . DeGeneres and Ms. de Rossi sold the home for $49. million .
 DeGeneres and Ms. de Rossi directed inquiries to a Sotheby's spokesperson . They said the couple is selling because they don't spend as much time in Santa Barbara as they would like .
 BILL ABRAN0WICZ; JIM BARTSCH CLOCKWISE FROM TOP: WILLIAMS NEW YORK; ILLUSTRATION BY PAUL DOTEY; THYSSENKRUPP For personal non-commercial use only .
 Ocean Course offers unparalleled views of the world famous Ocean Course and Atlantic Ocean . The course is located in Florida .
 Luxe home with heated pool and spa, spectacular outdoor living spaces, and fine furnishings and finishes . Private second floor master, four guest suites, handsome library, two living rooms, gourmet kitchen .
Six-acre recreation area with 13,000 sq. ft. clubhouse, resort pool, fitness, tennis, indoor sports court and much more included in low HOA fees .
 Seven Bridges brand new homes in a highly amenitized non-golf community in Boca Raton / Delray Beach area .
 Generous features include impact glass, marble countertops, gourmet kitchens and 30,000 sq. ft. club .
 TwinEagles boasts two 1 8-hole, tour-quality courses and a spectacular 47,000 sq. ft. country club . The course was awarded ‘Best New Private Course in America’ by Golf Magazine .
Golf membership initiation fee is included with every Minto new home purchase . Best of all, golf membership initiation fees are included .
 BA, 4000 SF residence blissfully enjoying unobstructed water views, parks & a walking neighborhood of top schools, restaurants and shops .
 Details include huge terraces, private enclosed twin garage, concierges, spa, rooftop pools, the worksoffered decorator ready . $6,500,000 rexhamilton.com is located where the “tropics begin’s
 This beautifully renovated 5BR retreat offers custom finishes, 6,466± GSF, gourmet kitchen, saltwater pool & new 1st floor master suite .
 Elegant estate with 1 2-ft ceilings, maple and oak floors, granite counters and granite counters, designer kitchen with butler's pantry . Seven en suite bedrooms and seven en suites .
 Each home includes an indoor/outdoor living room, and a private pool and spa designed to soak in the majestic mountain views . Each home has an outdoor living room and private pool .
 Experience world-class golf, tennis, shopping, dining, culture and entertainment in this exquisite desert oasis .
 The townhomes are now under construction on a private, gated lane in Petersburg, Petersburg .
3 bedrooms, 3 Vz baths, 2 car garage, private elevator, and amazing rooftop terrace . Totaling 2,335 sq. ft.
 Walking distance to world-class restaurants, museums, shopping, parks, marina, and Tampa Bay .
 Price Upon Request robertdvorin.com Douglas Elliman Real Estate Robert Dvorin, Lie.com .
 This exquisitely crafted 17,000+ sq ft residence situated on over 12 acres is a self contained oasis, secluded and secure .
 Amenities include a one acre lake with falls, carriage house, indoor and outdoor pools, stable, riding ring, tennis court, and two screening rooms, wine cellar and wine cellar .
 Los Angeles comedy writer recently rented a 1-acre yard where he can play catch and Frisbee with his two sons .
 Two-bedroom apartment in a high rise where rents range from $9,000 to $25,000 a month .
 Developers say their parks are part of an effort to chip away at resistance to living in dense urban areas with little greenery .
 Parks also provide a natural meeting space for people who fear high-rise living might be too isolating .
 Brendan Heath, a 36-year-old academic adviser, bought a %-acre park on the third floor and community gardens on the 10th floor . Heath is an academic adviser in Toronto .
 When the weather allows, he grows heirloom tomatoes, pickling cucumbers and basil on his 10thfloor garden plot .
 He paid about $220,000 for his one bedroom, in which he lives with his wife, Lisha Lo, and their 21-month-old son .
 The third-floor park can be packed in the summer, says Mr Heath . In the winter, these areas are fairly deserted .
 The urban-gardening concept helped One Cole to sell out quickly, so the developer has included it in a total of eight new Regent Park buildings .
 The park, which will be divided into areas for residents and hotel guests, has plans to include a basketball court, several pools, two dog runs, a large lawn and dozens of trees . The park has just been purchased and will be grown for two years before planting .
 Units will go on sale next year. Units will be completed in 2019, Mr Feng said .
 Manhattan Loft Gardens, slated for completion next year, will have a 10,000-squarefoot garden on the seventh floor . In London, Loft Gardens will have 10,00-square feet on the 7th floor, 4,000 square feet on 25th floor .
 The 1950s saw the dawn of modern green roofs, says Steven Peck, founder of Green Roofs for Healthy Cities . Green roofs help absorb water, regulate building temperatures and offset the high heat in urban centers .
Parklike plaza decks at the entry level to buildings became popular at the same time . Parklike plaza deck decks at entry levels to buildings become popular at same time as other plaza decks .
 In the past decade or so, builders have sought to combine the two concepts by putting parks on higher floors .
 Oceanwide's park will be rimmed by a 42-inchhigh glass railing to help block wind . The railing will be "very expensive," says Mr Mowbray .
 A lot of dirt goes into building these parks. Ten Thousand's includes about 58,000 cubic feet of soil and foam .
 Mr Morrison was hired to create a %-acre park on a 46-year-old, 43-story building on West 64th Street .
 Mr Morrison had to find plants that would do well even though sun in the summer is blocked until about 1m.
 The budget for Mr Morrison's project was roughly $3 million . The project included building access stairways for residents and commercial tenants to get to the garden .
 Oceanwide Plaza gives a rough estimate of $10 million for the construction of its eighth-floor park .
 music mogul Sean ""Diddy" Combs has sold his one-bedroom condo at Manhattan's ■ Park Imperial for $5.
 H 7 million in cash, accordpjf ing to people with jv knowledge of the trans^ action . H 7million in cash. H 7m in cash .
 Harlem-born rapper, producer and entrepreneur first listed the Midtown condo in late 2012 for $8. million . He then reduced the price several times .
 Whitney Didier of Douglas Elliman Real Estate took over the listing from another agent in June, pricing it at $6 million .
 The 66th floor apartment measures about 2,300 square feet, according to the listing . The apartment is located on the 66thfloor .
 Mr Combs bought the 56th Street apartment in 2005 for $3.82 million, public records show .
 He converted the three-bedroom to a one-bedroom with large entertaining spaces . He converted a three- bedroom home into a one.
 In 2014 he paid $39 million for a mansion in Los Angeles, according to public records .