 Canada was the first nation to recognize Ukraine’s independence after 92 percent voted in their 1991 referendum to declare independence from Russia . Canada is the first country to recognize the independence of Ukraine .
 Approximately 1.36 million Canadians self-identified as Ukrainian in our 2016 census . They have since the 1890s played important roles across Canada .
 The 2013–14 Euromaidan ‘Revolution of Dignity’ included 90 percent of the Kyivans and much of the population of Ukraine . The 2013-14 “Revolution of Dignity” included 90 per cent of the Ukraine population .
 President Viktor Yanukovych fled to Russia after seeking to block Ukraine's integration with the European Union . Yanukovych's success caused the deeply kleptocratic President Yanukovych to flee to Russia .
 Vladimir Putin launched an undeclared war on Ukraine in February 2014 . Putin was angered by the loss of Russian influence in Ukraine .
 More than 10,000 people died, 25,000 were wounded, and almost two million internally displaced . Almost two million people were internally displaced.
 His tactics have included cyberattacks on electricity grids, targeted assassinations, defaming the father of Canada’s foreign affairs minister Chrystia Freeland .
 infrastructure of Ukraine's Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts has been destroyed . Infrastructure of Ukraine’s Donetsk andLuhansk Oblasts is destroyed .
 Regular Russian army units comprise 8,500 to 10,000 of the estimated 36,000 Russian and separatist fighters continuing to terrorize Eastern Ukraine . About 34,000 Ukrainian troops face about 34,00 Ukrainian troops .
 About 70 percent of Ukrainian casualties are thought to be from MLRS and artillery strikes . About 70 per cent of the casualties are believed to have been caused by MLRS.
 Ukraine seized or dismembered could prove to be a domino in central-east Europe . Unless rogue despots are confronted forcefully, they become much worse .
 A viable NATO strategy for deterrence is needed now. A viable strategy is needed for deterrence and a response to aggression is needed .
 Ukraine's borders have been violated by military force since Ukrainians were persuaded that their country's territorial integrity and political sovereignty were inviolable . The pledges of the United States, U.S. and U.K. and the Russian Federation have been made .
 Ukraine managed to check the forces Putin was prepared to risk for the sake of foreign adventurism . Ukraine alone managed to checked the forces.
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko last summer called for 1,240 Javelins, the exact number of nuclear warheads Ukraine surrendered in exchange for guarantees of its sovereignty .
 The Javelins should decrease further Putin’s aggression against Ukraine by sending him a clear message that the West is no longer turning a blind eye to misbehavior . TheJavelins are not only the Javelin, but they are also the first to
 The lethal damage Javelins can inflict on armored vehicles and their personnel might give him a pause .
 The world knows by now that he respects only those who operate from positions of strength . The world is now aware that only those in strong positions can be trusted .
 Arming Ukraine defensively might significantly help to secure the peace of Europe . Arming the Ukraine defensively may significantly help the peace in Europe .