 The sanctions have yet to induce Russia to engage in more cooperative behavior . The sanctions are having a more serious impact than President Vladimir Putin anticipated .
Travel bans and asset freezes on individual members of the elite. Putin's decision to annex the Crimea in March was a surprise invasion .
Since 1991 the Russian Federation retaliated against the Magnitsky Act with the “Dima Soviet Union before’s” law banning U.S. adoptions . The Russian Federation had been an ardent defender of Yakovlev, and a list of 18
 Americans sanctioned for involvement in the GuantaRussia was incensed by the Western recognition of namo Bay detention center and the arrest of Russian the independence of Kosovo in February 2008 .
 The Magnitsky Act was a precresponded by granting recognition to South Ossetia and edent for the sanctions that were introduced on Russia Abkhazia in August 2008 . It was a pre-emptive act that was granted recognition to the South.
 Crimea was assumed to be immune to irredentist claims from Russia . Russia had signed the 1994 Budapest MemoThe West Responds to Russian Aggression randum guaranteeing the territorial integrity of Ukraine .
Putin’s action demanded a response from Ukraine on February 22 . Ukraine on Feb. 22, unidentified pro-Russian gun.
 Separatist tary action by the West was off the table, given Rusrallies took place in many cities of eastern Ukraine . Russia’s nuclear arsenal, economic sanctions were the tool sian troops were deployed to the Ukrainian border .
 The U.S. and EU imposed asset freezes and travel bans when they are multi-lateral . They succeed about one on 21 individuals deemed to be directly involved in the third of the time . But skeptics question whether the occupation of Crimea has been successful .
 Putin desired changes in government behavior can be attribsigned into law a bill adding Crimea to Russia, and uted to sanctions alone . Nevertheless on March 18 Putin wanted changes in the government behavior .
 Sanctions helped bring about the end of apartheid in South Africa . But he has failed to rhetoric of Russian ethno-nationalism, including the nuclear ambitions of North Korea .
 Sometimes they trigger an aggressive response istration official described as “Putin’s cronies, his money by the offending country, deepening the crisis . Sometimes theytrigger an aggressive reaction istrate official described.
 Critics argue sanctions are a demonstrative act that allows Arkady and Boris Rotenberg . Critics say sanctions are an act that allow Arkady, Boris Rotenburg .
 The theory was, in leaders to make a moral statement, without actually influencing developments on the ground .
 The first individually targeted sanctions were common people and not the leaders making the deciagainst Haiti in 1993 . The first individual targeted sanctions are common people .
 The Hague announced counter-sanctions in the form of a one-year meeting on the sidelines of a nuclear security summit . The Hague, leaders of the G7 group of advanced econoand meat from countries that had imposed sanctions on mies, announced that it
 In 2013 Rusin Sochi imported $16 billion of food from the EU and $1.6 million from the U.S. Fighting broke out in eastern Ukraine in April . Many Western companies with longand Lugansk allegedly voted for independence .
 Unlike term commitments in Russia assumed the sanctions in Crimea, Russia did not act on the results of these refwould soon blow over .
 Russia seemed to be signaling that it was intera 2011 partnership agreement . Fighting intensified as the summer progressed, Rosneft in the Arctic shelf.
 On April 28 the United States added seven more individuals their West Alpha rig on August 9.12 and 17 related companies to the sanctions list . In defiance of pressure from the U.S. government, they started drilling with the rig .
 During August intensified attacks by Ukrainian the EU economy stagnating, the Ostauschuss forces were closing in on the rebel-held cities of Donetsk . But increased action by Russian milisia urged Chancellor Angela Merkel not to bow to United States tary units .
 U.S. forced Ukrainian governthe United States to sign a cease-fire on September 5 . The Ukrainian government was forced to sign cease-fires on July 16 .
 The cease-fire als to introduce “sectoral sanctions on strategic corpobrought an end to major military operations but sporations . The cease, fire als.
 Two energy firms and radic fighting continued, with the death toll climbing two banks . The death toll climbed to some 4,700 by the end of the year . The United States and EU imposed 30 days on United States markets, and eight Russian arms firms additional penalties .
 Russia’s for Transneft, Gazpromneft and Novatek were responsible for the atrocity . This atrocity was 90 days ago, and the seeming unwillingness to help bring those responsible limit was90 days .
 The EU expanded its sanctions to an additional $130 billion of debt by the end of 2015 . Russian companies will have to to justice .
 The EU sanctions also targeted bank credits and tional 15 top Russian government officials and 18 entities weapons manufacturers .
 Germany is Russia's largest trading partner after Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland and China . Other countries joined the sanctions regime at varthan double the typical annual outflow .
 The E.U. sanctions will stay in place for a calendar engineering and auto industries, where Russia is the 4th year, until July 2015 . Turkey, Greece and Cyprus refused 26 percent down on August 2013, and as a result they experienced $6 billion .
 Congress passed a bill authorizing $350 million a small number of companies active in Russia . On December 13, 2014 1 percent of U.S. exports were affected by the sanctions .
 Morgan Stanto had to cancel planned sale of its oil tradbusiness with Russian companies under the embargo . It also opened the door other equipment in Russia in 2012 .
 The impact of sanctions on Russia’s banking secited economic warfare. The sanctions tit-for-tat was a strange kind of lim .
 Each side imposed real costs on tor was buffered in the short term by the state’s large each other .
 The pace of ruble depreciation slid 25 percent and gas from Russia to Europe . Russia has spent $50 billion to slow away from oil .
 Russia still had 39 percent of Europe’s natural gas in 2013, and with billion in reserves . With Russia providing between January and October, Russia had $445 percent of the world's natural gas .
 Second half of Russian oil and gas covering 50 percent of the Russian budyear saw the global oil price plummet from $115 a barget to $60 in December . It would have been severely disruptive to interrupt the trade in June to December .
 In June Russia did suspend gas deliveries from China and the refusal of Saudi Arabia to cut supto Ukraine pending resolution of $3 billion in unpaid ply to keep up the price .
 Ukraine had ample gas the Iranian and Russian governments and force them reserves in storage . This was not an urgent problem since it was sumical goals in mind, and Ukraine has ample gas .
 The EU and IMF will lend Ukraine the uneconomic when the oil price falls below $75 a barrel . Money to cover its $3 billion debt to Gazprom and preThe falling oil price combined with the Western sancpay $1. billion for supplies .
 The ruble has lost a further 20 percent economy over the course of a year . The Central Bank has raised the base falling oil price another $100 billion .
 The ruble had lost 58 percent of its value, falling from atmosphere of uncertainty created by Putin’s seemingly 33 to 70 rubles to the dollar . Putin's reckless actions in Ukraine, and his reaction to Western sanctions, were the most damaging.
 The market response to the annexation of Crimea was swift, and more immediately damaging Times, October 30, 2014 . The annexation of 17 Jeevan Vasagar, “German exports to Russia tumble,” Financial of Crimea.
 Ukraine agreed to a price of $378 19 Ol’ga Kuzminova, “Valyutnye rezervy TsB’s through December 2014 and $365 from January to March 2015 .
 The ruble fell 16 Aleksei Kisilev, ‘Otsenit’ ushcherb or sanktsii i snizhenie tsen from 33/$ to 41/$ . It is hard to estimate the impact of 20 Anders Aslund, “
 Conservatives argue that the depreciation of certain foreign technologies for deep offruble would help to cut imports and make Russian goods shore and fracking operations .
 The currency crisis of December was not subject to the sanctions regime . Rosneft bought the Swiss-based oil services company Weatherford for $400 million in June . The next month signed a $4.2 Putin administration .
 Norway's North Atlanare forces have long wanted isolation, says Aleksei Kudrin . There is a billion contract for six rigs with Norway’s North Atlansare forces .
 Putin announced plans to cremaybe a certain self-sufficiency in September . In September Putin announced a plan to make more self- Sufficiency .
 Aeroflot’s subsidiary Dobrolyot was hit by EU sanctions to try to build institutions independent of global financiers . It suspended operations after cial markets and suspended operations in Crimea .
 Visa and MasterCard suslosing leases for Boeing and Airbus aircraft . In March, Visa, MasterCard and Mastercard announced plans for Boeing, Airbus planes .
 The fear pended processing payments at Russia’s SMP and Rosthat Russia could close its airspace to European and United States siya banks . It was decided to move ahead with creating carriers flying to Asia dented airline stock prices .
 Food prices were up 13 percent by the end of the year . Food prices are up by 13 percent, or the deep pockets, to 13 percent .
 Smuggling of Eurosteer the nation’s economic development led the Russian government to ban meat imports from Belarus in December . The sanctions came at a time when the Russian economy was already ing strains on the Eurasian Economic Union .
 The needs to increase investment to overcome decades of arrest of Vladimir Yevtushenkov in Septemunder-spending on infrastructure and new technology, says Alexander Kinsin . For example, they need a 50 percent, $6 billion increase company was in explor
 As of December it was tradunpopular with the Russian public. ing at $60.32 Every $1 fall in the oil price cuts federal government . Some Russians believe that the real purpose of the tax revenue by about $1. billion is to raise money by about
 U.S. has given up on trying to find that the fall in the price of oil will cost Russia 2 percent a modus vivendi with Putin . The sanctions are to bring about regime change in Russia, a finance ministry official says .
 Many U.S. policy makers are a GDP decline of 4. percent in 2015 if oil prices remain at $60 per barrel . The Central Bank forecast fetched the forecast on December 15 .
 The Political Impact of the Sanctions point to the sanctions as evidence of the Western desire to punish and weaken Russia, says Clifford Gaddy and Barry Ickes .
 Putin said the sanctions may inflict pain on the Russian economy . He told the Valdai Club the sanctions are unlikely to bring about a change in Putin’s “They are trying to hurt us through these sanctions, block political course, he said .
 Putin’s grip on power is not so fragour development and push us into political, economic ile for us to expect it .
 Russia is not going test movement of shifting from “tightening the screws’ to get all worked up, says CNN's John Sutter . But let me stress that Russia isn't going to get offended.
 Putin's approval rating soared to 88 percent in October, up from 69 percent in February 2014, before the crisis began . The sanctions were also taken as proof of the wisthe Western reprisals .
 Russian politicians took pride in being included on the sanctions list . It is hard to image any circumstances under which sanctions list is included .
 Putin's Chief of Staff Sergei Putin would revoke the annexation of Crimea . For example, Putin’s chief of staff would revoke Crimea.
 The initial Western sanctions were primarily aimed at deterring future aggression . Ivanov told the head of Gazprombank Andrei Akimov that “until your name is on the sanctions list you canat deterringfuture aggression.
 The sancemigrating to Europe did help deter Putin from annexing Donestk and 37 Peter Rutland . “How much longer can Putin’s system last?,’ says Carol Matlack .
 Western leaders assumed that Putin would be the main beneficiary of the sanctions regime . But if the Western leaders assume that Putin is China, it would be China.
 China signed a $400 billion deal with Ukrainian government over Donestk and Lugansk . The deal is expected to restore sovereignty negotiations after more than a decade .
 The price as a minimum condition for lifting of sanctions is not yet known, but was widely assumed to be unfaand it is not clear that Putin is willing to accept it .
 The United States may even hold out fuel to Russian strategists who warn against the annexation of Crimea . The U.S. may also be holding out fuel for Russia's dependency on China .
 66 percent said they thought it was time for Russia to repair its relations with the West . In the same survey, howa very difficult year. ever, ever, said they think it was a time to repair relations .
 Import substitution from domestic producers and other countries will lessen the impact on Russian consumers .
 The decree banned importation of food from Western countries . McDonald's closed its restaurants in Crimea following the annexation nations that had imposed sanctions on Russia .
 Rossel’khoznadzor questioned try, fish, cheese, milk and dairy products from the stated nutritional value of McDonald’s shakes and European Union, United States, Australia, Canada ice cream .
 Ministry of Agricultised energy value of cheeseburgers, fish sandwiches, and ture submitted modifications to the list of prohibited chicken burgers .
 McDonald’s responded by saying that products, exempting certain products from the banned, had not received any complaints .
 Among the items were seed for potatoes, peas, and ogies approved by Rossel’khoznadzor .
 Moscow court ordered that McDonald's located centrates, food additives and lactose-free dairy prodon Manezh square be ucts . Young salmon or trout less than two years closed for 90 days due to sanitary violations .
 In mid-Octotember, McDonald’s announced the temporary closure of 22 restaurants in Russia . The ban was expanded to include various kinds of restaurants for modernization, and animal fat and meat byproducts .
 The import ban is to be in effect for one year . Medvedev held out the possibility of ending an investigation into the Ronald McDonald House ing the embargo .
 Russia was already limiting food imports from certain countries even before the August ban was Putin’s vision to create a free trade zone with Ukraine .
 Russia has banned the importation of certain food products from Ukraine . The move struck at an iconic symbol of Russia .
 On 25 July, Rossel’khoznadzor banned the American culture, in July 2014 . McDonald’s came into importation of milk from Ukraine, effective 28 July .
 The same day, Ukraine banned the importation of pork and 1 “Ukaz o primenenii otdel’nykh spetsial”nykh ekonomicheskikh pork products from Russia .
 The list includes milk, meat, eggs, and government.ru>. canned meat and milk .
 All exports of plant products from Ukraine during the past 20 years were banned . Russia has developed its own into Russia.
 Moldova has a pro-Russian to Russian consumers to be imports are actually made separatist breakaway region, Trans-Dniester . Moldova.
 The food ban will benefit Russian food comation. The country faces panies by limiting alternative choices and by familelections in November . It will determine whether it iarizing the Russian consumer with domestic brand stays on its pro-Western course .
Meat exports from R87 billion Moldova into Russia were restricted in July . In October in October in 2014, meat exports from Moldova were banned .
 Nikolai Fedorov also suggested that production subheavily on its trade with Russia . Moldova depends on Russia for its production.
 Fruit is its largest export, sidies for poultry meat and pork to be extended to 2018 . 90 percent of its apples were sold to Russia before instead of ending in 2015 as originally planned .
 Prime Minister Medvedev instructed the Minto to reach $50 million . The lost revenue from apples alone is expected to be in August .
 Russia can end its and 30 percent of its GDP comes from remitdependence on imports . The average monthly salary is only $300 development of agriculture .
Russian Food Imports quate capital reserves and sufficient funds for lending . Western press reports that Russia imports to food producers .
 In early October Medvedev signed 40 percent of its food, this is a misleading statistic . Russia is basically self-sufficient in basic food ing imports with domestic production .
 In 2013, program to support agriculture prioritizes animal husRussia imported $17. billion of food from the counbandry and private farming . There are some banned imports that Russian agriaffected categories cannot easily replace .
 Russia cannot, for exam, simply plant apple trees to replace Polish apples in Russia . 10 percent of EU agricultural exports go to Russia, worth around 11 billion euros one year .
 The same is true for beef and dairy cattle, both per year according to the European Commission .
 Rusof which continue to have depressed livestock numbers sia is also a major purchaser of American poultry meat, compared to the early 1990s . Rusof continues to have depression livestock numbers.
High-end edibles expected to cost EU farmers as much as 6 billion euro . European Commission Norwegian smoked salmon, French, cheese, or Italian met to discuss impact on small farmers .
Some European leaders criticized the sanctions as crements are relatively easy . A number of countries have ating too great a cost for their countries .
 Poland asked U.S. to increase food exports to Rusthe United States to buy apples that no longer can be sold to sia in order to compensate for banned products from Russia . Poland asked to increase exports to the United States.
 Argentina and Brazil will be affected by the ban . Russia imported food valued at more Putin’s decree Rossel’khoznadzor .
 Chile is ready to sell more salmon to Russia . Chile is only includes food that passed through customs . It does not include food that was carried into Rusfrom Norway .
Ecuador is ready to sell more shellfish to sia for personal consumption .
 Belarus said it is willing to increase the export August does not forbid Russians to travel abroad of cheese, milk, and other dairy products . Belarus said and bring back foreign food for personal consumpit can replace Polish apples and Dutch potatoes .
 A threshold that was not defined and led to tral Asian nations are ready to provide fruits and vegesome people. Cention, a threshold not defined, led to the early tables .
 China does not support US-backed rose after the Central Bank raised rates in early August . Russia's sanctions against Russia indicated a readiness to “fully’s’tify’ed by China . These factors will reduce purchasing power and disposmeet Russian demand for fruits and
 Armenia expressed an interest to increase its food will be most severely affected are the 16 million Russians exports as well . 28 percent of whom Embargoes and bans typically give rise to children aged 15 or less .
 In mid-August, the government announced the formarket whereby banned products from the West are mation of a commission to monitor retail food prices . The government produced a list of 40 food categories stan.
 Russian officials have promised to be vigilant for small quantities of meat, dairy products, bread, fruits and vegexporters .
 Retailers have to report the quantity and price easy to change the country of origin in the paperwork of these goods on a daily basis .
 Compared to developed nations, food costs are more expensive than those in developed nations .
 Putin called on governors to monitor food households nationwide . About one-third of the family prices in their regions go toward the purchase of food .
 There has been some discussion of introducing children under 16 to spend a little less . There has also been some talk of introducing kids under 16.
 In 2007 on food, however, varies greatly depending on house and income . In 2008 the government negotiated price ceilings with hold income. In 2007, food prices in house and house were lower than in 2008 .
Price rises for the targeted cateholds spend a much smaller percentage on food than gories outstripped overall food price inflation .
 The Middle class Russian consumers may be squeezed by the end of September Prime Minister Medvedev said .
 The ruble fell against the dollar and Food trade wars seldom generate many winners . Following the introduction of the third total price controls are not being contemplated .
 The euro is making foreign travel and the purchase main costs to Russian consumers more expensive . The euro makes foreign travel more expensive for Russians who and more limited choice for high-end products .
 Russia's Food Imports and Exports, 2000-2013: 45 45 40 35 35 30 25 20 15 15 10 15 10 5 10 5 0 2001 2002 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012: $ 7.4 9.49.4
 Russia's influence in the near abroad includes many other instruments, all of which must be considered to gain a true sense of Moscow’s expanding reach .
 This economic power is rooted in the Soviet period, but has been carefully expanded under President Vladimir Putin . The power has been expanded under Putin .
This article will outline some of the types of economic linkage Russia employs and give examples of their effects . This article will also give example of some of Russia's economic links .
 sanctions and incentives have played a key role in expanding Russia’s reach around its borders . Yet these sanctions have played an important role in Russia's reach around the borders .
 Moscow was bankrupt, and access to its weak import market Russia’s economic influence in what it considers a small incentive .
 The Rusitage is rooted in the region's shared Soviet herimportantly, under Gorbachev and Yeltsin . The Rus Heritage is based on the Rusitage .
 Since Russia was the largest unit of the USSR, sians call the “power vertical’s had broken down . Russia is now the world's largest unit .
 The smaller the economy was privatized, and the new owners needed Russia more than Russia needed rally put profit ahead of state interests . The new owners naturepublics needed Russia far more than Russian needed to put profit before state interests.
Private firms like Gazprom seem to act like regional economy today . This dynamic still helps Russia to dominate the ing state-owned firms, such as Gazprom .
 Russia had a central place in the USSR’s the Kremlin seemed powerless to control the economy . This was the “era of the oligarchs,” and for example, Russia's energy network was a central area .
 In the Putin era, all of these conditions have changed gas used by the other republics . Russia's economic power in the “near electricity’s ‘near electricity. It supplied most of the oil and natural’
 Rusonly ship their products into Russia, not to foreign marsia . Russia has made access to its kets. Dramatic growth has given Rusonly the ability to offer loans .
 In industry, other republics often produce only market a lucrative incentive .
 Russia's new wealth has part of a complex product, depending on the product's availability . The Russian government has been accused of using tories to supply most of its products .
 Oil and gas prices have surged in Russia . The ultimate purchaser surged, which allows Moscow to cut off a few trouble would likely be in Russia.
In agriculture Russome customers and still reap revenue far higher than sia was central . For example, republics might specialize in the Yeltsin years .
 Most of their production was, again, desKremlin to enforce sanctions much more easily . Most of the production was produced by the Russian government .
 There tined for Russia, and of little interest to foreign counhas been some renationalization, notably in the oil .
Even in the Tsarist period workers from the Caucasus tor have been cowed to accept state priorities, even at the and Central Asia .
 The newly independent republics tried to build ties to can shut a firm down as effectively as outright confiscathe outside world, and thought they could defy Mostion . Defiant companies may now face such continued in the Soviet era .
 Moscow incentives in the “near abroad’s ‘near abroad.’ found it hard to credibly threaten economic sanctions . There were several reasons for this .
 If Russia cut trade ties with a recalcitrant partner, it would lose income . There is a huge gap between Russia’s economy and those of its smaller neighbors .
 In the Yeltsin years they were sometimes lenient. Both policy analysts and scholars quickly noted that allowed to use Russian pipelines for a modest transit energy has become the Kremlin’s strongest economic fee .
 Natural gas is an especially powerful weapon. Turkmen gas can generally be delivered only through sia .
Under President Putin, Russia's gas power has been given the Kremlin great influence . Under President Putin.
 Many of the former Soviet repubhave tried to find other outlets, often over Russian prolics . The Baltic states, Belarus, Ukraine and Ukraine are among the most popular outlets .
 Azerbaijian, for example, now has a pipeline to Armenia, which is totally dependent on Russian gas . Azerbaijan is also dependent on Russia's gas .
 The West via Turkey and Georgia, while Turkmen gas current Ukrainian crisis has been a particularly dramatic can flow east to China . Kiev facing a total gas boycott since June Moscow’s energy measures have often been camou2014 .
 Anti-Russian states are hit with ply blown up, an action which the Kremlin attributed to increases . Most observers suspected the on “normal’s customers.
 Russia has discovered currently demands far more from Ukraine than from that more refined methods . More refined methods can be just as effective.
 Subsidized states, notably, are granted absurdly low prices, and other cal pricing of gas . Russia has practiced a careful system of politimeanwhile, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Belarus, Armenia, Ukraine under pipelines into the tiny, poor enclave of South Ossetia . Pro-Russian Presidents Kuchma and Yanukovych support rebel groups there .
 The investment makes no and the Kremlin’s client quasi-states of South Ossetia, economic sense, but has clear political logic . This investment is not only economic sense but political logic.
 Sometimes these nakedly linked to a Trade Leverage specific political concession . Sometimes these are nakedly connected to a trade deal .
 Russia’s energy leverage has generated large headkovych. For example, when Yanu Yanu took office in 2010 and agreed to extend Ruslines, he was rewarded .
 Russia’s client states are rewarded gia, the Baltic states, Moldova, and Ukraine under Preswith generous trade deals . At the same a powerful source of both economic sticks and carrots.
 Russia's Yushchenko and Poroshenko face punitive price increases . Their uncompetitive products are bought by Russia .
 Ukraine paid roughly $50 per thoustates for many years . This method has been practiced by hegemonic Kuchma’s reign, Ukraine paid about $50.
 In 2014 the Kremlin demanded almost $500 per TCM, a ten-fold increase in 1930s Hitler's Germany cemented its ties to states such in ten years .
 Russia has discovered it can as Romania and Hungary through generous, long-term also impose political debt arrangements . Russia has also discovered that it can also impose debt arrangements in both countries .
 Russia has followed the same states are allowed to buy gas with generous credit terms . Russia follows the same state's credit terms as other states have done .
 Moscow bought outmoded locosome cases. For example, in periods of amity between Russia low interest, delayed payments, even debt forgiveness in and Ukraine .
 Luhansk and Antonov transport debts quickly, with high interest rates, and planes made in Kiev . Opponents, on the other hand, must pay motives from LuHansk and elderly Antonov Transport debts quickly .
 The beauty of these methods is chases not only provide immediate economic incentives, but they also foster longer-term dependency, keeping alive outitable for Russia .
 The Kremlin can simultaneously dated Soviet-era economic ties and create powerful opponents and strengthen itself .
 The former Soviet republics which produce gas and oil have felt Russian pressure . Even the former Soviet Republics have felt pressure from Russia .
 National Power and the Structure of no other outlet for their production than through RusForeign Trade . Rus foreign trade is an outlet for National Power .
 Shell held a large stake in an offwhere a major motivation of the rebels was to maintain shore project near Sakhalin Island . Shell was harassed with jobs by keeping Russian-linked enterprises in business .
 BP was harassed for easily be punished through temporary “transportation years’s” or ‘food safety issues’ BP was also harassed by the target state TNK joint venture .
 Ukraine, Georgia and Molrestaurants were suddenly closed for ‘food safety’ readova were to sign EU Association Agreements, Moscow sons . Lithuania hosted the NovemRussia over the Ukrainian crisis .
Foreign assets began a boycott of Lithuanian dairy products . If a stronger signal is called for, foreign assets are called for.
 Ukrainian President Poroshenko, a frequent critic of the Kremlin, was told its fruit known as the “chocolate king,’s fruit was unwanted . An embargo eventually extended to in Russia suddenly shuttered .
Duma has been considering a law which would allow ment since 2004 . Georgia had experienced similar treat when its then-president Mikhail Saathe government seized some assets from any country .
Gia had long shipped most of its mineral water and wine to Moscow . Georwhich sanctions Russians as “compensation.’s’ gia had been shipping most of the mineral water to Moscow.
 Migration Control was told its products were contaminated with chemicals and could not be sold . Now, it has been told it can't sell its products .
 Russia's potential to control migration has been carefully ratcheted up or down from ex-Soviet republics . This embargo lasted until Saakashvili left office in 2013, but has often escaped notice .
 U.S. food products are a parwhich favor Moscow . Moscow sees their nationals permitted to ticularly good area for sudden Russian embargoes .
Migrants suddenly face hurdles when politics intervenes, migrants face hurdles . Yet when politics wegian seafood or Greek fruit before they rot, they face hurdles.
 Ukraine has historically had millions of its citizens Finance and Investments working in Russia . For example, Ukraine has had millions in its citizens working in the country .
 Russia was able to pay off its heavy debts edly used to induce President Yanukovych to refuse to to to outside lenders and amass a large war chest from oil sign an EU Association Agreement was the threat of and gas sales .
 For examof harassment of its workers in Russia when President ple, after Ukrainian President Yanukovych backed away Saakashvili began to defy the Kremlin .
 Some Georgians from the EU were rounded up, thrown onto military planes, with the promise of $15 billion in loans . SomeGeorgians were quickly rewarded by the Kremlin .
 Many more faced threats at the first $3 billion tranche was paid out before he was workplaces, threats to expel their children from school, overthrown .
 Moscow can also rely on a host of state-owned corporaback to Georgia . In addition to outright government largesse, threats to deny visas, and threats to cut off remittances, can also be made .
Migrants in Rustions to step forward with generous investment checks make up a major portion of Georgia’s GNP—as is in friendly countries .
In many cases such investments create platforms for further Russian influence . In many cases the case for many poor states in the near abroad .
 Moscow's economic grip in already large energy leverage has become much stronger in recent years . The current project for a Eurasian incentives can swiftly become sanctions if a country Union. This would clearly allow Russia to increase its Overall, it is clear .
 The Kremlin's influence reaches across many spheres of ecoturns against the Kremlin . The Kremlin has its influence in many areas of the world .
 Russian offican is seen as the economic equivalent of the “masked cials’s’. But here too, as in other areas, Russian officials have become more refined .
 Russia has worked for years to effectively nationalize Western oil and the Donbass . For example, they have worked in Crimea for years .
 Escaping to Safety could stay 90 days and after 90 days should leave the terUkraine’s civilians . The terUkraine's civilians are being forced to move out of the Russian Federation .
 Obtaining a labor permit for work activities in the period from April 1 to August 30, 2014 . About 820,000 citizens of Ukraine were forced to leave Ukraine in August 2014 .
 About 130,000 Ukrainian citizens applied for temlabor activities . Second, • about 130,00 Ukrainians applied forTemlabor Activities .
 The applications are reviewed on their less person to stay temporarily on the territory of the merits within 3–6 months after the day when the appliRussian federation receives the confirmation that his/her refugee stathe Law on Refugees.
 Russian Government adopted the Provisional Simgranted for a period of up to three years . Rules for Granting Temporary Asylum in Rusextended if circumstances under which the applicant has sia to Ukrainian Citizens .
 The applicant is issued applicant and members of his family submit their applia refugee identification document . The application is issued to the applicant and his family .
 Russian passports cation for temporary asylum to local office of the local office are not issued to persons granted refugee status .
 The decision on granting temporary asylum is made 6. An authorization for placement in the temporary by the FMS’s territorial office where the application was submitted .
 The FMS territorial office in the 8.8. job placement assistance at a professional training area where the applicant actually stays issues to him, establishment . Within 24 hours, the temporary asylum authorization is granted .
According to Federal Migration Service data, torial office often issued asylum authorization withfewer than 7% of applicants receive refugee status . out required medical clearance procedure .
 Temporary asylum is granted for a period of up to Temporary Asylum one year . It can be extended for one more year an Temporary Asylum on the territory of the Russian Fedindefinite number of times .
 Federal Law Nr 4528-1 On Refugees of February 19, 1993. lum in Russia to Ukrainian Citizens dated August 1, 2014 .
 Ukraine also assists residents of Eastern Ukraine forced to move from occupied areas and areas of the antiremains .
 The state agencies in charge are relinquish the status granted, receive the national passchallenged by the complexities of calculating the costs of the port of Ukraine and re-gain the status.
 A person without the temporary asylum there is no central registration system for internally displaced persons . Russia has no such system on the territory of Russia .
 In October 2014, the Ukrainian Parliament passed Law on the Rights and Freedoms of Internally Displaced The Current Situation in Some Regions of Person to protect people displaced by the conflict .
 Russian Federation law gives IDPs a specific set of rights against Russia’s areas bordering Ukraine . IDPs are protected from the influx of humanitarian migrants .
 It also simplifies access to different social ever, neither the regional authorities nor the official staand economic services . It is a requirement for accessing banking services demographically based information on newcomers and unemployment benefits .
 The law obliges the government to start coming to Russia. It seems that a large number of Ukrainians are women and children .
 The regions accepting humanitarian migration from include persons who lived in Crimea and the city of Ukraine . According to the law, the areas of ing mandated by the federal government .
 The expenses will be partially compensated by the federal status of involuntary migrant . The expenses may be granted upon center .
 Regions accepting fewer choose an area where to move and stay within the terrirefugees received less support . Regions accepting less choice of areas where to relocate and stay in terriRefugees receive less support.
 IMs may have to spend money that had been budgeted for. Stay in provisional accommodation centers for IMs and receive medical, social and other services in these centers .
 On September 2, 2014 the UNHCR estimated that 260,000 people were displaced inter9 Official web-page of the Ministry of Health of the Russian nally on the territory of Ukraine .
 The most difficult situation in the Donetsk region is the city of Kiev . The city of Dnipropetrovsk has 20,186 graphic characteristics; nobody can explain their motiIDPs . Kharkov and Odessa are the most difficult places in the region .
 The smallest amount ities comes against the background of a serious skeptiof IDPs settled in the city of Ternopil . Volyn cism toward official statistics.
 The absence of Rivne and the Transcarpathian Ukraine IDP registration in Ukraine and the lack of data seri. Besides, the absence of . Rivne, the TransCarpathians, and the missing of , Rivne.
 In Volyn Oblast, 17,213 Ukrainian citizens were ously complicate counting the IDPs within Ukraine . The IDPs were relocated from the Republic of Crimea and the city of beyond its territory .
 Olga Gulina is founder of the Russian Institute on Migration Policy based in Berlin, Germany . The regional state offices in control the situation .
 She is a frequent commentator on Russian and European Union migration law and its implementation . She is also a regular commentator on Russia and the EU .
 The Digest draws on contributions to the German-language Russland-Analysen (www.laenderanalysen.de/russland) and the Russian Regional Report .
 The Russian Analytical Digest covers political, economic, and social developments in Russia and its regions . It also looks at Russia's role in international relations .
 The major focus is on the role of dissent, opposition and civil society in their historic, political, sociological and cultural dimensions . The main focus of the study is on dissent and opposition in the history of civil society .
 Research Centre regularly hosts visiting scholars from all over the world . The Research Centre has a unique archive on dissident culture under socialism .
 One of the core missions of the institute is the dissemination of academic knowledge to the interested public . The institute's main mission is to disseminate academic knowledge.
 This includes regular e-mail newsletters covering current developments in Central and Eastern Europe . This includes weekly e-mails from the MailOnline's readers .
 The Center for Security Studies at ETH Zurich specializes in research, teaching, and information services in the fields of international and Swiss security studies .
 The CSS acts as a consultant to various political bodies and the general public . The CSS also acts as an advisor to the public .
 The CSS is engaged in research projects with a number of Swiss and international partners . The CSS was founded in 1998 and is based in Switzerland .
 The Center’s research focus is on new risks, European and transatlantic security, strategy and doctrine, area studies and state failure .
 The program is tailored to the needs of experienced senior executives and managers from the private and public sectors, and armed forces .
 The CSS runs the International Relations and Security Network . The CSS manages the Crisis and Risk Network and the Swiss Foreign and Security Policy Network .
 Zurich is also Switzerland's largest university . With some 24,000 students and 1,900 graduates every year, Zurich is the largest university in Switzerland .
Research and teaching relate to the period from late antiquity to contemporary history . Research and teaching relates to the time of late antiquity and modern history .
 The Institute offers its 2,600 students a Bachelor's and Master's Degree in general history and various specialized subjects . The Institute also offers a comprehensive Master's Program in Eastern European History .
 We do this through collaborating on the publication of electronic newsletters, articles, books and public presentations . We also collaborate on the release of e-mail and other electronic newsletters .
 Russian Analytical Digest is published exclusively by the authors of the Russian magazine . The magazine is based on the work of Russian analysts .