 The precedence of Russian military intervention illustrates the porosity and potential for conﬂicts in other post-Soviet border regions .
 Narva, Estonia's borderland city, is populated predominantly by Russian-speakers . The Estonian city is one such potential site of tension with Russia .
Narva’s Russian-speaking community is in an effort to generate insights as to how any Russian overtures and potential intervention might be received in Narva .
 Estonia hosted a military parade and invited troops from fellow North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries to participate in the celebration . Estonia hosted the parade in honor of its Independence Day .
 Estonia and its Baltic neighbors, Latvia and Lithuania, have all been members of both the European Union and NATO since 2004 . Russia’s annexation of Crimea in 2014, still internationally recognized as part of Ukraine, raised concern in states adjoining Russia .
 Narva shares many paralleled similarities with Crimea and the Donbas region . Narva and Crimea share many parallels with the Don Bas region .
 Russia has been militarily active in several of its border areas . Russia has, in fact, been militately active in many of its borders .
 In late March 2015, the Russian military conducted large-scale “sudden exercises on several fronts.
 Russia has been upgrading military equipment and capacity in the Stavropol region of the North Caucasus . Russia has also been upgrading its military equipment in the region .
 Russia’s increased militarization has intensiﬁed NATO and the United States military activities in the Baltics, exacerbating tensions .
Narva is Estonia's easternmost Estonia . It has a history with Crimea and the presence of ethnic Russian irredenta .
 Narva was also the home of the Estonian Workers’ Commune . It provided a short-lived Bolshevik foothold in Estonia and partial legitimation to Soviet occupation .
 Narva had long been associated with Estonian territory . Narva was part of the St. Estonian city of St. Petersburg .
Following the Estonian War of Independence and 1920 Treaty of Tartu, Narva and its twin-town of Ivangorod became part of the independent Republic of Estonia .
 Narva’s territorial afﬁliation and its associated border also changed . During Soviet occupation, Narva's territorial af ﬁLiation and associated border changed .
 The Estonian-Russian border discrepancy is not unusual, particularly in the context of the former Soviet Union . After decades, the discrepancy was peacefully resolved in 2014 .
 Narva’s population changed in tandem with broader geopolitical and territorial shifts . Narva's population also changed in conjunction with wider geopolitical shifts .
 Narva became the largest Russian-speaking city in Estonia built for and by a Soviet Russian citizenry disconnected to the city’s past and population .
 During the late 1980s, the Estonian and other Baltic republics non-violently organized for independence from the Soviet Union .
 This policy had the effect of rendering stateless all Soviet era migrants and their descendants . Most of whom were ethnic Russians who did not possess pre-Soviet Estonian citizenship .
 Narva’s post-Soviet changes reﬂect and mirror broader socioeconomic shifts impacting other predominantly Russian-speaking communities in Estonia .
 The heightened regional tensions coupled with their ethnicization highlight Narva’s prickly geopolitical position and the necessity to better understand Narva's Russianspeakers .
Narvan perceptions and potential reactions to Russian activities. Narva’s Russian-speaking community to understand the community's citizenship practices, perceptions, and identities .
 Much can be gleaned from the project’s preliminary ﬁndings to speculate how Narvans might react to Russian military activities .
 The lead author conducted ﬁeldwork in the autumn of 2013 as part of an ongoing doctoral project . It was just weeks prior to the onset of the “Euromaidan’s’ uprising in Ukraine .
 Estonian state has made recent reforms to its contentious citizenship policy . Narvans’ formal citizenship statuses and perceptions of such policies remain complex .
 Narvans are as varied as their statuses as their citizenship statuses .Narvans have a wide range of citizenship options .
 citizenship should be based on birthplace, a slight majority of Estonians said . A slight majority said citizenship is based on birth . The primary legal principle of jus sanguinis currently used in Estonian policy.
 Most Narvans argued that the current language requirements were unrealistic and a major obstacle to naturalization . The language exam should be a requirement .
 The data suggests that there is not a homogeneous Narvan citizenship group or associated identity seeking to separate from Estonia .
 Narvan Russian-speakers comprise a variety of citizenship status groups and citizenship understandings . They often challenge Estonian state policy, but do not oppose the Estonian State .
 Narva’s Russian-speaking community remains politically disengaged and fractured . Narvans and politics in Estonia remain politically disengaging .
 Narvans stated that they are “not very interested’s in politics . Based on survey responses, they said they are not at all interested in politics.
 Narvans tend to be split when it comes to perceptions of political and state accessibility and representation at all political scales in Estonia, Russia, and the EU .
 Narva resident: ‘Every political party tries to protect their own interests.’
 Preliminary results also reﬂect the particularities of Estonian policies related to citizenship as practice . The preliminary results were released on Thursday .
 Such policies highlight inequitable political relations, which impact the civic and political life of Russian-speakers .
 From these data, it appears that Russian-speaking Narvans are politically fractured, disengaged, and unincorporated .
 Narva’s Russian-speakers also seem to be wary of Estonian party politics and non-local political institutions .
Narvans, like other Russian-speaking communities outside of the Russian Federation, maintain plural and hybrid identities . Narvans are not deﬁned solely by the territorial state .
 Estonian citizens and Russian citizens were more inclined to deﬁne themselves, respectively, with Estonia and Russia . Estonians and Russians were asked to de ﬁe their spatial identities .
 At ﬁrst glance, these spatial identity imply a strong relationship between formal national citizenship and spatial identity .
 Narvans overall tend to maintain a strong local identity, and most residents imagine Narva as unique within Estonia .
 Narva residents have different associations with spaces and identity with homeland with homeland . These different associations and identities with homeland reﬂects the plural and hybrid identities of Narva Residents .
 Narva remains solely characterized as ‘Narva’ and distinct from Estonia altogether . Anecdotally, many residents recognize the spaces outside of Narva's municipal borders as “Estonia’s” While Narva is solely characterized by
For many Narvans, spaces outside of Narva are almost foreign or distinctly Estonian . For many Narva, places outside of the Estonian capital are almostforeign or distinctly Estoniaian .
 Hybrid and complex spatial identities were revealed and reinforced through interviews .
 I am like half Estonian and half Russian and I am really lucky and I really like it… And it is hard. I'm like half Estoniaian andhalf Russian. And it's hard. It's hard, it's really hard, I'm really lucky.
 Preliminary data suggest that Narva’s Russian-speakers embody an array of plural and hybrid spatial identities, with an emphasis on local .
 Complex spatial identities have consequences and political entanglements . Complex spatial identity has consequences and consequences for political and social ties .
 spatial identities problematize how Russian-speakers identify and engage with political and territorial spaces, according to data .
Narvans are not a monolithic community and should not be as assumed to be a homogenous group associated solely with Russia or Russian-ness . Discussion and implications Narvans should be considered as part of a group of people .
 Narva’s Russianspeakers and ethnic Russians comprise an array of political perceptions, citizenship statuses, and spatial identities . Narva's Russianspeaker and ethnic Russian comprise a range of political and cultural perceptions .
 Cyberwar is already a major threat to Estonia’s e-state system . Such variations make any accurate geopolitical or security analyses difﬁcult .
Narvans maintain plural and hybrid spatial identities and citizenship practices . Narvans emphasize local spaces and communities in which they are embedded and engaged .
 Narvans perceive their hometown and community as distinct even when compared to other Estonian Russian communities, like those in Tallinn .
 Estonian, EU, and NATO activities to counter Russian overtures and nationalist discourse. Such strong local attachments, coupled with a lack of social integration and political incorporation, pose serious challenges to Estonian and EU activities .
 Narva’s political and citizenship landscape remains fractured, and Narvans themselves tend to be politically disengaged . Narva's political and Citizenship landscape is fractured .
 Narvans have pursued local autonomy in the past and maintain strong localisms . Politically they are weak and uninterested, according to local authorities .
Narvans tend to perceive the Estonian, Russian, and EU political systems as out of reach . Narvans do participate in political and civic life, particularly at the local/city level .
 Citizenship continues to be problematic for Russian-speakers and the Estonian state . Citizenship is still a problem for Russian and Estonian citizens .
 Narvans with Russian citizenship and stateless residency view Estonian citizenship as inaccessible without additional worthwhile beneﬁts . They remain resentful for the loss of citizenship and political opportunities following independence .
 Stateless and Russian citizens in Narva also tend to share similar views of Russian citizenship and politics . While maintaining trust and strong political engagement at the local rather than national scales .
 Narvan Russian-speakers remain resentful of the Estonian state . They also are wary of Russian overtures for fear of instability and lower living standards .
 Narva’s strong local attachments and Russian linkages by no means equate to affable responses to any future Russian interventions or potential annexation . Narva's strong local connections and Russian links by no mean equate to a future Russian intervention .
 Narva’s proximity to its Russian twin-town of Ivangorod just across the Russian border. Narvan cross-border experiences problematize Russian engagement in the region because of the stark economic, social, and political differences illustrated .
 Ivangorod and Narva have historic ties, and shared economic interests . Ivang or Narva has a long history of cross-border ties .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the cities’ ties were severed because of border re-demarcation . Ivangorod suffered steep economic and living standard declines, compared to Narva .
 Current waves of Russian nationalism may have dampened Ivangorod’s regionalist aspirations . Narvans maintain their strong localisms while remaining cautiously bound to Estonia and Europe .
 Narva’s precariousness and Narvans’ strong local attachment illustrate the necessity for scaled-down research and more critical approaches to the current geopolitical dilemma . Narva's precariousness.
 As media and diplomatic storm clouds gather over Narva and other potential sites of tension, it is imperative to keep in mind local speciﬁcities and community dynamics .
 The current pace of militarization and security-driven discourse is subject to essentialist and broad assumptions . The pace of military discourse is "subject to broad assumptions," says the author .
 Population by Citizenship, Sex, Age Group and Place of Residence, 31 December 2011 .
 VjOMg6TNPEI Freeman, Colin, Tom Parﬁtt, Prince Rosa, Chan Szu Ping, and Dominiczak Peter. 15.15.15 .