 The Ukraine-Russia crisis. The Ukrainian President's office appears to show an explosion in Kyiv early Thursday .
 Russian forces have begun an attack on Ukraine after months of military buildup and brinkmanship . Ukrainian President's Office has said the attack will take place .
 Putin ordered troops into separatist-held parts of eastern Ukraine in what the Kremlin called a "peacekeeping" mission . Earlier this week, he signed decrees recognizing independence of the Moscow-backed regions .
 European countries and the U.S. have begun rolling out sanctions in response to Russia's actions . Russia has been criticized for its actions in recent months .
 A whirlwind of diplomatic efforts in recent weeks has so far failed to defuse tensions in the region . The region has been rocked by a series of tensions over the past few weeks .
 Russia has been tightening its military grip around Ukraine since last year . Tens of thousands of soldiers, as well as equipment and artillery, are on the country's doorstep .
 The escalation in the years-long conflict has triggered the greatest security crisis on the European continent since the Cold War . It has raised the specter of a dangerous showdown between Western powers and Moscow .
 A wounded woman is seen after a reported airstrike at an apartment complex outside of Kharkiv, Ukraine, on February 24 .
People shelter in a subway station in Kharkiv, Ukraine, on February 24 . People shelter in the subway station.
Smoke rises from an air defense base after apparent Russian strike in Mariupol, Ukraine, on February 24 .
 A CNN team in Mariupol has reported hearing a Evgeniy Maloletka/AP Firefighters attempt to extinguish a fire after a reported strike on February 24 .
 A CNN team in Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-biggest city, heard a Aris Messinis/AFP/Getty Images .
 Arieva, a 21-year-old deputy on the Kyiv city council, and Fursin, a 24 year-old software engineer, had planned to get married in May but moved it due to attacks by Russian forces on Thursday . Arieva is a 21 year- old
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky holds an emergency meeting in Kyiv on February 24 .
 Zelensky announced that he was introducing martial law in a video address . He urged people to remain calm .
 Ukrainian servicemen patrol in the Luhansk region of Ukraine on February 24 . Ukrainian Presidency/Anadolu Agency.
 A staff member of a hotel in Kyiv talks on the phone on February 24. Anatolii Stepanov is a member of the hotel's staff .
Train tickets at Kyiv's central station in Kyiv on February 24 .
 A long line of cars is seen exiting Kyiv on February 24. Timothy Fadek/Redux.
 Heavy traffic appeared to be heading west, away from where explosions were heard early in the morning .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin announced a military operation in the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine on February 24 .
 A convoy of Russian military vehicles is seen on February 23 in the Rostov region of Russia, which runs along Ukraine's eastern border .
 Ukrainian soldiers talk in shelter at the front line near Svitlodarsk, Ukraine, on February 23 .
 Ukrainian authorities say the power plant was hit by shelling on Tuesday, February 22 .
 The town of Shchastya has sustained some of the heaviest shelling, the Ukrainian Defense Ministry said . The town has been hit by some heaviest shelling .
 Ukrainian Army Capt. Gleb Garanich died on February 22 at a hospital in Kyiv .
 The Ukrainian military said he was killed by a shrapnel wound on February 19 . Several rounds of artillery fire were directed at Ukrainian positions near Myronivske .
 Ukrainian soldiers pay respects during Sydorov's funeral in Kyiv on February 22 .
 A RUB HAM OUUOULIDE tH Tah sign displays conversion rates at a currency exchange kiosk in Kyiv on February 22 .
 Global markets tumbled the day after Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered troops into parts of eastern Ukraine .
 Russian howitzers are loaded onto train cars near Taganrog, Russia, on February 22 .
 Putin blasted Kyiv's growing security ties with the West . He appeared to cast doubt on Ukraine's right to self-determination .
 heads of the self-proclaimed pro-Russian republics requested the Kremlin leader recognize their independence and sovereignty . Earlier in the day, the heads of pro- Russian republics asked the Kremlin to recognize their sovereignty .
 Members of Putin's Security Council supported the initiative in a meeting earlier in the day . Members of the Security Council also backed the initiative .
 Protesters demanding economic sanctions against Russia stand outside the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Kyiv on February 21 .
 CNN Activists hold a performance in front of the Russian embassy in Kyiv in support of prisoners who were arrested in Crimea .
 Crimean Tatars, a Muslim ethnic minority, say red doors are a symbol of the doors that were kicked in to search and arrest them . They say the doors were used to arrest them and search them. They say they are a sign of a Muslim minority .
 Ukrainian servicemen shop in front-line town of Avdiivka, Ukraine, on February 21 .
 People lay flowers at the Motherland Monument in Kyiv on February 21 .
 A local resident shows the depth of a crater from shelling in a field behind his house in the village of Tamarchuk, Ukraine .
 A Ukrainian service members are seen along the front line outside of Popasna, Ukraine, on February 20 .
 People evacuated from the pro-Russian separatist regions of Ukraine are seen at a temporary shelter in Taganrog, Russia, on February 20 .
 A Ukrainian soldier stays on position on the front line near Novohnativka on February 20 .
 A couple arrives at the city council to get married in Odessa, Ukraine, on February 20 .
 Ukrainian authorities reported further ceasefire violations and top Western officials warned about impending conflict . Life went on in other parts of the country.
 Ukrainian Interior Minister Denys Monastyrskiy visits soldiers at a rontline position in Novoluhanske on Saturday .
 A woman rests in car near a border checkpoint in Avilo-Uspenka, Russia, on February 19 .
Ukrainian army is expected to launch an offensive in the next few days . The Ukrainian army is preparing for an imminent offensive .
 The restive eastern part of the country has witnessed the worst shelling in years in recent days . Ukraine and Russia have accused each other of heavy shelling of civilian areas .
 A Ukrainian service member walks by a building that was hit by a mortar fire in the front-line village of Krymske, Ukraine .
 Vadim Ghirda/AP Fighter jets fly over Belarus during a joint military exercise with Russia on February 19 .
Soldiers stand guard at a military command center in Novoluhanske on February 19 .
Pro-Russian separatists have ordered people to evacuate to Russia by pro-Russian rebels .
Remains of a military vehicle seen in a parking lot outside a government building following an explosion in Donetsk on February 18 .
 Ukrainian and United States officials said the explosion was designed to stoke tensions in eastern Ukraine . Ukrainian and U.S. officials said it was intended to stir tensions in Ukraine .
 A memorial service and candlelight vigil is held at the St. Michael's in New York City .
 They honored while protesting against the government of President Viktor Yanukovych, a pro-Russian leader . He later fled the country .
 A kindergarten that officials say was seen in Stanytsia Luhanska, Ukraine, on Thursday, February 17 .
 No lives were lost, but it was a stark reminder of the stakes for people living near the front lines that separate Ukrainian government forces from Russian-backed separatists .
 Children play on old Soviet tanks in front of the Motherland Monument in Kyiv on Wednesday .
Ambassadors of European countries lay roses at the Wall of Remembrance in Kyiv on February 16 . Fay 4 oA A fee ELIA ff —_ . 5, ae ay Ambassadors of EU countries lay flowers at the wall .
 The wall contains the names and photographs of military members who have died since the conflict with Russian-backed separatists began in 2014 .
 US paratroopers landed in Poland as part of a deployment of several thousand sent to bolster NATO's eastern flank . The deployment is in response to tensions with Russia .
 Boryspil International Airport outside Kyiv, Ukraine, is located in the country's capital city . The airport is located near Kyiv .
 President Joe Biden has urged Americans in Ukraine to leave the country . He warned that "things could go crazy quickly" in the region .
 A Ukrainian serviceman carries an anti-tank weapon during an exercise in the Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine .
 Oschadbank, a state-owned bank, is seen in Kyiv .
 It's on the outskirts of the Three Sisters border crossing between Ukraine, Russia and Belarus . The border crossing is between the two countries .
 F/A-18E and 18F Super Hornets are seen on the flight deck of the USS Harry S Truman in the Adriatic Sea .
 The Truman was on its way to the Middle East in mid-December . The Pentagon decided to keep it in Europe as tensions began to escalate .
 Ukrainian service members talk at a front-line position in eastern Ukraine on February 14 .
Members of Ukraine's National Guard look out a window as they ride a bus through the capital of Kyiv .
 Dozens of helicopters appeared at a previously vacant airbase in Russian-occupied Crimea .
 US soldiers and military vehicles are seen at a military airport in Mielec, Poland, on February 12 .
 The White House approved a plan for the nearly 2,000 U.S. troops in Poland to help Americans who may try to evacuate Ukraine if Russia invades . The plan was approved by the White House .
Pro-Russian separatists observe the movement of Ukrainian troops from trenches in Ukraine's Donbas area .
 Javelin anti-tank missiles were delivered to Kyiv on February 10 as part of a U.S. military support package for Ukraine .
 Ukrainian service members walk on armored fighting vehicle during a training exercise in eastern Ukraine's Donetsk region on February 10 .