 The aim of the paper is to scrutinize the process of politicization Kosovo . The paper will focus on the case of Russia’s legitimacy Serbia; Ukraine claims in Ukraine .
 The Autonomous Republic of Crimea held a referendum on the status of the Ukrainian peninsula in March 2014 .
 Crimea's people were asked whether they wanted to join Russia as a federal subject . The 1992 Crimean constitution implied a larger autonomy for Crimea within Ukraine .
 97% of valid votes were in favour of unification with Russia, organizers say . The referendum took place several days after the referendum .
 Kosovo and Crimea have triggered contradictory narratives, either supporting the change of borders based on the principle of self-determination or contesting it as an evident breach of international law .
Politicians have used narratives to influence public opinion and legitimize their decisions to the international community . Those narratives have been used by politicians.
 The present article focuses on the main legitimization discourse of the Crimea annexation . The article is based on those premises .
 Balkan's precedents and Western intervention in connection with the contested international norms concerning self-determination, secession, independence and their various interpretations, outside the strict legal framework .
 The theoretical approach that we chose for this analysis focused on the uses of policy narratives for legitimization in foreign policy . We chose to focus on the use of policies to legitimize foreign policy.
 The empirical part of the analysis tried to assess the instrumentality of the Kosovo precedent in Russian foreign policy discourse since the beginning of the Ukrainian crisis . The empirical parts of the study were used in the analysis of Kosovo .
 This paper tries to contribute to the existing research by tackling the complex interplay between politics and international law for the legitimization of foreign policy decisions . By examining the elites’ policy narratives referring to the Kosovo–Crimea parallel after 2014, this paper attempts to contribute.
In this case, we assumed a constructivist approach to show that differences in legitimacy claims may derive from power-political sources rather than international law .
 Russia's intense legitimization efforts are faced with several inconsistencies, says CNN . We argue that the difficult task of Russia’s intense legitimisation efforts was faced with inconsistencies .
 The Kosovo–Crimea parallel represents a form of instrumentalization of Balkans’ recent past, says the authors . In our view, those inconsistencies show that the Kosovo-Crimea parallels are not true, they say .
 We started by scrutinizing a selection of recent theoretical contributions on the importance of legitimacy in international interactions . We also reviewed several recent analyses on Russia's foreign policy behaviour .
 Russia and Ukraine have been involved in a territorial dispute since Crimea was annexed in Crimea . The annexation of Crimea occurred in the countries directly involved in this territorial dispute . The Ukraine-Russia territorial dispute is a key part of the dispute .
 Russia’s strategy of legitimization for domestic and foreign audiences, we analysed the findings . We drew several conclusions pointing to Russia's strategy of legitimacy.
 Critical approaches tried to problematize the ways norms are defined, renegotiated and contested .
 The ways in which states adjust their foreign policies to international norms depend on the various understandings of what constitutes ‘appropriate behaviour’ in a given issue area .
 Wiener showed that cultural and organizational practices contribute to the interpretation of meanings that are entailed in fundamental norms which are constitutive of democratic governance beyond the state .
 compliance theorists in both law and political science assess the effectiveness of norms with reference to implementation . For example, compliance theorists assessed transposition, internalization, social learning, constitutionalization and legalization .
 IR specialists and international lawyers have contrasting theoretical positions on legality and legitimacy claimed by countries when they take actions beyond their borders . It is important to highlight that there are contrasting theoretical position between IR specialists.
 The recent ‘narrative turn’ in IR has improved our understanding of how narratives influence state policy choices . The ‘Narrative turning’ has improved the understanding of what narratives influence policy choices.
 Subotic provided an interesting approach to foreign policy analysis . Serbia’s change in foreign policy behaviour regarding the disputed status of Kosovo was highlighted .
 She argues that state narratives can and do guide and influence contemporary policy decisions . She says myths are often mixed with objective facts in order to legitimate a certain view on international politics .
 This ‘meaning-making’ process reduces political space or debate and conflict into an area . It can be fully controlled by the state apparatus that invokes the legitimating mechanism .
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russia has often invoked both the domestic and international law for explaining its positioning towards post-Soviet countries .
 In the literature, scholars have identified several main sources of legitimization in Russia’s foreign policy .
 It was argued that one of the main goals of Moscow’s foreign policy has been the construction of its role as the defender of the compatriots abroad and the guarantor of their rights .
 Russian-speaking people would legitimate its own military intervention. It is important to note that this view assumes the existence of a serious threat to its security, from a Russian perspective .
 Russia's legitimization strategy was to take Western actions as a point of reference . Russia's military interventions are both at home and abroad . Russia has a history of using its military interventions to legitimize its actions .
 The literature on the topic refers to three main situations when Russia elaborated legitimacy claims for its foreign policy decisions . The literature refers to the war in Chechnya, the war with Georgia and the military intervention in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine .
 Chechnya was described as a counterterrorist operation since its beginning . The character of ‘fight against terrorism’ was highlighted after the 9/11 attacks .
 The 2008 invasion of Georgia was presented as a peacekeeping operation meant to defend the lives of Russian citizens and peacekeepers from South Ossetia . Georgian troops supposedly were attacked by Georgian troops .
 Moscow accused Tbilisi of genocide against the local population . Then, as the war in Georgia developed, Moscow even accused the country of genocide .
 The annexation of Crimea was framed by Russia as a democratic expression of the right to self-determination . The annexation was framed as an expression of a democratic statement of self- determination .
 Russian military intervention was a cover operation and was later described as a necessary means to secure the framework for local population to democratically express their will . In contrast to the previous cases, Russian military action was a covered operation .
 Tsygankov argues that even if Russia’s foreign policy has been formulated in response to various international contexts, it has displayed a remarkable degree of historical continuity . TsyGankov: Even if Russia's foreign policies have been formulated, they have been
 The scholar identified three patterns in Moscow’s foreign policy thinking and behaviour that have been developed and determined over time by the established images of the country and the outside world .
 The Westernizers highlight the similarity of Russia with the West and perceive the West as the most viable and progressive civilization in the world . The Westernizer highlight the similarities between Russia and the West .
 The Civilizationists argue that Russian values are different from those of the West . They seek to spread them abroad, outside the West, with predilection in former Soviet space .
 Russia has sought to challenge the Western system of values insisting on Russian cultural superiority . They have tried to challenge Western values.
 The Neo-Eurasianists are today the most prominent exponents of the Civilizationists . They are today's most prominent ex-civilians .
 In Tsygankov's view, the most influential school of Russia’s foreign policy thinking is that of Statists . TsyGankov: Statists are most influential in Russia's foreign policy.
 They are explicit in choosing values of power, stability and sovereignty over those of freedom and security . They are explicitly in choosing power and security over sovereignty .
 The Statists are not inherently anti-western, but they argue liberal values should be established to strengthen not weaken the state .
 Tsygankov argued that Russia’s recent actions in Ukraine demonstrate both change and continuity in its foreign policy .
 The scholar considers that the assertiveness of Vladimir Putin’s foreign policy is meant to signal that the Kremlin views revolutions in the former Soviet space . Russia insists on Russia being treated as an equal partner in relations with the United States and the European Union .
 The annexation of Crimea was determined by President Putin's feeling of personal humiliation . Lo considers that even if the control over Ukraine is integral to Moscow’s understanding of national security, the annexation was first of all .
 This view offers an instrumental explanation to the choices elites make when deciding to present history in a particular way . This view is based on the history of American history .
Russia's intervention in Crimea was also used in the case of Russia’s intervention. This implied a reinterpretation of the past, building on controversial claims about Ukraine from a Russian perspective .
 Russia's claims of legitimization are the types of arguments used in elite policy narratives that we consider relevant for unpacking Russia’s current justification strategy and for explaining Kosovo precedent in particular .
 Russian political representatives had advocated for Russia’s right to take similar actions as those of the West in Kosovo . The starting point of our analysis was the observation that, in the context of the Ukrainian crisis, Russian political officials had advocated.
 Since the beginning of 2014, the parallel between Kosovo and Crimea has been widely used in the public space based on both legal and extralegal arguments .
German Law Journal 2015: Grant 2015 . We focus mostly on the ways dominant narratives on Crimea have been constructed and performed in the field of foreign policy. We focus on the extralegal claims of legitimacy .
 We believe that a thorough investigation into these extralegal claims of legitimacy made by Russia in the particular case of Crimea is needed . We believe this is needed.
 The main case study of the analysis is the politicization of the so-called ‘Kosovo precedent’ for legitimization purposes . The analysis is thus the politicized of the ‘kosovo precedes’ to legitimization.
Based on theoretical contributions, we would place Russia’s legitimization foreign policy narratives in Crimea at the interstice of these main arguments. Based on the aforementioned theoretical contributions.
 The annexation of Crimea is not breaching the international law, but rather on the political instrumentalization of this issue in Russia’s foreign policy. As such, we will not focus on the discussion whether the annexation is breaching the law .
 This implies focusing on elite discourses, as they have the role to produce and reproduce legitimacy claims based on specific elements that would trigger the support of targeted audiences . This implies that elite discourse has the role.
 legitimization is understood as a hermeneutic process in which certain meanings are selected and attributed by elites in their foreign policy narratives in order to convince the public on the 'rightfulness' of a certain action on the territory of another state .
 This particular definition of legitimization goes beyond the issue of legality and the two do not overlap . The two don't overlap, says the author .
 The purpose is to show how the Kosovo case was constructed as a precedent in the annexation of Crimea . The Kosovo case is to be shown as an example of the annexation in Crimea .
Main elites have referred to the Kosovo–Crimea parallel in their public policy narratives . The focus of the article will be on those particular arguments which have been selected and ‘performed’ by the main elites .
 The Kosovo–Crimea parallel is relevant indicators for Russia’s legitimization strategy in foreign policy, says the authors . They say that policy narratives centred on the Kosovo-Crimea Parallel are relevant indicators .
 As Subotic argues, policy narratives are powerful tools of influencing state decisions . Policy narratives redefine how certain events are represented in public discourse and fix their meaning in place .
Field research was conducted in Russia and Ukraine on the identified patterns during the desk research . After, a number of policy narratives based on similar arguments were selected .
 The main challenge was to select the most relevant legitimization discourses, and to identify the mostrelevant actors performing them . The main goal is to identify most relevant actors performing these discourses .
 Ukraine and Russia have been involved in the Ukraine-Russia debate . In the first stage, we identified a different set of actors from the countries directly involved . We focused on gathering major public statements referring to the situation in Crimea .
 We mainly followed speeches/statements of state representatives, such as the President, the Prime Minister and the PM .
Beyond public statements of politicians, we have included as relevant texts that consolidated the dominant policy narrative the prominent experts’ op-eds and think tanks’ online analyses .
 The main criteria we used for the selection of these sources were the Internet or expert relevant rating points (e.g.G. The Internet or experts' rating points were used to make the selection .
Experts' previous experience in the region and regularity in commenting foreign policy events in the analysed region (e.g. The Think Tank Index Report 2015)
 The main legitimization discursive patterns of 2014 were the annexation and the follow up of the annexation of the territory . The narrative analysis was focused on the whole year 2014 .
 We calibrated our interpretative analysis based on Putin’s 18 March 2014 address . It represents the first official position of the Kremlin announcing the annexation of Crimea .
 The speech has guided our subsequent policy narratives analysis for the following stages of the research . We took this speech as the main reference point, which has guided the subsequent policy narrative analysis .
We conducted interviews in Ukraine and Russia between April and May 2016 . We structured our research interviews into a series of questions . The main questions were based on these initially formulated patterns .
 The main features of the Kremlin’s Crimea legitimization narrative were presented during the 18 March 2014 address of President Putin to State Duma deputies, Federation Council members, heads of Russian regions and civil society representatives .
 From the beginning, the legitimization arguments have targeted simultaneously both domestic and foreign audiences .
 Vladimir Putin tried to warn Russia’s elites and ordinary citizens for the upcoming negative consequences due to international pressure and future economic sanctions .
 Vladimir Putin mentioned Russia’s support for the reunification of Germany and the importance of freedom for the U.S. citizens .
 The Kremlin has a frequent reliance on revisiting history . The use of history is one of the most striking features of the Kremlin's discourse .
 The Kremlin's legitimization narrative has been the use of extralegal claims as arguments connected with international law .
 Russia's foreign policy discourse on Crimea has been focused on respect for the international law . These references to extralegal elements have been a constant in Russia’sforeign policy discourse regarding Crimea .
 Russia has a frequent invocation of the West’s reinterpretation of the international law . The other important feature is the frequent invocation in Russia's discourse .
 Russian leaders have been constructing a humanitarian argument in case of Crimea as well . But, despite this first impulse, they have been building a human rights argument .
 Russia’s rationale behind the humanitarian argument has been constructed around counterfactual security threats to the lives of local population rather than facts .
 Moscow has emphasized that after the ‘coup’ in Kiev, Crimea was in particular in danger ‘because it was more densely populated by Russians and Russian-speaking than other parts of Ukraine’ The Kremlin was ‘very concerned about any possible ethnic cleansing’ there
 Kiev's reaction to the annexation of Crimea came shortly and was predictable . Kiev’s reaction to Crimea was predictable and predictable .
 Ukraine has maintained since then this conflictual position denying Russia’s legitimization claims . Ukraine has been in conflict with Russia since then .
 The majority of Western experts have dismissed the comparisons between Crimea and all the countless secessions, coups and undemocratic regime changes around the world .
 Drezner argues that the ethnic Albanians living in Kosovo feared Serbian repression, just as Russians living in Crimea feared Ukrainian nationalists that had assumed power in Kiev .
 He states that those fears may be valid, but their exploitation and their consequences make one claim of self-determination more legitimate than the other . He says those fears are valid but their consequences are also valid .
 Russia acted unilaterally in Crimea, while Kosovo's independence was a matter of diplomacy . Expert stresses that the guiding principles between the two processes were completely different .
 Russia gave up on any chance for multilateral diplomacy, and developed a policy of ‘occupy first and negotiate later’ The policy is evidently not in line with the international law .
 Wesley Clark, the former Supreme Allied Commander in Europe for NATO during Kosovo crisis, dismantled Russia’s argument based on Kosovo–Crimea similarities .
 Many Russian experts have been in line with the Kremlin's contradictory narratives in relation to the West .
 Yugoslavia was transformed into a bunch of small, deprived of their own ambitions states . Lukyanov reminded that it was the West that did not rest until Yugoslavia became independent .
 Karaganov accused also the West of misusing the chance for a normal relationship with Russia after the cold war when bombed Yugoslavia . The West also misused the chance to normal relationship after the war when bombing Yugoslavia .
 The expansion of the West’s area of its own military, political and economic control pushed Russia towards the ‘Weimar syndrome’ The condition once led a humiliated Germany to Nazism, and that made Russia to look for revenge .
 The syndrome had to be cured by Russia by fighting in Chechnya and Georgia . It was later cured by taking over Crimea .
 Putin’s justification for occupying part of Ukraine has been to save the Russians there from the fascists . Putin has threatened to invade the entire country .
Western commentators have expressed similar narratives to Russian official Crimea legitimization discourse . Besides Russian experts, we have identified also Western commentators that expressed similar stories .
 The two cases are not as different as they may originally seem, according to other critical perspectives . In assessing the two cases on the basis of the legality of their secessions or the influences of surrounding powers.
 This regional disparity, with ethnic and cultural tensions, makes them conducive to secessionist movements . The region's main population is different from each nation’s main population .
 Experts’ narratives have reproduced the same dividing lines of arguments between the Russian–Ukrainian perceptions of the Russian-Ukrainians . Experts' narratives are similar to those of Russia and Ukraine .
 We identified in many of those online expert debates similar elements with the ones from official narratives and the uses of extralegal claims in assessing the legality of the annexation .
 Russia's main goal is to promote a dominating narrative of the events in Crimea in the international public sphere . This supports our initial assumption that one of the main goals of Russia’s legitimization strategy is to promoting a dominant narrative of Crimea .
 The Kosovo precedent is being constructed as a legitimization mechanism for the annexation of Crimea . We argue that this transfer of narratives from officials to experts is part of the symbolic ‘meaning making’ process .
 The ‘Uncomfortable Comparison’ and its Impact in the views of local experts’ narratives 3.4.1.1 . The 'uncomfortable comparison' and its impact on local experts' narratives is 3.2 .
Reinterpreting the western actions in the Kosovo war was the use of Western actions as a source of legitimacy for Russia . The use of western actions was the most recurring pattern from the policy narratives that has been confirmed in the elite interviews .
 The U.S. has been allowed to intervene in other states, Russians should be allowed to do the same, they said .
 For Russians what Americans and other Western countries have done on international arena is a precedent to be used on international arenas . For Russians, what Americans have done was a precedent for Russians to use international arena .
Experts consider that Russians appeal to the international law and reinterpret it as do the Americans . They consider that Russian appeal to international law.
 For each stage there are documents, even if the way these documents were obtained can be discussed . For every stage there is documents, there is a document for each stage .
 Russia wants to be part of the Western democratic community and is looking at the West for examples of behaviour . For Russia it is important to create a façade of legality of its actions, says Russia .
 The invocation of the history of Crimea in the aftermath of its annexation has been considered generally by Ukrainian and Russian experts as targeting, first of all, the Russian domestic public .
 Russian experts acknowledged that Moscow omits to remind the population that Russian Empire conquered Crimea from the Ottoman Empire . The Tatar Khanate had a longer history in Crimea than Russia .
Nikitina considers that the historic arguments used by the Kremlin after the annexation of Crimea are part of a post-factum rationalization, more than real justification .
 Russia's foreign policy is based on a politicized selection of past events to be promoted in public discourse . This perspective points to a strategic use of history in Russia’s foreign policy, according to the Russian Foreign Ministry .
 Zadorozhnyi considers that the historic arguments are part of a ‘psychological war’ and are not legally substantiated .
Russian Federation does not have the right to question act of a different state, he says . He highlights the moment of transferring of Crimea to Soviet Ukraine, in 1954, should not be brought into discussion by the Kremlin .
 In 1954, parts of the Ukrainian SSR, the Rostov region, were transferred to the Russian SFSR as well . The surfaces of the two regions were comparable .
 Moscow’s questioning of the administrative act of 1954 is not legitimate . The former Soviet republics recognized their borders of 1991 at Belavezha Pucha .
Experts stressed the dangers of reinterpretation of history for relativization of borders . This position was expressed also by other experts .
 The risks of instrumentalization of history in foreign policy reside in the clash between subjective interpretations of the same events by different sides . Ukraine and Russia on one side and Kosovo and Serbia on the other, deepening the dividing lines between the two .
 Ukrainian experts consider that the role of Crimea in Russian history was embellished and that the allegedly large role that Crimea played for the Russian nation is exaggerations .
 Respondents have drawn attention to the need for moderation and caution in the politicized views of contemporary politicians . They have confirmed that those subjective interpretations of history are one of the strongest extralegal elements to be found in the Kosovo–Crimea parallel .
Ukrainian experts insist Kosovo took 10 years to become independent . In Crimea the events occurred in only three weeks and the date of referendum was changed thrice .
Marga argued that this fact shows a clear misconduct in organizing Crimea’s referendum pointing to an already pre-established result . Marga argues that this is a clear Misconduct in organizing the referendum .
 Ukrainian and the foreign movies were dubbed in Ukrainian . This was considered as creating some discomfort not oppression . Russian and Ukrainian languages are mutually understandable .
 Russian has always been used as a second language in Crimea and in the Ukraine .
 In everyday life and even in state institutions Russian has been largely used, and in real practice one can choose which language to speak .
 Russian language used in Crimea is a counterargument to Russia's claim for a humanitarian intervention in Crimea . The use of Russian language serves as a counter argument to the narrative of Russia’s claim for an humanitarian intervention .
 All the interviewed Ukrainian and part of Russian experts agreed that there were no physical threats for the Russian population in Crimea . There were no ethnic conflicts, no open clashes, no vivid separatism and no real pro-independence party, they said .
 The Russians from Crimea had no valid reasons to have been subjected to a humanitarian intervention . In other words, based on their status of ‘new-comers’ the Russians had novalid reasons for the intervention .
 The humanitarian argument is based on cultural and ethnic grounds rather than facts, says the author . The author says.
 Umland stressed that the invocation of Russia’s rights in Crimea based on ethnic factor reminds the argument that Hitler used when Sudeten territory was annexed . In support of this idea, Umland stresses that the invoking of Russia's rights in Ukraine based on Ethnic factor reminds Hitler used
 Evseev and Oznobishchev stroke a discordant note. Compared to the above-mentioned opinions, Evseeva and OzNobishchev's opinions are different .
 The two experts consider that Russia’s humanitarian intervention was based on valued arguments of real danger for the local population .
 Evseev considers also that even if it would have been more legal for Russia only to recognize the independence of Crimea not to annex it, the presence of Ukrainian military bases in the peninsula would have raised the risk of military clashes .
 Experts showed that their perception of the Kosovo–Crimea parallel was influenced by Russian official narrative . That is why Russia had no choice but to accept Crimea to join Russia .
 Those ‘reactivated’ legitimacy claims channelled experts’ perceptions on the subject . ‘Reactivated” legitimacy claims. And those ‘rescued’ legitimate claims were channelling experts' perceptions .
 The principles of territorial sovereignty and self-determination are open to contestation and raise controversies in international relations because of lack of unanimous consensus over those norms .
 The story is based on context-based interpretations by actors who in a certain situation manage to impose their narrative .
 From an international law perspective, an external intervention on foreign territory can be judged only as complying or not complying to a previously agreed norm .
This assumes a fact-based assessment and a clear distinction between right and wrong/true or false . This assumes a clear difference between right/right/true and false .
 legitimacy is constructed not around facts but on versions of the facts that are more appealing to certain audiences . In other words, legitimacy is built on facts, not on facts .
 Our focus on the annexation of Crimea tried to point to the distinction between the legality and legitimacy of Crimea's annexation .
 Many analyses in Russian media mix the two elements in their narratives of justification for the annexation of Crimea . The Crimea is a ‘precedent’ in itself for other territorial annexations .
For the domestic audience, as well as the possible audience in the Balkans, the uses of historical arguments and the ‘ethnicization’ of territory were the most powerful legitimating elements .
 Russia's foreign policy towards Ukraine and the ambiguous way it tries to positions itself towards the West . We argued that those very different legitimization claims used for the same situation show the inconsistencies of Russia’s foreign policy.
 Russia's foreign policy towards Ukraine shows inconsistencies with its actions towards the West . We argued that those different legitimization claims used for the same political action show inconsistencies of Russia’s foreign policy .
 Russia’s actions in Crimea posed both a conceptual and an empirical challenge to the field of international relations . Conclusions: Russia's actions posed both an empirical and a conceptual challenge to international relations.
 The purpose of the article was to analyse the conflict of narratives regarding the secession/annexation of Crimea . The article focuses on extralegal arguments .
 Russia's main policy narratives over time. Aiming to assess continuity and change in Russia’s legitimization strategy .
 The Kosovo precedent for Russian foreign policy was built in Kosovo, says the authors . They concluded that extralegal arguments have been instrumental in constructing the Kosovo precedent .
 interpretative policy narrative analysis followed the transfer of discursive patterns from official statements by state representatives to elites who reproduced the dominant narratives .
 We explored various sites where ‘clashes of narratives’ on Kosovo–Crimea parallel have occurred . We focused mainly on dominant narratives, as they are enacted by the selected elites .
 The Kosovo precedent was chosen in connection to Crimea in Crimea . We reflected on the political rationale behind choosing the Kosovo precedent in connection with Crimea .
 The comparison of these two cases allowed the Russian political elite to promote in the international public sphere a series of extra-legal elements that can easily trigger norm contestation .
 This includes sensitive topics for the Western Balkans like the connection between ethnicity and territory . This includes the instrumentalization of the recent past with the aim to change borders, destabilize and challenge the international law .
 The strategy of selecting and then using one version of the past fits short-term political purposes, or the reinterpretation of the international law . Russia’s legitimization of certain decisions have become common practices for Russia .
 Russia refers extensively to legal norms and international law instrumentalizing them as legitimacy mechanism . The article showed that in designing and performing foreign policy narratives, Russia refers to legalnorms and international laws .
 The extralegal legitimacy claims refer to Crimea annexation are an illustration of how Russia’s foreign policy narratives influence diplomatic practice . Experts’ perceptions on the subject are deepening the politicization of international law .
 We believe that those policy narratives are relevant for understanding Russia’s positioning towards the Western powers in the conflict in Ukraine . We believe those policies are relevant to understanding Russia's position towards the West .
 The way states use their foreign policy narratives to frame an action which challenges the international order deserves more attention, especially in a situation of conflict, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Moscow has used a series of extralegal arguments to claim legitimacy for its external intervention on the territory of Ukraine . Russia's actions in Crimea have been questioned primarily from the point of view of legality .
 The Kosovo precedent was used in the case of Crimea is an example of a dominant policy narrative that fixes the meaning of a certain event and limits the opportunity for further political contestation of Russia’s actions in Ukraine .
 Russia's final status is still contested by several countries inside and outside Europe, including Russia . Russia included.
 The independence of Kosovo is not recognized by 5 EU Member States –Spain, Greece, Slovakia, Romania, Cyprus, Cyprus . Kosovo has not been recognized by the EU .
 Serbia called on the International Court of Justice to rule on the declaration of Kosovo’s secession . The declaration was in breach of international law .
 The name Kosovo is used in the whole article without prejudice to position on status . Kosovo is in line with UN Security Council Resolution 1244/99 and International Court of Justice Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence .
 Serbia deemed Kosovo’s decision unconstitutional and keeps considering Kosovo as part of its territory . Serbia considers Kosovo's decision unconstitutional .
 She held research fellowships in Berlin and Ljubljana . She conducted field research in Sarajevo and Prishtina .
 EU Enlargement policy, Europeanization, Democratization in the Western Balkans, Post conflict societies, post Yugoslav space, post Yugoslavia space .
 Russian normative justifications in Georgia and Ukraine and their implications for global norms. Russian norms have implications for the global norms .
Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov speaks during plenary session of the State Duma of the Russian Federation . He answers questions from deputies during the plenary sessions .
 Foreign minister Sergey Lavrov's interview with Vladimir Solovyov on Russiya-1 TV Channel . The interview took place on Russian TV Channel.
 Foreign minister Sergey Lavrov delivers a speech and answers questions during debates at the 51st Munich Security Conference .
 Russian Federation representative to the OSCE Alexander Lukashevich speaks at OSCE Permanent Council on Crimea . The need to fulfil the Minsk agreements is needed to fulfil Minsk agreement .
 The formation of a conceptual framework for Russian dominance in the post-Soviet area . Russian dominance was formed in the early 1980s .
 Putin, V 2014 Vladimir Putin’s interview with Radio Europe 1 and TF1 TV channel .
 The Kosovo "precedent" does not justify Russia’s annexation of Crimea. Why the Kosovo “precedents’d’t justify Russia's annexation of the Crimea is not clear .
 The Quality of Norms is What Actors Make of It Critical Constructivist Research on Norms . The Quality Of Norms has been published in the past .
 Research interviews Nr Name Position & organization Date & location Ukraine 1.1 .
 Haran Olexiy Head of research, Ilko Kucheriv Democratic Initiatives Foundation 13.04.2016, Kiev 3.4. 2016, Kiev.
 The Kiev-based Hybrid Warfare Resistance Bureau is based in Kiev, Ukraine . It was founded in the 1990s .
 Myroshnychenko Vasyl Expert, Ukraine Crisis Media Center 15.04.2016, Kiev 5.4. 2016, Kiev. MyroShnychenko vasyl Expert .
 Smelyanski Yurii Economic expert, Maidan of Foreign Affairs 12.04.2016, Kiev 6.4. 2016 .
 Umland Andreas Senior research fellow, Institute for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation 13.04.2016 .
 Baunov Alexander Editor-in-Chief of Carnegie Moscow Center .
 Kolesnikov Andrei Senior Associate, Carnegie Moscow Center 17.05.2016, Moscow 11.5. 2016, Koleskov Andrei senior associate . Kolesnik Andrei is a senior associate at the center of the center .
 Makarkin Aleksey Expert, Center for Political Technologies 11.05.2016, Moscow 12.05 . 2016 . 2016. 2016 .
Nikitina, Yulia Associate Professor, Moscow State Institute of International Relations 17.05.05 . Nikitina is Yulia associate Professor of Moscow State University .