 The Continental Congress decided to declare independence from the British empire in 1776 . 10% of the population of the fledgling country was from Ireland .
 They were very active in the American Revolution, both on the battlefields and off, and yet their stories are not well known .
 The important contributions of the Irish on military, political, political and economic levels have been long overlooked and ignored by generations of historians .
 The Continental Army consisted of a far larger percentage of Irish soldiers than previously thought . Between 40% and 50% fought and swayed some of the most important battles of the American Revolution .
 Romanticized versions of this historical period tend to focus on upper class figures that had biggest roles in America’s struggle for liberty .
 These adaptations neglect the impact of European and Irish ideals as well as citizens on the formation of the Revolution . But these adaptations neglect impact of EU and Ireland's ideals, they say .
 Irish contributors such as John Barry, the colonies’ foremost naval officer; Henry Knox, an artillery officer and future secretary of war . Richard Montgomery, America’s first war hero and martyr, were all instrumental in carrying out the vision for a free country .
 Without their timely and disproportionate assistance, America almost certainly would have lost the fight for its existence . America would almost certainly have lost a desperate fight for their existence .
 Outside the U.S. Email Sales@BarnesReview.org for best international rates .
 Point of Origin Gobekli Tepe and the Spiritual Matrix for the World’s Cosmologtes eveals. Tepe as a center of civilizing knowledge for the ancient world .
 Laird Scranton shows how the complex at Gobekli Tepe in Turkey is the point of origin from which all the great civilizations of the past inherited their cosmology, esoteric teachings, and civilizing skills, such as agriculture, metallurgy, and masonry, fully
 Scranton explains how the po oo i carved images on Gobekli Tepe’s pillars were the precursors to LAIRD SCRANTON the sacred symbols of the Dogon, Egyptians, Tibetans, and Chinese .
 The only complete English translation of the 1943 “Official Material on the Mass Murder of Katyn’s’ compiled on behalf of the German Foreign Office based on documentary evidence .
 The first-ever English translation of the complete forensic report by the German government detailing the mass murder of Polish officers and officials by the Soviet Union's secret police in the Katyn Forest, originally published in 1943 .
 The report is an understatement of the murderous nature of Soviet Bolshevism . Dismissed as “propaganda’ and ignored for nearly 50 years, this report was completely accurate .
 The meticulous report starts with an overview of the basic facts surrounding the discovery of the mass graves . It then produces a series of eyewitnesses accounts of the Poles being moved to the execution area .
 The reader is given a thorough account of the environment and its effect upon buried bodies . Next, the reader will provide a series of postmortem studies on the bodies .
 The victims had all been executed by single shots to the back of the head, a merciless and brutal way to individually execute the thousands of victims discovered in mass graves .
 The Allied response to the revelations consisted of a pretence that the murders had not taken place . It also provides a full copy of the major exchanges between the International Red Cross and other parties on the matter .
 The Communist atrocity at Katyn was a turning point in the propaganda war of World War II and post-war propaganda . It was the Soviet Union's desire for revenge over National Socialist Germany’s exposure of the Katyn massacre which led to the first “mass genocide�
 This report has only ever been partially translated into English before . This report is only ever partially translated in English .
 This firstever full translation contains the complete original text, and all 83 original photographs . The first ever full translation of the original text.
 It also includes 18 new footnotes, explaining events and details to the present-day reader . The document also includes the original footnotes .
 The full extent of the murders which was not available to the Germans in 1943. In addition, it contains a brand-new introduction .
 The abridged 1942 edition is completely re-set and illustrated . Léon de Poncins of Francois Trocase’s remarkable 1899 study of the end of the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 Jewish Austria provides a crucial insight into the role played by one alien group in the collapse of this venerable Catholic empire at the heart of Europe .
 Trocase’s work presents an objective and detailed analysis of the economic and social conditions of the Austrian Empire in its last days .
 Trocase’s thorough investigation of the modus operandi of Jewry continues to have an urgent relevance to the socio-economic and political conditions of contemporary Western states . Poncins’ readable edition of Trocase's thorough investigation continues to be readable .
 Use the form below and return it in the TBR reply envelope enclosed within 30 days . Use the letter below to send a reply to the Mail Online home .
 Phone call 1-877-773-9077 toll free Mon.-Thu.-Fri.-4.30 ET to charge or PROVIDE EMAIL . If you want free ACCESS to TBR'S onLINE mail this form in the return envelope supplied .
 No one else in modern politics has anywhere near the power and influence of George Soros, both domestically and internationally .
 Soros has his hand in influencing the media, activist groups, colleges, presidential elections, global elections, local United States politics, and much more . Backed by the tens of billions of dollars he’s accumulated throughout his career .
 Soros has earned himself a reputation as a “boogeyman’s character on the right, and nowhere else will you find such an extensive documentation of his influence as in this book .
 Millions of readers rely on investigator Matt Palumbo for the most important information on what is going on in the world .
 If you know nothing about George Soros, aside from the fact he is a billionaire, you will learn so much more .
 The power this man actually wields should scare every American, Republican and Democrat alike, and the people of the world .
Soros sees himself as a God, on a global crusade for equity among nations . Soros is a global crusader for equity.
 Soros has stated his true desire is to control everything happening in America and the rest of the world . Soros has even stated as such that he wants to control all things in America .
 Many people across the world have been victims of his highly effective and incredibly well-funded meddling . While that may be hyperbole, the sentiment is shared by many thousands of people .
 In The Man Behind the Curtain, the author has done a meticulous job researching all Soros has done . He is doing to destroy American principles of democracy .
 He funds candidates and initiatives that are anti-free speech and who aim to defund the police and who don't care about property and personal safety as well as due process of the law .
 It makes sense that he doesn’t truly appreciate the American ideal of a fair opportunity for all and the right to be rewarded for your hard work .
After all, he made most of his money through arbitrage and market manipulation . He made most from arbitrage, market manipulation, he said . He created anything but anarchy .
 He started his work in Europe and we will end up like them if we don’t watch out. He started work in the UK and has worked in Europe .
 Pharma-funded mainstream media as convinced millions of Americans that Dr. Dr. John Sutter's work was on the right side of the world .
 As director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases . Dr. Dr. John Sutter is also the head of the N.I.D. of the International Health Organisation .
 Anthony Fauci dispenses $6. billion in annual taxpayer-provided funding for scientific research . He dictates the subject, content, and outcome of scientific health research across the globe .
 Fauci uses the financial clout at his disposal to wield extraordinary influence over hospitals, universities, journals, and journals . He has the power to ruin, advance, or reward, he says . He uses the power of financial clout to wield power over hospitals and universities
 During more than a year of painstaking and meticulous research, Robert F Kennedy Jr. unearthed a shocking story that obliterates media spin on Dr. Kennedy .
 Fauci . . . and that will alarm every American who cares about democracy, our Constitution, and the future of our children’s health . Fauce . .
 Fauci orchestrated fraudulent studies, and then pressured the U.S. Food and Drug Administration . He pressured Bill Gates, Big Pharma, and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health Robert F Kennedy Jr.
 Fauci repeatedly violated federal laws to allow his Big Pharma partners to use impoverished and dark-skinned children as lab rats in deadly experiments with toxic AIDS and cancer chemotherapies . Fauce repeatedly violated the federal laws.
 In 2000, Fauci shook hands with Bill Gates in the library of Gates’s $147 million Seattle mansion . The partnership would aim to control an increasingly profitable $60 billion global vaccine enterprise with unlimited growth potential .
 The Pharma-Fauci-Gates alliance exercises dominion over global health policy . Through funding leverage and carefully cultivated personal relationships with heads of state and leading media and social media institutions, the Pharma- Fauci Gates alliance exercise dominion.
 Fauci, Gates and Gates use their control of media outlets, scientific journals, key government and quasi-governmental agencies to flood the public with fearful propaganda about Covid-19 virulence and pathogenesis, and to muzzle debate and censor dissent .
 These books are compiled from the actual writings and photos of the German troops who participated in World War Il. The books are published in a book called 'flemories V9 tr'
 This is the real history of the war, directly from the guys in the trenches, on the ships and in the air . This is a real history from the men on ships and on the air.
Rare photos taken in combat as well as relaxing, playing soccer and enjoying life. Now you can read their eyewitness accounts .
 The report had never before been seen in its entirety in English . Kemp discusses the highlights of that report, which had never been seen.
Historians insist Hitler launched a war of aggression against Poland in September 1939 to subdue the “inferior’ nation, expand German territory and dominate Eastern Europe . Germany’s repeated attempts to peacefully resolve the conflict were ignored .
 John Wear explains Hitler’s decision to invade by relying solely on neutral sources .
 Many of the decisions made by German Chancellor Adolf Hitler are regularly ignored or completely dismissed by most mainstream historians .
 Hitler delivered on September 1, 1939, outlining his reasoning and justification for the Third Reich's invasion of Poland .
 Adolf Hitler’s National Socialist regime made numerous and repeated peace offers leading up to and during WWIL is censored in the West .
Politically motivated Court Historians have whitewashed Hitler’s tireless efforts to establish and ensure peace in Europe . TBR's Karl Haemers outlines the efforts in this important piece .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is one of the most demonized international political figures in the world . Putin's reasoning for his invasion of Ukraine on February 24, 2022 .
 We will let readers judge for themselves whether the invasion was necessary . We will allow readers to decide if invasion was, in fact, necessary .
 A pro-Russian separatist movement in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine has sparked a broader war between Russia and Ukraine . A major disruption to the current America-centric international political order .
 Richard Nixon’s controversial 1971 decision to close the “gold window’’ The conversion of U.S. dollars to gold by foreign nations holding dollars. The end of one of the key pillars of the post-WWII Brenton Woods economic agreements .
 The U.S. Army leaders tasked with taming and battling the Indians on the High Plains had their work cut out .
 A list of Hitler's peace offers is a list of his peace offers . We need an American Putin --42 What happened to Ukraine? —52 Ethnic Russians in Eastern Europe --59 Salazar and Duplessis .
 Dr. RICHARD LANDWEHR DEANNA SPINGOLA: Atlanta, Georgia, Brookings, Oregon Woodridge, Illinois .
 CarLo MATTOGNO Upo WALENDY Tampa, Florida Palestrina, Rome, Italy Vlotho, Germany Prok. TREMBLAY Memphis, Tennessee Corona del Mar, California Quebec, Canada .
 Periodical rate postage paid at Dulles, VA 20101 and additional mailing offices. Periodical rates are paid for the mailing offices .
 No changes are made for TBR. All rights reserved except that copies or reprints may be made without permission so long as proper credit and contact info are given to TBR .
 All manuscripts submitted must be typewritten (double spaced) or in electronic format . All manuscripts submit must be written in a typewritten format .
 Send your old, incorrect mailing label and your new, correct address neatly printed or typed 30 days before you move to ensure delivery .
There is still a war raging in Ukraine with heavy fighting in the Donbass region . There is still an ongoing conflict in the region.
 Most Americans had never even heard about this region before the Russian invasion . It could still bring us to the brink of a shooting war in Eastern Europe .
 The Donbass has a complex history of the Donbass . It was founded in the early 1960s and has a history of complex and complex history .
 Putin is a modern-day Adolf Hitler, both of them standing accused of wantonly invading a "peaceful neighbor" Both of them are accused of invading a “peaceful’ neighbor .
 researcher John Wear has compiled an article quoting heavily from non-German sources . The article is based on an article by John Wear .
 Hitler himself explains why he invaded Poland on page 24 if you prefer the reasoning from the horse's mouth .
 Vladimir Putin tells us why he invaded Ukraine in a transcript we've included for your edification . The transcript is part of the Putin-Putin transcript .
 The Russian leader paints a different picture of Ukraine than we get from the Western press .
 We believe a physical, print reproduction of Putin's justification for the invasion of Ukraine is an important addition to the permanent, written historical record . We include it here because we believe it is a physical reproduction of the invasion .
Karl Haemers' article discusses Hitler's many viable peace offers . We lay at least one of those myths to rest in the article .
 More than 75 years after the end of WWII, allegations are again being made that mass atrocities are being carried out in Europe .
 TBR readers know, more than most Americans, that atrocities are committed in war . More than most of the world's war crimes are committed.
War is itself an atrocity, one that has plagued Mankind since we first emerged from our Paleolithic caves . War is itself a atrocity.
 exaggerated atrocity tales and accusations of genocide are two of the most effective ways to rile up the public to support the atrocity of war . But you also know that exaggerated atrocities tales are also a way to support war .
 The Soviets effectively blamed the mass execution of Polish military and police officers on the Nazis . They used it in their agitprop. The Soviets used it to blame the Nazis for the execution .
 Germans conducted a thorough forensics examination in 1943 proving the Soviets were the culprits . For years, the truth remained hidden, even though the Germans, with the help of the Poles, had conducted an examination . But for years, it remained hidden.
 Western intelligence knew this, as well, but kept silent, as fictional tales of Nazi atrocities played well in their own “evil German” propaganda play .
 The rare German report on Katyn was translated by historian Arthur Kemp into English for the first time ever .
 Maurice Duplessis, Nixon's golden mistake and a fateful encounter on America’s High Plains plus John Amery .
 The San Francisco Examiner. Prior to publishing the Journal, Hearst managed TheSan Francisco Examiner . The Journal was published by Hearst in the 1990s .
 Both men helped revolutionize journalism and news reporting, but in ways that weren't necessarily beneficial to the public .
 Pulitzer and Hearst would go down as icons in the history of journalism, known for their innovation in the industry and mastery of what would become known as yellow journalism .
Facts and objective reporting were of lesser importance to the practitioners of yellow journalism than circulation .
 This approach to reporting the news has come to dominate the reporting produced by virtually every mainstream mass media organ in existence in the modern Western world today .
 Both men were competing for readers and thus used sensational, over-the-top headlines and imagery, largely in the form of cartoons, to attract eyeballs to their papers .
 Pulitzer and Hearst played leading roles in the escalation of the conflict between the U.S. and Spain . In 1898, the pinnacle of yellow journalism at the time was reached .
 USS Maine, a Navy ship sent to Cuba as a display of U.S. power, was sunk in Havana Harbor . Spain, which then ruled Cuba, was then ruled by the United States .
 Pulitzer and Hearst quickly launched their popular newspapers into overdrive . They churned out endless stories demonizing the Spanish, demanding revenge and demanding revenge . Spain's insistence it had nothing to do with the sinking of the ship.
 U.S. papers were also filled with stories of mass atrocities committed by the Spanish against the natives of Cuba and the Philippines .
Readers had no way of checking the facts, as we can today with instantaneous global communications technology .
 Pulitzer and Hearst published had little to do with the facts on the ground or the complex geopolitical realities in contention . Nearly all of what Pulitzer, Hearst publish did not do with facts on ground or geopolitical realities .
 This sort of mindset, and the irresponsible, reprehensible perversion of journalism it has produced, has proven to be disastrous to humanity and to the cause of truth and justice in the world, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Western media outlets amplify entirely unverified and extremely dubious narratives and reports coming out of Ukraine, without even attempting to fact check or confirm the allegations .
 No doubt it will continue unabated for weeks to come as long as this NATO-instigated conflict continues .
 Both work handin-hand in the promotion of blatant falsehoods and deceitful narratives to advance the interests of the New World Order and their own kleptocracy .
 Both are equally as guilty in their irresponsible and mendacious rhetoric, their loathing of Russia and their promotion and amplification of outright war propaganda . Both are also guilty of their irresponsible rhetoric and their lashing out at Russia .
 This sort of brazen dishonesty has been a mainstay of the fake news media establishment and the political elite in America and the wider Western world for far too long .
 Russia and their budding coterie of allies, including China, India, Brazil and others, are tired of living under Uncle Sam's boot .
 National Socialist Germany was accused of committing the worst atrocities imaginable . The execution of Polish intelligentsia, army officers, policemen during WWII continue to emerge .
 Arare translation of the German investigation is conclusively debunking many of these fictional tales . The story of the mass murder of helpless prisoners in Katyn Forest in Eastern Europe and why .
 The full German report on the events, first published in 1943, has never before been completely translated into English . It was published in the first German report in 1943 .
 English language portions of the medical conclusions have seen the light of day . But the complete document has remained in the shadows, available only to those with deep pockets .
 The saga of the Katyn Forest murders started with the origins of World War II and the build-up of hostilities between Germany and Poland that dated back to the Versailles Treaty .
 At the end of World War I (1914- 1918), Poland was recreated as an 4 + THE BARNES REVIEW .
 Katyn memorials are found in many cities across the world with Polish populations . Katyn Memorials are often found in cities around the world .
 Polish people were divided up and ruled over by the Austro-Hungarian, German and Russian empires .
 When recreated as an independent republic in 1919, the new Polish state was given huge slices of land from Germany . The region of West Prussia, specifically the province of Posen and East Upper Silesia.
Both sides had nearly equal historical claims to the territory . Both sides had done the most to increase the wealth and prestige of the regions in question .
 The major German coastal and port city of Danzig was established as a “Free City’s” run by the League of Nations to serve as a major port for Polish trade . The city was also established as an ‘Free City' run by
 Stalin approved NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria’s recommended plan to execute Polish prisoners of war considered enemies of Soviet regime .
 The first page of Beria’s four-page letter, written on official NKVD letterhead and addressed to Stalin himself, is shown to the left, along with official signatures of approval from Stalin and five other regions .
 Nazi Germany offered to renounce all territorial claims in return for road and train overland access to Danzig and the return of that city to German rule .
 Polish government refused to accede to reasonable requests from Britain and France . Polish government refuses to accept reasonable requests .
 At the same time, some Polish nationalists were persecuting Germans within the Danzig Corridor . A number of murders and attacks took place upon German civilians .
 The ongoing harassment and tension had convinced Adolf Hitler that there could only be a military solution to the crisis .
 German chancellor had to take care of potential international diplomatic fallout . He gave orders to the Wehrmacht to prepare an invasion of Poland .
 The British and the French had started talks with the Soviet Union in the summer of 1939 . The aim of forming an anti-German alliance was to form an alliance against Germany .
When senior Soviet officials broke down, Hitler seized his opportunity . The talks broke down and Hitler seized the opportunity .
 Hitler's own followers, for whom the Bolsheviks had always been the main enemy, signed a non-aggression pact on August 23, 1939 .
 These numbers do not suggest that Germany had planned and prepared a great war that they started in 1939 .
 Britain and Poland signed a formal military alliance on August 25, 1939 . It was as a result of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact .
 The British ambassador to Berlin met with Hitler and was presented with a list of minimum conditions to settle the dispute . Danzig and its “corridor” to be returned to Germany.
 Hitler also directly requested the Polish government to send a senior representative to Berlin to discuss these requests .
 Polish government refused to even respond to Hitler’s request for talks .
 The two Allied powers assured the Poles that they would come to their aid should Germany invade, and the situation became deadlocked .
 The French government issued an ultimatum to Germany on September 2, demanding an end to the invasion, and giving 6 + THE BARNES REVIEW . The German government until 5m. the following day to respond .
 The British government delivered a similar ultimatum to the German government on September 3, with an expiry time of 11:00m. that day . The German government has a similar deadline to the British government .
 France also declared war the same day, shortly after the expiry of the 5m deadline .
 The Soviet army invaded Poland from the east on September 17 . It rapidly advanced through the already largely defeated Polish forces .
 There was no reaction at all from Britain or France . Even Polish government officials refused to even respond to Hitler's request for talks .
 The military alliance signed between Poland and Britain on August 25 specifically limited the British obligation to protect Poland from “aggression’ from Germany and nowhere else. In fact, the agreement was signed between the two countries .
 There has never been any publicly provided reason for the Allied powers to have engaged in such duplicity . This minor legal issue aside, there has been no public reason for such duplicity .
 By October 6, the Polish armies had been utterly defeated, and the campaign came to an official end . Poland never formally surrendered, even though Poland never surrendered .
 The Soviet Union incorporated eastern Poland into the Byelorussian and Ukrainian Soviet republics . The Soviet Republics were formed from Poland and Ukraine .
 The remainder of Poland was then organized under civilian rule . It was then renamed as the General Government .
 About 200,000 Polish soldiers were taken prisoner by the Germans, and another 200,00 by the Russians . About 200k Polish soldiers took prisoner by Germans, another 200k by Russians .
 The Germans quickly released the vast majority of their prisoners of war back into the General Government . The fate of the Poles captured by the Soviets came to be tied up with the events at Katyn .
 The Soviet Union began with an extensive project to Sovietize that portion of Poland under its control . The Soviets began with a project toSovietize that part of Poland.
 Polish officers, police officers and other law enforcement officials were sent to concentration camps at Ostashkov, Jukhnov, Kozelsk, Putivl, Starobelsk and Oranki .
 There, they were repeatedly interviewed, and their views on a wide range of topics recorded . They were interviewed and recorded on numerous occasions .
 The purpose of these informants was, it would appear, to serve as a means of checking what the interviewed Polish intelligentsia were saying back in their barracks, as opposed to what they might be telling their questioners .
 The Soviet secret police compiled a list of 25,000 mostly Polish origin “enemies’s ‘enemies.’ It had taken several months and by February 1940, it had compiled the list . The list was compiled by the People's Commissariat of Internal
 NKVD chief Lavrentiy Beria sent a letter on official NKVD letterhead to Stalin . He stated that Polish prisoners of war kept at camps and prisons in western Belarus and Ukraine were implacable enemies of the Soviet Union .
 The first page of the letter shows, in his own handwriting, the word “Za’s” scrawled by Stalin in person . The letter was written by Stalin.
After World War II, Kaganovich became deputy head of the Soviet government . He became deputy chief of the Russian government .
Senior figures were informed beforehand and actively endorsed the mass murders at Katyn . All of these senior figures were therefore informed beforehand. All of them were also informed beforehand .
 They are all sworn enemies of Soviet power. They are filled with hatred for the Soviet system of government . They are also sworn enemies.
 Prisoner of war officers and police in the camps are attempting to continue their c-r work . They are conducting anti-Soviet agitation .
 Each one of them is just waiting to be released in order to be able to enter actively into the battle against Soviet power .
 The NKVD organs in the western oblasts’ of Ukraine and Belorussia have exposed several c-r insurgent organizations .
 In all c-r organizations, an active guiding role is played by former officers of the former Polish army and former police .
 The Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish prisoners of war is a crime to which there are no witnesses . The massacre is the first time there have been no witnesses.
 The Soviet regime maintained the fiction that Katyn was a Nazi atrocity, their story unchallenged by Western governments . The NKVD was on the direct orders of Josef Stalin, for nearly 50 years .
 Surviving Katyn explores the decades-long search for answers, focusing on the experience of those individuals with the most at stake .
 Call 1-877-773-9077 toll free to charge, Mon.-Thu.-Fri.-4-30 ET or visit www.com.com .
 The prisoner of war camps are holding a total of 14,736 former officers, officials, officials and officials . The prisoners are more than 97% Polish by nationality .
 Comrades Beria, Merkulov, Kobulov and Bashtakov. Assign the examination of cases and the carrying out of decisions to a troika consisting of Comrade Beria.
 The killings started in earnest on April 3, 1940, and continued until May 1940 . The killings were sanctioned at the very highest levels of the Soviet Union .
 The NKVD was well versed in the procedure. Executing the large number of prisoners took careful planning, but the NKVD had a good plan .
 Katyn Forest had been used as a communist execution spot from the time of the 1917 Revolution . First and oldest mass graves on the site were of dissident Russians executed by the NKVD and its predecessors .
 Prisoners invariably had their hands bound behind their backs before being shot once in the back of the head .
 Other prisoners had garments placed over their heads, and a noose-type rope placed around their necks . Other prisoners also had garments put over their head and a rope put around their neck .
 This noose was then connected to their bound hands, meaning that if they struggled at all, they would effectively strangle themselves . If they struggled, the noose would then be connected to the bound hands . This would then connect them to their hands .
 The immobilized prisoners would then have been held by the arms on both sides by two NKVD men . A third, the most practiced of all, fired the execution shot .
 The body was either thrown directly into a pit or put on a truck and transported to the pits for burial . Depending upon the place of execution, the body is either thrown into the pit or transported to a pit .
 Topsecret records and archives were finally opened after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1990 .
 The newly post-communist Polish Institute of National Remembrance has launched its own investigation into Katyn . The newly-post-communists institute is investigating Katyn.
 The Warsaw Institute Review is the official journal of the Polish NGO think tank, the Warsaw Institute . Other documents revealed that the executioners and other participants had provided statements of their work to the NKVD for internal control purposes .
 A fuller picture of the mechanics of the mass murder finally emerged . The report was drawn up after a thorough review of all the available documentation supplied from the NKVD archives .
 The prisoners were brought to the building's cellar, where their identities were checked . Their identities were also checked .
 Once their hands were bound behind their backs, they would be executed with a single shot to the back of the head . The execution would take place with the hands bound behind the backs .
 A Nagant revolver was initially used to carry out the executions . But soon the executioners began using a German Walther 7.65.65 .
 The above propaganda poster, released in 1943 by the Germans, depicts two crazed Soviet NKVD operatives on the verge of executing a Polish officer with a dead officer at their feet .
 The NKVD executed nearly 22,000 Polish officers and officials in the months of April and May 1940 . It was one of the most horrific mass murder operations in history .
 NKVD leaders advised that any Polish POW deemed to be hostile to the Soviet occupation should be executed in a systematic campaign to eliminate any opposition to communist rule in Poland and other parts of Eastern Europe .
 The Walther pistols used as execution weapons were never found, but would most likely have been acquired in the same manner as the ammunition . They were used in execution weapons .
 A description of the killing of inmates from Ostashkov was provided by the head of the board of the district NKVD in the Kalinin/Tver region in 1940 .
 Blokhin'* put on his special clothing: a brown leather cap, a long leather brown apron, brown leather gloves with cuffs above the elbows .
After being dragged to the cell, the victim was killed by a shot in the back of the head .
 The shootings ended at dawn and, in the morning, the corpses were transported by trucks to the forested area where they were buried .
 Work crews brought in with orders to plant trees and vegetation over burial sites . Later, work crews were brought in to plant vegetation over the burial sites.
 It seems that most of the executions were carried out at the burial site, and not elsewhere . Drawing upon the evidence provided at the other scenes, it is likely that a similar procedure was followed .
Before the victims were sent to the execution site, they were directed to a NKVD villa, mentioned in the German report .
 The NKVD villa was destroyed by the Germans once the excavated bodies had been reburied . The villa had been destroyed by Germans after the bodies were found .
 The total number of victims in all these massacres appears to have been around 22,000 . The total of victims appears to be around 20,000.
 3,739 prisoners were murdered in the basement of the NKVD's headquarters . It is one of the great ironies of the Katyn massacre that the victims also included . At the very least, several dozen of the victims were Polish Jews .
 Germans report says a handful of the identified bodies have obviously Jewish names . This fact was noted upon by the Germans in their report .
 The Soviet Union insisted that the Germans were to blame for the massacre . The massacre began in the early 1990s .
 The claim was a cold and calculated lie, but it served the Soviet Union’s purposes . The claim has subsequently engulfed Nazi Germany as the epitome of “mass murder,’ the claim was readily believed .
 In Poland, however, the Poles never quite accepted it, says the Polish media .
 In the spring of 1945, even the communist-controlled ‘provisional government of Poland’ launched its own inquiry . The inquiry was launched by the communist government in 1945 .
 Roman Rudenko, the chief prosecutor for the USSR at the Nuremberg Trials, formally filed a case against the Nazi leadership for the murder of the Polish officers at Katyn . This was quickly shut down in 1946 when the case was filed .
 The attempt to bring Germans to trial at Nuremberg failed when the British and Americans refused to support Rudenko’s efforts .
 The British and Americans both knew, or strongly suspected, that the Soviets had committed the mass murders . This refusal showed clearly that the British and U.S. both knew .
 The British and Americans were quite prepared to overlook obvious Soviet crimes against humanity in their quest to see Germans punished . This shows, without any shadow of a doubt, that the British and U.S. were quite willing to overlook the crimes . This is without any doubt,
 This moral and legal corruption serves as an indictment upon the entire Nuremberg process . This moral, legal corruption is an indictment on the entireNurembergprocess .
 In fact, the Soviets had already prosecuted Germans for the Katyn massacre .
 In Katyn Forest, 15,000 to 20,000 persons, including Polish officers and Jews, were shot and buried . The officer, Duere, describes in detail how Russian women, children and old men were murdered .
 The reburial and memorial sites erected by the Germans and the Polish Red Cross in Katyn in 1943 were torn down and replaced by memorials 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE .
 All Iron Curtain schools were taught the official history that the Germans were to blame . The history was taught in all schools .
 Dissenters were silenced, and at least one of the doctors from the international medical team were silenced .
 In 1951, a U.S. congressional committee held a formal investigation into the Katyn issue . The issue was the subject of an investigation .
 The committee's conclusion was that the Soviets were responsible and recommended that the USSR be held accountable . The committee’s conclusion was the Soviets are responsible and recommend that they be accountable .
Nothing happened to this recommendation and the story was largely buried by the media . Nothing happened to the recommendation .
 The establishment’s version of events that the Germans had been responsible was still largely accepted and propagated . It was known and understood that it affected the entire Nuremberg legal process .
 Behind the scenes, it was becoming increasingly clear as to whom was responsible . However, behind the scenes was becoming more clear .
 Poirier looked for the first time at captured German air reconnaissance photographs of the Katyn woods . Poiriers looked for a first time.
 The Germans had flown 17 photographic sorties over the site between July 9, 1941 and June 10, 1944 .
 The most striking conclusion contained in the report was the revelation that the vegetation and terrain in the Katyn Forest displayed changes that predated the German arrival .
 This irrefutably disproved any claim that the Nazis were responsible for the massacres . This ir Refutably proved that the Nazi regime was responsible for massacres .
 Smolensk was the primary target . Katyn, though identifiable, is imaged on an extreme oblique photo of poor scale .
 There are no noticeable differences between Katyn on July 9, 1941 and September 2, 1942 .
 The imagery taken on September 2, 1942, permits a detailed examination of the site and its surroundings .
 The most striking features on the imagery are the growth differences in vegetation over the location of the reported mass graves and the nearby woods . The images appear to show extensive ground disruption and a natural or intentional renewal of vegetation .
 The growth over suspected grave sites was neither as tall nor as dense as in the woods . The growth was not as tall or dense as the woods.
 The presence of a building complex, referred to in written sources as the dacha, is verifiable . The building complex is referred to as a dacha .
 The Red Army retook the area from the Germans in September 1943 . They immediately launched a major effort to obliterate evidence at the scene .
 Mechanical earthmoving equipment was brought in, the area plowed up and bodies removed . The area was removed from the ground .
 The obvious search for new graves, when combined with backfilling of the grave sites found earlier by the Germans and the security measures in place on June 10, 1944 . Two NAZI GENERALS HANGED by RUSSIANS LONDON, Dec.
 Martin Adolf Lemler were hanged in Bryansk four hours after a military tribunal had convicted them as German war criminals .
 Karl T Stein was sentenced to 20 years in prison, broadcast said .
 German officer facing trial in Leningrad for 'nightmare deeds' during war . 10,000 people were killed in Katyn, in Smolensk region, where mass graves were found .
 The Germans had alleged that Poles had been murdered by Soviet political police and buried in Katyn in 1939 . The Germans alleged that Polish political police had murdered them .
 A German news agency in April, 1943, asserted German troops had discovered the Katyn graves and blamed Russians for the atrocity .
 The International Red Cross has been asked to send a delegation to investigate on the spot . The Polish Cabinet in London announced four days later that the International RedCross had been sent to investigate . The Red Cross had been asked by the Polish Cabinet to investigate.
 A captured German officer ‘has admitted Nazi guilt for the massacre of Katyn’ during a Soviet military trial in Leningrad .
 The Germans had long accused the Soviets of having murdered thousands of Polish officers and officials . But that narrative was entirely flipped on its head as pro-Soviet, anti-German propagandists initiated a campaign to pin the blame on the Germans .
 Polish and German military men are shocked by the scale of the NKVD mass murder . Poland and Germany have been trying to obliterate evidence of gross misdeeds .
 The explosive nature of the revelations resulted in Poirier’s article being put into the ‘classified’ section of the Studies in Intelligence journal .
 Poland's deputy general prosecutor made a presentation to the media in May 1991 . World learned then, for the first time, of the existence of aerial photographs proving the German version of events at Katyn .
 Mikhail Gorbachev was forced to publicly admit that the NKVD had been responsible for the mass murders . The Soviet Union’s last leader, Mikhail GorBachev, was forced.
 He ordered that, for the first time since the war, further on-site investigations be conducted at Katyn . He ordered the investigation into the war to be carried out .
 Exhumations carried out from 1991 to 1995 found mass graves of prisoners from Starobielsk camp in Piatichatki .
 In 2011, excavations in Katyn found the remains of many other victims who had not been buried in the Katyn region . The remains of those who had been held at WWW were identified .
 In June 2000, the first proper and factually accurate modern memorial to the Polish citizens murdered and then buried in mass graves in Katyn was opened in Kharkiv-Piatichatki .
 In 2012, new memorials were built at Katyn and Mednoye and in 2012, amemorial and cemetery were opened in Kiev . That same year, new Memorials were also built in Kiev.
 It is still unknown if any documentation was destroyed, and if that which survived is only what was missed .
 First and foremostly, the horror of the victims and their families must have been beyond imagination . The victims' families must be beyond imagination.
 Many of the victims had bayonet stab wounds at the Katyn site, according to the German report . Many had to be tortured to step to the very edge of the execution pit .
 To have looked down upon the bodies of one's comrades, thrown into an earth pit like animal carcasses, must have been a harrowing last sight .
 The torture to which the families were subjected, not knowing what had happened to their loved ones, must have been psychological torture . The families held on to false hopes and the lies strung out by the Soviet Union.
 Given the nature of the war, it is entirely possible that many families would not have believed the Germans .
 The Germans only excavated a small portion of the Katyn site, and never even knew of the other mass shootings . Only a handful of victims were ever named in their report .
 The German report says 17,000 victims were unnamed . This meant that well over 17,00 victims were not named .
 communists took control of Eastern Europe at the end of the war . Even then, the psychological torture would not have ended, as the communists took over Eastern Europe .
 The official communist line was that all the Polish prisoners had been murdered by the Germans . Anyone who dissented faced imprisonment or worse themselves .
 In the spring of 1943, German troops discovered mass graves in the Katyn Forest, Germany . An internationally staffed medical commission organized by the German government to excavate and investigate the graves .
 It was determined that the mass murders occurred in 1940, well before the Germans had control of the territory . The crime could only have been committed by the Soviet Union .
 When the Soviets re-captured the territory in the fall of 1943, they set up their own commission . The Soviets set up the commission when they re- captured the territory .
 The Katyn massacre, or rather its exposure by the Germans, was a decisive motivation for the origin of the USSR’s desire for revenge and the manufacture of atrocity propaganda against Germany .
 The communist propaganda effort started by the communist juggernaut has since become so successful that it now dominates any establishment discussion of World War II or National Socialist Germany . That propaganda effort is so successful it has now dominated any discussion of the war .
 The Soviet Union was a mass-murdering nature of the Soviet Union, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: It's important to make new generations aware of the events at Katyn . He says those who started the smear campaign against National Socialist Germany were motivated
 The evidence for this claim is a single statement made by an SS officer, Alfred Naujocks, at the legally flawed Nuremberg Trials .
 establishment historians have taken Naujocks’s claim as the literal truth for decades . The Gleiwitz ‘false-flag’ theory has firmly taken root in the anti-Nazi liturgy .
 German-British historian Jak P Mallmann Showell finally revealed that Naujocks’s claims were a fabrication designed in a pleabargain with the Allied prosecutors to avoid a personal prison sentence .
 Naujocks had, in fact, deserted to the Allies in 1944 and faced possible prosecution as a war criminal .
 In exchange for his “evidence, he walked away from Nuremberg a free man .
 Polish special forces attack on Gleiwitz tower was carried out as part of an attempt to seize a German Enigma code machine . Showell also revealed that the attack on the tower had in fact been carried out by Poland's special forces .
 The Soviet copy was finally only declassified in 1992 and published for the first time in 1993 . It was finally published in 1993 and only released in 1992 .
On November 30, 1939, the Soviet Union invaded Finland, a neutral non-belligerent state, and waged a three-month war with little success . The Soviet Union and Finland fought for three months before the invasion .
 The League of Nations deemed the attack illegal and expelled the Soviet Union from its ranks .
 In June 1940, the USSR annexed the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania . The USSR annexed Baltic states in June 1940 .
 Allied powers had been so quick to declare war on Germany for invading Poland . All these aggressive moves were met with silence from the Allied powers .
 Order to cancel inquiry was kept secret and only revealed much later . Even then, the order to cancel the inquiry was still kept secret .
 Russian authorities officially classed the Katyn massacre as a “common crime,” and therefore subject to a statute of limitations . At the same time, the Russian authorities classed it as a "common crime"
 A History of the White Race is one of the most important books ever written . The book is based on the history of the white race in America .
 Kemp is a publisher of hundreds of books about White history from all periods in time . Kemp is also the owner of Ostara Publications, a publisher for hundreds of White history books .
 ere is the first-ever full English translation of the complete forensic report by the German government detailing the mass murder and burial of Polish officers and officials by the USSR’s secret police in the Katyn Forest, originally published in 1943 .
 The meticulous report starts with an overview of the basic facts surrounding the discovery of the mass graves . It then produces a series of eyewitness accounts of the Poles being moved to the execution area . The report is based on eyewitness accounts.
 The report then provides a full list of the names of victims the postmortem investigations were able to identify . It also provides a complete photographic record of the mass graves, the postmortems and the items recovered from the scene .
 Also includes 18 new footnotes, explaining events and details to the present-day reader . Also includes the original footnotes .
 The Daring Missions of Otto Skorzeny and the Nazi Special Forces were written by Otto Sk orzeny . They were published in the book "Daring Missions" and "The Daring Mission"
 Skorzeny successfully led the daring glider rescue of Benito Mussolini . It was the first time the glider rescued Mussolini.
 A few months later, he took a critical role in the Ardennes offensive with a controversial plan to raise a brigade disguised as Americans with captured U.S. tanks . He took a controversial role with the plan.
 The author gives us fascinating details about his many famous missions between 1943 and the end of the war . He offers a fair appraisal of the situation in Germany, as well as any tactical and military mistakes .
 Otto Skorzeny's operations are a great book for anyone who wants to learn about them . If you are interested in the operations of Otto Sk orzeny, this is a good book .
 This far-reaching document provides a sweeping and comprehensive look into the dramatic worldview of National Socialism . Deals with foreign policy, internal policy, property, usury, economics, race, religion, culture, agriculture, citizenship, and much more .
 Adolf Hitler transformed Germany into an authoritarian state advocating sovereignty of nations, advancement of labor, preservation of the Germanic race, and commerce based on exchange of wares .
 Included are vivid and unique descriptions of Hitler at school, his World War I battlefield experiences, early politics, and the struggle to power from 1926 to 1933 .
 It ends just after the Austrian Anschluss and the end of the Czech/Sudeten crisis . The Czech/Czech crisis is over for the first time .
 Hitler turned around a destitute nation in just a few short years. This work is vital for anyone interested in understanding how Hitler turned the nation into a destitutes nation .
 The author formed part of Hitler's inner circle and campaign staff during this period . He later went on to become the chancellor’s press officer .
 Leon Degrelle’s autobiographical account of his daring escape from war-ravaged Germany in 1945 and his adventures after the war . The author's autobiography is published in the UK .
 Degrelle escaped by flying from Norway and crash-landing in Spain . Sentenced to death by the Belgian government after the Axis surrender .
 The great Belgian Waffen-SS officer also recounts his experiences as a rising nationalist politician . His battle against the Bolsheviks, the last days of the Reich and his escape.
 Within these pages the reader will find the philosophical principles that underwrote German domestic and foreign policy, and predictions by Hitler .
 The Harvest of Hate Here is the truth about WWII in graphic detail . Germany, Japan and Japan and the Harvest ofhate Here are the truth.
 We shot prisoners in cold blood, wiped out hospitals, strafed lifeboats, killed enemy civilians and killed enemy wounded . We killed enemy soldiers, boiled the flesh off enemy skulls to make table ornaments or carved their bones into letter openers and committed mass rape .
 We topped off our saturation bombing of enemy civilians by dropping A-bombs on two defenseless cities .
 The Death of Nazi Germany, 1944-1947, is a collection of books from the same period of WWII . Readers will see what Allied airmen saw as they rained down death on German cities . The book will be published in the summer of 2015 .
 The reader will view the horrors of the Eastern Front during the last months of fighting, through the mud and madness .
 Readers will witness for themselves the fate of German women as the rampaging Red Army raped and murdered its way across Europe .
Learn about the criminal sinking of German ships loaded with innocent refugees . Learn about the greatest mass migration known to man and the fate of those wretched victims in postwar death camps .
 Memoirs of the Third Reich’s leading ideologue, Alfred Rosenberg, are the memoirs of Alfred Rosenberg . Rosenberg's memoirs are published in Germany and Germany .
 memoirs contain a no-holds-barred overview of Rosenberg’s political life . They give us some astonishing revelations about the communist revolution in Munich, the relationship between Christianity and National Socialism . Rosenberg's prediction of race violence in America, the Strasser brothers, the Alpine
 The illegalities of war crimes proceedings include the admissibility of oral and written hearsay . The introduction of the concept of conspiracy into international law . The total lack of any pre-trial inquest or forensic evidence . Trial before a court itself composed of actual war criminals .
 The issues surrounding the war crimes trials are numerous and complex, but what can be agreed is that fair trials before impartial courts almost never happen in war crimes trial .
 To charge, please call 1-877-773-9077 toll free, Mon.-Thu.-Wed.-Fri.-4.30 ET or visit our online store at www.BarnesReview.com .
 Streicher was convinced the dangers were very real, and his articles gave a blunt and direct account of them .
 The cover of every issue, and several interior pages, displayed cartoons depicting alleged Jewish dangers, in a most striking and graphic form .
 His cartoons became the signature feature of the German newspaper, and grew to represent the broader German struggle against Jewry . His cartoons are now the mainstay of the newspaper .
 Der Stiirmer and Fips’s cartoons were largely buried and forgotten .
 The victorious nations certainly did not want old Nazi images floating around . It raises difficult questions about why the Nazis were so critical of Jews .
Digital artist Robert Penman rediscovered the forgotten images . He is a skilled digital artist .
 Fips’s cartoons clearly demonstrate a progression of views over the period of 20 years, from before the Nazis assumed power until the very end of the war .
Historians state that Germany’s invasion of Poland was an unprovoked act of aggression designed to create Lebensraum, living space for the growing German nation, and take control of all of Europe .
 The Polish Corridor had been intended by the framers of the Versailles Treaty of 1919 to cut off East Prussia from the rest of Germany . It had long been presented as a casus belli by the Nazis, as had the ethnically German Baltic port of Danzig .
 By 1939, by 1939, it had become a serious obstacle to the eastward expansion of the Third Reich . But, by the time of the 1940s, the situation had changed dramatically .
 It had to be wiped from the map, and ruthlessly exploited to finance preparations for the coming war in the west . It was also used to finance the preparation for the upcoming war .
 Polish Foreign Minister Jézef Beck accepted an offer from Great Britain on March 30, 1939 . It gave an unconditional unilateral guarantee of Poland’s independence .
 The British Empire agreed to go to war as an ally of Poland if the Poles decided that war was necessary . Britain agreed to fight Poland if war was needed .
 His Majesty's government would feel themselves bound at once to lend the Polish government all support in their power. I now have to inform the House, that in the event of any action which clearly threatened Polish independence, the government considered it vital to resist .
 Four Cities German Wounded To Gleiwitz Headlines in Western newspapers left out key details explaining the background and circumstances leading up to Hitler’s decision to attack Poland .
 Poland controlled key German territories after WWI and the implementation of the Treaty of Versailles . Poland controlled the German port city of Danzig and West Prussia .
 Ethnic Germans living in Poland were regularly mistreated, abused and discriminated against . Increasing violence against the German minority in Poland is increasing .
 The guarantee of assistance given Poland by the British government was the agent which lent impetus to Britain’s policy of encirclement .
 It was designed to exploit the problem of Danzig and the Corridor to begin a war . It was long-prepared by England for the annihilation of Greater Germany .
 In Warsaw, moderation was no longer considered necessary, and the opinion held was that matters could be safely brought to a head . In Poland, moderation is not considered necessary .
 England was backing this diabolical game, having guaranteed the “integrity of the Polish state’s government . England was backed by the Polish government, with the support of the government .
 The British assurance of assistance meant that Poland was to be the battering ram of Germany’s enemies .
 Polish soldiers and civilians would eventually interpret the slogan to extirpate all German influence as an incitement to the murder and bestial mutilation of human beings . Polish government would hardly have let matters develop to the point where German influence was being used as a weapon .
 Violence against Poland’s ethnic Germans has been well-documented by numerous non-German sources . However, as we will see in this article, the violence against Poland's ethnic Germans that led to Hitler's invasion of Poland has been documented .
 More than 1 million ethnic Germans resided in Poland . They were the principal victims of the German-Polish crisis .
 The Germans in Poland were subjected to increasing doses of violence from the dominant Poles . The Germans are subjected to increased doses of violent violence from Poland .
 Many thousands of Germans in Poland paid for this crisis with their lives. Ultimately, many thousands of German citizens paid for their lives . Many of them were killed by the Polish government .
 They were among the first victims of Britain’s war policy against Germany .
 The Poles then proceeded to close and confiscate the remaining German businesses, clubs and welfare installations . The Poles also closed and confiscated the remaining businesses .
 The arrested Germans were forced to march toward the interior of Poland in prisoner columns . The Germans were arrested in Poland .
 The various German groups in Poland were frantic by this time . They feared that the Poles would attempt the total extermination of the German minority in the event of war .
 Thousands of Germans were seeking to escape arrest by crossing the border into Germany .
 By August 1939, horrible atrocities were being inflicted every day on the ethnic German minority of Poland . William Lindsay White, an American journalist, recalled that there was no doubt among well-informed people that the atrocity was occurring .
 White said that a letter from the Polish government claiming that no persecution of the Germans in Poland was taking place had about as much validity as the civil liberties guaranteed by the 1936 constitution of the Soviet Union . White said the letter from Polish government claimed no persecution.
 Mass arrests and long marches along roads toward the interior of Poland. Mass arrests are common in Poland .
 I've been questioning people all my life, and I think I know how to make deductions from exaggerated stories told by people who have passed through harrowing personal experiences . I have been questioned by people all of my life. I have made deductions from the exaggerated stories. I
 The leaders of the German minority in Poland repeatedly appealed to the Polish government for mercy during this period. Hoggan argued that they repeatedly appealed for mercy .
 More than 80,000 German refugees had been forced to leave Poland by August 20, 1939 . Almost all ethnic Germans in Poland were clamoring to leave to escape Polish atrocities .
 British Ambassador Nevile Henderson was concentrating on obtaining recognition from Halifax of the cruel fate of the German minority in Poland .
 Henderson emphatically warned Halifax on August 24, 1939 that German complaints about the treatment of the German minority in Poland were fully supported by the facts . Henderson emphatically told Halifax that German complaint about treatment in Poland was fully supported .
 Henderson pleaded with Halifax that it would be contrary to Polish interests to attempt a full military occupation of Danzig . He added a scathingly effective denunciation of Polish policy .
 Halifax was pursuing war for its own sake as an instrument of policy, says Henderson . Henderson failed to realize that Halifax was trying to win war for the own sake .
 On August 25, 1939, Ambassador Henderson reported to Halifax the latest Polish atrocity at Bielitz, Upper Silesia .
 Henderson never relied on official German statements concerning these incidents . Instead he based his reports on information he had received from neutral sources .
 The Poles continued to forcibly deport the Germans of that area and compelled them to march into the interior of Poland . The Germans were forced to march in the interior.
 Eight Germans were murdered and many more injured during one of these actions . Many more were injured.
If Hitler did nothing, the Germans of Poland and Danzig would be abandoned to the cruelty and violence of a hostile Poland . If Hitler did not, they would have been abandoned to a hostile country .
 If Hitler took offensive action against the Poles, the British and French might declare war against Germany .
 Henderson feared that the Bielitz atrocity would be the final straw to prompt Hitler to invade Poland . Henderson feared the atrocity was the last straw for Hitler to enter Poland .
 Henderson strongly desired peace with Germany . He continued to implore the British government to convince the Polish authorities to stop violence .
 The primary responsibility for the outbreak of the German-Polish War was Poland and Britain . Britain, guided by Halifax, was almost exclusively responsible .
 Hitler’s responsibility in 1939 was far less than that of Beck in Poland, Halifax, Halifax in England or even Daladier in France .
Dutch historian Louis de Jong wrote that windows were smashed in the houses of many ethnic Germans in Posen and Krakow .
 German agricultural cooperatives in Poland were later dissolved . Many German schools were closed, while ethnic Germans who were active in the cultural sphere were taken into custody .
 Around the middle of May 1939, in one small town where 3,000 ethnic Germans lived, many household effects in homes and shops were smashed to bits .
 German printing shops and trade union offices were closed . Numerous houseto-house searches took place .
 Polish censors permitted the newspaper Illustrowany Kuryer Codzienny in Krakow to feature an article of unprecedented recklessness .
 The article stated that Polish units were constantly crossing the German frontier to destroy German military installations, and to carry confiscated German military equipment into Poland .
 Russell Grenfell was highly critical of Britain's unilateral and unconditional guarantee of Poland’s independence . He was also critical of the UK’'s unilateral guarantee of independence .
 He said that in general, special territorial guarantees were a means by which a great power could turn its challengers into criminals .
 Grenfell was also critical of Britain's guarantee of Poland’s independence because a guarantee is itself a challenge .
 This is exactly what happened in the case of Britain's guarantee of Poland’s independence . This is what happened to Poland in case of the UK's guarantees of independence .
 The Germans in Poland continued to experience an atmosphere of terror in the early part of September 1939 .
 These massacres brought a tragic end to the long suffering of many ethnic Germans . The massacres brought an end to a long suffering.
 The catastrophe had been anticipated by the Germans before the outbreak of war, as reflected by the flight of large numbers of Germans from Poland .
First victims of the war were Volksdeutsche, ethnic German civilians . The first victims were ethnic Germans.
 The first victims of the war were Volksdeutsche, ethnic German civilians, resident in and citizens of Poland .
 Poland immediately deported 15,000 Germans to eastern Poland . In part by lower administrative offices, Poland immediately deport 15,00 Germans .
 German “spies’ were seen everywhere, suspected of forming a fifth column . The German "spies" are seen everywhere .
 More than 5,000 German civilians were murdered in the first days of the war . More than five,000 Germans were killed during the war in Germany .
 Gruesome scenes were played out in Bromberg on September 3, as well as in several other places throughout the province of Posen, in Pommerellen, wherever German minorities resided .
 German Minister of Foreign Affairs Joachim von Ribbentrop informed Soviet leaders Josef Stalin and Vyacheslav Molotov of Hitler's intention in a note on September 15, 1939 .
 Stalin and Molotov sought to stifle any action that might bring Germany and the Allies to the conference table . Stalin, Molotsov, however, sought to stop any action.
 Ribbentrop said they did not approve of the resurrection of the Polish state . They told Ribbentro that they didn't approve of it .
 Hitler's invasion of Poland was forced by the Polish government’s intolerable treatment of its German population . The Polish government was forced to stop the invasion .
 Germany did not invade Poland for Lebensraum or any other malicious reason, it was not malicious .
 British Ambassador Nevile Henderson said that the entire responsibility for starting the war was on Hitler .
 If Hitler wanted peace, he knew how to ensure it; if he wanted war, he also knew what would bring it about . If he wanted it, he would know what to do with war, if he was interested in it .
 On September 17, 1939, roughly two weeks following the German invasion of Poland, the Soviet Union invaded Poland from the east . Both Great Britain and France had declared war against Germany .
 The West was in league with the communists in the Soviet Union in an unholy alliance to annihilate Hitler’s Germany .
 France and Britain did not protest the Soviet annexation of large parts of eastern Poland into the Soviet Union either . France and Great Britain didn't protest the annexation of parts of Poland .
 The Soviet annexation and occupation of Poland resulted in countless tragedies and horrific crimes, including the Katyn massacre . The Soviet invasion and occupation resulted in many tragedies and crimes, such as the Katyne massacre .
 When Peaceful Revision Failed, Costa Mesa, CA: Institute for Historical Review, 1989, 419 .
 Mastermind of the Third Reich, London: Focal Point Publications, 1996, 304, 304 .
 His most recent employment was from 1994 to 2008 with Lacerte Software . He has worked with the software company since 1994 .
Hitler blames warmongers, merchants of death, attacks on ethnic Germans as reasons for offensive September 1, 1939 . The Versailles Diktat created a problem that has deteriorated until it has become intolerable for us .
 Both territories owe their cultural development exclusively to the German people . Both these territories are located in Germany .
 All German minorities living in the East have been ill-treated in the most distressing manner . As in other German territories of the East, all German minorities live there.
 More than 1 million people of German blood had to leave their homeland in the years 1919-1920 . More than one million people had to flee their homeland .
 As always, I attempted to bring about, by the peaceful method of making proposals, an alteration of this intolerable position . As always. I tried to bringAbout, by a peaceful method, he said .
 It is a lie when the outside world says that we only tried to carry through our revisions by pressure . It is the lie when we only try to carry on with our changes by pressure.
 On his own initiative he has, not once but several times, made proposals for reversal of intolerable conditions .
German sovereignty over German territories is a key issue in the country's sovereignty .
Austria and the Sudetenland, Bohemia, and Moravia are the two countries involved in the conflict . Austria and the Czech Republic have been at odds with each other for years .
 It is impossible to demand that an impossible position should be cleared up by peaceful revision . At the same time, constantly reject peaceful offers .
 Versailles Diktat is not law to us. It is also impossible to say that he who undertakes to carry out these revisions for himself transgresses a law .
A signature was forced out of us with pistols at our heads and with the threat of starvation for millions of people . A signature was made by a group of people who had been forced to sign up .
 This document, obtained by force, was proclaimed as a solemn law . And then, this document, with our signature, was declared as a law .
 In the same way, I have also tried to solve the problem of Danzig, the Corridor and the Corridor by proposing peaceful discussions . The Corridor has been called the Corridor .
 Si eR Adolf Hitler salutes as he oversees troops during the Third Reich’s invasion and occupation of Poland . It is quite understandable to us that the problem was to be solved 1-877-773-9077 .
 The troops are crossing a wooden bridge, hastily constructed by the Germans across the San River, near Jarolaw, Poland, September 1939 . The Germans had little interest to the Western powers .
 It was not and could not be a matter of indifference to those who are suffering the most, it was not .
 I must once more repeat that there is nothing more modest or loyal than these proposals . I then naturally formulated at last German proposals, and I thenNaturally formulated at the last German proposal .
 I alone was in the position to make such proposals, he says . I know very well that in doing so I brought myself into opposition to millions of Germans. I was a member of the German parliament, he adds .
 The Free City of Danzig has been strangling by military means in recent weeks . Germany has a slow strangling of the city by military Means .
 Poland was not prepared to settle the Corridor question in a reasonable way that would be equitable to both parties . Poland did not think of keeping her obligations to minorities .
 No Frenchman living in the Saar territory is oppressed, tortured or deprived of his rights . No Frenchman can stand up and say any Frenchman living there is oppressed or deprived.
For four months I have calmly watched developments, although I never ceased to give warnings . For four months, I have watched developments for four months .
 Polish ambassador told Polish ambassador that if Poland continued to send notes in the form of ultimata to Danzig, an end was not put to customs measures destined to ruin Danzig’s trade .
 I left no doubt that people who wanted to compare the Germany of today with the former Germany would be deceiving themselves . I leave no doubt. People who want to compare Germany with the Germany today would be deceived themselves .
 I do not know what these provocations on the part of women and children consist of, if they themselves are maltreated, in some cases killed . I don't know what the provocations are, but I do know what they are .
 No great power can, with honor, long stand by passively and watch such events unfold . No greatPower can't stand by passive and watch the events unfold, but can't be ignored .
 I made a final effort to accept a proposal for mediation on the part of the British government . I made one more final effort. I made another final attempt to accept the proposal .
 Poland and Germany proposed not that they themselves should carry on negotiations, but that they should come into direct contact and once more pursue negotiations . They proposed not to carry on the negotiations, rather that they instead come into contact .
 I must declare that I accepted this proposal, and I worked out a basis for these negotiations that is known to you . I must declares that I accept this proposal. I must declaring that Iaccepted this proposal , and I work out the basis for this proposal .
 Polish government has sent a plenipotentiary to Poland . The government has not said whether it was convenient for the government to send it to the country .
 The British ambassador told us through their ambassador that they were still considering British proposals .
 The Polish government also said that they would inform Britain of their decision . Poland also said they would tell Britain of the decision .
 Germany would deserve to disappear from the political stage if it had endured such treatment, says German official .
 But I am wrongly judged if my love of peace and my patience are mistaken for weakness or even cowardice . But I'm wrongly judged for my love and patience.
 I can no longer find any willingness on the part of the Polish government to conduct serious negotiations with us. I decided last night, and informed the British government, that under these circumstances, I can't find any willing to conductserious negotiations with them .
 I have resolved to speak to Poland in the same language that Poland for months past has used toward us . I have, therefore, resolved to talk to Poland.
 Italy does not intend to appeal for foreign help. I should like here, above all, to thank Italy, which, throughout, has supported us, but you will understand that for the carrying on of this struggle, we do not want to appeal to foreign help .
 We will carry out this task our no great power can, with honor, long stand by passively & watch such events . We will do this task with honor. We will be able to do it with honor .
 The neutral states have assured us of their neutrality, just as we had already guaranteed it to them . The neutral countries have already assured us that they are neutral .
 statesmen in the West declare that this affects their interests, I can only regret such a declaration . When statesmen say that this affect their interests it is only regreting such a statement .
 I have solemnly assured them, and I repeat it, that we ask nothing of those Western states and never will ask anything . I have assured them that we will never ask anything, and that we never will do anything .
 I have declared that the frontier between France and Germany is a final one . I have declare that the French-German border is the final one in the world .
 I have repeatedly offered friendship and, if necessary, the closest cooperation with Britain, but this cannot be offered from one side only . I have also offered friendship with Britain. I have always offered friendship, if needed, but if necessary.
Germany has no interests in the west, and our western wall is for all time the frontier of the Reich on the west . Germany has no interest in the West, and its west wall is the frontier.
 We are in solemn earnest and as long as others do not violate their neutrality, we will likewise take every care to respect it . We will also take every cared to respect them, we say .
 Russia and Germany are governed by two different doctrines . You know that Russia is governed by a different doctrine .
 Soviet Russia has no intention of exporting its doctrine to Germany, he says . "I no longer see any reason why we should still oppose each other"
 We have resolved to conclude a pact that rules out forever any use of violence between us . We have, therefore, resolved to resolve to conclude the pact. We have also agreed to end the violence between ourselves .
 It imposes an obligation on us to consult together in certain European issues . It imposes the obligation on me to consult with us in some European issues.
 It makes possible for us economic cooperation and, above all, it assures that the efforts of both these powerful states are not wasted against each other .
 At the same time, I should like now to declare that this political decision means a tremendous departure for the future, and that it is a final one, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I should like to say now that this is a tremendous
 Russian Minister of Foreign Affairs Molotov. I can only endorse word for word the speech of Russia's Foreign Affairs Minister .
 Polish citizens dig trenches and other defensive reinforcements in Warsaw to protect the capital against a German invasion . In this I am resolved to continue to fight until either the present Polish government is willing to bring about this change or until another government is ready .
 Polish government was manipulated by the leading Western powers, particularly Great Britain and France, in an overall strategy to undermine Germany . Leading up to WWII, the Polish government had been manipulated by Western powers .
 Poland was quickly defeated, first by the German army in the west and later, by the Red Army in the east . Poland was defeated by the Germans in the West .
 I am resolved to remove from the German frontiers the element of uncertainty, the everlasting atmosphere of civil war conditions . I'm resolved to removed from theGerman frontiers. I am resolving to remove the element. of uncertainty .
In the east, there is a peace exactly like that on our other frontiers. I will see to it that, in the east there is, on the frontier, a peace similar to that on the east .
 In this I will take the necessary measures to see that they do not contradict the proposals I have made known in the Reichstag itself to the rest of the world .
 I have ordered my air force to restrict itself to attacks on military objectives . I have orders to restrict myself to attack military objectives. I have been in charge of the air force since 2003 .
 If the enemy thinks he can do whatever he likes carte blanche on his side, he will receive an answer that will deprive him of hearing and sight . If he wants to fight by other methods, he'll receive a answer that would deprive him.
 This night, for the first time, Polish regular soldiers fired on our territory . Polish soldiers fire on their territory .
 Since 5:45m., we have been returning the fire and, from now on, bombs will be met by bombs . Since 5.45m, we have returned the fire .
 Whoever departs from the rules of humane warfare can only expect that we shall do the same. Whoever depart from the Rules of humane Warfare can only expects that we will do thesame .
 I will continue this struggle, no matter against whom, until the safety of the Reich and its rights are secured, I said . "I will continue the struggle," he said .
 Over 90 million marks have been spent on the building up of defense forces . Over 90million marks have in that time been spent.
They are now the best equipped and are above all comparison with what they were in 1914 . They are now better equipped and better equipped than they were before .
 When I now ask sacrifices of the German people, then I have a right to do so, he says . "I am today absolutely ready, just as we were formerly, to make every necessary sacrifice," he says.
 I am asking of no German man more than I myself was ready throughout four years at any time to do. I am asked of no Germans more than he himself was ready for four years . I'm asking ofno German man. More than I was ready to do
 In the photo above, Soviet and German troops have a laugh following both country's successful invasion of Poland .
 The two European superpowers would soon be at war with one another, resulting in the deaths of millions, civilian and military alike . There will be no hardships for average Germans that I will not submit to myself .
 I have once more put on that coat that was the most sacred and dear to me . I have one more put onto that coat. I have a coat that is most sacred to me. I've put on one that was most sacred, dear to him .
I will not take it off again until victory is secured or I do not survive the battle . I will not be able to take the fight off again. I'll not take the battle off again unless victory is achieved or I don't survive the fight .
You would then be under obligation to give to them the same complete loyalty and obedience as you would to me as Fiihrer . You would then have to give the same loyalty and obey as you'd be to me .
Germany has been a long struggle for its re-storation and for Germany . My whole life has been nothing but one long struggle, for my people, for their re storation .
 The Prussian king, with a ridiculously small state, opposed a more powerful coalition and, in three wars, emerged victorious because that state had the stout heart that we need .
 "November 1918" will never be repeated in German history. I would like to assure all the world that a “November 1918’s’ will not be repeated, I would say .
Germany's president says he is ready to stake his life . He asks for all others to do the same .
 It is essential that our people shall live, that Germany shall live. It is quite unimportant whether we ourselves live, but it is essential to Germany to live, says the author .
 The sacrifice that is demanded of us is not greater than the sacrifice that many generations of our people have made, says the author . The sacrifice is not more than that of many generations.
 "If we form a community closely bound together by sacred vows, we will overcome every hardship and difficulty," says John Sutter . Sutter: "We are ready for anything, resolved never to surrender"
 I would like to close with the declaration that I once made when I began the struggle for power in the Reich. And I would want to close the declaration I made.
 British Nationalist John AMERY helped organize the British Free Corps . He dedicated his life to rallying the British people against the communist menace .
 During WWII, he broadcast from Germany seeking to end hostilities between his native Britain and Germany . During WWII he was trying to end the hostilities between Germany and Britain .
 He believed the true enemy was the communist Soviet Union and international Jewry, not Germany . He also produced leaflets, including one reproduced here, specifically for British audience .
 Amery was tried for treason and hanged in Wandsworth Prison on December 19, 1945 . For his public anti-Semitic and anti-war activities, he was hanged in December 1945 . He was found guilty of treason for his actions .
 We started the war to make the world safe for democracy and to achieve that, we allied ourselves to a country where, from Brest-Litovsk to Vladivostok, nobody has ever heard of such a thing. We started to make it safe fordemocracy and,
 We signed an Atlantic Charter to guarantee the small nations of Europe . It was signed by the European Union and the United States .
 Finland, Romania, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland have been handed over to Stalin and to Communism . Poland, Poland, Lithuania, Latvia and Lithuania also handed over .
 We started a war invoking the blessing of the Almighty on the justice of our cause . We allied ourselves with the atheist murderers of over a million priests, against Germany, where the state subsidizes religion .
 Not one of the reasons for war invoked is true or holds good five years later, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is for Stalin and for Jewry that our boys are dying on the Guarigliano, in the swamps of Burma, on the Seven Seas and here in our England. It's for Stalin, and forJewry, that our children are dying.
 It is for Stalin and the Jews that you to get something to eat, when there can be an abundance of everything . It is also for the Jews to get things to eat .
 It is for Stalin and the Jews that you no longer get a living salary when before you were relatively well paid, and articles of prime necessity could be found on the market .
 It is because of Stalin and the Jews that you cannot have a suit with more than so many pockets without going to the black market. It is due to Stalin and Jews that they cannot have more than a suit. It's because of the Stalin and Jewish people,
 Stalin and the Jews never allowed to write or discuss their impressions of wartime Germany or say how they had been treated over there .
 It is by order of Stalin and the Jews that whole populations have been forcibly evacuated from the south coast .
 It is by order of Stalin and the Jews that the best blood of our country goes forward to the inevitable massacre of a second front ... with an American commander-in-chief. It's by order.
 It is thanks to Stalin and the Jews that we have lost Hong Kong, Singapore, the Straits Settlements, Burma and the rest to the Japanese .
 impartial Red Cross of Geneva has given the figure at 152,674 . It is thanks to Stalin and the Jews that thousands of our fellow countrymen here have languished in the jails of the Isle of Mann .
 Hitler has said in his book Mein Kampf that he had no quarrel with England . Hitler has also said that he has no quarrels with England.
 Hitler offered us peace after the collapse of France on the basis of the status quo ante . Hitler offered peace after France's collapse on the ground of the collapse.
 Hitler has declared 1,000 times that National Socialism is not for export . Hitler has also declared that National socialism is not to be exported .
 The Bestselling Tall Tales of Dr. Dr. The Auschwitz Doctor’s Eyewitness Account is the bestseller .
 Josef Mengele is said to have done comes from Miklés Nyiszli, a forensic physician who claims to have been Mengesle’s assistant .
 The book has become one of the mainstays of the orthodox Auschwitz narrative . The book is now a mainstay of theorthodox Auschwitz narrative.
 As important as Nyiszli writings are deemed, shockingly, they had never endured critical scrutiny before .
 A classic treatise not only on the WWII “holocaust of the Jews, but also an inside look at how constant torture destroys a man from within and without .
 This narrative is based on a wide range of evidence, the most important of which was presented during two trials . The findings form the foundation of our present image of Auschwitz, the author says .
 When we dig deeper into the rulings of these trials and the actual evidence they are based upon, the story looks quite different . But when we dig deep into these rulings, the stories look different .
 Judge Wilhelm Staglich has so far been the only legal expert to critically analyze the foundations of the Auschwitz war crimes trials . He is a German judge who has been a judge for decades .
 His research concludes there is no real proof of mass murder . His research, presented here, leaves the reader at times breathless as it concludes .
 Most copies were distributed to camp libraries in Englishspeaking POW camps . They all carried a camp rubber stamp on the title page of the “Stalag’s” edition .
 The Secret Decisions, Forgotten Blunders and Cover-Ups that really Determined its Outcome. The SecretDecisions, The Secret Blunders, and Cover Ups that Really Determined Its Outcome .
 An alternative history of WWII covers the obscure men, bizarre weapons and forgotten blunders that really determined the outcome of WWII .
 Lothrop Stoddard was sent to report on wartime conditions in Nazi Germany . U.S. became involved in the war at a time before it became involved .
 He interviewed Hitler, Goebbels, Himmler, Ley, Frick, Darré, Fischer, Lenz, Giinther and more Nazi leaders . He was granted access to the National Socialist government and interviewed Hitler .
 It contains his thoughts on Italian politics and some of his most inspirational speeches . It also includes the text of some of the best speeches .
 Benito Mussolini's autobiographical account, written in the third person, of the dramatic events . Mussolini was leader of German-occupied Italy from the time of El Alamein until his rescue and reinstatement .
 The mainstream historical establishment insists that WWI and WWII were started by Germany . The Guilt Question of the Second World War is the "Guilt Question"
 The myth of Germany’s guilt for fomenting war is refuted by famed historian Udo Walendy .
 Covers the allegations that Germany instigated the war, debunks long-held fallacies about German atrocities . The true nature of Hitler and more.
 Germany’s Madagascar Resettlement Plan offered Zionist leaders the island of Madagascar . The island is the untouched, mineral-rich, barely populated, large and secluded island off the coast of east Africa .
 This new Madagascar was to be governed by a joint German-French board with representation granted to any government cooperating .
 Ralph Grandinetti tells us what the Madagascar plan was and why it failed . He tells us why Madagascar plan failed and why the Madagascar government failed .
 This volume provides a picture of the mortal dangers posed to every German soldier by the Red Army’s bestial conduct of partisan warfare in violation of international law .
 The official German account of the destruction of the Warsaw Ghetto in 1943 is written by SS Brigade Leader Juergen Stroop . The account is translated, annotated and introduced by Arthur Kemp .
 The report contains a number of fascinating insights into the brief and brutal conflict . The report was published in September 2013 .
Today, historians either do not know or prefer to suppress the facts about the uprising . Today, historians do not want to suppress or suppress the information .
 This book contains two recently discovered war diaries . One by a member of a Panzer Division in Russia, and the other by Rommel’s AfrikaKorps .
 The stories are told as events occurred, and without postwar reflection . The stories have been told in the past as well as the present .
 Allied propagandists determined to boost Western morale. That conclusion originated with Allied propagandaandists .
 The Duce was constantly ridiculed, his successes pointedly demeaned or ignored . He was always ridiculed, and his successes were often ignored .
 Italy's navy, air and land forces were nothing more than a bungling bunch of clowns. Mainstream historians love to say that Italy’s navy and air forces were a bungled bunch of Clowns .
Historian Frank Joseph of often neglected materials presents a different picture . But a closer examination by Joseph of the materials presents different picture.
 The ongoing caricature of Mussolini’s servicemen as laughable buffoons is laid to rest by this book . Volume 2—Apotheosis.
 Italy’s participation within the context of its industrial disadvantage, says Italy . It views Italy's participation in Italy's industrial disadvantage as a result of its economic disadvantage .
 For example, her total production for the entire war amounted to approximately 3,500 tanks, less than all those used by the German Army in its 1940’s invasion of France .
 Mussolini declared war on the Western Allies in June 1940, his country produced 4. megatons of coal to Britain’s 224. meg at the time . Britain's 224. Megatons were of iron ore against Britain's 17. megatsons .
Fascist Italy was able to sustain five years of unremitting combat and score significant victories against overwhelming enemy forces . Fascist Italy testifies to her terrific fighting spirit and human resilience .
 This diary covers from April 1942 to March 1943 . It details the German victory at Kharkoy, the advance to the Caucasus and the brutal winter of 1942-43 .
 It starts with the beginning of the war and ends shortly after the occupation . It begins with the start of the conflict and ends with the occupation shortly after .
 To charge, please call TBR toll free at 1-877-773-9077, or visit our online store at www.BarnesReview.com.com . If you want to charge, call the TBR Toll free at the end of the
Hitler's Olive Branches is a run-down of Germany's attempts to make peace . Reviewing the numerous genuine peace offers Hitler made toward France, Poland and Great Britain .
 Adolf Hitler was chancellor of Germany from 1933 until his death in 1945 . He was a psychopathic warmonger, flinging his military might in every direction in a sadistic orgy of violence and blood .
 To help answer these questions, we will look primarily at a slim but dense book compiled by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . We will also look at the book's contents .
 Adolf Hitler gave a speech to the Reichstag German parliament on May 17, 1933 . Three-and-a-half months after he took office on January 30, 1933, Hitler took office .
 The new chancellor addressed his resolve to establish arms reduction terms with “neighboring countries,” “armed 32 * THE BARNES REVIEW’s” The West portrays him as a fanatical psychopath .
 Germany is prepared to renounce aggressive weapons if the rest of the world does the same . Germany is at all times prepared for aggressive weapons. Germany is also prepared to withdraw its own weapons .
 Germany is prepared to agree to any solemn pact of non-aggression because she does not think of attacking anybody, but only of acquiring security . Germany does not want to attack anybody, only to acquire security .
 Germany was limited by the Treaty of Versailles to no air force and an army of only 100,000 men devoted only to domestic activities .
 Hitler was prepared to expand the German military beyond the limits of Versailles . He was willing to accept total disarmament, but was willing.
 The British rejected Germany's peace offers, preferring war instead, the San Francisco Chronicle says .
 Hitler’s political career prior to WWII was dedicated to avoiding yet another fratricidal European war through diplomacy and rebuilding and revitalizing the German nation .
 Some countries, such as Britain and France, continued to increase their munitions manufacturing capabilities and troop strength . Some countries have increased their munitions production capabilities .
Germany had already complied with the Versailles diktat for 24 years . By this time, Germany had already comply with the dikTat for24 years .
 Five months later, on October 14, 1933, Hitler withdrew Germany from the League of Nations . Five months after the withdrawal, Hitler withdraws Germany.
 Hitler offered his second proposal for peace and disarmament in Europe on December 18 . On December 18, Hitler offered a second proposal in Europe .
First of which granted Germany “full equality of rights,” a provision Hitler considered necessary to ensure peace . It contained six points, the first of which grant Germany ‘fullequality of rights’
 A balance of military powers would deter aggression, while a weak Germany would encourage it . A weak Germany could encourage it, according to a German official .
 The third point imposed a freeze on all arms increases, and the third granted Germany freedom to restore a balance in her arms with neighbors . The second point imposed an increase in arms increases and a freeze in all arms .
 The fourth required ‘conducting war on humane principles’ and again called for elimination of weapons that could harm civilians . The fourth needed “conducting War onhumane principles” and again calls for elimination.
 Hitler requested approval to increase the German army to 300,000 men in order to conduct aminimum defense . The German army's perimeter featured few natural defenses such as mountains, ice sheets and deserts .
 Hitler felt the need to bring back conscription in Germany . Hitler felt a need to return conscription .
 He referred to the Geneva Red Cross Convention and proposed expanding it to eliminate aerial bombing altogether . He called on the Red Cross to expand the convention and eliminate aerial bombings altogether .
 France signed an alliance with the Soviet Union, furthering the encirclement policy of aggressor nations surrounding Germany . France also signed a deal with the Russian Union . France signed the deal with Russia in 2008 .
 Far too much history assessing Germany and its chancellor fails to mention this causal chain of provocation, focusing exclusively on Germany’s action .
 Hitler's orders to reoccupy the Rhineland lying between Germany and France was a direct result of France's rejection of Hitler's proposals . France’s rejection of Germany's proposals, and France's alliance with the Soviets, was a result of Hitler’
 The Rhineland was a key corridor of attack for invading French armies into Germany . Hitler knew he had to take back this region that had traditionally belonged to Germany .
 The Rhineland had a majority of ethnic German people for centuries .
 The Wehrmacht crossed into the Rhineland with no opposition, and with joyous citizen approval . On March 3, 1936, the WehrMacht crossed in theRhineland .
 The peace plan was the most extensive yet, with 19 points addressing the presence of German troops in the Rhineland . The plan was designed to reassure France in an attempt to reassure the country .
 Hitler was offering his fourth peace plan in the course of three years . By March 31, Hitler had offered his fourth plan in three years.
 Sees called for a commission presided over by Britain and Italy to oversee peace terms among Germany, France and Belgium . Sees also invited the Netherlands to participate in peace talks .
 A 25-year ‘non-aggression or security pact’ between France, Belgium and Germany was proposed . The pact was proposed by Germany and France .
 Germany and France pledge to stamp this peace pact as the reconciliatory conclusion of a centuries-old dispute . In order to stamp the peace pact, they pledge themselves to take steps to see that, in the education of the young, as well as in the press,
 Chancellor Hitler, his NSDAP party and most of the German people saw confiscation of German colonies given to other European nations as a gross injustice . Germany lacked key resources as it increased its industrial output .
 The League of Nations viewed Germany as an enforcement structure for limitations on Germany through the appalling strictures of Versailles . They viewed the League of nations as anenforcement structure for restrictions on Germany .
 Hitler said he would allow Germany to rejoin the league if it “cleared up’s injustices. Hitler would allow the country to return to the league .
 Point 19 proposed establishing an “International Court of Arbitration’ to ensure compliance with the peace plan . Point 19 proposes establishing an international court of arbitration .
 Hitler proposed arms reduction treaties, prohibiting gas and incendiary bombs, bombing of civilian towns or villages, and abolishing heavy tank and large artillery production . Once again, Hitler proposed weapons reduction treaties .
 The German government believes that if even a first step is made on the road to disarmament, this will be of enormous importance to the nations and to the recovery of confidence, trade and prosperity .
 The German government is prepared to enter into an exchange of opinions on economic problems, the government says .
 The German government believes that it has made its contribution to the reconstruction of a new Europe on the basis of reciprocal respect and confidence between sovereign states . The German Government believes that ... it has ... made its contributions to ... reconstruction of ... new Europe .
 Many 1-877-773-9077 toLL FREE opportunities for such a pacification of Europe have been neglected . Germany has so often in the last few years made her proposals, for which Germany has often made proposals .
Germany’s economy boomed at the time exclusively from arms production, says historian . Hitler's peace proposals of Hitler suggest peaceful economic cooperation between the nations of Europe generates prosperity .
 The U.S. economy did not revive from the Great Depression until war production increased . It is commonly said that the United States economy didn't revive until war produced increased .
 In addition, immense Soviet war production (long before its entry into World War II) destroyed living conditions for Russian people .
 Hitler signed a naval agreement with Great Britain on June 18, 1935 . Between Hitler's arms reduction proposal of May 1935 and France’s alliance with the Soviet Union, Hitler signed the agreement .
 Hitler knew Germany’s naval strength, particularly its U-boat fleet, was a reason for the outbreak of World War I with Great Britain . He sought to soothe any British concerns by limiting Germany's naval fleet to 35% of the British fleet .
 After Pilsudski’s death in May 1935, Polish attitudes toward Germany worsened .
 France offered Poland an unconditional guarantee of protection against any outside aggression . Germany, Britain and then France offered the country an unconditional protection against outside aggression. Poland has been accused of provocative attitudes toward Germany .
 The GermanPolish conflict could have remained local, as Hitler stated, if not for the guarantee Britain and France offered Poland . Poland accepted the guarantee .
 Hitler participated in the Munich Agreement of September 28, 1938, at which Britain, France, Italy and Germany agreed to peaceful dissolution of Czechoslovakia . The Sudetenland, which held millions of ethnic Germans, was returned to Germany .
 Hitler’s ‘Appeal for Peace and Sanity’ speech was made before the Reichstag on July 19, 1940, following the fall of France .
 Hitler once again offered unconditional peace to Britain. In that speech, Hitler onceagain offered unconditionalpeace to Britain .
 This speech was printed in English and dropped by tens of thousands from German aircraft over Britain .
Nearly half the British cabinet wanted to take Hitler up on his offer . But Churchill put an end to this final peace offer .
 Hitler receives the Olympic olive branch from Greek athlete Spyridon Louis . Louis won the 1896 marathon at the 1936 Berlin Olympics .
 The two nations agreed the borders between the two nations were undisputed . They agreed to consult over future issues . They both agreed to discuss future issues.
 Hitler presented a proposal to Poland on generous terms for the return of Danzig to Germany and construction of an autobahn and railroad through the Polish Corridor to connect Germany with its severed East Prussia region .
 Hitler offered to allow the Poles to use this transportation avenue as well, at no cost, as well . The two nations will be able to strengthen economic activity between them .
 By August 23, 1939, the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact was signed, declaring “spheres of influence’ for the USSR and Germany . The pact ensured neither nation would attack the other .
 Hitler advocated for arms reductions to protect civilians, particularly women and children . Both sides planned to break the agreement at the time when European nations had exhausted themselves fighting .
 The second called for a ‘reorganization of the international economic system’ so that “unrestricted trade’ could flourish . The second said that ‘un restricted trade” could flourish.
 The third once more advocated arms reductions to protect civilians, particularly women and children . The third time in a decade that arms reductions have been advocated for civilians .
 The following spring, Britain and France, had declared war on Germany, having fielded an immense army pointed at Germany through Belgium . The following year, Britain, France and Britain, having declared war, fielded an enormous army .
 Belgium participated in supporting infrastructure to pass the army through to Germany . Belgium participated by supporting infrastructure for the army .
 Hitler presented another Reichstag speech on July 19, 1940 . After French and British armies were subdued within six weeks, Hitler presented the speech .
 It was translated into English and dropped as leaflets by Luftwaffe planes into British cities . It was dropped into Britain as leaflets were dropped into cities .
 Hitler emphasized that it was the goal of the NSDAP to be allies with Italy and Britain . He emphasized that the goal was to be an ally with Italy.
 It still saddens me today that, in spite of all my endeavors, I have not succeeded in obtaining this friendship with England . I was not able to do so despite my persistent, sincere efforts, he says .
 I know of the women and mothers at home whose hearts, despite their willingness to sacrifice tacked America . I know that of those who have sacrificed, even though their hearts are at home .
 Prior to WWII, the anti-war sentiment in U.S. was widespread . Many Americans wanted to avoid yet another costly and deadly war overseas .
 Churchill ordered Berlin, Germany’s capital, bombed for the first time . Britain had been bombing German civilian organized rallies and speeches .
 Red Army c OA N\ Vvoys forces were advancing on his Berlin bunker N O% troops from entering a protracted European conflict . American and British forces Des a7, on Fi oR AMERICAN BOYS were approaching from the west .
 It was desired and instigated exclusively by those international statesmen who were either of Jewish origin or who worked for Jewish interests .
 Hitler made unconditional offers of peace to all the nations of Europe . The major antiGerman belligerents, France and Britain, turned down these offers each and every time .
 Call 1-877-773-9077 toll free to charge, Mon.-Thu.-4.30 ET. posterity will not be able to disregard the responsibility for the outbreak of this war to be laid on me .
After the first disastrous world war, a second should arise against England, much less against America . I have furthermore never wished that, after the first world war. I have also never wished for that .
 Hitler points to his “proposal to the British ambassador in Berlin of a solution to the German-Polish problem’s problem” as proof of his peaceful intentions .
 What the World Rejected ends with two chapters, including one containing Hermann Goring’s letter from the Nuremberg Trials to Winston Churchill . One chapter blames Churchill for forcing war on Germany, allowing Europe to be overrun by ‘Asiatics and Jews’
 The final chapter addresses the diaries of Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal toward the end of the war and first secretary of defense afterward .
 Since America, especially the FDR administration, was largely under communist/Jewish/Zionist influence, as honest research has detailed, this statement is redundant .
 More than 80 years of Jewish war propaganda depicting Adolf Hitler as a warmonger and lusting after bloody conflict are not only refuted but inverted by the historical record presented in What the World Rejected .
 KKARL HAEMERS is the pen name of an author and researcher currently working in Oregon . He is currently working on a project in Oregon.
 Some of his essays have been published in the online journal The Occidental Observer, and reproduced elsewhere . Some of the essays are published on the website of the journal .
 He is currently assembling his writings and thoughts over the past year and a half into a book tentatively titled Covid Culprits . He is now assembling his writing and thoughts and thoughts for a book .
 Pastor Pete Peters daily on WWCR shortwave radio. 24 hours a day, seven days a week .
Historical news items gleaned from various sources around the world . Most likely did not appear in local newspaper or on mainstream television news broadcasts .
 Deckert worked as an English and French teacher in German schools and uni versities for roughly 20 years . He was ‘cancelled’ for his political views for his views .
 During his lifetime, he not only served as a leader of the nationalist NPD political party from 1991 through 2005 . He also worked tirelessly as an activist and stood for office in multiple elections .
 Deckert was imprisoned on two separate occasions as a result of his activities on behalf of the Revisionist cause .
From 1995-2000, he was imprisoned in a facility at Bruchsal for translating the words of American Revisionist Fred Leuchter into German .
 In 2018, he spent five months in prison for helping translate a book written in Italian by Carlos Mattogno dealing with the Auschwitz concentration camp .
 A 37-year-old Austrian musician has been sentenced to 10 years in prison for violating Austria's tyrannical Nazi Prohibition Act .
 He was recently sentenced to a 10-year prison term by a Vienna Region Court . He was sentenced in March by ajudge at the Vienna Region court . The music was popular due to his politically incorrect music .
 Readers are encouraged to visit www.FreeMrBond.com for more details and to support the young man financially .
 Haverbeck has insisted the concentration camps administered by the National Socialist regime during WWII were not ‘death camps,’ as maintained by Court Historians and Zionist organizations, but rather labor and transit camps .
 She has bravely stated her belief that the official German policy was to ensure inmates were properly cared for . She has also stated that she believes that the German policy is to ensure inmate care is properly treated .
 Haverbeck has powerfully argued that the official “Holocaust story is the biggest and most persistent lie in history’ She has been repeatedly persecuted and jailed, she has said .
 Zelensky has repeatedly invoked the memory of the ‘Jewish Holocaust’ in his criticism of Russia’s attack on Ukraine . He has also demanded Western leaders send more money and weaponry to Ukrainian armed forces .
 Zelensky spoke to the German Bundestag in mid-March . He denounced Western politicians for not following through on their commitments to “never again’s”
 Zelensky's pleas for more weapons and a no-fly zone could end up in an nuclear holocaust . The death and destruction from which could dwarf even the Soviet Holocaust, estimated at 60 million people .
 Jewish oligarch allegedly paid Ukrainians to spray swastikas and other Nazi graffiti in Kiev and Kharkiv . Ukrainian oligarch has close ties to Russia .
 Pavel Fuks was “allegedly approached by Russian agents and persuaded to pay local criminals anywhere between $500 and $1,500 to vandalize the streets of Kharkiv with Nazi symbols, the Times of Israel reported .
 In the past, Fuks has donated to Jewish organizations in Ukraine, including the Babi Yar Holocaust Memorial Center .
 So-called "neo-Nazi" groups operating in Ukraine have long been exposed and denounced by Western media outlets and organized Jewish groups .
 The Azov Battalion is one of the most infamous and effective “neo-Nazi” militias operating against Russian military forces in Ukraine . It was described as an “extremist group” with “ties to neo-Nazis and White supremacists” by the
 Ukrainian government is led by a Jewish president and a Jewish vice president, not to mention the large The BARNES REVIEW .
 Some have alleged that groups such as the Azov Battalion and other farright militias have ties to Western intelligence and are being manipulated in order to carry out a proxy war against Russia .
Credible reports indicate Israel is a funder of the Azov Brigade . Other credible reports indicate it is an Azov brigade .
 The Azov Battalion is neoNazi and at the same time, attracting so much Jewish support . We would find it hard to believe that the Azov battalion is neo Nazi and, at thesame time, is Jewish .
 Ukrainians are virulently anti-Russian if they are aware of the history of Ukraine and Communist Russia, a relationship that ended in millions of dead Ukrainians, starved to death or murdered by Soviet commissars .
 Father Patrick Desbois is known for popularizing the term “Holocaust by bullets’ in reference to the alleged mass shootings of Jews on the Eastern Front during WWII . He will lead an investigation into alleged war crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine .
 Previously, Desbois created an organization called Yahad In Unum based in France that investigated the alleged mass killings of Jews in Ukraine . The alleged massacre of 34,000 Jews at Babi Yar near Kiev near Kiev in September 1941 .
 No forensic evidence exists of this alleged massacre, yet the myth remains . The myth remains that the alleged massacre was committed .
 The International March of the Living will once again conduct its annual march from the former site of Auschwitz to Birkenau . The march will take place from the site of the infamous ‘death camps’ in Poland .
 The annual pilgrimage has been on hold for the past two years due to the Covid-19 pandemic . It will resume on April 28 of this year . The pilgrimage will be held for the first time in two years .
 Kim Reynolds recently signed two bills that require the state to officially adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s definition of anti-Semitism . The bills also prohibit the state from investing in “companies that boycott Israel,” according to Jewish Telegraphic Agency .
 An American Version of Vladimir Putin to Save Us From the NWO Oligarchs. An American version of VladimirPutin to Save us from the NWo Oligarch .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski, former national security advisor, calls Putin not just another Hitler but also a thug, a menace, a Mafia gangster, and a Mussolini .
 Putin is standing up against Western aggression, not only in Ukraine but also in Syria and Iran . Putin has stood up against West aggression in Ukraine and Syria .
 Ongoing Western attempts to destabilize these and other countries are just the most recent examples of a decades-old pattern of aggression .
 The creation of a New World Order global dictatorship is the result of a global dictatorship, says the author of the book .
Today, the childish anti-Putin namecalling is rising to new heights of hysteria . Today, the immature anti-Russian namecalling has become more common .
 The Western-dominated globalist globalist oligarchy nearly destroyed Russia in the 1990s . The West-dominated oligarchy almost destroyed Russia.
 Russian men lost eight years of life expectancy, the equivalent of what happens to a country completely defeated and destroyed in an all-out war . Russian men lose life expectancy for eight years .
 After the neoliberal globalist oligarchs had burned Russia to the ground, it somehow arose, phoenix-like .
 At the helm, charting the course of Christian Russia’s rebirth, is Vladimir Putin .
 During the 1990s, Russia’s oligarchs looted the country in service to Zionism and the New World Order .
 From now on, stay out of politics, keep your corruption within limits, and don’t harm Russia’s national interests . Don't harm Russia.
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Vladimir Yevtushenkov, two of Russia's richest oligarchs, imprisoned for tax fraud and money laundering . To show he meant business, Putin had Khodorksovsky and Yevtshenkov imprisoned .
 Putin rebuilt his country’s economy and its military with it, its military .
 Russia’s abundant national resources were suddenly no longer open for looting . Russia's abundance of national resources is no longer available for looting.
 “Oligarchs’ is a term largely associated with Russia due to the rapacious plutocrats who took over large swaths of the Russian economy following the collapse of the Soviet Union . ‘Oligarch’ was a term mostly associated with the Russian Federation .
 Vladimir Putin has effectively checked these oligarchs in Russia, but they operate freely in the U.S. and other Western nations . The oligarchs operate to the detriment of the people and nation's national interests .
 Putin insisted that the people, not globalist oligarchs, should be the primary beneficiaries of his nation’s God-given wealth . George Soros, Jeff Bezos, Bill Gates and Mark Zuckerberg are just some of the oligarchs dominating American politics and big business .
 In 2014 they hatched a plot to steal Sevastopol, Russia’s most important naval base, by sponsoring a coup d’état in Ukraine .
 Putin pre-empted their plot by respecting the wishes of the people of Crimea, as expressed in a referendum . Hillary Clinton and Victoria Nuland went ballistic .
 The Russian puppet government in Kiev has control over 40% of Ukraine . They used their control over the puppet government to launch a genocidal war against the Russians . The Russian government is currently in control of the Kiev government .
 Ukraine has been arming Ukraine with NATO weapons, including possibly biological weapons . And they began arming the country with the weapons .
 Ukraine would join NATO and host American first-strike nuclear missiles on the Russia-Ukraine border . The BARNES REVIEW could reach Moscow in a matter of minutes .
 He said it over and over, calmly laying out Russia’s legitimate security concerns . He said Russia's security concerns were legitimate .
 Putin's leadership of Russia has been distinguished by competence and courage. So, contrary to everything our oligarch-owned media tell you, Putin’s leadership has beeninguished by competence .
 He would encourage a long-term effort to restore traditional spiritual and religious values . He would also encourage a return to traditional spiritual values .
 He would refuse to let Israel completely control our Middle East policy . He would not allow Israel to control our Mideast policy .
 Trump has some of the instincts of an “American Putin,’ he wasn’t capable of pursuing, much less achieving, a real Make America Great Again agenda .
 Barrett taught at colleges and universities in San Francisco, Paris, and Wisconsin . He taught at universities in California, New York, San Francisco and Wisconsin.
 Putin speaks again about the tragic events in Donbass and the key aspects of ensuring the security of Russia . Putin's speech censored by West was censored by the West in February 2022 .
 Ispoke about our biggest concerns and worries, and about the fundamental threats created for Russia by Western politicians .
 NATO is moving its military infrastructure ever closer to the Russian border . I am referring to the eastward expansion of NATO, which is expanding its military facilities .
Over the past 30 years, NATO has been trying to come to an agreement with the leading NATO countries regarding the principles of equal and indivisible security .
 North Atlantic alliance continues to expand despite protests and concerns . In response to our proposals, we invariably faced either cynical deception and lies or attempts at pressure and blackmail .
 Its military machine is moving and, as I said, is approaching our very border . The military is moving, as he said, as well as its military machine .
 In the late 1980s, the Soviet Union grew weaker and subsequently broke apart . The Soviet Union became weaker in the 1980s .
We lost confidence for only one moment, but it was enough to disrupt the balance of forces in the world . We lost confidence in the first time we had lost confidence, but we lost confidence again .
 As a result, the old treaties and agreements are no longer effective . The old treaties are no more effective .
 Anything that does not suit the dominant state, the powers that be, is denounced as archaic and useless .
 At the same time, everything it regards as useful is presented as the ultimate truth and forced on others regardless of the cost, according to experts .
 This has to do with the entire system of international relations, and sometimes even U.S. allies, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The collapse of the USSR led to a redivision of the world, and the norms of international law that developed by that time . The fundamental norms that were adopted following WWII and largely formalized its outcome were adopted .
 The practice of international relations and rules regulating them had to take into account the changes that took place in the world and in the balance of forces .
 This should have been done professionally, smoothly, patiently and with due regard and respect for the interests of all states and one's own responsibility .
 We saw a state of euphoria created by the feeling of absolute superiority, a kind of modern absolutism . Instead, we saw a feeling ofabsolute superiority, coupled with the low cultural standards and arrogance of those who pushed through decisions that suited only themselves .
 There are many examples of this in the U.S. The United States has a history of international relations .
First a bloody military operation was waged against Serbia without the UN Security Council's sanction, but with combat aircraft and missiles used .
 The bombing of peaceful cities and vital infrastructure went on for several weeks . The bombing took place in the past few weeks .
 I have to recall these facts, because some Western colleagues prefer to forget them . Some Western colleagues don't remember these facts .
 When we mentioned the event, they prefer to avoid speaking about international law, instead emphasizing the circumstances which they interpret as ... necessary .
 The tragedy was created for hundreds of thousands and even millions of people . It has led to a large-scale exodus from the Middle East and North Africa .
 The combat operations conducted by the Western coalition in that country without the Syrian government’s approval or UN Security can only be defined as aggression and intervention .
 The U.S. used the pretext of allegedly reliable information about the presence of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq . But the invasion of Iraq without any legal grounds is of course, of course .
 The U.S. secretary of state held up a vial with white power, publicly, for the whole world to see . To prove that allegation, he said it was a chemical warfare agent created in Iraq .
 It later turned out that all of that was a fake and a sham, and that Iraq did not have any chemical weapons . It was later revealed that Iraq had no chemical weapons, and the claim was a sham .
 We witnessed lies made at the highest state level and voiced from the high UN rostrum . We witnessed lie made at highest state levels and voiced by the UN roStrum .
 As a result, we saw a tremendous loss in human life, damage, destruction and a colossal upsurge of terrorism . We saw a huge loss in our lives, we see a huge upsurged of terrorism, we say .
 The U.S. brought its “law and order,” this created bloody, festering wounds and the curse of international terrorism and extremism . It appears that nearly everywhere, in many regions of the world, the United States brought its law and order .
 I have only mentioned the most glaring but far from only examples of Western disregard for international law . Ihave only mentioned most glaring and most glaring examples of western disregard for law .
 This array includes promises not to expand NATO eastward, even by an inch . This array also includes promises to not expand NATO Eastward, including not to move further .
 It could be dirty, but it shouldn't be as dirty as it is now, not to such an extent . It's not as dirty now as it's now, but not as much as it was now, it could be .
 This type of shady, con-artist behavior is contrary to the principles of international relations but also to the generally accepted norms of morality and ethics . The behavior is not only shady, but also contrary to international relations.
 U.S. politicians, political scientists and journalists write and say that a veritable ‘Empire of Lies’ has been created inside the 46 .
 All its satellites not only humbly and obediently say “yes’ to it and parrot it at the slightest pretext, but also imitate its behavior and enthusiastically accept the rules it is offering them . All their satellites say ‘yes” to it
 Russia has been trying to destroy its traditional values, writes Alexander Vatkov . He says Russia's openness to work with the U.S. and other Western partners is a reason for its disarmament . Vatov: "They immediately tried to put the final squeeze on us,
 This is how it was in the 1990s and early 2000s when the so-called collective West was actively supporting separatism and gangs of mercenaries .
 Properly speaking, the attempts to use us in their own interests never ceased. Properlyspeaking, we were never used to being used by people .
 The West has sought to destroy our traditional values and force on us their false values that erode us, our people, from within . The West wants to destroy the West's traditional values .
 In December 2021, we made yet another attempt to reach an agreement with the U.S. and its allies on the principles of European security and NATO’s non-expansion .
 It does not believe it necessary to agree with Russia on a matter that is critical for us. It doesn't believe it is needed to agree on the matter, it says .
 The United States is pursuing its own objectives, while neglecting our interests . The U.S. is pursuing itself own objectives.
In 1940 and early 1941, the Soviet Union went to great lengths to prevent war or at least delay its outbreak . If history is any guide, we know that, in 1940 andEarly 1941, it was a major effort to prevent the outbreak .
 USSR sought not to provoke the potential aggressor until the very end by refraining or postponing the most urgent and obvious preparations it had to make to defend itself from an imminent attack .
 Nazi Germany attacked our Motherland on June 22, 1941 without declaring war . As a result, the country was not prepared to counter the invasion .
 The country stopped the enemy and went on to defeat it, but this came at a tremendous cost . "This came at the tremendous cost," says the author .
 The attempt to appease the aggressor ahead of the Great Patriotic War proved to be a mistake . It came at a high cost for our people.
 In the first months after hostilities broke out, we lost vast 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE territories of strategic importance . We lost millions of lives in first months of hostilities .
 Those who aspire to global dominance have publicly designated Russia as their enemy . Russia is considered the world's most powerful nation .
 It is true that they have considerable financial, scientific, technological, technological and military capabilities . It's true that the military has considerable financial and scientific capabilities .
 We are aware of this and have an objective view of the economic threats we have been hearing . We have been heard of this, just as our ability to counter this brash and never-ending blackmail.
 Let me reiterate that we have no illusions in this regard, and are extremely realistic in our assessments . Let me reiterate that we are very realistic, and that our assessments are very accurate . We have no illusion of this regard.
 Russia is one of the most powerful nuclear states in the world . It has lost a considerable part of its capabilities after the dissolution of the USSR .
 In this context, there should be no doubt for anyone that any potential aggressor will face defeat and ominous consequences should it directly attack our country .
Technology, including in the defense sector, is changing rapidly. At the same time, technology is changing quickly, according to experts .
 Russia's military presence in territories bordering on Russia will stay for decades to come or maybe forever, if we permit it to go ahead . Russia is an ever-mounting and totally unacceptable threat for Russia, according to the U.S.
 The situation for Russia has been becoming worse and more dangerous by the year . NATO’s eastward expansion has been more dangerous than ever .
 NATO leadership has been blunt in its statements that they need to accelerate and step-up efforts to bring the alliance's infrastructure closer to Russia’s borders .
 In other words, they have been toughening their position. In other Words, they've been toughing their position .
 Any further expansion of the North Atlantic alliance’s infrastructure or ongoing efforts to gain a military foothold inside Ukrainian territory are unacceptable for us . Any further Expansion of the alliance's infrastructure is unacceptable, says the U.S.
 The problem is that, in territories adjacent to Russia, which are our historical lands, a hostile “anti-Russia’s” is taking shape .
 NATO is fully controlled from the outside, it is doing everything to attract NATO armed forces and obtain cutting-edge weapons .
 For the U.S. and its allies, it is a policy of containing Russia, with obvious geopolitical dividends .
 For our country, it is a matter of life and death, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "For our country. It is a matters of life, death; it is an historical future as a nation"
 It is not only a very real threat to our interests but to the very existence of our state and to its sovereignty. It is a real threat. It's not only an issue of our interests, but to our state's sovereignty .
 The forces that staged the coup in Ukraine in 2014 have seized power, says the writer . They are keeping it with the help of ornamental election procedures and have abandoned the path of a peaceful settlement .
 For eight years, we have been doing everything possible to settle the situation by peaceful political means . We've been doing all we can to settle it by peaceful means .
 We had to stop that atrocity, that genocide of millions of people who live in Russia, on all of us . We must stop that atrocities, we had to end it, we said .
 A New History of WWII Prize-winning historian Sean McMeekin reveals how Stalin was the driving force of World War II in this major new history .
 WWII endures in the popular imagination as heroic struggle between good and evil, with villainous Hitler driving events .
 Hitler was not in power when the conflict erupted in Asia . He was dead before it ended, but he was not.
 His armies did not fight in multiple theaters, did not span the Eurasian continent, and he did not inherit any of the spoils of war . His armies didn't fight in several theaters, and his armies did Not fight in many theaters .
 Stalin’s War revolutionizes our understanding of this global conflict by moving its epicenter to the east. Drawing on new research in Soviet, European and USS archives .
 McMeekin shows the war that emerged in Europe in 1939 was the one Stalin wanted, not Hitler .
 The Pacific war of 1941-1945 fulfilled Stalin’s goal of unleashing a war between Japan and the “Anglo-Saxon” capitalist powers he viewed as his ultimate adversary .
 McMeekin reveals extent of Soviet Communism rescued by self-defeating strategy of America and Britain via Lend-Lease aid .
 U.S. generosity gave Stalin's armies the striking power to conquer most of Eurasia, from Berlin to Peking .
 McMeekin is no fan of Adolf Hitler and accepts many of the claims of ‘the Holocaust’ without question . He accepts many claims of the Holocaust.
Lead NATO countries are supporting the far-right nationalists and neo-Nazis in Ukraine . They are focused on their own goals, the leaders say .
 Ukrainian nationalists and Adolf Hitler's accomplices did during the Great Patriotic War . They will undoubtedly try to bring war to Crimea just as they have done in Donbass .
 Russia and Russia's forces cannot be avoided, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Russia and the U.S. are at odds over the future of Russia and its military forces . Russia's military forces are at the center of the conflict in the region .
 We have been treating all new post-Soviet states with respect and will continue to act this way. We will continue this way, we say . We will treat all new Post-Soviet States with respect.
 Kazakhstan faced a challenge to its statehood and integrity. We respect and will respect their sovereignty, as proven by the assistance we provided .
 Russia cannot feel safe, develop, and exist while facing a permanent threat from today’s Ukraine .
In 2000-2005, we used our military to push back against terrorists in the Caucasus . In 2000- 2005, we stood up for the integrity of our state. Let me remind you that in 2000-— 2005, our military fought against terrorists .
 In 2015, we used our armed forces to create a reliable shield that prevented terrorists from 48 terrorist attacks . We also used our forces to prevent Syria from penetrating Russia .
 Russia did not leave us any other option for defending Russia and our people, other than the one we are forced to use today . They did not left us any else option for defend Russia and their people, according to the Russian government .
In this context, in accordance with Article 51 of the UN Charter, with permission of Russia’s Federation Council, and in execution of the treaties of friendship and mutual assistance with the Donetsk People's Republic . It is not our plan to occupy Ukraine, according to
 We do not intend to impose anything on anyone by force, says the military chief . He made a decision to carry out a special military operation.
 The purpose of this operation is to protect people who, for eight years now, have been facing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the Kiev regime . The Kiev regime is trying to protect those who have suffered from the regime's humiliation .
 To this end, we will seek to demilitarize and de-Nazify Ukraine, as well as bring to trial those who perpetrated numerous bloody crimes against civilians, including against citizens of the Russian Federation . We will also seek to de- Nazify Ukraine and demilitate Ukraine
 West has been hearing increasing number of statements coming from the West that there is no more to abide by the documents approved after World War II . The documents were signed by the totalitarian Soviet regime .
 The sacrifices our people had to make to defeat Nazism in World War II are sacred . The sacrifices we made to defeatNazism in WWII are sacred.
 This does not contradict the high values of human rights and freedoms in the reality that emerged over the postwar decades . This doesn't contradict the High values of Human Rights and freedoms that emerged in the 1950s .
This does not mean that nations cannot enjoy the right to self-determination . This does not means that nations are not able to enjoy self- determination .
 Freedom guides our policy, the freedom to choose independently our future and the future of our children . Freedom guide our policy and our children's future .
 Anyone living in Ukraine must be able to make a free choice. We believe that all the peoples living in today’s Ukraine, anyone who wants to do this, must have the right to do it .
 In this context, I would like to address the citizens of Ukraine . In thiscontext, I want to address Ukraine's citizens .
 Crimea and Sevastopol made their choice in favor of being with their historical homeland, Russia, and we supported their choice . The people of Crimea and Crimea made their decision in Favor of being in Russia .
 The current events have nothing to do with a desire to infringe on the interests of Ukraine and the Ukrainian people . The Ukrainian people are not interested in the current events .
 Russia is trying to use it against our country and our people. They are connected with the defense of Russia from those who have taken Ukraine hostage . They are also connected with those who take Ukraine hostage.
 We are acting to defend ourselves from the threats created against us and from a worse peril than what is happening now. We're acting to protect ourselves from threats made against us, says David Cameron .
 I am asking you, however hard this may be, to understand this and to work together with us, to turn this tragic page as soon as possible and to move forward together . I'm asking you to work with us so as well as to turn the tragic page
 We will do what we must independently, so as to create 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE a favorable environment so that we can overcome all of these challenges . We will be able to overcome all the challenges we face .
 This will strengthen us from within as a single whole, despite the existence of state borders . This will strengthened us from inside as a whole, even if there is no state borders.
 I would also like to address the military personnel of the Ukrainian Armed Forces . I would like to also address the Ukrainian military personnel .
 Comrade officers, your fathers, grandfathers and great-grandfathers did not fight the Nazi occupiers . They did not defend our common Motherland to allow neo-Nazis to seize power in Ukraine .
 You swore the oath of allegiance to the Ukrainian people and not to the junta, the people’s adversary that is plundering Ukraine and humiliating the Ukraine people .
Military personnel who do this will be able to freely leave the zone of hostilities and return to their families . The military personnel of the Ukrainian army will be allowed to return to the families .
I want to emphasize again that all responsibility for the possible bloodshed will lie fully and wholly with the ruling Ukrainian regime . I want to emphasizes again that. all responsibility will lie with the Ukrainian regime.
 I would like to say something very important for those who may be tempted to interfere in these developments from the outside . I would now like to tell people who may have been tempted to intervene from outside .
 No matter who tries to stand in our way or create threats for our country and our people, they must know that Russia will respond immediately .
 The consequences will be such as you have never seen in your entire history . The consequences are such as the consequences you will never see in your history .
 Russia's culture and values, values, experience and traditions of our ancestors always provided a powerful underpinning for the wellbeing of entire states and nations, says author .
 The ability to adapt to constant change depends on the ability to quickly adapt, maintain social cohesion, and the readiness to consolidate and summon all available forces .
 We always need to be strong, but this strength can take on different forms, says author . "We always need a strong person, but that strength can be different," says author.
 The “Empire of Lies ’ that I mentioned in the beginning of my speech proceeds in its policy primarily from base, direct force. The ‘Empire Of Lies’ that he mentioned in his speech Proceeds from the policy, he says .
 We all know that having justice and truth on our side is what makes us truly strong, we all know . Having justice andtruth on our sides is what make us trulyStrong, we say .
 If this is the case, it would be hard to disagree with the fact that it is our strength and our readiness to fight that are the bedrock of independence and sovereignty .
 These provide the necessary foundation for building a reliable future for your home, your family and your Motherland . These provide a necessary foundation.
 Russia's armed forces will perform their duty with professionalism and courage, says Putin . "I am certain that devoted soldiers and officers of Russia’s armed forces" Putin says .
Government institutions will work effectively to guarantee stability of our economy, financial system and social wellbeing, says David Cameron . The same applies to corporate executives and the entire business sector .
 I hope all parliamentary parties and civil society take a consolidated, patriotic position . I hope that all parliamentary Parties and civil societies take a consolidating, patriotic positions .
 At the end of the day, Russia is in the hands of its multiethnic people, as has always been the case in our history . The future of Russia is the future of the country, says the author .
 This means that the decisions that I made will be executed, that we will achieve the goals we have set and reliably guarantee the security of our Motherland . This is the first time the decision has been made by the government . This means the decisions will be made,
 He was also the prime minister from 1999 to 2000, and again from 2008 to 2012 . He has been in charge of the country since 1999, and was also a prime minister for three years .
 Few leaders worldwide have maintained such high levels of popularity as he did .
 Putin's political and economic successes are too startling to be debated . Putin’s political, economic and political successes are also too startling.
 Putin has become a trusted populist leader, and a significant figure in global nationalism, non-alignment and multipolarity . With high rates of economic growth, military and police reform, he has been a key figure in the world's politics .
 Matthew Raphael Johnson, Ph.D., is an internationally acknowledged expert on Slavic and Russian studies . He says he synthesizes the basic political views of Putin . Johnson is a former BARNES REVIEW editor .
 A Poetic Memoir Leon Degrelle’s The Burning Souls now available in English .
Following the German occupation of Belgium, Degrelle enlisted in the Wehrmachtorganized Walloon Legion to aid in the liberation of the Soviet Republics .
After the fall of Berlin, Degrelle escaped to Spain, where he was safeguarded by Franco . He was rescued by Franco in Spain after the fall.
 The Burning Souls is Degrelle's reflection on his experiences and on the soul . It's part poetry but mostly memoir .
 He traces his journey, from his idyllic childhood to the steppes of Russia, to his spiritual trial . He says he is not just a physical journey but as a spiritual trial.
 He tells us that to give oneself completely to service of a transcendent ideal is what is required to overcome the spiritual malaise of our day .
 Germany's Rudolf Hess remained a prisoner of the Allies for 46 years until he died at 93 in Spandau Prison .
 The book was published by Abdallah Melaouhi . But that changed with the publication of this book by the author .
 Melaouhi spent five years with Hess, acting as Hess’s medical aide at the Military Prison in Spandau, up until his death .
 Melaouhi gives us the entire story about Hess’s time in Spandau, his murder, and the plot to cover it up and the effort to suppress this book .
 A substantial portion of Madame Degrelle's writings were rescued by a group of honest historians . The group was supported by the general's widow .
 This is one of those volumes, painstakingly recreated by expert translators and editors . This is the latest in a long line of volumes that have been published .
 The former Belgian Waften SS officer discusses the tragedy of the Versailles Treaty and Hitler’s impressive WWI experiences . The inside story of the Beer Hall Putsch, Hitler's unification of the German state and the Anschluss.
 Elie Wiesel was the face of the "Holocaust" for many years . Wiesel appeared on "Oprah" and "Opra" and other venues .
 Large crowds listened intently as he described his time in WWII ‘death camps’ and how he miraculously survived them all .
 Holocaust Revisionists have been exposing this fraud for years . But they say his writings show gross ignorance of the camps he was allegedly incarcerated and poking holes in his tall tales .
 The Man & His Work This, the only official biography of Hermann Goering, was published in 1938 . It was a bestseller in Germany and in English-speaking world .
 The book details the many astonishing services that Goering rendered the German state, including recreating the German air force .
 This book contains the original English version plus all 57 original photographs and the 1938 introduction written by Sir Robert Lockhart . This book also contains the first English version of the book .
 Germany’s War documents that the Allied leaders were primarily responsible for starting and prolonging WWII . Germany's War documents: The Allied leaders are responsible for the start and end of WWII .
 FDR’s numerous provocations forced Germany to declare war on the U.S.A. despite Hitler's desire for peace . FDR's many provocations made Germany declare war despite Hitler’'s desire to peace .
 Also covers Stalin's plan for European conquest, America’s second crusade, how WWII was planned and instigated . Also covers the Allied conspiracy to prolong the war, the Allied POW camps that killed a million Germans, the appalling plight of expelled Germans .
 Reynouard compared the accusations made against the Gestapo at the Nuremberg Tribunals by the Allies with the postwar French trials of the same personnel . The same cases, the same victims and the same eyewitnesses were the same cases .
 He found that the evidence and accusations presented by the Allies against the Germans were fake .
 The author has been imprisoned because he refuses to parrot the official lies of the German and Allied governments .
 Walendy describes the hidden truth of the “legal origin of today’s German laws, forced on a defeated people, now stripped of their history and identity .
 The German government is so intent on suppressing “Holocaust’s research, then you need to read this book . If you want to know why the German government wants to suppress "Holocaust" research, read it .
 Amazon finally caved and banned Mike King's The Bad War after years of five-star ratings .
 A photo-journalistic chronology of the most important events of the war reinterpreted in brief synopses . Illustrations include 300 events from the war .
 In this book, for the first time ever, the reader will see a real historical debate on the issues .
 Operation Keelhaul author Peter J Huxley-Blythe discovered why the Russian people do not trust the U.S. or Great Britain .
 When WWII ended, millions of Russian men, women and children in the West were shipped back to the Soviet Union to face Stalin's executioners or to serve long sentences at hard labor in the death camps of Siberia .
 This was a betrayal that resulted in the death and enslavement of millions of good Russian freedom fighters and their families . This is a betrayal, says one Russian journalist .
 An Investigation Into the Mass Deaths of German Prisoners at the Hands of the French and Americans after WWII .
 Dwight D Eisenhower deliberately starved to death German prisoners of war in huge numbers . Eisenhower was responsible for the deaths of thousands of German prisoners.
 Photo section shows the deplorable conditions in which the German prisoners were kept .
 concentration camp inmates got barracks, bunks, food and heat . Germans were kept in open-air pens in freezing weather without proper sanitation .
 Allied air photos of Auschwitz show that there were no “gas chambers,” no ‘burning pits,’ no � “burning pits’ No “Zyklon-B insertion holes’s” and no ’s
 Throughout history, Jews have played an exceptionally active role in promoting and inciting war, says the author .
With their influence in government, we find recurrent instances of Jews promoting hardline, uncompromising stances and actively inciting people to hatred .
 The author maintains that Jewish misanthropy, rooted in Old Testament mandates, has led them, time and again, to instigate warfare if it served larger interests .
 Dalton dissects Jewish strategies for maximizing gain amidst warfare, reaching back centuries . Along the way, Dalton dissected Jewish strategies.
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization is a self-evident front for the U.S. government .
 All European nations in the alliance are Uncle Sam’s indentured puppets . The puppets are the puppets of all European nations .
 Ukrainian politics have always been among the most deeply corrupt on Earth . NATO consistently denied membership to Ukraine for fear the contending criminal syndicates that run that brazenly exploited country would use advanced weapons against one another .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said Ukraine would be put on a path to NATO membership regardless of what Russia had to say . That very real concern was abruptly put aside in June 2021 .
 As a NATO member, Ukraine would then receive the latest guided missile systems and other high-tech weaponry from the United States . Moscow has long 52 + THE BARNES REVIEW: MAY/JUNE 2022 + VOLODYMYR ZELENSKY Ukrainian president .
 The imminent placement of modern weapon systems in Ukraine is a blatant threat to Russia . No other nation in the world, faced with a similar situation, would accept such a threat .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin cide, which is tantamount to surrendering to foreign coercion without a fight . To not have responded as Putin did in February, cide would have been a sign of surrender.
 Stoltenberg and his ilk certainly knew they had backed Putin into a corner from which he could escape only by recourse to military action . Stol tenberg and the Russian government were not happy with the situation .
 It is clear that they were directly responsible for the war they wanted and made as unavoidable as it was inevitable . It's clear they were making the war as unavoidable.
 Years earlier, current President Joe Biden and his son Hunter were infamously implicated in underhanded financial dealings with Kiev's party bosses and organized crime figures .
 The Ukrainian capital was known worldwide as a playground and rich pasture for oligarchs and high-profile influence peddlers . Law enforcement authorities and politicians were mostly on the take, where illicit cash flowed .
 Many if not most of the corporate 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE or government thieves are not even Ukrainians .
 The whole country had become a kind of transnational Las Vegas. As such, the whole country has become a sort of trans national Las Vegas .
 There, oligarchs, mobsters, major-league criminals and Ukrainian versions of Jeffrey Epstein or Bernie Madoff flourish in their own element . They make some of their biggest investments, from cocaine peddling and sex trafficking to illegal arms swindles and espionage for profit .
 The threatened loss of these lucrative investments suddenly endangered by foreign invasion was the sole impetus behind the unilateral demonization of Russian President Vladimir Putin by all news media and government authorities .
 The same faceless manipulators of public opinion up to their necks in Ukrainian corruption. They are often the same face-to-face manipulators up to the necks in Ukraine .
 Putin only decided to act following NATO’s attempt to admit Ukraine, but especially after U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan in August 2021 .
 They had been fatally distracted by Critical Race Theory, systemic racism, Black Lives Matter grievances, gender discrimination, gay pride and other forms of political correctness . They were too weak, therefore, to interfere with Putin’s plans for Ukraine .
 In Putin's view, Ukraine had become a backed-up toilet overflowing with an excess of Western degeneracy, threatening Russia with contamination .
 Western cultural poison is exacerbated by possibly quite real deadly poisons contained inside dozens of Ukrainian bacteriological laboratories overseen by U.S. and British scientists .
 This is a violation of both the Chemical Weapons and Biological Weapons conventions . This is the first violation of the Chemical weapons and Biological weapons conventions .
 Initially, Washington officials vehemently denied the existence of any such laboratories . Initially, officials vehemently deny any such labs .
 State Department official Victoria Nuland finally admitted that the labs are there, being run for humanitarian reasons, but that they are worried the contents of the labs might escape or be used by the Russians .
 Russia’s only goal in Ukraine is to either make it a buffer against serious NATO threats or neutralize the country by removing the hostile, anti-Russian regime in Kiev .
 Russia's enemies hate her because she has so far escaped contamination by their decadence . Russia’s enemies love her as she has escaped contamination.
 The “progressive West,’s fanatically intolerant of any contrary views, wants the Russian people subsumed in the same kind of wholesale degeneracy degrading Western civilization . The ‘pro progressive West’ wants the Russians to be more tolerant of
 There are those congenital liars in power, telling millions of emotionally engineered audiences who to hate and who to love according to the greed-obsessed investors in Ukraine .
 A modern-day Esau slaughtering fellow Goyim is a spectacle of a modern- day Esau killing . The men stand on the sidelines, counting their coin, and counting their coins .
 Contains five dozen blackand-white illustrations, genealogies and a full index . Includes five dozen illustrations and full index.
 The book ends in 1911 before the period of the Bolshevik overthrow of the Romanovs .
 A pro-Russian separatist movement in a relatively remote and largely unknown region of eastern Ukraine has led to a major realignment of the international political order . The power and significance of nationalism in an era of globalization.
 Matthew Raphael Johnson krainian nationalism has been one of the most heartbreaking failures of recent decades . Johnson has been a member of the British National Council for decades .
 Twice, Ukrainian nationalists have been fooled into believing the West was their champion . The West is their champion.
 In 2004 and again in 2014, Western-financed violence and riots brought in governments that were nothing more than collection agencies for Western capital . In 2004, 2004 and 2014, violence and rioting brought in government agencies .
 Ukraine has fallen to the level of Gambia or the Ivory Coast in economic terms . Ukraine has now fallen to an economic level in Gambia and Ivory Coast .
 Her potential has been destroyed and her public morale, even before the invasion, is low . Her public morale is low, and her potential is destroyed, she says .
 Ukrainian government installed as a result of violent protests organized from the American Embassy . Today, the Ukrainian government has neither legitimacy nor money .
 Kiev's economy is entirely based on foreign aid, and this is guaranteed to the extent Kiev postures as the main force against Russia in the east . Her economy is completely based onforeign aid .
 'OZDnipro 4 Sv Sty Dnipropetrovsk 5 D oO Was Ss Donen. RA 2 rd NS Donetsk 5 Luhansk 9 A, it says .
 West seems to tire of writing checks, warnings of “an imminent Russian invasion’s’ appear in Western press .
 Many of the instigators of the uprising had ties to the West, especially the U.S. The United States through the National Endowment for Democracy and other subversive anti-Russian, pro-Russian NGOs operating in Ukraine .
 A leaked 2014 phone call between Victoria Nuland, a longtime State Department operative and anti-Russian fanatic, and then United States Ambassador to Ukraine Geoffrey Pyatt demonstrates overt U.S. involvement and interference in Ukrainian internal political affairs . The call was leaked by a former State Dept.
 The Donbass rebellion and its aftermath has already upset the liberal American-centric world order . The rebellion has been dubbed the "Donbass rebellion"
 The violence of the Maidan protesters in 2014 overwhelmed the police forces .
 A variety of political dissidents and troublemakers used the Maidan Square in central Kiev as their rallying point and occupation zone . Many of them were financed, trained and backed by the West .
 The U.S. embassy was giving away Captigon, a strong amphetamine and painkiller . It permitted protesters to withstand tear gas and truncheons, eyewitnesses say .
 The violence of the Kiev riots surpasses anything this author has seen in riots from South Korea to Northern Ireland .
 Police were strangely hesitant to defend themselves, even when their lives were in danger . Police are strangely hesitant.
 The U.S. was claiming the Maidan protests were peaceful and only the separatists in the eastern Donbass region were violent . The United States was claiming that the protests in the region were peaceful .
 The U.S. press and government were merely making up facts to suit their agenda, knowing there were very few that could dispute them .
 Since Ukraine is largely unknown territory for even well-educated Americans, the press and the then-Obama administration could say whatever they wanted .
 Donetsk separatists say the evacuation of their forces is contingent upon Maidan activities ending their legal and peaceful protests . Donetsk separatists have said the evacuation is contingent on Maidan activity ending their protests .
 You know where we stand on the legitimacy of the government of Ukraine, says the Ukrainian government . You know what you stand on, says Ukraine's president .
 We disagree with claims that there was a coup, which we completely disagree with . You know where we stand on these claims.
 Elements of the junta, appointed from Kiev, moved southeast to the pro-Russian Donbass region to take profitable firms there and sell them off to the West to pay debts .
 The workers there quickly organized arevolt leading to an armed uprising . The workers arevolted leading to a violent uprising .
 Russian volunteers, especially Cossacks, quickly came to the aid of the Donbass and reinforced their armed forces . The Donbass is Russia's largest region .
 Crimea voted overwhelmingly to rejoin Russia in a referendum on March 16 . The population had always been pro-Russian .
 More than 40 pro-Russian sympathizers burned alive in Odessa on the same day as the failed invasion . In response, a group of thugs burned alive more than 40 anti-Russian supporters .
 Petro Poroshenko was essentially appointed president by Western bankers who held Ukraine’s debt .
 Russian gas chief Alexei Miller warned little had been paid on Ukraine’s gas bill .
 Russia offered a loan to Ukraine to assist them since early April . Ukraine's economic production had come to a halt . Russia has offered to assist Ukraine since the crisis began .
 All promises made by the leaders of the coup were immediately discarded and broken . As with the protests of 2004, all promises were immediately abandoned .
 Ukrainian media continued fanning anti-Russian hysteria and intimidation. To cover for this, Ukrainian media continues to fan the anti-Russia hysteria .
 Kolomoisky was the governor of the Dnepropetrovsk region at the time . He promised $10,000 for each separatist soldier or sympathizer killed .
 Oleg Tsarev was the 56-year-old coordinator of the southeast resistance in Ukraine based in Donetsk, one of the largest cities in the region .
 The oligarch Kolomoisky was paying mercenaries to attack the separatists . Most of the Ukrainian army fled or went over to the rebels .
About 5,000 Ukrainians a day were applying for visas to move to Russia . About 5,500 Ukrainians a week were applying to move there .
 Putin and Medvedev sought cooperation to rebuild the moribund Ukrainian economy . Putin and Dmitry Medvedeva sought cooperation.
 The politAs with the protests of 2004, all promises made by the leaders of the coup were immediately broken .
 Ukrainian authorities soon began an “anti-terrorist operation’ in Slavyansk . The operation was launched by Ukrainian authorities .
 The operation began after a confidential visit to Kiev by CIA Director John Brennan . The operation was carried out by CIA director John Brennan.
 The Ukrainian military and its allies struggled to make progress against the pro-Russian separatists . The Ukrainian army and its allied forces have struggled.
 To cover for Ukrainian defeats, the story of a “Russian invasion’s’ was then invented . The story of an invasion was first invented to cover for the Ukrainian defeats .
 Public debt was now 60% of GDP, though the real figure was likely higher . The real figure is likely to be higher .
 The Kiev government then began a round up and execution of its enemies . The government then started a round-up and execution.
 From January to February 2014, 5,172 were executed in Kiev prisons . 10,000 were killed immediately after the coup and another 5,000 in March .
 Kiev cut off the canal supplying fresh water to Crimea’s farmers, ruining their harvest . Crimea's farmers were affected by the cut off .
 Strikes in industrial centers and mines in western Ukraine turned pro-Russian .
 Food prices rose by an average of 25% in Kiev, closing about 50 restaurants and cafes .
 In response, the United States financed legislative bills and a television propaganda blitz to legalize samesex marriage .
 In 2009, the electricity produced in Ukraine was about 40% of the last year of the Soviet Union, 1991 . In 1991, electricity produced was about 30% of last year's electricity produced .
 Agricultural production of meat and dairy products was 56% and 53% less than that level respectively . Agricultural production was 56 per cent and 53 per cent less than the same level .
 Since independence, Ukraine had lost 40% of its equity capital and 60% of fixed asset investment . Since its independence, the country has lost more than half of its capital .
 Ukraine's heavy industry, chemical and mechanical engineering and light industry largely disappeared, except in the Donbass .
 Major protests in western Ukraine erupted over 1-877-773-9077 toLL FREE TAPOSEEBO . Since the Maidan coup in 2014, a bitter civil war in the Donbass region has resulted in the deaths of thousands of residents .
 Russian officials have described the situation as a genocide against ethnic Russians . Western media and political establishment have entirely ignored the plight of the Donbass people .
Residents demand an end to Ukrainian assault on Donbass . Residents demand end to unpaid wages and high fuel costs .
 Pavel Gubarev declared himself the ‘people’s governor’ of the Donetsk region in March 2014 . He said the main reason for the development of the “Donbass Idea,’ or independence from the Kiev regime, was the nature of the second Orange
 Its purpose was to sell Ukraine off to pay debts and to pocket the cash for the corrupt oligarchs plundering the nation .
 The Donbass and the so-called "southern Russian regions of Ukraine" are directly interested in the development of economic and cultural relations with the Russian Federation .
 Looking westward toward Kiev and western Ukraine, as both a market and resource base, is insufficient for the Donbass region . Looking westwards toward Kiev, Ukraine, is not enough for the region .
Western Ukraine is an extremely favorable transit position . Western Ukraine is a very favorable transit place .
 Russia has traditionally sought to establish contacts with the business world in Lviv and Uzhgorod in order to secure fa vorable conditions for transit of raw materials elsewhere .
 The Ukrainian political elite have used the idea of national independence for the purposes of the uncontrolled plunder of their own people . The political elite, from communists to nationalists, have used and continue to use the idea.
Pro-Russian eastern regions rejoining or aligning with Russia in the minds of Kiev’s political leadership is directly related to the question of their own responsibility for crimes committed .
 Since the middle of the 1990s, this author has stated that Russia and Russia alone possesses the people, tradition, territory and self-reliance to be the brake on the New World Order .
 The Soviet Experiment Challenging the Apologists for Communist Tyranny Br. MATTHEW JOHNSON.
 The USSR remains one of the least understood of all societies despite having only existed in the 20th century . The USSR is one of only the most common societies in the world .
 It stands as the great embarrassment of the globe’s liberal elite and they do all they can to mystify their role in creating and supporting this totalitarian disaster . It is a great embarrassment for the world's liberal elite.
 Few people can wrap their heads around depravity of this magnitude . One of the reasons it remains so misunderstood is that very few can wrap its heads around this magnitude.
 Matthew Johnson explains the catastrophe of the Marxist Soviet Union and the ideological fog behind which it hid for so long . Johnson also explains the ideology behind which the Soviet Union hid .
BarnesReview.com has hundreds of Revisionist books, videos and other items . Visit us at www.Barnes review.com to see hundreds of revisionist books .
 It is distorted by the desire of the United States and the United Kingdom to maintain Ukraine as a force against Russia . The United States wants to maintain globalization at its present pace .
 The goal of the Western powers is to oust Russia from the Black Sea basin . The goal is to eliminate its influence on developments in the Mediterranean and Central Europe .
 Russia also had to be removed from the Caucasus, which explains the Western backing of separatist efforts in the Muslim autonomous regions in the late 1990s .
 The U.S. needs a strong hand in Eastern Europe, the Black Sea, the Mediterranean, and the Mediterranean . The United States needs to be strong in the region, as well as in transit routes of raw materials .
Strengthening the U.S. position in these areas comes only by weakening the position of the Russians in these countries .
 The Anglo-Saxons traditionally have sought to isolate Russia from the countries of Europe . An independent, Western-leaning Ukraine serves their interests perfectly .
 The conservation of Ukraine as an economically insolvent, culturally backward, but legally independent state is meeting the “vital interests of the United States and her allies in the West’s.
 Her system collapsed before the first Orange Revolution financed by the U.S. in 2004 . She has been sustained solely with aid from the West ever since .
 No one denies that it is intensely corrupt and has a non-functioning economy . No one says it is a corrupt economy . It is not the economy .
 The International Monetary Fund has been working with the United States to sell off what’s left of Ukraine to the banking cartel .
 The regime in Kiev exists only with foreign money and is thus under foreign control . The regime is under foreign Control .
 Ukraine is today an experiment in the privatization not BARNESREVIEW.com .
 Organized crime has taken over, and smaller revolts are breaking out with little media coverage . The uprising in Bessarabia is the latest in a series of revolts in the region .
 The media and political establishment hysterically insist that Russia is an “aggressor’ nation, particularly in light of the special military operation launched against Ukraine in February 2022 . China is denounced as a systemic abuser of human rights and a thief of industrial and technological innovations in the West
 Real power lies with banks, energy firms, finance and media and entertainment giants, including entertainment giants .
 U.S. politics ceases to make any sense unless one looks at both the global and domestic economic situation .
 Russia is a “threat worthy of a major war’s major war because it refuses to abide by U.S. dictates and commands, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia is the world's biggest threat, Sutter says .
 Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia has genuinely attempted to work cooperatively and respectfully with the West, including the United States, only to be disrespected, ignored and denigrated, all in an effort to undermine Russia's rise on the world stage .
 The American-dominated international order is losing its legitimacy and has largely sabotaged the very 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE foundation upon which it was built .
 The decadent, decaying and degenerate Western powers are rapidly crumbling, an ugly reality . Western political and financial elites wish to ignore, hide or deny, hide and deny. The decadents, decaying, decaying Western powers.
 Some of the more extreme elements in the Western political establishment have even threatened to launch World War III in order to maintain their international hegemony . The threat is a frightening prospect to say the least .
 Moscow and Beijing have developed a close, mutually beneficial relationship that has grown much stronger recently . The two countries recognize this fact and have a close relationship .
 In essence, they are pursuing a geopolitical strategy to break United States control over the Eurasian landmass, and thereby break U.S. global power .
 The United States has dominated the world for the past 70 years . The U.S. has maintained its dominance over Eurasia since the start of the Cold War in the early 1950s .
 The U.S. and its allies have enacted a variety of economic sanctions against Russia . Many of its top political and business leaders, entire industries and corporations and its export commodities are affected .
 President Joe Biden and other Western officials insist the measures are designed to punish the Russian regime . Many countries that made up the former Soviet republics still have a large ethnic Russian population .
 Percent of ethnic Russians in former Soviet republics . Estonia 24.8% Latvia 26.9% Estonia 26.7% Latvia .
 Putin has described the Russian people as a “state-forming people.’s history of influencing culture, politics and economic foundations of the regions where large populations of ethnic Russians reside .
 Western media portray all Russians as brutes, particularly following the invasion of Ukraine . In Ukraine, the invasion has severely impacted their domestic economy .
 The measures, however, have largely backfired and have only undermined and delegitimized the political and economic position of the Western powers . The measures have also been undermined by their very currencies and the status of the dollar .
 Putin announced in late March 2022 that Russia would only accept payment in Russian rubles for its natural gas . The move will have major repercussions on international financial and currency markets .
 This could end up destroying the petrodollar system that has dominated international energy markets for decades . This could be the end of the energy industry's dominance for decades.
 Russian Finance Minister Anton Siluanov has stated that roughly $300 billion worth of foreign reserves held by Russia in Western institutions have been frozen . Russia being unable to access them as a result of the Western-imposed sanctions .
 Many commentators have seen this move as a confiscation of Russian foreign reserves . Many commentators say this move is an attempt to confiscate the reserves .
 This amounts to a theft of Russian assets at worst or a default on Western obligations to Russia at best . This, in essence, amounts to the theft of Russia's assets at least at worst .
 Putin insists it “makes no sense anymore’ to sell Russian goods and commodities for dollars or euros to the U.S., EU members or any other hostile nation .
 Joe Biden and other Western leaders blame Russia for rising inflation, rising energy costs and other economic maladies . They fail to recognize that their own misguided policies are causing significant damage and harm to their own economies .
 The United States and the EU have defaulted on their obligations to Russia . In fact, the U.S., the EU and the United States are defaulting.
 Many countries in the immediate future may begin to convert their paper and digital assets into real reserves of raw materials, land, food, gold and other real assets . This will only result in more shortages in these markets.
 The incessant Western demands for a potential World War IIT scenario can only be viewed as a desperate and quite pathetic attempt to maintain Western political, financial and economy hegemony .
 The Donbass rebellion sparked this wider chain of events that will have reverberations for decades to Families with two parents are rarely poor and rarely produce misfit children . Come is yet another remarkable aspect of the nationalist struggle for independence, self-determination and, ultimately, dignity and respect on the
 The political theory of Novorossiya is worth noting at some length . The theory of the Russian state is a political theory .
 The Republic of New Russia is a social state and has under its jurisdiction national land, nationalized property, as well as all mineral resources, production facilities .
 In New Russia, there will be no monopoly on social institutions such as a party monopoly or presidential autocracy . It would control and destroy all other administrative institutions, leading to dictatorship . It did in Nazi Germany or the Soviet Union under Josef Stalin .
 This leads to a change of constitutional power and the loss of the legal authority of all state bodies . This is the first time a state has lost the power of its own body to a state .
 The oligarchy in Ukraine, from the clans created during privatization, is also forbidden . The oligarchs in Ukraine are also forbidden.
 It's like so many of the scientific theories of the Enlightenment, it assumes a vacuum . It's a vacuum, like many other scientific theories. It's not a vacuum.
 The market was forced on Russia and Ukraine that already had people in power . The reality is that the market was forcing people into power .
 Market thinking implies that all are equal at the time the system is imposed. Market thinking suggests that all is equal at a time of the system.
 Priority is given to international laws and regulations if they do not contradict the development of public, social, cultural, ideological, economic and other moral relations of the Republic of New Russia . International laws have morally declined in their economic, political, ideological preferences and programs .
 Promoting a rigid system, an evil oligarchical, competitive idea of self-interest and gain, encourages all of society toward competitive relations for survival . Promoting the rigid system encourages all the society toward a competitive system .
 The Republic of New Russia will not survive if competition within and among countries is the goal . However, it will not be able to compete if competition in and among nations is thegoal .
International legal instruments and agreements are given sanction only when they harmonize their economies with other public policies with existing international standards, but also with our own state interest .
 Using the government of the Unites States or the European Union, banks and other irresponsible entities impose their will on the world. Using the U.S. or the EU, banks, and others impose theirWill.
 These conglomerates have no interest in free markets, as they seek total monopoly . They seek total monopolization .
 Private property is held in contempt as wealth and power are the domain of a tiny handful, almost totally alienated from the population at large .
Without fatherhood, a paternal, military awareness, one cannot be a citizen or statesman . Without fatherhood or military awareness. Without paternal, a citizen, one can't be a state or citizen .
 In the kitchen, in the domain of a woman’s life, a busy landscape exists .
 In aself-reliant and responsible society, a working identity is one not self-created . In a self-reliance and responsible Society, a work identity is not self created .
Children should not fall into narrowminded, consumer, egoistic attitude toward social life, says author . He says preferential treatment in the upbringing of children should be paternal .
 The scientific literature showing the destructive effects of broken homes is so overwhelming that only a handful of academic feminists choose to ignore it .
 Families with two parents are rarely poor and rarely produce misfit children . Families with three parents are often poor and often have poor children .
 Divorce and family breakdown lead to social destruction and the very competitiveness and ego that is decried elsewhere, says author .
 In Novorossiya, the family, not the person, is the foundation of the state .
 As Novorossiya begins to rebuild and sees its pensions and salaries rise, Ukraine is now at Fourth World status .
 The government is merely a puppet of the U.S. and the IMF. Her army has failed to dislodge the rebels in the east and has virtually collapsed .
 For Ukraine to have any future in the West is absurd, as the West itself appears to have no future . Ukraine has no future in West, as it appears to be having no future.
 It is an essential signal showing the destruction of the Western imperium, says the author . It is a sign of the demise of the western imperium.
National socialists can win victories against larger armies fighting for nothing. It shows that national socialists can fight for nothing, it shows .
 The only sad consequence is the continued sinking of Ukraine into a failed state and economic servitude to globalist interests as a direct result of Western intervention and meddling .
 Kiev Junta's Days Are Numbered, "Sputnik News" is on May 16, 2014 .
 Pravy Sektor vs. the Kiev Junta is a battle of the Ukraine Junta .
 Problems in Ukraine’s Economy About Which Official Statistics Remains Silent,” “Vox Ukraine,’ August 2015. ‘VoxUkrainian’
 MATTHEW RAPHAEL JOHNSON is a nationalist historian and writer specializing in the Russian Orthodox political tradition . He is a Russian Orthodox historian and author .
 The nature of autocracy is inimical to the great oligarchic interests for it controls their reach to the levers of power, says the author .
 In Russia, that meant real property ownership for the peasants and a system of social insurance and labor legislation second to none in the world . Russia's social insurance system was second tonone in the World .
All of this under an absolutist system while the sweatshops dominated “democratic America’s” America . All of this is under anAbsolutists system while sweatshops dominate ‘democratic’ America .
 Holy Russia, Tsavism and Orthodoxy establishes the reasons why, and in so doing, shows the true historical roots of modern Russia and resistance to the New World Order .
 This is first-class Revisionist history, proving the link between monarchy and resistance to the great oligarchic cabals that presently rule most of the world . This is the first- class Revisionists history, and proves the link.
 Includes chapters on the most prominent Russian leaders from Ivan III to Alexander Karensky . Includes chapters of the most famous Russian leaders .
Sales@BarnesReview.org for best shipping rates to your nation . Outside the U.S. please email Sales@Sales.org to best shipping rate to your country .
 The Incredible Story of the Real Captain Morgan Graham A Thomas presents the compelling true story of a Welshman who became one of the most ruthless and brutal buccaneers of the golden age of piracy .
Capt. Capt. Captain is the namesake of one of the world’s most popular rum brands . He is the inspiration for dozens of fictionalized pirates in film, television and literature .
 Unlike most of his contemporaries, he was not hunted down and killed or captured by the authorities .
 Instead he was considered a hero in England and given a knighthood . He was eventually made governor of Jamaica . He became governor of the country .
 The author reveals an exceptional military leader whose prime motivation was to amass as much wealth as he could by sacking and plundering settlements, towns, and cities up and down the Spanish Main .
 A fresh and vivid narrative history of the Roman Empire from the point of view of the “barbarian enemies of Rome’s. The Barbarian Rebellion Against theRoman Empire is a fresh and compelling narrative history .
 History is written by the victors, and Rome had some very eloquent historians . Rome had many eloquent Historians, including some of the greats .
 Those the Romans regarded as barbarians left few records of their own, but they had a tremendous impact on the Roman imagination .
 Stephen Kershaw builds a narrative around the lives, personalities, successes, and failures of Rome’s rise and dominance . He builds a story of those who ultimately brought the empire down .
 Rome's history follows a remarkable trajectory from its origins as a tiny village of refugees from a conflict zone to a dominant superpower . Rome’s history follows the trajectory of its history as a small town of refugees .
 16th-century Dutch explorer William Barents and his crew of 16 lost their ship off the frozen coast of Nova Zembla to unforgiving ice . The crew were on their third polar exploration .
 The men would spend the next year fighting off ravenous polar bears, gnawing hunger, and endless winter . They would spend a year battling off the polar bears and gnawed hunger .
 Pitzer masterfully combines a gripping tale of survival with a sweeping history of the great Age of Exploration . The book is a time of hope, adventure, and seemingly unlimited geographic frontiers .
 Barents was one of the 16th century's greatest navigators . His quest to chart a path through the deepest, most remote regions of the Arctic ended in tragedy and glory .
 The author retraces Barents’s steps and also gives us a history of mutiny and the art of celestial navigation .
 For 1,400 years, the Christians of the Mideast lived under a system of sustained persecution as a lower class of citizens under their Muslim rulers .
 Christianity maintained a tenuous, even sometimes prosperous-foothold in the land of its birthplace up until the past several decades . Despite this systemic oppression, Christianity maintained its tenuous existence up until now .
Today, Christianity stands on the brink of extinction in much of the Mideast . Yet today, Christianity is on the verge of extinction.
 This book examines these questions based on the firsthand accounts of those who are living it . The book is based on those who have lived it .
 Irish immigrants were very active in the American Revolution, both on the battlefields and off, and yet their stories are not well known .
 The important contributions of the Irish on military, political, and economic levels have been long ignored by generations of historians .
 An authoritative and immersive history of the far-reaching events in England that led to the sailing of the Mayflower .
 The Pilgrim fathers to the New World was a foundational event in American history . It began as an English story, which pioneered the idea of religious freedom .
 The illegal underground movement of Protestant separatists from Elizabeth I’s Church of England is a story of subterfuge and danger .
 Queen Mary’s attempts to burn Protestantism out of England started with her attempt to burn out Protestantism . The Protestant underground created a Protestant underground .
 radicals met illegally throughout England, facing prison and death for their crimes . Elizabeth’s Protestant reformation didn’t go far enough, radicals recreated that underground .
 They went into exile in the Netherlands, where they lived in poverty, and finally to the New World . They are now living in the United States .
 The 2,000-year-old Copper Scroll was discovered in 1952 by a team of Bedouins led by Henri de Contenson .
 The Copper Scroll is considered to be the work of a secretive Jewish sect of devout Essenes . It is believed to be a list of buried treasure engraved on copper pieces .
 No one has been able to explain its meaning or discover any of the 64 locations it lists are buried . The Biblical treasures are buried in 64 locations .
 Robert Feather has unraveled the enigma of the Copper Scroll in a fascinating study . The study takes the reader on a journey from ancient Mesopotamia, through Canaan, into Egypt, and back to the Dead Sea .
 His exploration links the scroll to the ancient Egyptian king Akhenaten . It confirms the influence of this pharaoh’s religious beliefs on those of the Hebrews .
 The Spiritual Matrix for the World’s Cosmologies Reveals Gobekli Tepe is a center of civilizing knowledge for the ancient world .
 Scranton explains how the carved images on Gobekli Tepe’s pillars were the precursors to the sacred symbols of the Dogon, Egyptians, Tibetans, and Chinese as well as the matriarchal Sakti cult of ancient Iran and India .
Richard Nixon made one of the most disastrous monetary decisions in U.S. history .
 The president declared that the nation would end the convertibility of dollars to gold . The post-WWII Bretton Woods system was established following the war .
 The Bretton Woods system established the dollar as the world’s reserve currency . The dollar is the world's reserve currency, to which foreign currencies were fixed .
 The dollar was fixed to gold and nations could theoretically exchange their dollars for physical gold . As part of the agreement, the dollar wasfixed to gold .
 Nixon's closing of the "gold window" put the world on an irredeemable paper monetary standard . Since the dollar was the world's reserve currency, the dollar has been the world’s reserve currency .
 America's repeated and ongoing financial crises, budget deficits, reoccurring booms and busts all have their genesis with Nixon’s infamous decision in August 1971 . The decline of living standards (particularly for the middle and working class) all had their genesis in 1971
 Richard Nixon has been judged by some scholars to be the worst president in American history . Others insist the opposite, while others insist he is the worst .
 Nixon’s decision to end the convertibility of dollars to gold was a disastrous monetary decision, according to author Antonius Patrick .
 The first step was the establishment of the Federal Reserve in 1913 . Its primary purpose was to allow its member banks to inflate the money supply without fearing the consequences .
 The Fed could, and still does, enrich itself, the government and its aligned financial elites at the expense of the public at large .
 Franklin Roosevelt’s draconian measure of outlawing the private ownership of gold . The next step on the road to monetary debasement was Franklin Roosevelt's draconian measure .
 The Fed has unlimited power to print money without fear of its notes being redeemed . This was not only an unprecedented and outrageous attack on private property, but it also eliminated gold redemption of dollars domestically .
 The Depression was not caused by Americans’ ownership of gold, but rather the Federal Reserve itself and its wild inflationary policies enacted throughout the Roaring Twenties .
 FDR's action, like Nixon's, demonstrated how much the power of the presidency had expanded . The president's action was like that of Nixon's .
 It shows again the flawed and frankly naive argument put forth by constitutionalists and conservatives of every ideological persuasion . The ‘separation of powers’ theory that supposedly checks the aggrandizement of federal power could not prevent the audacious acts of FDR and Nixon .
 A true gold standard is a greater protector of an individual’s economic well-being and their political liberty than any legislation, bills of rights or constitution ever penned .
 The primary reason why Nixon closed the gold window was to fund the nation's “guns and butter’s economic and social policies that had begun under Lyndon Johnson .
 Johnson’s “War on Poverty’ and his escalation of the war in Vietnam caused the Fed to print vast amounts of money that began to drain the United States Treasury of gold .
 U.S. citizens and financial institutions could not redeem dollars for gold, but foreign central banks could . The United States can not redeem money for gold .
 America’s inflationary policy to fund its domestic and foreign objectives was why the gold window was closed . America's inflationary policies to fund foreign objectives were behind the closure .
 In effect, the United States was reneging on the commitment it had made at Bretton Woods .
 banana republics often pursue monetary chicanery that they often pursue . Instead, it was the type of monetary chicansery that Banana republics sometimes pursue .
 Culturally, the eradication of hard money was part of the transformation of a mature, frugal, hardworking and future-oriented people into an infantile, self-absorbed, dysfunctional and hedonistic collection of proles .
 National debt now exceeds $30 trillion . Personal and corporate debt are at dizzying heights, as well .
 At this point, a reversal of Nixon’s decision would do little to confront the problems that the U.S. economy faces .
 A “Great Reset’ of the economic system is in order, but not the kind envisioned by the world’s financial elites represented by the World Economic Forum .
 All national currencies would be redeemable in gold or silver or gold . A return to a metallic monetary standard would begin with a return to the metallic standard .
 Such a move would put areal check on banks’ ability to create money out of thin air . Such a change would put the banks' ability to make money from thin air into thin air.
 The return of prosperity will only come about when gold is again a part of the monetary order and reasserts its critical role in the limitation of cen2 tral bank power . The returns of prosperity only come when gold's value is restored .
 This essay is dedicated to the greatest hard-money advocate in Congressional history, Rep. Rep. John Boehner .
 Patrick's index TBR includes in every TBR November/December issue . For more from Patrick, see the index Tbr includes in each issue .
 Pat Buchanan tells the untold story of Nixon's White House, from Vietnam to the Southern Strategy . Buchanan was a speechwriter and senior adviser to President Nixon .
 In his inaugural address, Nixon held out a hand in friendship to Republicans and Democrats alike . In his first address, he said he was a friend to both Democrats and Republicans .
 By the fall of 1969, massive demonstrations in Washington and around the country had been mounted to break his presidency . But by the fall, massive protests had been mounting to break the presidency .
 Buchanan chronicles Nixon’s historic trip to China . He also describes the White House strategy that brought about Nixon's 49-state landslide victory over George McGovern in 1972 and Watergate scandal .
 A Revisionist look at a legendary French Canadian traditionalist who dominated politics in Quebec for close to two decades . As more rational, levelheaded people, both contemporarily and historically, get “canceled” and demonized for their political, social or historical views, a
 Canadian political figure Maurice Duplessis is one such example worth taking a good look at . He is a well-known figure in Canada's politics .
 Maurice Duplessis is an important yet overlooked political and historical leader in Quebec . He kept the province in what was called the Great Darkness .
 His name has been associated with religious bigotry and ignorance . He is considered a dark legend that preceded the Quiet Revolution of the 1960s .
 It is time to reassess the legacy of Duplessis, Quebec's version of Dr. Dr. Duplessi .
Antiliberal traditionalist who ruled Portugal 66. Antonio de Oliveira Salazar ruled Portugal for three decades . The antiliberalTraditionalist ruled Portugal.
 Maurice Le Noblet Duplessis was born on April 20, 1890, in Trois-Riviéres, a city on the St. Louis-St. Louis.
 He had a traditional upbringing in a deeply Catholic society . His youth was otherwise uneventful .
 Quebec Premier Louis-Alexandre Taschereau predicted a great future, as well, for the young politician . He quickly began to shine in the Legislative Assembly .
 In parliament, he was known as a fierce debater, a bulldog always ready to defend his point and humiliate his opponent .
 In Canadian politics, Conservatives and Liberals alternate on a regular basis . Similar to how the Democrats and Republicans trade places in American politics .
 Maurice Duplessis served as the 16th premier of the province of Quebec from 1936 to 1939 and again from 1944 to 1959 . This balance was locked in Quebec.
 He dedicated much of his adult life to the welfare of his constituents . He once famously said, ‘| have no family.’
 Quebec has been kept in the opposition for 35 years . ‘My only responsibility is the welfare of Quebec’
 He then managed to merge with the Action Libérale Nationale led by Paul Gouin under the banner of the Union Nationale (National Union) He won the 1936 elections, sweeping the Liberals, capturing 76 seats out of a total of 90 .
 The elections had been initiated after the Liberal leader LouisAlexandre Taschereau had stepped down in favor of Joseph-Adélard Godbout amidst a corruption scandal .
 His government was considered to be a puppet of the Anglo-Saxon trusts . His government had been considered to have been a puppet to the trusts .
On August 26, 1936, Duplessis fulfilled his own prediction and became Quebec's premier . He became Quebec’s premier.
 The achievements of the first mandate are impressive, especially since neither he nor any of his MPs had any prior experience in government . The achievements are impressive.
 Duplessis was indeed the boss, ruling his party in an authoritarian way, while still being loved and respected .
 With such a positive track record, one would think that historians would present him favorably .
 Quickly after taking power, he started a crusade against communist subversion in the province .
 He adopted the Act to Protect the Province Against Communistic Propaganda, commonly known as the Padlock Law, a law prohibiting communist propaganda .
 Most contemporary politicians and commentators condemning that law are quick to condone laws enacted by current Prime Minister Justin Trudeau .
 The Padlock Law was extremely popular in Quebec, where most people were favorable to strong Catholic Latin regimes . The law was also popular in Portugal, Italy and Spain .
 The law was first applied in November 1937 against the communist newspaper Clarté . It was later applied against the Daily Clarion .
 Raids were launched by policemen who seized communist papers and tracts . Raids launched by police who seized Communist papers.
 Opponents claimed that Duplessis was doing much to fight Communism, but 68. Opponents said Duplessi was doing little to fight communism, but he was not .
 It was federal opposition to the law that finally forced Quebec to abandon it in 1957 . It was the first time Quebec had to abandon the law .
Duplessis was in a full-scale political struggle against Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King for the respect of provincial autonomy . Duplessis had been in a political struggle with the Prime Minister for the Respect of Provincial autonomy .
 Duplessis launched elections on the theme of autonomy . To make sure he had the support of the population, he launched elections .
Adelard Godbout’s Liberals raised the issue of a possible conscription if Duplessis was elected . His opponents, AdelardGodbout's Liberals, raised the possibility of a conscription .
 Duplessis was politically closer to the Conservatives who had imposed forced enrollment during WWI . Godbout claimed a Liberal province would have more weight as Liberals were in power in Ottawa .
 Quebecers elected Godbout in 1939, more so ouf of fear of conscription, rather then disapproval of Duplessis . In the end, Quebecers elect Godb out in 1939 .
 Prime Minister King forced Canadians to go fight and die in Europe . Ironically, despite their pledges and promises, King forced them to fight and died in Europe.
 Duplessis defeated Godbout, who had presented himself as a bulwark against forced conscription . At the following elections in 1944, the roles were reversed .
 The debater of yesteryears had become a more dignified man, a statesman .
 His popular support would increase in the years to come, allowing him to win a stunning victory in 1948 . He would win the election in 1948.
 During his first mandate (19361939), Duplessis had placed a crucifix in the Blue Room of the parliament in Quebec, only removed in 2019 .
 Duplessis was extremely close to the Church . Some historians have wrongfully claimed to be a 1-877-773-9077 TOLL FREE duplicitous, dishonest strategy .
 Francisco Franco always sought to govern in a Catholic way . He can be considered of the same breed as Eamon de Valera, Antonio Salazar, Engelbert Dolfuss and to a lesser degree .
 Duplessis was also close to foreign investors, whom he tried to attract in order to give work to French Canadians . He was also trying to attract foreign investors to his home country .
Mainstream historians tend to focus on some of the extremely long and even violent strikes in Quebec’s mines . Duplessis took the side of the owners rather than that of the workers .
 Duplessis was not opposed to unionization, but he himself simplified the unionization process, allowing the creation of more unions . He felt that those he felt were subversive or aligned with Communism .
 The dishonest legend fails to mention that there were fewer strikes under Duplessis than under other premiers . There were less strikes under the duplessis under the premiers.
 The media may have been more intense, more sensationalized by the media, but assuredly not more frequent .
Cities, schools and universities were heavily indebted, and the region’s infrastructure was in asorry state .
 He enacted a law for reasonable wages, forcing employers to offer decent salaries to their employees .
 Schools and hospitals continued to be run by the clergy, improving quality and also ensuring the quality of the hospitals .
 Salazar was an authoritarian leader who ruled based on Catholic social teaching . Described as a dictator, Salazar ruled on social teaching.
Far from fascist and Nazi leaders who cpnside the people, he envisioned a state that would be turned toward the spiritual and material needs of his people .
 Salazar governed like a father or a professor, which is what he was. Salazar was not a violent man . He was a professor and a father .
 religious, though religious, relied on cold logic rather than passion. They avoided demagoguery and avoided demagogueuery . They used cold logic.
 Both devout Catholics rejected Communism, atheism and internationalism . They were both devout Catholics who rejected Communism.
 The major difference is that Duplessis was elected democratically, while Salazar had banned the existence of political parties within Portugal .
 Overall, the standard of living greatly increased during this period, as Pierre Berthelot has detailed . The standard of life greatly increased in this period .
 Duplessis was a true French Canadian nationalist, working for the survival of his people within the bilingual and bicultural union of Canada . He was also a true Canadian nationalist .
 He broke with the traditional way of conceptualizing French Canadian nationalism . However, he broke with a traditional way.
 He felt his work was to secure their homeland, namely Quebec, and the dominance of Moliére’s language in the province . Instead of defending the French across Canada, he felt he was to protect their homeland .
 Quebec's place in Canada could simply leave the confederation, he said in 1953 . He once stated, in 1953, that if Quebec’s place in the Canada was problematic, they could just leave .
 His words were what allowed a transition in the 1960s from an ethnic, linguistic and religious form of nationalism to a purely civic brand of provincial nationalism .
 Allhis life, Duplessis fought against the forces of centralization, adopting a position similar to the states’ rights movement in the United States .
 The fleurdelisé is an emblem combining the French fleur-de-lis with a white cross in the center of a blue field . It was the first national flag for Quebec .
 His autonomous stance led him to modernize government operations, something all objective historians recognize today .
 He was arrested in August 1940 after calling for defiance of draft registration . He was interned in Ontario for four years and interned for four .
 Lionel Groulx found him too ‘old school’ and “too compliant,’ while still applauding some of his accomplishments . On the other hand, he found himself too “old school,” and ‘too compliant.
In fact, he loved refined pleasures like the opera, and collected paintings, especially those of Auguste Renoir . He was an avid reader and collector of paintings .
 He thought those interests may have sounded a bitt too pedantic, so he only advertised his passion for baseball .
 He listened to citizen’s concerns, answered letters addressed to him . He would freely give his own money to help others, although he himself struggled with financial difficulties .
 He always remained a bachelor, literally giving his life for the service of his nation . He always stayed a bachelor .
 He would wake up early, go to work and come back to his hotel room after the day . He would study the most important issues of the day, never slowing down despite growing old .
 I have no responsibility other than the wealth of Quebec, as Duplessis put it, he says .
 He sometimes used the state as his own possession, without consulting with the parliament, even shortcutting the usual legislative procedures .
 He did so not for his own sake but for the sake of what he considered to be the good of the province . He did not do so for himself but for what he thought to be good of his province .
 The author interviewed members of Adrien Arcand's inner circle for a biography . Several told him that from time to time, a man’s car would stop a block or two beforeArcand's home .
 The man would walk with a hat covering the upper half of his face, the lower half hidden behind his collar . The hat would be hidden behind the collar .
 He would enter Arcand’s home quietly, almost secretly, and would sit and watch a hockey game before the black car would come back to get him .
 Ernest Laforce had served as a bridge between Duplessis and groups on the right in the 1920s and 1930s . The story has never been proven, but the two men had a common friend, Laforce .
 Laforce remained a good friend of both Duplessis and Arcand, who wrote him “that when he will leave, I am scared that it will be a catastrophe for our race already so threatened. Laforce: "I'm scared that when he'll leave, he will
After more than a decade in power, his party had come to resemble the Liberals . The party had become more like the Liberals.
 Paul Sauvé, who Duplessis had personally chosen as his heir, became premier and leader of the National Union . He was chosen as the heir to Duplessi .
 The following decade would become known as the Quiet Revolution with the Liberals breaking away from French Canadian traditions and making a hard left turn characterized by statism and secularism .
 The new doctrine of the Quiet Revolution insisted that Quebec was born in the 1960s, and anything preceding it was not worth honoring .
 Maurice Duplessis, who had epitomized the era before this new “enlightenment,” became an object of fascination . In this changing context, Duplessi became a fascination .
 Le Chef, une biographie politique de Maurice Duplessis, Editions du Jour, 1963, 19. The French chef was born in Paris, France, in 1963 .
 REmI TREMBLAY is the editor of the French-Canadian magazine Le Harfang . The author of Le Canada frangais, de Jacques Cartier au genocide tranquille.
 Tremblay is a freelance journalist for European and North American media outlets . In addition, he is a popular freelance journalist.
 Lawrence, Canada won by Wolfe; transition, Pontiac’s War; Quebec Act; American Revolution; invasion of Canada . Canada as a nation, political rights; the desires of French Canada .
 Cavalry engaged by massive Indian force shortly before disastrous Battle of Little Big Horn by Thomas Goodrich is the American who has not heard of the Battle of the Little Bighorn .
 On June 25, 1876, while the nation celebrated its centennial, Montana's most famous fighting regiment, the United States 7th Cavalry, lost .
 Hundreds of soldiers were killed when thousands of Indians overwhelmed him and his men . The “Boy General of the recent Civil War, George Armstrong Custer, had also been killed .
Few are aware that an incident that occurred a mere week before the disaster contributed directly to the defeat of Custer and his 7th Cavalry . Few are aware of the incident.
 The federal government called in the military to clear the last of the prairie tribes from their High Plains homeland in 1876 .
 To accomplish this feat, thousands of U.S. soldiers were assigned the job . Thousands were assigned to the job.
 Alfred Terry were three prominent U.S. officers tasked with battling renegade Indians on the High Plains in the 1870s . Terry was one of three prominent United States officers who fought renegade Indian Indians .
 George Custer would be committing suicide to challenge the massive Indian army assembled around the Little Bighorn without a whole lot more soldiers . He would sweep east from Fort Ellis.
 George Crook, victor over the Paiute in Oregon and the Apache in Arizona, won over the Apache . Crook was the winner in Oregon, Arizona, and Arizona .
 The plan was to drive the Sioux, along with their allies the Northern Arapaho and Cheyenne, into an area where all could be either herded onto reservations or defeated in a pitched battle .
 The Sioux were a major force like no other tribe, and their captives were well known . The fate of their captives was well known.
 Any man who ignored those words faced torture so hideous and prolonged that they would wish they had never been born . Any man would have been tortured so hideous that they'd wish they'd never beenborn .
 Taylor captures the United States Cavalry’s charge at Rosebud Creek . American troops were lucky not to have been overwhelmed by a much larger Indian force .
 George Custer and his men were wiped out by the same massive Indian force, numbering a minimum of 2,500 Indian braves .
 When Custer arrived with his command, he should have known that he would be facing the largest unified Plains Indian army ever assembled .
 By mid-June, the southern wing of the campaign had begun its thrust into Montana .
 Crook was also leading several hundred Indian scouts as they searched for the Sioux . With 1,000 soldiers, Crook also led several hundred scouts .
 The much smaller Crow and Shoshoni tribes had spent years fighting the Sioux . They now welcomed the chance to join the powerful Whites and punish their cruel oppressors .
 A large trail of Sioux had been discovered leading down the valley of Rosebud Creek . Indian scouts immediately applied war paint on their faces and their mounts, then began racing the animals back and forth .
 Anewsman John Finerty asked a White scout what it meant .
 Crook formed his column for the march to a large Sioux encampment believed to be somewhere down the Rosebud . The next day, June 17, Crook forms his column. Crook's column is for a march to an encampment.
Crook called a temporary halt to feed his horses and men after a march of 10 miles . Crook called the halt after a 10-mile march .
 John Finerty seized the opportunity to gain more sleep on his saddle .
 The newsman heard sporadic gun fire beyond the bluff just north of the creek .
 The growing racket was dismissed by the newsman as nothing more than the Indian scouts hunting buffalo .
 Crook thought otherwise and began deploying his force to meet the enemy . Crook, however, thought otherwise. He thought otherwise .
 The general was momentarily stunned. With Indians, friend and foe alike, screaming “at the tops of their lungs giving the war whoop that caused the hair to raise on end,’ the general was stunned .
 Crook saw 2,500 Sioux and Northern Cheyenne warriors, either on the bluffs or racing over the prairie to reach him . Crook's blood run cold .
Anson Mills and most of the cavalry to charge up the bluff and scatter the Indians . Anson Mills was the leader of the army's cavalry .
 These Indians were most hideous, every one being painted in ... colors and designs, stark naked, except their moccasins, breech clouts and head gear . They proved then and there that they were the best cavalry soldiers on Earth .
 The Indian were charging up toward us with one arm around the neck and one leg over the horse . There was no part of the Indian at which we could aim .
 The Indians came not in a line but in flocks or herds like buffalo, and they piled in upon us until I think there must have been 1,000 or 1,500 in our immediate front .
 As bullets and arrows whizzed by, a young officer paused briefly beside his commander .
 When the soldiers were ordered to dismount and fight on foot behind the rocks, the Indians wisely withdrew to the next ridge .
 Many laughed and slapped their posteriors as if they were encouraging the soldiers to follow .
 If you go down there, you can never get out of the trap, you will all be killed . Crook quickly ordered his men to remount and take the next ridge, which they did . If you went down there you can't get out, you'll
 It was noticed that some leader was orchestrating Indian movements with pocket mirror .
 The Indians were trying to divide his command and attack its weakest part, Crook says .
 As troopers fell back from the bluffs already taken, many Sioux swarmed into the valley . Many Sioux swarming into the Valley .
 Crook and his men realized not only how desperately outnumbered they were, but how greatly outgunned they were as well, with many of the enemy armed with repeating rifles .
 In one spot, six soldiers who straggled were slaughtered where they stood . The soldiers were killed in one spot .
 Shoshoni scouts appeared when hundreds of Sioux threatened to slice Crook’s force in half .
 A small, misshapen Crow scout named “Humpy’s” rode into the midst of a dozen Sioux and rescued a big sergeant they were trying to kill . But more Sioux came pouring in when they heard of the fight .
 The audacity of the move and the sheer speed of Humpy’s horse saved the day . Humpy's horse was the fastest horse in the world .
 Crook and Crazy Horse traded blows along the Rosebud for the next several hours . Crook, Crazy Horse exchanged blows for several hours before the fight .
 A battalion of cavalry was ordered to form up and move down the valley as though determined to strike the Sioux village . The Sioux village felt to lay just beyond several miles .
 Crook thereupon called back his cavalry battalion . As the Indians began falling back to protect their families, Crook called back the battalion .
 It was only then when the screams and shouts had ceased and the exhausted soldiers finally could see through the lifting smoke, that they truly appreciated what had occurred .
 Crook was shattered by his check on the northern Plains . “ never saw a man more dejected,’ an officer later wrote .
 Crook once more muttered something about heading for the Sioux village . The exhausted Crow allies dismissed the words as the ravings of a lunatic .
 The Crow rubbed his palms together as if grinding a clod of dirt to dust . With that, he rubbed his hands together .
 One column fell back, but another force, much smaller than Crook's, was preparing to advance . Ironically, even as one column falls back, another force was preparing.
 Unaware of defeat on the Rosebud, this column, is the 7th Cavalry under Col. Col. John Sutter's command .
 Custer would march right into that huge camp that the Crow and U.S. officers feared . The Crow and United States officers feared that he would be killed within days .
 THOMAS GOODRICH is a professional writer living in the U.S. and Europe . He is also a freelance writer in Europe and the United States .
 His biological father was a United States Marine in the WWII Pacific Theater . His adoptive father was in the U.S. Air Force in Europe . He was born in 1944.
Black Flag and The Day Dixie Died is based on this article . For more on the subject and reference sources, we suggest you read Black Flag.
 The U.S. military well aware a massive Indian force was present in the Little Bighorn Valley May 29, 1876 .
 The Crow Indians report going to fight Crow Indians, but he says they are going to join Sitting Bull .
Rare pictures show the faces, expressions, and clothing of hundreds of men, women, and children in this unique book .
Where possible, they have been carefully repaired and enhanced by the author . Where possible, the author says. Where possible.
 Feel the antebellum, bellum and postbellum periods come alive as you peruse the searing portraits of the people who endured one of the most unnecessary conflicts ever .
 Author's introduction, a full index, an exhaustive bibliography, footnotes and educational appendices . Includes author’s introduction, full index and exhaustive bibliographic bibliography .
 Seabrook has compiled thousands of scrumptious old-timey recipes from America’s Southland .
 The book's recipes provide detailed instructions on how to prepare a wide variety of Southern victuals . Many borrowed from places as diverse as New England, West Coast, Europe and Russia .
 Lincoln’s illegal, unnecessary, and merciless destruction of the South and her people is his legacy . Lochlainn Seabrook reveals in The Unholy Crusade that Lincoln's illegal and unnecessary destruction of his South is his Legacy of Destruction .
 Dixie was ransacking and burning of thousands of Southern homes and businesses . Hundreds of 19thcentury photos and drawings of the North’s demolition of Dixie .
 Universities, hospitals, livestock, livestock and even family pets were wantonly destroyed by Union troops .
Also documents the arrest, abuse, torture, rape and murder of thousands of innocent Southern civilians . Also documents the arrests, abuse and torture of hundreds of innocent civilians .
 The story of Lee and Jackson is the story of the unique relationship between the two leaders . The pair chiseled a strategic path forward against the odds and almost triumphed .
 This remarkable history tells the story of the rebel republic from its very beginning to its bitter end . Written by the man who was at the very center of the CSA and who held its highest office .
 Davis' War between the States is not an exhaustive story of the War . It is not a exhaustive story, but rather the events of those times as experienced by Davis .
 The author deals with the fundamental questions that caused the rupture .
Real and Imagined September/October 2018: American Indian holocaust; Bolshevik holocaust in Russia; Hitler and the World War I holocaust . The MK Ultra “mind holocaust’s’. pages, $15 each, include more pages .
 Defending American Heroes September/October 2020 is a biographies of some of America's slandered heroes .
 Stuart, Matthias Baldwin, Charles Lindbergh and Mayor Frank Rizzo are among those hiding about Judah .
 Hitler vs. the Bankers September/October 2021 . Hitler locks up members of the Rothschild family . Josef Stalin is really the founding father of the Zionist state of Israel . The Spanish Civil War as a warning for the West today .
Little Jews and “the Holocaust’s’. David Irving, the Holocaust, and the Zionists want David Irving silenced . The Zionists also want Dr. Dr. John Sutter to be silenced .
 Sigmund Rascher's medical experiments include Canada’s Great Upheaval of the Acadians and the Aryan race in antiquity .
 The Journal of Historical Review's September/October 2021 issue has to be the most informative issue thus far in your 28-year history .
 The articles by Antonius J Patrick and Marc Roland were very helpful in showing readers the sequence of events that lead up to a communist takeover of a nation .
 The relationship to the events of the past year under the Biden administration are startling .
 Both articles contained factual information relevant to explaining what is happening in America today . Both articles were published on CNN.com .
 Both should be required reading for all high school students in America . Both should also be required to read for all students in the U.S.
 The expanded September/October 2021 “Hitler vs. the Bankers’ edition of TBR is available for sale . subscribers would like to buy extra copies to send to friends and family .
 See page 77 for a list of our special expanded TBR issues published over recent years . Seepage 77 for the list of special issues published by the TBR .
 The ANP was founded some two decades ago by Rocky Suhayda as a party of education and racial consolidation . The ANp was founded by the former president of the United States.
 The party name was assumed with permission from Matt Koehl, George Lincoln Rockwell’s successor .
 The average American is completely ignorant of Adolf Hitler's conception of socialism . Nazi was used instead of National Socialist .
 As an old LIBERTY LOBBY supporter and reader of The American Mercury and The Spotlight, I was privileged to correspond fairly regularly with Willis Carto .
 His comments on the Ukraine war, also in the March/April issue, are too tolerant of Vladimir Putin, he says .
 Whatever the reason, Whites killing Whites on such a scale is an irredeemable crime, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Despite lessons of the previous century, White fratricide is well under way, again . Despite the lessons of previous century.
 Our race has been diminished not only in numbers, but also in common social discourse, denigrated as ever-criminal, evil, worthless, a history for which all Whites must feel shame .
 He is dragging Russia, and as much of Europe as he can convince or corral through gas and oil dependencies, to the East, to some imagined Eurasian New Jerusalem .
 Putin pronounces again and again that he is fighting against nationalists and Nazis . Putin says he is still fighting against Nazis and nationalists .
 He bombs hospitals, schools, schools and shelters with the justification that the buildings actually house nationalists using civilians as shields .
 White nationalists and self-described Nazis still support this epigone tzar . But, yet, White nationalists still support it .
 In August, Russia intends on convening an international conference focused on the destruction of nationalism and fascism . The conference will be held in August .
John KOEHLER has been a loyal supporter of THE BARNES REVIEW and AMERICAN FREE Press for many years . He has also been a supporter of The BARNES ReVIEW and American FREE Press .
 I have written a newsletter for just as many years to family, extended family and others, enclosing your editorials and articles and encouraging their subscriptions to your periodicals .
 Having said this, I hope I have enough status with you to take me seriously, I have said this . I hope this will make me feel better, I said .
 A Q&A section would enhance the circulation of THE BARNES REVIEW . I think you should try it, and I believe that a Q&a section would boost the circulation .
People seem to like this idea, so we will give it a try and answer as many questions as we can in the time we have .
 Since being introduced to your magazine and becoming a subscriber, I've bought numerous books from your store . I've also told many others about your publication .
 Idon’s "A List" of subscribers includes prisoners in California prison system . Idon: "I assure you that you are widely read"
 I look forward to every issue, along with your politically incorrect coverage of current events . I lookforward to every topic, including political incorrect coverage, and I'm happy to hear your opinions .
 Without TBR, I would not know what is really going on in the free world . I use the word “free’s liberally, and I use it liberally .
 TBR: "We have a strong following inside and, of course, outside prisons"
 Many prisoners across America have not had such ‘tolerant’ jailers . Many prisoners have seen their magazines destroyed and book orders returned .
 Dozens of letters have been sent to wardens imploring them to lift the ban on TBR . In response, we have written dozens of letters to various wardens across the country .
 Theologian Rudolf Bultmann is a Lutheran theologian . He is the author of his book Salvaging Civilization .
 Schwab recently was quoted also saying that the preexistence of Jesus and the resurrection are fake news . Schwab also said that Jesus's resurrection is fake news.
In trying to save the “baby’s” Christian values, we have left it in the bathwater for centuries . But, in trying tosave the ‘baby�’ — Christian values — we have been left in the water.
 We don't dare let these Christian values slip away, says Christian author .
 The baby's bathwater is much better than Schwab's, but it's slipping away, says CNN.com .
 We abandoned the myth that the sky is an astrodome and the Earth, a flat pancake, is the platform of the universe .
 That doesn't infer that the universe has evaporated, but those notions are long extinct . That doesn’t infer that it has evaporate, but that’s long extinct.
 Equally extinct are the other ways of pre-scientific thinking, the “spirit and wonder world” in Bultmann’s words .
 The wrappings were the package bringing us the everlasting Good News . The package brought us the forever Good News.
The virgin-birth myths, 2000 years ago, flunk today’s scientific biology test . The virgin-born myths are still true today's scientific biology tests .
 When we link these values that liberate and fulfill our nature with antiquated concepts, we discredit them . We discredit them.
In fact, research confirms that sincere atheists practice these Christian values on a par with identified Christians . In fact, all “non-Christians’s” are sincere atheists .
 As that becomes more developed, more enlightened, as new discoveries are made, institutions must advance also to keep pace with times .
 Our Founders stressed that teaching universal brotherhood and a standard of right and wrong is essential . Only an educated and moral people can succeed at self-governance .
 Keeping pace with the times we all, we all need an updated refresher course to uphold these humanizing values and recruit everyone to reclaim America .
 Schwab will get his way and throw out our cherished baby, says author . The Good News that defines human homo sapiens is good news .
 Everything Putin's Russia is doing these days is exactly the opposite of what the “Great Reset’s Russia wants done. Everything Putin is doing is the same as what he wants to do .
 Putin came to power out of nowhere by the graces of Boris Yeltsin, who was not in love with the West . Schwab would have even gotten into the same orbit as Putin, who came to the West in a drunk .
 The West was already in the process of raping Russia's resources. Then, the West was in theprocess of raping the country's resources . Then, they were already raping Russia.
 Please leave a phone number so we can call to discuss your letter or answer your questions . Please leave your phone number to talk to us .
 The book is free to charge. Order your book at the bottom of the book . Order the book by the end of the day .
TBR SUBSCRIBERS: $28 EACH INSIDE United States TBRSUBSCriBERS . $28 is 10% off SUBTOTAL INSIDE U.S. FOREIGN S&H on BOOK ORDER SUBT TOTAL
 If you would like to send electronic gift subscriptions to friends, we must have their email addresses .
 The Daily Discussion is a written version of each day's edition . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on the Daily Discussion . At the bottom of the page, please share your email address for the weekly Discussion .