 A former Russian insider says he was there when Putin began openly planning the present invasion of Ukraine back in 2003 .
 Andrey Illarionov, a Russian economist and former economic advisor to Vladimir Putin, informed that the invasion of Ukraine has been in official planning since at least 2003 .
 Questions relating to the future war with Ukraine were discussed in his presence, he says . I can say that certain questions relating to future war were discussed .
 Russian officials discussed the potential for launching a military occupation of Crimea and it’s subsequent annexation .
 Illarionov also discussed leaked documents which detail the operation of Russia’s future war with Ukraine .
 By 2009, he stated that plans to conjure and support separatism in Ukraine began to surface . He said that plans for separatism began tosurface in 2009 .
 The terrorist organization known as the 'Donetsk Republic' began to reassert itself online in 2008 after then Russian-backed Viktor Yanukovych lost his position as PM .
 ‘Donetsk Republic’ members attended training camps in Russia funded by the Russian Presidential Administration . instructors from the security services taught methods of espionage and sabotage .
Illarionov began organizing local terrorist training camps as early as 2009 .
 A war he steadfastly describes as being long in the works that will continue to play out in the long term . A war that will play out for a long time will continue in the future, he says .
 The other matter is that it is a long war that has been continuing for more than 16 months . The war has been ongoing for 16 months, and has been fighting for over 16 months.
 It was officially launched on July 27, 2013, by Putin’s speech in Kyiv on the occasion of the anniversary of the baptism of Kyivan Rus .
 Putin speaks glowingly of Stalin’s reforms and investment in Ukraine during his first ‘Five Year Plan,’ a disastrous policy which resulted in the Moscow-orchestrated genocide of up to 7 million Ukrainians .
 The next day Putin would attend Russian naval celebrations in the Ukrainian city of Sevastopol in Crimea .
 Russia's unborn Eurasian Union and reuniting with Russia is a cynical sales pitch for Ukraine . Russia is trying to convince Ukrainians the perils of European integration .
 Illarionov resigned from his position within the administration in 2005 . He has been an outspoken critic of president Vladimir Putin since that time .
 In October 2008 he quickly exposed that the Russian invasion and occupation of Georgia was premeditated and instigated by the Russian government . Many still debated whether Georgia fired on Russian soldiers first .
 In February of this year, Russia’s ‘green men’ swarming into Crimea, he fully predicted the occupation of the peninsula and similar destabilizing actions in the south and east .
 Igor Girkin, ‘Supreme Commander’ of the Donetsk Republic, openly admitted recently to Russia’s involvement in the war . He told how his special forces group entered Ukraine in April to seize government buildings .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says insurgent and terrorist groups in Ukraine’s east “will always get weapons,” including armored vehicles and artillery .
 He reiterated this position on the German channel ARD prior to the G20 Summit in Australia . NATO officials confirmed reports that the Russian military's invasion of Ukraine was continuing full speed despite an agreed upon ceasefire .
 The state-owned international network published an analysis on the aftermath of the fall of the Berlin Wall . It likens Russian President Vladimir Putin to former United States President John F Kennedy .
 JFK was an unapologetic liberal . It's only those among the conservative right who would ever raise the specter and threat of Obama-brand socialism .
Mr Butler is an MH17 truther . For good measure, we should also point out that Mr Butler is a MH17 Truther .
 The JFK comparison was not the only oddity put out by RT today, with Butler describing what can only be assumed as a continuation of his alternate bizarro reality, one where NATO expansion was designed to prevent a brain drain.
 RT paint Moscow as the villain for once, maybe waxing poetic on Putin has its logical limits . While it’s refreshing to see RT painting Moscow as a villain, maybe it's not .
 "observers" who would go illegally to Eastern Ukraine took a morning flight from Moscow to Rostov-on-Don on the 1st of November . Then travelled by bus from there to the Russian town of Kuybyshevo .
 At the border, Russian extremists put armed escorts into the buses of “observers’s” Then they crossed the border.
 The ‘observers’ were introduced to the leadership of the terrorist organisation “Donetsk People’s Republic” and issued with ‘international observer’ cards .
 On the 2nd of November, international “observers’ began their work of “legitimising’s illegal, fake elections held by Russian extremists .
 Adrienn Szaniszló of the extreme right Jobbik party stayed in the Rostov region to observe the “elections’s” there .
 Bureaucratic stonewalling is hurting the morale of Ukraine’s fighting men and women .
 Some are taking photos of their deployment to prove their involvement to disbelieving officials . Some are even taking photos to prove they have been deployed .
 The friend was shot and injured by a sniper. He couldn't get status as a casualty of anti-terrorist operations, which affects his ability to get benefits .
 His brother, serving in the 95th Brigade, was advised to take photographs as proof of his war service . His brother was told to take photos of his brother as proof.
 The bed, helmet and kit bag of one of the soldiers alleges some of their officers are betraying them . The bed and helmet bag of a soldier alleges some officers are betrayaling them.
 The three refused to give names or be photographed for fear of punishment from the army . They were placed in their room recently at the regional hospital here while traveling with volunteers .
 One of them had been injured after the turret of a large gun on an armored vehicle swung unexpectedly and struck him . He bled from the ear and wears a bandage around his head .
 This city of 78,000 is about 88 kilometres north of Donetsk, where fighting has raged over control of its airport . The Sept.th ceasefire has been in place since the Septemberth ceasefire .
 The United Nations Human Rights Office reports that at least 3,517 civilians and Ukrainian soldiers have died in the war since April . The U.N. Human rights office says at least 2,500 people have died since April.
 Soldiers are not allowed to speak to the press unless officers are present . Normally, soldiers are allowed to talk to the media unless they are present.
 The soldiers also said some of their senior officers were selling information about their whereabouts to the enemy . This could not be confirmed .
 Many of their peers have died when they were shelled by separatists after their coordinates were sold . They said many of them were killed by separatists .
 One soldier said evidence of this is that on one occasion the men refused to stop as scheduled, and proceeded on . Another soldier said the men did not stop as planned, and went on .
 A new shell comes right down onto the trenches, and sends shrapnel far and wide, injuring and killing .
 One of the injured men said that since they lack winter clothing and other equipment, the Ukrainian army may have to shut down operations for the winter . One of those injured said that the army may be forced to close down operations.
 Graham Phillips interviewed Austrian right-wing politician Ewald Stadler at “elections in the Donbas’s Donbas . Phillips is a controversial British reporter for the Kremlin's disinformation service Russia Today .
Stadler does not see a man in military fatigues standing behind him . OK, so Stadler doesn't see the man in fatigues .
 There are no armed men “inside’s polling stations, Stadler says .