 The annexation also violated a number of bilateral agreements between Ukraine and Russia .
Russia's actions were immediately condemned by the international community . Russia's actions are immediately condemned .
 Crimea and the rest of Ukraine are experiencing a difficult economic situation . The nationalisation and confiscation of companies and a decrease in the agricultural and tourism sectors have brought about an increasingly difficult economy .
There has been a worrying rise in extremism, xenophobia, and violations against human rights and fundamental freedoms . There has been an increase in extremism and xenophobia in recent years .
 One of the most disturbing outcomes has been the persecution of persons belonging to minorities, in particular the Crimean ethnic Tatar community .
War in Eastern Ukraine has drawn the world's attention away from Crimea . The plight of the people in an increasingly lawless Crimea should not be forgotten .
 The international community should remain committed to a policy of non-recognition . Increased pressure needs to be placed on Russia over the deteriorating human rights situation .
 Crimea populated Crimea in the 13th century following Genghis Khan's great Mongol expansion . Crimea was populated by the Crimean people in the 14th century .
 The Khanate of Crimea became a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire . By the middle of the 15th century, they had founded their own state .
 Moscow began its reign in the 18th century, when Catherine the Great invaded the Peninsula . The city was founded in the early 1800s .
 The Tatars were regularly persecuted and driven into exile to the Ottoman Empire . Viewed as Ottoman allies, the Tatars had a history of being persecuted .
 The city was crucially important as it offered access to Black Sea trade routes, the Caucasus and allowed Russia to extend its naval might in the Mediterranean .
 Russia's Mediterranean Task Force has recently resumed permanent operations in the Eastern Mediterranean . Today it also serves as headquarters for Russia's newly constituted Mediterranean Task force, which has recently resume permanent operations .
 The Fleet was used to conduct a blockade against Georgia in 2008 . The base's significance was highlighted during the 2008 Russia-Georgia war .
 Crimea became an overwhelmingly Russian populated territory in 1944 . Only in 1944 did Crimea become an overwhelminglyRussian populated territory .
 Stalin ordered the deportation of the entire Crimean Tatar population to Central Asia . The entire CrimeanTatar population was deported .
 Almost 200,000 were abandoned there in camps, surrounded by barren wastelands . Almost 100,000 people were abandoned in camps across the world .
 Tens of thousands of Russians were settled on the land vacated by the Tatars .
 In 1954, following Stalin's death, Nikita Khrushchev gave Crimea to Ukraine . In 2014, Crimea was given to Ukraine by Ukraine.
 The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 had a huge impact on Crimea's population, Ukraine and the new Russian state . The consequences of this decision were only really felt with the fall of Soviet Union .
 The King Baudouin Foundation is the strategic partner of the European Policy Centre . It was difficult for Russia to accept the independence of Ukraine due to the pivotal role of Ukraine for Russia .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea began when armed men with no insignia appeared on the Peninsula in late February 2014 . The annexation began after the departure of Ukraine's then President, Viktor Yanukovych .
 This was the beginning of what has become commonly known as "hybrid warfare" - covert as well as overt activities backed up by a disinformation campaign . This is the first time this has become known as hybrid  warfare .
Pro-Russian actors claim Kyiv's new pro-Western leadership are fascist nationalists . They say they represent a significant threat to Russians and Russian speakers .
 Ukraine's governance of Crimea was far from perfect, with Kyiv's attention frequently drifting away from the Peninsula . But this was not so different from many other parts of Ukraine .
 The Russian language was furthermore protected by the Constitution of the Autonomous Republic in Ukraine .
 The little green men spread out, taking control of key infrastructure, clearing the way for the seizure of power .
 The international community condemned the referendum and the unfree and unfair circumstances under which it took place . The referendum was held in a referendum in a bid to decide whether to hold the referendum .
 The UN General Assembly immediately passed a resolution declaring the referendum invalid . The vote was declared invalid by the UN.
 Russian soldiers backed Crimean self-defence units to prevent a conflict . Russia initially denied any military involvement in the Crimea referendum .
 President Putin claims he personally oversaw the annexation of Crimea . He said it was all carefully planned .
 A large majority of Russians have never stopped viewing Crimea as culturally and ethnically a part of Russia . There was no doubt in Putin's mind that the majority of Russian society would back his annexation .
The banking sector is paralysed with international investors long gone . The banking sector has been paralysed for years .
 Some 500,000 people have seen their pensions increase, many residents struggle to make ends meet . Some residents have seen a rise in their pensions .
 An embargo on any goods originating from Crimea has been imposed, and trade and investment restrictions are in place .
 In 2013, Ukraine signed exploration and production agreements for large areas of Crimea's eastern and western coast . EDF, ExxonMobil and Royal Dutch Shell were among the energy giants in Ukraine .
 Prior to annexation Crimea received some six million tourists annually .% of those tourists came from Ukraine .
 Russians amounted to some 30%, with the remainder being mainly passengers from international cruise liners docking at the Peninsula . The remainder of the passengers are mainly from international Cruise liners .
 Crimean tourist numbers more than halved in 2014, according to Crimean authorities . Russian government launched programme promoting tourism .
 The economic impact of sanctions, the drop in oil price and subsequent devaluation of the Ruble has made Russians more cautious about spending money .
 Turkey and Egypt are more popular, and often cheaper, than Crimea . Other destinations, in particular, are also more popular than Crimea, and are often cheaper .
 Crimea remains dependent on water and electricity from Ukraine, but there are frequent blackouts and disruptions .
 The closure of the North Crimean Canal has adversely affected agriculture, with numerous crops failing . The canal is the main irrigation source for Crimea's interior dry steppe lands .
Construction of a bridge connecting Crimea to Russia across the Strait of Kerch is not due to be completed before 2019 . Crimeans hope that the bridge will bring an economic upturn .
Economic downturn in Russia means there are less employment opportunities for seasonal workers . The economic downturn means there is less employment opportunity in Russia .
 Putin originally pledged $18 billion for development, but most of that money is yet to be seen . Most of the money is not yet seen .
 Crimea has witnissed a huge influx of administrative and security personnel from Russia, along with a consolidated and enlarged Russian military presence . Instead Crimea has woken up to the huge influx.
 Some 20,000 people have left Crimea for mainland Ukraine, according to UNDP . UNDP says some 20.000 people left Crimea.
Human rights situation is also a result of a harsh crackdown on voices of dissent under way . This is partly a consequence of the worsening economic situation, it is also the result of the deteriorating human rights situation .
 Most independent or critical journalists and activists have left for mainland Ukraine . Most independent and critical journalists have left the country .
 Those who remain are constantly at risk of being attacked or worse, especially if they are perceived as pro-Ukraine . Those who are seen as anti-Ukraine are also at risk.
 Ukrainian schools in Scholkino and Kerch are being closed while the Ukrainian Gymnasium in Simferopol is under increased pressure .
 Only four Ukrainian schools remain operational, with an uncertain future . Only four of the four remaining Ukrainian schools are operational .
 Russia launched the so-called "passportisation" process after the annexation of Crimea . It required any permanent resident of Crimea with Ukrainian citizenship to either apply for Russian citizenship or declare an intent to maintain Ukrainian citizenship .
 Refusing to surrender Ukrainian passports and rejecting Russian citizenship can have dire consequences . Refusing Russian citizenship and rejecting Ukrainian passports can be dangerous, say experts .
 With the exception of the Russian Orthodox Church, most religious faiths are experiencing intimidation and discrimination . Most religious faiths in Russia are experiencing discrimination and intimidation .
 Kyiv Patriarchate churches have been shut down in Sevastopol, Krasnoperekopsk, Kerch and the village of Perevalne . The village was subjected to an armed attack in June .
 Kyiv Patriarchate Archbishop Klyment of Simferopol and Crimea constantly receives threats . His dacha was burned down and his dacha burned down .
 The Kyiv Patriarchate is under increasing pressure to relinquish its main church in Simferopol . The church's main church is located in the town of Simferopoulos .
 The persecution of Crimean Tatars No group has been hit harder than the Crimean Tatar No group . The persecution has been harder than any other group .
 When Ukraine became independent in 1991 high numbers began to return to the Peninsula . Tatar in-migration has continued ever since .
 The Tatars have remained a reliable pro-Ukrainian and pro-Western electoral bloc and staunch supporters of Ukraine's territorial integrity . They have struggled on issues such as land and property returns .
 The majority boycotted the illegal referendum and Russian local elections in September 2014 . The majority of the vote was held in a referendum and local elections .
 In the past twelve months, their freedoms and rights have been repeatedly attacked . In the last 12 months, they have been attacked .
 Mustafa Dzhemiliev, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko's representative on Crimean Tatar affairs and Refat Chubarov, the President of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatars .
 The Tatars have also been prohibited from celebrating their holidays and remembering victims of political repressions . They are harassed by secret services and "self-defence forces" that search homes, offices and mosques .
 Today the Tatars feel they are reliving the brutal events that led to the 1944 deportation . The Tatars were deported from Russia in 1944 .
 Ankara has taken steps to deepen economic ties with Russia in the last 12 months . Ankara has professed itself the steadfast defender of the Crimean Tatars .
 Putin may still be basking in his "glory" with high popularity ratings . Many people in Crimea still euphoric about being part of Russia, this is unlikely to last forever .
 Crimea has quickly become a millstone around Russia's neck and this financial burden is likely to get heavier rather than lighter as time goes by . The realities of international isolation begin to hit home on the Peninsula .
Young people will find themselves trapped under corrupt and criminal authorities with few opportunities for the future . This will particularly be the case with the younger generation that will be trapped under the authorities .
 Crimea will be "returned" to Ukraine any time soon, but it seems unlikely that it will be .
 Even if Putin's rule comes to an end, it seems unlikely a new leader would make a U-turn .
 Such was the popularity of the annexation in Russia that any attempt at reversal would be political suicide . Any attempt to reverse the annexation would be a political suicide, it was said .
 Even leading opposition figures such as Alexei Navalny and Mikhail Khodorkovsky recognise this fact . Kodorkovsky says the Crimea problem will go on for decades .
 A recent survey revealed that only 13% of Ukrainians believe that Western sanctions will bring about a return of Crimea .
 Crimea is not a reason for the international community to give up on Crimea . However, this is not the reason for it to do .
 Almost every country in the world now seems to see the Crimean situation as a fait accompli .
 Crimea was not even mentioned during the recent Minsk II ceasefire negotiations . Crimea was never mentioned in the discussions .
High Representative Mogherini underlined the anniversary of the illegal referendum . It is important that the international community maintains a strong focus on developments on the ground .
 Russia's recent effort to press UEFA to recognise Crimea as an entity seperate from Ukraine should be rebuked . For example, Russia's attempt to press the European governing body for football should be robustly rebuked.
 At some point in the future a compromise can be found regarding Crimea . By changing the image and face of Ukraine, there is a far greater likelihood that at some point a compromise could be found .
 The Government of Canada/Mission of Canada to the European Union for their kind support for this Policy Brief .