 No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means without permission in writing from the Atlantic Council . The Atlantic Council does not allow for the use of words in news articles or critical articles .
 Pro-Russian rebels stand on top of a burnt-out Ukrainian personnel carrier near the village of Novokaterinovka .
 The Atlantic Council Policy on Intellectual Independence. This report is written and published in accordance with the Atlantic Council's policy on intellectual Independence .
 The authors are solely responsible for their analysis and recommendations . They are responsible for its analysis and recommendation .
 The Atlantic Council and its donors do not determine, nor do they necessarily endorse or advocate for, any of this report's conclusions . The Atlantic council and its donor do not necessarily endorse and advocate for.
 A Kremlin-Made War 4 Russian Denial of Facts. Using Digital Forensics to Expose Russia’s War in Ukraine . A Steady Flow of Arms and Military Equipment from Russia to Eastern Ukraine .
 The Atlantic Council has worked to advance the vision of a Europe whole, free, and at peace in which Russia enjoys its peaceful place .
 Putin’s War in Ukraine EXECUTIVE SUMMARY: Russia is at war with Ukraine . Russia's war in Ukraine is the latest in a long line of conflict between Russia and Ukraine .
 A combination of satellite data, crater analysis and open source materials confirms that many attacks originated in Russia, not in the separatist areas of Ukraine .
 Western political leaders should speak clearly about Russia's war against Ukraine, including Russian forces fighting in Ukraine and the Kremlin's direction of the campaign .
 Russia strengthens the capacity and arsenal of the forces in eastern Ukraine . The Kremlin is building its case that forces engaged in any future outbreaks in fighting are indigenous Ukrainian forces .
Russian President Vladimir Putin and Sevastopol Mayor Alexey Chaly sign a treaty making Crimea part of the Russian Federation on March 18, 2014 .
 In the winter of 2014, the Maidan revolution in Kyiv led then-Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych to flee Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin practically boasted that Russian troops carried out the Crimean operation . But in public statements in Moscow one year after the annexation, he practically boasted .
 Russian-supplied “volunteers’s” seized the opera theater in downtown Kharkiv on April 7, 2014, when they seized the theater .
 Kremlin-supported authorities in Luhansk and Donetsk held their own illegal and unmonitored referendums on May 11 . They declared independence from Ukraine for the Luhans and Donetsk oblasts in May .
 Moscow responded to the Ukrainian counteroffensive by sending in ever more sophisticated artillery, tanks, and anti-aircraft missiles . The Buk surface-to-air missile system was used from Russian-controlled territory in Ukraine to shoot down Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 (MH17)
 Numerous independent investigations corroborate Russia's role in this tragedy . Many independent investigations have corroborated Russia's involvement .
Russian artillery from Russian territory into Ukraine into Ukraine stop Kyiv's advance .
 At that point, the Kremlin decided to send in approximately four thousand regular army troops . The Kremlin has sent in about four thousand troops .
 Russian escalation prompted additional sectoral sanctions from the European Union (EU) and gave impetus to Minsk negotiations, which led to a ceasefire on September 5, 2014 .
 According to the most conservative estimates, the war has killed 6,000 Ukrainians and Russians .
 The Russian government and military have repeatedly denied involvement in Ukraine . Putin’s War in Ukraine RUSSIAN DENIAL OF FACTS .
 The proof that Lavrov asks for is out in the open, says the Russian Foreign Minister .
 A year after the annexation of Crimea, Putin publicly admitted that the annexation was planned well in advance . The annexation was a year after Crimea was annexed .
 Russian soldiers fighting in Ukraine and Ukrainian and Russian civilians on both sides of the war are posting photographs and videos of convoys, equipment, and themselves on the Internet . The Kremlin continues to deny the role of regular Russian forces in Ukraine .
 Digital forensic techniques involve verifying the locations of where videos and photographs were taken in a process known as "geolocating" "geotagging" is the automated process of adding geographical identification data to various media such as photographs and videos .
 Using photographs posted on social media sites, geolocation techniques pinpoint the coordinates of where photographs were taken . Google Earth and Yandex Maps use satellite imagery and street view images .
 Geolocation is a powerful and effective tool for tracking individuals and the images they produce . Geolocated is so powerful that it can be used as a tool to track individuals and images .
 When these media images are uploaded to social media and other platforms, the geotag remains embedded in the image and can be identified . When these images are then uploaded to Twitter and Facebook, they can be used to identify and identify the Geotag .
 Separatist forces relying on steady flow of Russian supplies, including tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, and advanced anti-aircraft systems . Buk surface-to-air missile system that shot down Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in July 2014 .
 Using geolocation to pinpoint the location of each vehicle from multiple sources shows that the vehicles are crossing from Russia to Ukraine in spite of the Kremlin's denials .
 In July 2014, a video was uploaded to YouTube showing the movement of a military convoy in Rostov-on-Don, Russia, heading west .
 A1 Jazeera crew filmed the movement of Msta-S system through Novoazovsk in Ukraine . Later in September 2014, an A1azeera news crew filmed it again heading west .
 In another case, a convoy of vehicles was filmed moving through Staraya Stanitsa, Russia in August 2014 .
 In the convoy, a BMP-2 infantry fighting vehicle with the painted text ""J1ABHHA"" — lavina, meaning "avalanche" — can be seen on a trailer .
 T-72B3 MODERNIZED MAIN BATTLE TANK Entered service in Russia 20 13 13 32 T- 72B modernization . New sight and fire control system, among other improvements, also improvements .
 KAMAZ-43269 ‘DOZOR’ Entered service in Russia 2009 Armored reconnaissance and communications vehicle . The vehicle is a Russian armored reconnaissance vehicle .
KBR 36 2B26 GRAD LAUNCHER on KAMAZ CHASSIS. KBR 362B26GRad LAUNCHer on K AMAZ-5350 chassis . K BR 36 2b26 GRad LAuncher on KamAZ- 5350 chassis
 Putin’s War in Ukraine associated with the pro-Russian separatists posted a video from Vuhlehirsk, Ukraine .
 In the video, a BMP-2 with the same painted text is visible, along with other features of the unit, like a painted green area and physical damages, which makes it possible to link the two videos together .
 Using geolocation methods, each piece of equipment can be pinpointed to its exact location coordinates using a combination of sources . Each piece of Equipment can be traced to its precise location using combination of source sources .
 Physical evidence was on public display in Kyiv in February and March of 20 15 . This physical evidence is on display for the first time since February .
 Thousands of trained Russian military forces have been operating and using Russian military equipment . Thousands of Russian military troops have been training and using military equipment.
 T-72B tanks used by members of the 5th Tank Battalion who departed from the Kuzminsky border camp in Russia in mid-February of 2015 to engage in the Battle of Debaltseve .
 Several Russian training camps stationed along the Ukrainian border are the launching points of Russia's war in Ukraine . In plain view for anyone with access to Google Earth or Google Maps .
 satellite images of Russian troop deployments on the Ukrainian border can be gleaned from accounts of Russian soldiers who were injured or killed in Donbas .
 Satellite imagery and the first-hand accounts of Russian soldiers show that the camps are launching points of Russia's covert war in Ukraine .
 The Ulan-Ude tank brigade is stationed in Siberia and was deployed to the Kuzminsky camp in October and November of 2014 . The brigade is based in Siberia .
 The United States Army Europe Commander Ben Hodges estimated that twelve thousand Russian soldiers are active in eastern Ukraine . The U.S. Army Europe commander estimated that 12,000 Russian soldiers, including "military advisers, weapons operators, and combat troops"
 Putin confirmed this, and many eager Russians filled out online applications to join the separatist ranks . Many eager Russians even filled out applications to become a separatist fighter .
 A series of expose reports from local Russian news outlets confirm the regular Russian military is active in Ukraine . A number of cases in which Russian soldiers accidentally revealed their presence on social media .
 Both Western and Russian journalists have uncovered the troubling details of active Russian soldiers who have died or suffered serious injuries in Ukraine .
 Reports include eyewitness accounts and photographs of Russian soldiers in Ukraine . Also interviews with grief-stricken parents whose sons died fighting among the so-called "local separatists" in eastern Ukraine .
 commanders will order soldiers to conceal the identifying features of military vehicles, remove insignia from uniforms, and travel across the border to join separatist forces in eastern Ukraine .
 Despite an orchestrated campaign from the Russian government, the coffins arriving from Ukraine cannot be hidden . The coffins arrive from Ukraine can't be hidden.
 separatist forces routed the Ukrainian army and took the city of Debaltseve . The city is a key location linking the railways between Luhansk and Donetsk .
Russian forces contained some separatist soldiers, but the reason for the overpowering victory was a combination of enlisted Russian soldiers and heavy machinery . The 5th Tank Brigade from Ulan-Ude, Buryatia 62 and 37th Motorized Infantry Brigade from Kyakhta, B
 Bato Dambayev trained at a large camp near the Russian city of Kuzminka . He gave a now infamous interview to Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta detailing his involvement in Debaltseve .
 Batomunkuyev specifically mentioned that contract soldiers from Kyakhta joined him when crossing the border to fight in Debaltseve .
 Dambayev photographed himself 65 with a Siberian Husky puppy at the Kuzminsky camp . Like many other soldiers of the 5th Tank Brigade and the 37th Motorized Infantry Brigade, he photographed himself with a puppy .
 He traveled to the nearby city of Taganrog with other soldiers during his free time . He was deployed near the base .
 Journalists in Debaltseve noticed large concentrations of soldiers identifying as Buryats in mid-February . Not a common sight in an eastern Ukrainian warzone .
 Other Internet users made numerous archived copies of 72 and took screenshots of the image . Google cached pages still show the above photo as his profile picture .
 The soldier reposted a story from Russian news outlet Lenta.ru that reports on how Buryat soldiers serving in the Russian military fought in the battle of Debaltseve .
 Bato has since changed his real name to Bato. Note that he used to use the pseudonym "David," but has now changed it to "Bato" The real name is Bato .
 Tumanov, who were killed after crossing into Ukraine to fight, returned home in zinc coffins under the designation ""Cargo 200" indicating that the soldiers were killed in action .
 A report by Boris Nemtsov, a prominent Putin critic, on Russian involvement in the war in Ukraine was published posthumously on May 12, 2015 . It put the number of deceased Russian soldiers at 220 .
 Bato Dambayev near a checkpoint in the eastern city limits of Vuhlehirsk, Ukraine, where Bato and other Russian soldiers fought in mid-February .
 Dambayev added this photograph of himself as his profile picture on VKontakte on February 23, 2015 .
 Russian forces in Ukraine have received cover from shelling from Russian territory . Russian forces have been fighting in Ukraine since April 2014 .
 Using satellite map imagery of craters left behind by artillery shells in Ukraine, it is possible to determine attack trajectories and origins .
 The research team then created templates for both types of craters . They used these to mark and measure the angle of the craters visible on Google Earth satellite imagery .
 The measurements were then combined to find the average angle of all measured craters in a crater field . It was then used to identify launch sites .
 Ukrainian and pro-Russian media outlets say clashes took place in the vicinity of a mine . The mine is near the Ukrainian town of Panchenkove .
 Four in the Russian Federation and one near Chervonopartyzansk, Ukraine, which is close to the border . The attacks led to five separate origin locations .
Townspeople confirmed that the attacks originated from the field identified in the video and satellite imagery analysis . The townspeople said the attacks originate from the video, satellite imagery and video analysis .
 The Kremlin launched a hybrid war in Ukraine's east, sending operatives to organize and run it . Moscow political consultant Aleksandr Borodai as President of the Donetsk People's Republic and FSB Colonel Girkin-Strelkov as Defense Minister .
 Putin and Russian officials denied that their troops were involved in the seizure of Crimea . Putin bragged about orchestrating the annexation in a film commemorating the Crimean operation .
 Many eschew references to Russia's war against Ukraine or referring to the so-called separatists as if they were independent Ukrainian actors .
 Social media is a critical source of information regarding movements of military equipment in Ukraine and in the vicinity of the Ukrainian border with Russia . Russian Military Equipment in Use in use in Ukraine is an important source.
 Video from the time of the Debaltseve offensive contains some of the clearest evidence of modernized main battle tanks in Ukraine .
 The base vehicle KamAZ-43269, among others, is used by the Russian Border Guard . The Dozor 86 variant with advanced electronics has been specifically designed and equipped for the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation .
 Dozor vehicles with similar camouflage patterns as seen in Ukraine are known to have been operated by the 4th Military Base in South Ossetia .
 Pantsir-S1 Air Defense System captured on pictures and video in early 2015 by residents in Luhansk and Makiivka .
 Search tools for geotagged social media content have been deployed in Russia's 89 Rostov oblast . Search tools are also being deployed in Ukraine .
 A YouTube account supporting the separatists posted a video in January 2015 . It shows several Grad systems firing a volley of rockets .
 The Russian military began rapidly constructing massive training camps only a few kilometers from the Ukrainian border in 2014 . Russian military is building massive camps on Ukraine's border .
 Stanislav Tarasov's Odnoklassniki file, captioned "At the border with Ukraine," was posted on June 18, 2014 .
 Many soldiers from the 291st Artillery Brigade photographed themselves at artillery firing sites near military camps between Kuybyshevo and the Ukrainian border in 2014 .
 The Russian military is sending its soldiers across the border to mix with Russian-instigated separatist forces in Ukraine .
 Tumanov with his fiancee Natasha Chernova in June 2014, before he left for service . Tumanova left for the military in May 2014 .
 Tumanov on the grounds of his camp near the Ukraine border before his deployment to Ukraine . He was deployed to Ukraine on Monday . Tumanova is a former Ukrainian soldier who served in the Ukraine.
 Robert Artyunyan and Anton Tumanov died on August 13 . The two men died at the age of 55 .
 Rolan Ramazanov, the soldier in the middle, shared this image online on August 26, 2014 .
 Tumanov's grave in his home town of Kozmodemyansk is four hundred miles east of Moscow, Russia . Tumanova's grave is in his hometown of Koz modemyansk, four hundred years east of Russia .
 Anton Tumanov and Robert Artyunyan documented their arrival in Snezhnoe on August 13 . The Buk system that likely shot down MH17 was spotted hours before the crash .
 The Khimmash factory was hit by an artillery strike from the Ukrainian military . Local social media reports and videos described how the factory was struck .
 Rolan returned home to the Krasnodar Krai to recover from his injury . He died on the operating table, said Rolan .
 Dozens of the 76th Airborne Troop soldiers out of Pskov stopped contacting loved ones between August 15 and 17, 2014 .
 Over one hundred mourners paid their respects to Kichatkin . A number of journalists attended the event .
 Oksana posted a message about his funeral on VKontakte. His grave marker stated that he died on August 19, three days before he posted the message .
 The conversation with the Echo of Moscow reporter went by the same script . The conversation went by same script as the interview .
Leonid's father and uncle came to the funeral, along with Aleksandr Osipov's father, who grieved the deaths of both soldiers . Leonid's brother and uncle also attended the funeral .
 Leonid died while fighting in his paratrooper division in eastern Ukraine . In this month two years later, Leonid was fighting in Ukraine's paratroop division .
 Since his funeral on August 25, there have been no indications that Kichatkin is alive .
 A group of young men chased the journalists away threw rocks at them, and later slashed their tires .
 Russian Cross-Border Artillery Attacks on Ukraine Ukrainian armed forces near the RussianUkrainian border were attacked by artillery fire in the summer of 2014 .
 Russian officials have denied that any artillery attacks on Ukraine originated from Russian territory . Russian officials, however, have denied any attacks originated from Russia .
 The pressure of sustained artillery attacks through early August led Ukrainian armed forces to lose control of hundreds of kilometers of border territory . The pressure on Ukrainian forces led to the loss of control.
YouTube and VKontakte captured artillery attacks as they occurred . The videos were analyzed and geolocated .
 The research team created a novel analysis method based on internationally-recognized "on-the-ground" procedures to determine the trajectory of the artillery fire .
 Maps show the average trajectory of craters measured at the Amvrosiivka impact site, the approximate direction of fire indicated by burn marks on the ground near Seleznev, and the position and size of multiple rocket launchers used during the attack .
 Ukrainian media reported that an attack took place on positions of the Ukrainian armed forces in the vicinity of Amvrosiivka .
 It was suspected that the origin of this attack was the territory of Russia . The attack was carried out in Russia's territory .
 Based on the markings at the launch site of the attack, it was possible to determine the type of multiple rocket launcher used .
 Burn marks at the site were used to determine the likely trajectory of the attack . This matched the trajectory determined by the crater analysis .
 Sverdlovsk militia pummels 72nd Motorized Brigade in Ukraine .
 Result of the crater analysis at the village Khmelnytskyi, south of Sverdlovsk, is not known .
 Ukrainian government officials, journalists, and civil society activists shared a concern about possible future Russian military actions in eastern Ukraine .
There was general consensus among interlocutors that the Kremlin was using the Minsk II ceasefire to funnel in soldiers and equipment in preparation for a possible incursion in the spring .
 concern for new aggression in the territories near Debaltseve seems greater . Mariupol's strategic location remains indisputable, but concern for aggression is greater .
 The Situation in the East Military and local government officials expressed no illusions about the Minsk II ceasefire continuing to hold in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . The situation has been described as the worst in the region .
 Violations of the Minsk II ceasefire, including shelling of Ukrainian positions along the line of contact, have been documented regularly by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
 Atlantic Council Ukraine Working Group members examined a series of fresh craters in the Luhansk oblast .
Soldiers reported observing the trajectory of the fire originating in separatist/Russian held LNR territory .
 Local government officials in the Luhansk region confirmed the need for more humanitarian assistance . Local officials said they need more assistance from the region .
 The internal refugee flows from the separatist or Russian controlled areas have strained public services and agencies .
 Volunteer groups, traveling from other regions, deliver basic aid, food, and supplies to the civilian population . Volunteer groups travel from other Ukrainian regions, delivering basic aid.
 Administrators noted that the most vulnerable groups, particularly the elderly, were living in unbearable conditions without electricity, heat, and clean water .
 Water shortages expected to worsen as temperatures increase in the summer . Water shortages are expected to be worse as temperatures rise .
 Local government authorities in the east face technical difficulties in countering the continued stream of Russian disinformation . Russian disinformation is broadcast on television and radio in the eastern regions .
 They expressed the need for additional technical assistance and support for developing local Ukrainian media . They expressed a need for more technical assistance .
Ukrainian government officials and independent observers warned that the difficult living conditions in the government-designated Anti-Terrorist Operation territories may make individuals susceptible to pro-Russian messaging and disinformation .
 Ukrainian security officials reported the discovery of bunkers scattered across Ukrainian-held territory . The bunkers were filled with arms, explosive materials, and communication instruments put in place by pro-Russian forces .
 The National Security Situation Officials in Ukraine and the Ministry of Defense shared physical evidence of Russian military presence in Ukraine . The Atlantic Council Working Group's own findings also shared the evidence .
Ukrainian officials in the intelligence community expressed a great deal of interest in using open source for intelligence gathering . Ukrainian officials said they were keen to use open source to gather information .
 Civil society groups using similar techniques emphasized the need for technical training . Civil society group using similar methods emphasized need for more training .
 Ukrainian sources confirmed previous estimates that the total number of Russian troops and separatist fighters in the Donbas came close to 30-six thousand along the line of contact . An estimated eight to ten thousand Russian regular troops among them .
 An estimated eight to 14 airborne and mechanized battalion tactical groups, each with a battalion tactical group, are known to be operating on Ukrainian territory .
 Ukrainian forces continue to observe significant Russian use of unmanned aerial vehicles for surveillance and targeting purposes, but also their own UAVs .
 Ukrainian forces frequently rely on donated UAVs or improvised Uavs built by citizen groups .
 Nicholas Burns William J Burns . Richard R Burt Michael Calvey James E Cartwright John E Chapoton Ahmed Charai Charles George Chopivsky Wesley K Clark David W Craig . Ralph D Crosby Jr.
 Nelson Cunningham Ivo H Daalder Gregory R Dahlberg, Jr. Thomas J Egan, Jr., and Patrick J Durkin Thomas J. Durkin, Jr,. Thomas J Edelman Thomas J J. Egan,. Jr. Nelson Cunningham, Ivo
 George A Joulwan Lawrence S Kanarek Stephen R Kappes Maria Pica Karp Francis J Kelly, Jr. George A. Karp Karp is a former member of the U.S. National Security Council .
 Melby Franklin C Miller. James N Miller . Alexander V Mirtchev Obie L Moore . George E Moose Georgette Mosbacher Steve C Nicandros Thomas R Nides Franco Nuschese . Hilda Ochoa-Brillembc Ahmet O