 We believe a savings account should actually help you save. Call us crazy.
 The odds on a nuclear deal have shortened, butitis notyetin the bag, page 42 Cuba American business is eager to cross the Florida Strait, but obstacles remain, page 31 .
Saratoga Springs, NY 12866 £C Ourfrictioniess enterprise has nearly tripled its capacity to deliver projects ofvalueto .
 The goal was to increase IT’s capacity to bring value to business teams while reducing costs . CtO T Tribune Media Tribune Media's goal is to improve IT's capacity .
 FedEx was confident that it could surmount any competition concerns in Europe over its $4. billion bid for tnt Express . The Dutch delivery company has operations in 40 countries .
 UPS, FedEx's main rival in America, tried to buy tnt in 2012, but Europe's antitrust regulator withheld its approval .
 Mr Kim plans to place the issue high on the agenda of the forthcoming spring meeting of the World Bank and imp.
 'tin Philbert, Ph.Di Wherever the toughest challenges in public health may be, we will be on the front lines,' he says .
 Hillary Clinton is expected to declare that she is running for president . The most familiar candidate is not expected to announce her candidacy .
 As secretary of state, she flew nearly a million miles and visited U2 countries . She flew nearly one million miles to visit U2 nations .
 The government is fanning racial and religious divisions in a majority-Malay country with large ethnic-Chinese and ethnic-Indian minorities .
 Having lost so much ground, the euro area clearly has enorited a fan . The euro area has lost much ground.
 Many European firms have done a good j oh of expanding their foreign sales in recent years . They will do well from a weaker currency, according to analysts .
 Neither Erance, the second-biggest economy in the currency bloc, nor Italy, is expected to muster growth above 1% this year . But neither Erance or Italy are expected to be the third-bigest economy in Europe .
 IBM and Smarter Planet and their logos, lbm.com, Watson Analytics and Watson Analytics are trademarks of International Business Machines Corp .
IBm.com/nnadewithibnn Smarter decisions are made with IBM . iiii ;ii; INI 16 Leaders The Economist April 11th 2015 ► sanctions would be reimposed .
Non-doms contribute about £8. billion in income taxes and at least £i5om in fees . Each year non-doments contribute about $8.7 billion in taxes and £5 million in fees.
 Only Volkswagen TDI® Cleon Diesel technology gives you the option of both .
 Your mileage will vary and depends on several factors, including your driving habits and vehicle condition .
 The earlier Millennium Development Goals fell far short of addressing gender inequalities . The SDGS are striving to ensure that the SDGS fully address the systemic injustices.
 Britain's relationship with Europe has been the Great Rift Valley running through British politics for 40 years . The question of Britain’s relationship with the EU has been running through UK politics .
People must be allowed to have their say on important matters in order to clear the air . Eirst, that occasionally in a democracy, that sometimes in ademocracy, is sometimes a democracy .
Business cards were just being reintroduced in China in the late 1970s .
 Using our unique intemanoual nctu ork and in-deprh market knowledgei we act discreetly to provide unrivalled access to pritne opportunities which are rarely published . We act discreet to provide access to the world's most valuable information .
 The United Nations is looking for an experienced senior executive . Assistant Secretary-Genera L Candidates should have extensive senior management and leadership experience .
 All applications should include a curriculum vitae and be sent to the Secretariat or emailed to UNDSSJobs@yn.org .
 The ideal candidate is a proven leader with at least ten years of executive experience . This individual will play a vital role in positioning AEMERA as a trusted and globally recognized source of credible, accessible, scientifically sound environmental data .
 Crisis Action is an award-winning organisation at the forefront of giobai advocacy .
 The oftplcprA dMHihl how oMCOcmfeng qcxidefnlc pedfnoA diuMgliciut. EI Elw^vc hmn p rapulfdliHUlidionmth FM Clo
 Th* pouthan h bosod at Ikihtafc wHNn the P4otkiaa ( Coptaol Re^hm. opproaimottlir o two~hout diiw hofn hkw Oete. The P4
 The Didctor Hd tie appointed ollv obtoineig opptavol d tht AppornimtfiU ComfTiiaoe of Cobnot (hCQ boHd on the ieconmpidahon» mode Q Swdi^wii
Jhal hove a conmetud tenm of oppoHment for hve ywi or unci ottoMng tfw ogt of lupeneviuotipn of hS whrehewer 4 eoilieT ^dondh.
 Nm Oite noixn . hidio ond tp The opphcortEi dwuld pnpnge IP lend the Vif^fonce ChwonoeiVachTomil Oeenna dhecdif horn theh' priwnt
 The closing date of the vacancy is Friday 17 April 2015 and challenge of the position .
The World Bank has commenced a global search for its next Vice President and Treasurer . The World Bank is looking for a new Vice President .
 Treasurer will lead an intemalional staff covering business areas including asset management and advisory, bond and investment products, financing and risk management, debt managemei^t and financial advisory and pension and endowments .
 A full position description will be sent upon receipt of nominations or expressions of interest to WBTreasurer^RussellReynolds . World Bank Group ts committed to achieving diversity in terms of gender* notionotity* culture and educatiomi background .
Two hundred years ago the most powerful eruption in modern history made itself felt around the world . Two hundred years later, the world's largest eruption made itself feel around world .
 Most of the world of 1816 was devoid of thermometers and rain gauges . The numbers come from recent computer modelling of the climate . The Economist seeks to mimic Tambora created .
 The situation in Yunnan would hardly have been as dire had the population not been hugely expanded by the Oing dynasty’s encouragement of new settlers .
Eyjafjallajokull cost it about $1. billion-and indirect impacts on its users-valued at about twice the direct effects . If the airspace in question were hard to reroute around, that would have both direct impacts on the aviation industry.
 Eor a smallish volcano at high latitudes the effects on the itcz would probably Pinatubo would probably be similar to the local and regional effects . Eor is a small-ish volcano.
 U In the Bible it says they asked Jesus how many times you should forgive, and he said 70 times 7 times . U in the Bible says they ask him 70 times.
 Marshall visited New Hampshire and Iowa just before Easter . He met local Democratic power-brokers .
 New Hampshire Democrats want a candidate who will fight against inequality and for the middle class . New Hampshire Democratic candidates want to fight for equality and for middle class.
 A libertarian pitch for the White House H e is the son of a former congressman who ran for president three times . The son is a senator and a congressman who runs for president.
Hard sell-libertarians are probably no more than 11% of the U.S. electorate . That is a hard sell-sell-libertarian. That is probably no less than 11%.
 C ALIFORNIA is no longer taking a laidback approach to drought . CHICAGO voters opt for fiscal realism over “Hanukkah Harry’s” C ALifORNIA .
 America's third city is veering toward insolvency . With unfunded pension liabilities of more than $20 billion, the city has an operating-budget deficit of over $300m .
 The institute is housed in an elegant white and grey complex beside the John E Kennedy Presidential Library . Each day the institute will focus on a single issue .
 The teenager cast as a Texas Republican channelled a real-life firebrand from that state . The teenager is a teenager from Texas .
Ted Cruz says he would try to shut the government down if he could . Cruz: "worst come to worst" is to shut government down .
 The mood is giddy, but the obstacles to trade and investment remain formidable .
 Mr Zakharov says his business suffered recently because his car parts business was down . He says the business suffered because of the lack of car parts .
 The vote was a stinging rebuke to the president of the United States . The Americas 33 The Economist is the latest edition of The Economist .
 MAS received just 41% of the votes, down from 61% in October’s national election . The MAS enjoyed the benefits of incumbency and the backing of the highly partisan State-run media .
George W Bush was greeted by a mass rally organised by the host, Nestor Kirchner . Hugo Chavez denounced Venezuela’s plan for a Eree Trade Area of the Americas .
 Chavez presented Barack Obama with an anti-imperialist tract in Trinidad . Eour years later, at a similar summit in Trinidad, Chavez presented Obama with a tract .
 Obama's staff thought that their boss would be greeted as a hero at the latest summit in Panama .
 Many Latin Americans dislike Cuba’s Eidel Castro and his brother, Raiil, the current president . They dislike the embargo even more .
 Eirst, talks over reopening embassies have been going more slowly than some had hoped . Eirst is the first time talks have taken place over the past few months .
 The sanctions undercut a attempt by the South American Union to mediate between Venezuela’s autocratic regime and opposition .
 Argentina’s Cristina Pernandez de Kirchner departs in December . Her successor will be more moderate .
 The bank has a mandate to reach. Still, zero inflation is far short of the target of 2% . The bank's target is to reach 2% of inflation .
Supporters would help the dpp broaden its alliances beyond those who emphasise “ethnic differences between original dwellers of Taiwan and immigrants (or their descendants)
 KMT voters alienated by bickering between the two parties over relations with China may be attracted by third-force parties’ emphasis on domestic reforms .
 If she hopes to co-opt young acFlower power tivists, she may have to take greater risks with the island's truculent neighbour .
 The species has few predators, reproduces profusely and can devastate a reef in months . Only a fraction of the tens of millions of crown-of-thorns starfish thought to inhabit the entire reef .
 Great Barrier Reef plans to cut nitrogen loads in half by 2018 and by four-fifths seven years later . It hopes to convince the World Heritage Committee not to classify it as endangered .
 The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority is charged with protecting it . It's not clear whether this is climate change in action, it says .
 Queensland state government will spend about A$2 billion over the next ten years to sustain the reef Dumping dredge waste from port expansions in reef waters .
 Officials increasingly ask people a once taboo question: what they think Opinion polls . The critical masses I N RECENT weeks official media have published a flurry of opinion polls .
 The party seized power in 1949. It has repeatedly unleashed public opinion only to suppress it with force . It briefly tolerated critical voices, to the student-led protests in Tiananmen Square in 1989 .
 Eor the past two decades, the party has effectively bought people’s obedience by promising-and delivering-a better, richer future . The party has been in power for two decades .
Around the same time party officials organised polls on religious belief . For years the use of such methods remained limited, whether by government or others .
 A survey in Beijing in 1995 found that 90% of people were satisfied with the city government’s performance . Yet some in the government, steeped in the party's traditional view that it enjoys universal public support .
 America’s initial position had been that sanctions would come off only in stages . Also in this section 43 Islamic State's gains in Syria 43 The looming battle for Mosul 44 The fight for Libyan oil 45 Nigeria's hopeful president-elect 45 The regeneration of Johannesburg 46
 The Iranian violation is both severe and flagrant enough even for Russia to refrain from us . Once lifted through a new Security Council resolution they may be well-nigh impossible to slap back on unless the violation is severe .
 In Tikrit, Shia militias had to be pulled out after looting and revenge attacks on Sunni residents . Last year hundreds of Shia soldiers were executed, and their bodies are now.
 The noc The Economist April llth 2015 and the central bank, both in Tripoli, have preserved their independence, but at a cost .
 Eew expect the nog’s revenue to end up in the coffers of the Beida government . The government has tried to get hold of the cash before by setting up a parallel outfit at Ras Lanuf .
 The president-elect faces enormous tasks, starting with halting corruption . M UHAMMADU BUHARI is fast learning what excessive expectations can do .
 It is owned by a black entrepreneur who was once a security guard for cars . It is called “The Blackanese’s”
 Nigeriaelections.org . r States j with j sharia Lagos Niger Delta of dollars without bidding during Mr Jonathan’s presidency .
 Poland's election is Poland's second election in a row . Eastern Ukraine, Greece and Russia are the top three countries in the world . Poland's new prime minister was expected to choose a new head of state .
 Fethullah Gulen is a Sunni cleric based in Pennsylvania . He once made common cause against army tutelage in the early days of ak rule .
 Andrzej Duda is a 42-year-old moderate conservative who serves as a member of the European Parliament . Duda has reached out to educated voters by nominating Duda .
 Eor a campaign stunt last month he travelled to neighbouring Slovakia, which adopted the euro in 2009, to show that groceries are more expensive there .
 Mr Nowak caused a stir in Eebruary by suggesting that Mr Kaczynski, who is 65, is too old to lead party .
 In late Eebruary a blast at a parade commemorating the Maidan anniversary left four dead .
 National polling data now show the Opposition Bloc outpacing the People's Eront party of Arseniy Yatsenyuk . The prime minister won last year's elections and has borne the blame for the country's continuing economic woes .
 Cosco, a Chinese shipping giant, already controls a container terminal at Piraeus, Greece’s largest port . It is transporting goods from it by special train to central Europe .
 Greece managed to scrape together its €458m repayment to the imf on April 9th, but another €950m comes due in May . Greece is due to repay its € 458m repayment on April 8th .
 1960s Paris landmark has itself cost €43m to revamp, twice the original estimate . The construction of a brand-new auditorium for €42m.
 The government has urged an end to the strike and summoned Mr Gallet, supposedly an independent appointee, to explain himself . It ought to be possible to create consensus for change.
 U NTIL science unlocks the secrets of time travel, the world will have to make do with Belarus .
 Poland emerged blinking into independence after the Soviet disintegration in 1991 . Little seems to have changed in this landlocked country of lom souls .
 Belarus is the only Ear country that has no territorial disputes with its neighbours . Belarus is one of only Ear countries in the world with no territorial dispute with neighbours .
 Belarus asked the Kremlin for a $2 billion loan, but received just $iiom . Earlier this year Belarus asked for $2. billion loan .
 An Ear summit in Riga next month will be watched closely for signs of a thaw, particularly if Mr Lukashenko is allowed to attend .
 The campaign's enthusiasm worked up during the referendum campaign . It was the biggest success of the campaign .
 The Britain section is looking for an intern to work for several months in The Economist's London ofh'ces this summer .
For this assistance, she would extract a leftist price . For this assistance she would have to pay a leftist cost .
 Associates, a tax-advice firm, out of the 110,700 people who declared themselves as nondoms . The firm is based in New York City .
 The non-dom system is an anomaly, but Britain should not stop the flow of skilled foreigners the economy needs . Britain needs more skilled foreigners to help the economy.
 Cameron promised to dismantle the ‘non-dom’ status until recently enjoyed by his party’s erstwhile biggest donor .
 Belatedly, he realised his error; having no credibility on the economy . Belatedley, he said: "I have no credibility"
 Labour has little prospect of winning votes beyond its Tory-hating base .
 Eurther gains can come from managing demand rather than simply ramping up supply to meet it . E further gains can be achieved by managing demand.
 Storing off-peak energy as ice is particularly useful for air-cooling systems, one of the industrialised world’s biggest energy .
 The lEA reckons that only one-third of the available energy-saving opportunities with a cost-effective payback period are taken up .
 Some savings can seem too low to be worth the hassle, such as buying a new appliance to halve a small running cost .
 The Economist raises its share buy-backs, all to its newly enlarged investor base .
 The fall in the oil price has highlighted S OMETHING new is in the air . The fall has highlighted the rise in the price of oil .
 The firm was founded in 2006 by a mainthe weaknesses of energy companies that place big, long-term bets on difficult production and exploration projects . The firm, founded by the company's main weaknesses, is based in London .
 The lander who studied engineering in Hong Kong, has become a leading light in the industry .
 It is launching lawsuits against rivals it suspects of infringing its intellectual property . It has filed hundreds of patents, and has launched lawsuits against rival companies .
 It is thought to have made around $500m in revenues in 2014 . It may be on track to become the first maker of consumer drones to reach a billion dollars in sales .
 In March Sony unveiled PlayStation Vue, which uses MLBAM to transmit television shows over Drug dealing . The net closes game consoles. In March, Sony unveiled the PlayStation VUE, which is used by MLBAM .
 mlbam’s success has led analysts to ask whether its non-baseball services might be a problem . i writes ‘Megan’ in an anonymous internet forum .
 The 60 Business Show is a weekly look at the best of the week's featured news stories . Watch 60 Business on CNN.com's iReport.com/60 Business .
 Bob Bowman, mlbam’s head, insists that it is only pursuing minority investments from partners within its industry . Bowman insists that he is only interested in minority investments .
 MLB has no interest in disrupting networks like ESPN, whose rights fees help keep it afloat . MLB's rights fees keep the network afloat .
 streaming video could shift the balance of power between upstart ott services and legacy cable providers . However, streaming video may shift the power between cable providers.
 Japanese firm Bridgestone made the mistake of promoting a new line of golf The Economist April llth 2015 clubs as being for senior citizens . A rival brand did better by avoiding any explicit mention of age .
 Germany will do most to pull the euro zone out of the mire, but Erance and Italy are expected to show slightly perkier growth too .
 Sanofi, a drugmaker, reckons foreign-exchange movements added three percentage points to its revenue growth in the fourth quarter of 2014 .
 Total, a Erench oil company, reported sharply lower revenue in the last three months of 2014 . The company has been busily downsizing since then .
 Over three-fifths of the sales of the companies that make up the main stockmarket indices in Germany are from outside their home markets . Erance, Italy and Spain are among the most popular companies in Germany .
 The Economist: Four-quarter moving average ning to do big deals once more .
 In 2012 Mr Schuller sold his Crystal Cathedral to the Roman Catholic diocese of Orange for $57.5m .
 Mr Schuller even sued his former ministry for $5m for copyright infringement and breach of contract-he was awarded a lesser sum . He was awarded lesser sum.
 The Economist Global Business Review is a bilingual app . It delivers insightful ana lysis on global trends in business, finance and technology .
 Unless wages grow, America's economic blip could become a trend Growth in America . Careful now T he people of Royersford are feeling pinched .
 Industrial machinery-dropped by 1.4% in the previous month .
 A research paper from the Eederal Reserve Bank of Chicago estimates that if real wage growth had followed its historical relationship with the unemployment rate, by mid-2014 it would have been 3. percentage points higher than it actually was .
 The PTER rate is a particularly important determinant of wage levels, according to Chicago Eed paper .
 David Blanchflower of Dartmouth College and Andrew Levin of the imp found similar results in a paper published in March . The two men found the results in the same paper .
 Nervousness about asking for more pay may ripple through the labour market, says Daniel Aaronson of the Chicago Eed .
 One survey found 70% of American companies expected to increase wages by at least 3% in the year from March . If so, the latest data suggest pay could be about to take off .
 If healthier wage data keep coming, interestrate rises from the Eederal Reserve will soon follow .
Under one of the provisions of the JOBS Act, companies will be able to raise up to $5om in what is commonly referred to as a “Mini IPO’s” or initial public offering .
 Pote n ti a 1 0 utp uti a 1.0 uti ate of a n economy's speed limit . How rapidly it can grow before inflationary overheating sets in is how rapidly it could grow .
 Anyone will be able to invest up to 10% of their income in earlystage ventures . The type of investment that makes stockmarket gyrations look dull.
 The case involves $65m suspected of having been embezzled and laundered abroad . Lazaro Baez is a building tycoon with ties to Cristina Eernandez de Kirchner, Argentina’s president, and her late husband .
 Elliott sued in Nevada for information on shell companies from their agent, MF Nevada, and by association, Mossack Eonseca, the Panamanian law firm understood to be mf’s parent .
 The ruling will also increase scrutiny of Cash in Argentina Low bill . The ruling was announced by Cristina Eernandez de Kirchner .
 Three private Argentine banking organisations argued in a letter to the Central Bank on April ist, is not a newioo-peso note . The country now has three-but a more valuable one .
 Ms Eernandez has refused to allow a higher-value banknote . Despite these drains on Argentines’ purchasing power, Ms E Hernandez has refused .
 Shells it helped set up have been linked to tax evaders and kleptocrats . Shells were set up to help set up and set up the Shells.
Black market flourished after 2011 when Ms Eernandez throttled foreign currency dealings . If relevant records are in Panama, they are unlikely to be produced in a hurry .
 Once the vehicle arrives at the site of the sale, bricks of pesos are shuffied inside using duffel bags .
 Ms Eernandez is unlikely to allow a more valuable banknote . With only eight months left in office, Ms E Hernandez is likely to allow more valuable notes .
 U.S. persons arrd entities should consult a tax advisor for more information . U. S. people should consult their tax advisor to get more information.
 By the mid-2000s they were much less in favour, fearing that help for the poor would cut health benefits .
 Fast mobile networks are far from ubiquitous even in rural parts of the rich world . They are almost unheard of in poor-country villages .
 A single satellite will be able to provide backhaul to dozens of villages at a time . Mr Wyler hopes that local operators can afford to build phone masts or internet base-stations .
 Low orbits offer much bet. But although low orbits offer a much bet, they are also more complicated .
 Facebook bought Ascenta for $2om in 2014 . The firm has already carried out flight tests in Britain .
 Rival companies are mostly concentrating on delivering the internet to mobile-phone towers or Wi-Fi relays on the ground .
 Loon balloons may be used as flying base stations, capable of talking directly to mobile devices on the ground .
 Google's balloon will go up 74 Science and technology The Economist April 11th 2015 . By taking advantage of different wind speeds, the balloons should be able to minimise the time they spend over uninhabited areas .
 Mr Enwezor has been a curator and critic for 30 years . He is intent on stretching the canon of Western contemporary art and testing what it might become .
15 years of civil war left behind tonnes of armaments in Mozambique . Eound materials like this are also an important feature of the work of many artists in the country .
 The continent that abounds with natural riches yet suffers, too, from greedy rulers, bad government and entrenched poverty .
 Africa-with a third of the Earth’s mineral deposits and some of its weakest institutions are vulnerable to the predations that arise from the combination of mineral wealth and poor governance .
 An Argentine diplomat's son, he knows many languages, and he lived in many places before settling in Erance . He is the son of a former diplomat who worked in Argentina .
 Pew readers have collected more curiosities from the world of books than they have ever been .
 Henry Pord so admired his friend Thomas Edison that he supposedly trapped his last breath in a test tube . Pord was so admired that he apparently trapped his final breath.
 Lawrence struggles with the demons that punctuate his seemingly normal life . Rachel must address her own destructive tendencies if she is to form real relationships and become a mother herself . It is a compelling, psychological drama .
 A storyline involving a protester in a wolf mask and sinister threats aimed at the project is never resolved . The darker side of the earl's family does not feel fully explored .
 Courses 79 GAME PLAYer Oxford Executive MBA Go from a game player to a successful game changer .
 This modular programme offers you the chance to create a new future for your organisation and for yourself as a leader .
 Your EOl should not exceed 3 sides of A4 . excluding CVs, company brochures and company brochure . Your EO should not exceeding 3 sides.
 The HYpropouKRTPI docurwn c«i be obUlned . iqiXi*jlemjlemJlemjkei rom. ihcstid be emiled to iqi Xi*jlei rom . ihstid is a
 The cknlhg detefor b 4 ih uty 39i9no leter then Id 00 ^^Jn Jmuni*/ locel lime tRAOE HARK r srAOi MARK PREQUAJJFrCation ANNOUNCEM
 M email aiB adTmantr mml be 5MR 9 msAavoumn met berheckd to pfooi Oidif apifcHMis hnn fallMVConeorbieM ***** r™ . The A cannot anv
 The Bank^ main product Snet ccjnipfise of Trade Finance and Pto is the Bank's main product . The Bank ^ main product is the bank's main products .
 PTA Bank is in this connectiQn. inviting quakhed and experienced consulting firms to submit proposals to undertake study .
 Any profiosais received after thii date and time wti not J be coniidtred. If you have a date that is after thi date, you can't be a profioais . If you want to be a professional, you should
 Christine Lagarde. So join us in Washington or on Twitter at IlSStogitmr .
 The Economist Newspaper Limited shall not be Liable to any person for Loss or damage incurred or suffered as a result of his/her accepting or offering to accept an invitation . The Economist newspaper is not Liable for loss or damage caused by the invitation .
 The Economist April llth 2015 83 Economic data % change on year ago Gross domestic product latest qtr* 2015t Industrial production latest Consumer prices latest consumer prices latest 2015t rate, % Current-account balance latest 12 % of GDP months, $bn 2015t.1 Budget balance %
 I www.oup.com/us 84 Economic and finandal indicators The Economist April 11th 2015 Markets % change on Dec 31st 2014 Index . Index Apr 8th one week in $ currency terms United States 17,902.
 Our global teams actively manage for long-term performance by assessing risk at every stage of the investment process . The company's global teams are responsible for their global performance .
 The Economist April 11th 2015 Visitors will be invited to check behind his ears for the telltale signs of a facelift .
 The full weekly edition of The Economist is published every week . Use the weekly edition to help you understand today's featured news stories . At the bottom of the page, please share your news and analysis with us on Twitter and Facebook .