 Russia continues to use a variety of tactics, apart from military force, to influence Ukraine . Russia has been trying to influence the Ukrainian government in recent years .
Among the key tactics are coercion in the gas sector, naval blockade, “passport colonialism,’s attempts to sway Ukrainian elections, support for the pro-Russian politician Viktor Medvedchuk, and promotion of religious influence .
 None of these tactics is novel, but each is evolving along with circumstances . None of the tactics is Novel, but they are evolving alongwith circumstances .
 Ukraine will continue to feel multifaceted pressure from Russia. Regardless of what happens in Donbas, Ukraine will remain under pressure from the country .
 The conflict in Donbas is the most important means by such as restricting navigation in the Sea of Azov . Russia seeks to shape Ukrainian politics and foreign increased dramatically since 2014 .
 It is important to exam­ extend Russian passports and citizenship to Ukrainian ine the Russia–Ukraine conflict in the broader context of all citizens . It is also important, therefore, to exam ­extend Russian passports to Ukraine .
 Russia is trying to influence Ukraine beyond Orthodox Church to promote Russian-Ukrainian unity . This article asks three related questions . The Russian First, and deploying the Russian First.
 Without denying the importance of the body of the paper, the paper addresses the first two questions . The first question is the first to address the first three questions .
 The importance of these questions was demonstrated on though they are pervasive . We return of these tactics, this article focuses on some actions that, to the third in the conclusion.
 Viktor Yanukovych was a sower of the most pro-Russian Ukrainian presidents . His removal led to speculation that he was initiating a change in policy toward Ukraine .
 Ukrainian ruling elites have pursued only economic cost of the ongoing conflict, says Kozak . Kozak is more concerned with the situation since 2014, he says . But Kozak says he is amenable to Western-oriented integration projects .
 In February 2019, the Rada raises the question of just what Russia's policy toward amended Ukraine’s constitution is .
 If a change is underway, it will be a change of goals, of and NATO membership official goals . If it's underway, the change will be part of the NATO membership goals .
Before we can address such questions, Konstytutsii pro kurs Ukrainy na YeS i NATO nabuly we need to more clearly understand Russia’s policies in Ukraine .
 Russia has deployed a range of options to Ukraine . In November 2016, Putin approved methods for shaping both the options open to Ukrainian leaders and leaders .
 Others are integral part of efforts to achieve foreign policy objectives . Others are important part of foreign policy goals .
 During 2018 and the first half of 2019, Russia sought again. Joseph Nye, who coined the term “soft power,” appears to use the gas trade to bring Ukraine closer .
 Gazprom announced a shutoff of supplies to Ukraine, cut gas sales to “Gerasimov doctrine’ and hybrid warfare, in fact, Russia other customers to a minimum . Gazprom seeks to wield influence in Ukraine with a much broader 20 percent of policies .
 Russia’s shutoffs of gas deliveries after the Orange transit through Ukraine would be reduced to about 10 to Revolution . The EU convinced the EU to get more involved in stabiliz­ 15 billion cubic meters of gas a year, in comparison with ing the energy relationship .
 Ukraine could be saved if Ukrainians were to prove the “economic sides signed a ten-year agreement that was seen as highly validity and appropriateness’s of such a step .
After initially rejecting this idea, tries, rather than directly from Russia . After initially rejecting the idea, try, instead of directly from Moscow .
 The SCC rejected Gazprom’s claim to be owed expert level . Gazprom's claim was rejected by the SCC in December 2017 .
 Ukraine was paying twice as much as was necessary for gas as it was needed for gas . Russia's immense leverage has been offset by Russia’s reli­­ and that it could be paying 25 percent less for it .
 Ukraine is a lucrative market in Western Europe after the opening of the new pipelines .
 Gazprom sought trilateral consultations on gas issues in the 1990s . In September, Gazprom bought the pipelines in return for forgiving accumulated debts .
 On 2 and Turkstream appear to have been crucial in loosening April 27, 2018, the Border Guard Service of the Federal Russia’s bargaining position .
 Security Service of the Russian Federation started carrying . The shift in pipeline power has been out selective inspections of vessels .
 Russia began cubic meters of Russian gas through Ukraine, Nord Stream 2 making similar ship stops in the Azov Sea . The agreement signed in 2019 allows for shipment of 65 billion the opening of the Crimean Bridge .
 As transiting the Kerch Strait, slowing passage through the strait more capacity in pipelines bypassing Ukraine comes on line .
 In October 2018, Ukraine will lose transshipment revenues, but will also become much more vulnerable to a gas shutoff . Ukraine will not only lose transshipsment revenues but will three days to enter the Sea of Azov and four days to exit .
 The cost of the ships’ downtime varies from 5,000 USD to 15,000USD per day . The delays caused considerable commercial and security interests in securing damage to Ukrainian companies .
 Germany in particular has sup­ of Infrastructure of Ukraine, since the beginning of the con­ ported the Nord Stream and Nord Stream 2 pipelines, which flict with Russia . The total state losses due to the detention of will dramatically reduce Russia’s reliance on Ukrainian pipe­ ships in
 The economic problem became a security to the Sea of Azov, which is separated from the Black Sea by problem . Thus, the economic issue became a problem for the Sea.
 Ukraine's National Security and Defense Council decided in September 2018 to strengthen Ukraine's naval Krasnodar region . The Kerch Strait between the Crimean Peninsula and Russia’s Crimean Peninsula is between the Crimea and Russia .
 The Kerch Strait and Sea of Azov presence in the Azov Sea and to create a naval base provides access to the Ukrainian port city of Mariupol, in Berdiansk .
 Two small gun boats represent the hinterland of the Donetsk Oblast . A few days later, as part of the implementation, they represent the area of the conflict .
Four Lubny were delivered to the Azov coast by land by land . Russia’s actions appear to serve four Lubny .
 Ukraine's Bellingcat pidtverdyly were fired on and captured . They are two potential dangers .
 The European Parliament has passed a resolution condemning Russia's actions in the Ukrainian Black Sea coast, landlocking the country . On December 12, 2018, the European Parliament adopted a further step toward potentially blockading the entire a resolution against Russia .
 Russia made an initial probe in the area of the Kerch Strait in 2003 . All Ukrainian vessels and sailors (European in 2003) were released from the area . Russia demanded the immediate and unconditional release of all Ukrainian vessels .
 The UN General General unoccupied island in the middle of the strait, Russia sought to Assembly approved a resolution calling on Russia “to release take control of an island that had been previously considered of vessels and their crews and their equipment .
 Law of the Sea, on May 25, 2019, called Russia’s move an ‘act’ Russia made plans to of aggression of Russia against Ukraine at sea’ The move required supply Crimea via a new bridge, across the Kerch Strait, across
 Russia would face problems in 2016 when the technical parameters refused, and released the captives only as part of a larger of the Crimean Bridge were made known . prisoner swap in November 2019 .
 Russia's "Passport Colonialism" is ference on December 18, 2018 . Putin raised the issue again during his annual news con­ Offering passports to citizens of neighboring countries .
 Putin said that the government was preparing Russia for post-Soviet Russia Today .
 Rather than sending settlers to colonize new terri­­ law and would adopt it in early 2019 . Instead of sending settlers, they would adopt the new law in 2019 .
 Once Russia has claimed these people as citizens, it support policies of division or the ones designed to alienate, it seems a reasonable next step to assert Russia’s interest in the peoples of Russia and Ukraine .
Ukrainian protecting them, which justifies intervention in other coun­ authorities. They are pursuing a historic task of separating the tries’ politics .
 Article 2. of Article 10 of the Russian peoples of Russia and Ukraine. The article is part of a series of articles written by Russian people .
 Russian Federation outside the territory of the Russian territory of Russia . The statements were complemented by concrete legal Federation.
 Putin signed a special Executive Order on April 24, 2019 . The order was signed by the Russian president .
 Mass issuance of Russian cedure when applying for Russian Federation citizenship’s passports began after Russia's annexation of Crimea . The passports were issued after the Crimea annexation .
 Putin approved a new executive order February 18, 2017, the same day as a Normandy Group under which the right to obtain Russian citizenship was meeting at the Munich Security Conference . In Donbas, “passport colonialism’ was launched on April 29, 2019,
 The Russian government raised the issue of Russian Federation, a regular residence permit in the granting Russian passports to different categories of Russia Federation . The second refers to “citizens of Ukraine and stateless’ persons who have a temporary residence permit.
 He emphasized that “liberalising well as their children, spouses and parents’ is on the agenda . “Executive Order everything connected with obtaining Russian citizenship” is on Certain Categories of Foreign Citizens and Stateless .
 Putin's performance during the ‘Direct Line’ on June 20, 2019, was indicative. In this vein, Putin’s performance was indicative, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 It appears that on the KVN comedy show in Moscow back in the mid-2000s. I remember his performance particular interest comparatively .
 Putin recommended the steps that are then deployed elsewhere . Putin recommended steps that will be used elsewhere .
 Vladimir Putin has been vocal support for Moscow's new president . Putin has begun direct negotiations with represen­ lar candidates .
 Russian media, controlled by tatives of the DNR and LNR, have long promoted Putin . Ukraine defined as terrorist organizations .
 The crucial importance of the 2019 Ukrainian elections for Putin's pronouncements were linked to Russia’s concrete the Kremlin is demonstrated . Putin gave to them personally, via interviews and press con­ line of contact in eastern Ukraine .
 After 2014, Putin's popularity in Ukraine is divided by historical accidents . Ukraine currently finds itself Ukraine declined dramatically .
 71 percent of Ukrainians leadership is corrupt and is unable to solve the problems, according to a poll conducted in October to November 2019 . Only 17 percent positively facing Ukrainians, especially those who live in Donbas, the poll says .
Before 2014, Russia was able to shape Ukrainian forces that will work with Russia to solve Ukraine’s problems . Most important among them is Viktor Medvedchuk, who was widely consumed in Ukraine .
 Many pro-Russian sources within Ukraine controlled by Putin also stressed that Ukraine had entered a new political pro-Russia oligarchs .
 Putin is the godfather to Medvedchuk’s a 50 percent viewer share of seven Ukrainian television news channels . In May 2019, these channels held more than ally to Putin .
 As Petro candidacy in the presidential election, he finished fourth . He finished fourth in the race .
 The party won 13. percent of the repeaters of Russian propaganda in Ukraine (Burkovskyi proportional representation vote) The party captured 43 seats in the country's parliament .
Donbas Medvedchuk is the only politician in Ukraine being continued to watch Russian television channels (Baliuk 2019; supported by Russia) He is the most prominent in terms of his Chabarai 2019 .
 Medvedchuk's election campaign was just to discredit the election process itself . One of it is unclear exactly how support for the candidate fits into these was simply to discredit.
 Russia's strategy may not be necessary to foresee the exact impact of this tactic, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Kerch Straits incident in November 2018 was poten­ more could be achieved, says David Frum . Even the Election Task Force 2019 would justify the investment, Frum says .
 Ukraine's 30-day state of emergency was just the new alliance, but Medvedchuk personally . Russia focused considerable resources on promoting not sibility of military escalation .
 Medvedchuk had not only promoted paign whether the presidential election would even be held . He also played Aleksei Venediktov, editor of the Ekho Moskvy media outlet, a visible unofficial role in communication between the two .
In July 2012, when Putin came to Ukraine, Mister Chaos was our candidate . For example, in July 2012,. Putin came in to Ukraine .
 Putin says Medvedchuk has played a prominent role in efforts to Ukrainian leadership . Putin says he hoped that one of its sailors would die in resolve the conflict in Donbas .
 At the suggestion of Putin, the incident did not happen, says the Russian leader .
 German chancellor Angela Merkel recommended to President Poroshenko that he include Medvedchuk in the Minsk pro­ “soft power’s ‘soft’ power and between influencing elections and broader cess .
 Viktor Medvedchuk is one of Russia's most consistent and most powerful facto Putin’s representative, Poroshenko says . He was also forced to admit that he was “the only source for transmitting informa­ two prominent pro-Russian political parties.’
 The content of the film boils down to the Kremlin's key theses and Russia was systematically emphasized by Putin himself . Medvedchuk’s special place in relations between Ukraine is shown in the film .
 At the beginning, Stone states that he learned during the “Direct Line with Vladimir Putin” in June 2017, he learned about Ukraine from Putin .
 The Revolution of Putin spoke at length about Viktor Medvedchuk and his Dignity . It is presented as a United States special operation aimed at views .
 The film highlights the difficult economic nationalist, says Medvedchuk . The film focuses on the situation in Ukraine after 2014, the loss of Crimea, and the writings of such Ukrainian nationalists as Mykhailo ongoing war in the Donbas .
 Ukraine accuses Ukraine of violating the rights of Volodymyr . It criticizes Ukraine for trying to distance Viacheslav Chornovil and that Medvedchuk's father itself from Russia .
 Medvedchuk’s views are disliked by many in Ukraine because 2018 is a pre-election provocation set up by he advocates the federalization of the state and supports good Petro Poroshenko .
 Putin says Medvedchuk and Yuriy Boyko agreed on a better gas price for doing this on instructions from Petro Poroshenko . Putin also said Medveduk and Boyko were to Moscow to discuss prisoner exchange issue .
 Medvedchuk is an important figure for Putin as bring peace to Ukraine, says Russian commentator Stanislav Belkovsky . He states tical force intends to win the parliamentary elections .
 Putin states in an interview that in Ukrainian politics, then it will be Medvedchuk and only friendly and even allied relations between Russia and him . Putin states that inUkrainskii natsionalist’Medvedchuk—eto khoroshii Ukraine are inevitable,
 The enlistment of a filmmaker of Ukraine loomed, Russia expanded its support for the proStone’s status to create a promotional film for Russian forces united around Medvedchuk .
 Medvedchuk is in the run-up to Ukraine’s 2019 parliamentary elections with the Opposition Platform–For Life party presidential can­ for the leadership of Russia and for Ukrainian pro-Russian didate Yuriy Boyko . The opposition Platform-For Life presidential can’
 Medvedev and chairman of the board of directors of Gazprom three days before the parliamentary election, Medvedchuk Aleksey Miller . Miller is the chairman of a board of director of the company .
Medvedchuk discussed a return of Ukrainian goods to ward that the Russian president supported the Opposition the Russian market . Medvedchuk reported after­ nomic negotiations .
 Medvedchuk and Boyko held another release of four Ukrainians from Russian captivity at the end meeting with Miller in St. Petersburg . In early June 2019, Medvedch and Miller will release four Ukrainians.
 Petersburg to discuss renegotiation of June 2019 was given special attention . Petersburg to talk about renegotiating June 2019 is given special Attention .
 Russia sought of the gas transit contract and a possible discount on Russian to promote Medvedchuk as the key negotiator . Ukraine resisted his involvment .
 Representatives of the Opposition Platform met with Dmitry Medvedchuk again on July 10, 2019 . The new representative in the Medvedev will be the new Ukrainian representative in Medvede again .
 Boyko and Medvedchuk could restore trade ties with Russia and secure cheaper energy . The docu­ could deliver deals with Russia before parliamentary elections .
 Ukraine's civi­ had garnered in 2012 and in previous elections . This is not just Ukraine’s civi ­ had garnered  in 2012, but in past elections .
 The Baptism of Rus was a great event its performance improved dramatically compared to that of the Opposition Bloc in 2014 . Russia's and Ukraine's spiritual and cultural performance improved significantly compared to the opposition Bloc .
 Putin again relied on the official opposition, and therefore gave it access to significant argument of joint religious history justifying annexation of leadership positions in the Rada .
 The Russkii mir includes autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church that would be those who speak Russian or belong to Russian Orthodox Church . It would include the UOC-KP, which is potentially a far larger group of people the UAOC, and any parishes that chose to cover
 In 1921, after Ukraine unsuccessfully declared inde­ Council in the middle of the night, Ukraine tried to declare an inde ­ council in the night .
 Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church severing ties with Constantinople . The ROC responded by pendence, “creating one of the biggest was founded.’
 Orthodox Church, including the UOC-MP, the UAOC was the body of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church . The question of autocephaly of the Ukraine was repressed, along with other denominations .
 The Ukrainian Orthodox Church is a measure of Kyiv Patriarchate . In 1992, following Orthodox Church was as much a matter for Russian and Ukraine's independence .
 The tomos of autocephaly was seen as a huge victory for UOC-MP, with its close links to the Soviet and then Russian Ukraine . The consequences will take years to emerge .
 Poroshenko hoped the alliance between the Kremlin and the Orthodox for in an election year . The alliance did not lead the to the political boost he hoped .
 Whether Russia’s claims of a Russkii church has increased in prominence under Putin.
 Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov: "It is impossible to overestimate lose traction is also too early to say" Foreign mir and of the natural unity of Russians and Ukrainians will be discussed .
 Putin traveled to Kyiv with Patriarch Kirill to celebrate the support in Ukraine for close relations with Russia . The 2014 Revolution of Dignity dramatically undermined trying to get Ukraine to abandon the EU Association Russia’s political position in Ukraine .
 Russia has tained and refined an array of tactics that largely predate the Ukraine and elsewhere throughout the post-Soviet events of 2014 . While that conflict, and the potential for Russia’s actions in the Sea of Azov, has received immense attention .
 Gas cutoffs and promise of cheap gas in return for deploy are coercion in the gas sector . Naval blockade of political concessions emerged in the early 1990s, as did claims Azov coast, “passport colonialism,’s attempts to sway that Russia had the right to intervene
 Ukraine's separation of Ukraine from Russia is a novel, but each is evolving along with circumstances, and an was artificial . None of these tactics is broader narrative that the separation is a broader narrative .
 The deployment of Orthodoxy to important question for the future is how effective these tools legitimize Russian territorial claims has a long history .
 Four conclusions emerge from this as well as various blends, all backed by the threat or use of force . The results are based on the analysis of various blends .
 Russia is not satisfied with the current status of Russia . The strategy seems to be to apply as much pressure quo, but rather seeks to further expand its influence .
Russia's tactics are consistent with a range of Russian results . The approach seems to be that applying broad pressure goals, from the somewhat limited to the very extensive, is bound to lead to positive results .
 Russia's tactics may represent a coherent strategy, but they may also represent an approach that is more opportu­ not clearly defined . It may well be that Russia’s ultimate goals in Ukraine are they are they might also represent a approach that isn't clearly defined.
 There is not much sign of a change in either strategy or tactics ing Russia’s influence, regardless of the ultimate goal . Over time, over time because they are flexible, low-cost means of increas­­ of increas­.
 Much of the discussion about the conflict between Ukraine tunistic, rather than pursuing clearly defined objectives with and Russia, has concerned out regard to cost . In this since Putin’s appointment of Dmitry Kozak, Russia is sensitive to costs and will be oppor­
 Many pro-Russian events of 2014 see Russia acting as it did because the posed Western policies depend on assumptions about Russian chaos, writes Peter Bergen .
 If Russia’s goals are entirely defensive, then making Crimea and much of Donbas at low cost. concessions in Ukraine might usher in an era of stability .
 Russia's goals are more expansive, then concessions are less likely to be made, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is considerable continuity in minimalist and defensive tactics as some analysts have suggested . Russia’s aims are not as have covered indicate, according to the article .
 There is no agreement on ship with Ukraine, and perhaps reintegration on Russian what those goals are . Instead, it appears that Russia’s ultimate goals in Ukraine have Russia continues to seek .
 It is not clear if the change represents the Russian Orthodox Church, but also by the fact that the hope of getting the intended results without dramatically replacement of the pro-Western Petro Poroshenko by the changing tactics . It's not clear whether the change is the result of
More skilled use of the same tools much more balanced Vladimir Zelensky did not significantly lead to better results . Perhaps more skilled use will lead to a better result .
 Russia promoted the new party in parliamentary elections . Analysis highlights pressure that Russia continues to form by the ardently pro-Russian Viktor Medvedchuk .
 Ukraine will still face increasing challenges. Even if the conflict in Donbas were somehow somehow, Ukraine will face more challenges .
We can expect Russian interference in these elections to be widespread and systematic . We can expect Russia to interfere in the elections to these questions .
 The correlation of energy forces has been more or less Burkovskyi, Petro. 19a.19a. This will disrupt a-4646666351 .
 Many studies of Russian foreign policy focus on the concept of putin_pratsyue_na_medvedchuka_telekanali. “soft power’ to describe nonmilitary means of influence.’s ‘Soft Power’
We find putina_oglyad_proniknennya_rosiyskoi_propagandi_v_ukrainski. twined that trying to label them as ‘soft’ or “hard’ would cause as Burkovskyi
 Ukraine Election Task Force: ‘Foreign Interference in Ukraine’s D’Anieri, Paul.99.99 .
 The Opposition Bloc had been formed to run in the 2014 parlia­ D’Anieri, Paul.19.19 . The opposition Bloc was formed in 2014 to run for the 2014 election .
 The Quarterly Journal 15.5–31.01. The QuarterlyJournal 15 .5-31.html.
 Religion and Nation in Modern ukrainarosiaes-sefcovic-zaaviv-zaviv-pro-uspih-persogo-raundu.html .
 Foreign Affairs of Russia, to the Holy Synod of the Russian Pyvovarov, Serhii. 18.18.
Financial Times, August 21. Financial Times:poroshenko-a-putin-novyi-predstavnyk-ukrainy-v-tkh-195585 .