 Dr. Laura Osterman is an expert in Germanic and Slavic Languages and Literature . She is also a primary advisor to the Primary Advisor .
 On February 14, 2014, the Russian government sent troops to illegally invade Crimea, Ukraine . Crimea was formally annexed to the Russian Federation .
 This thesis focuses on how and why the Russian government justified their illegal actions . This event offers multiple avenues for research, but this thesis is a thesis .
 The purpose of this thesis is to study sources from the Russian government regarding the 2014 annexation of Crimea and their connection to the anti-West conspiracy theory .
 This conspiracy theory states that there is a secret group in the Western world, mostly in the United States, that has been attempting to undermine Russian culture and power in the Eurasian world for their own benefit .
 Russia is an authoritative, powerful nation, and their ability to use conspiracy theories as part of their aggressive foregin policy is something that needs to be better understood . Studying the relevance of this conspiracy theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea is crucial .
 Using a case study to narrow in on a specific incident can eventually lead to solutions on how to combat this type of disinformation .
 The Russian government has proven that their disinformation tactics work, one example being their interference in the 2016 U.S. Presidential elections, as well as the 2022 war in Ukraine . The government has also been involved in the 2022 Ukraine war .
 The Russian government is able to manipulate people around the world into believing their false narratives to promote their own agenda .
 The study of the Crimean annexation where disinformation was used can be helpful in exploring what makes Russian disinformation so powerful . The study may shed light on how American policymakers can create a recommendation to prevent that disinformation from spreading .
 Plots Against Russia, Eliot Borenstein, and Fortress Russia, by Ilya Yablokov .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 3 will explore how and why the anti-West conspiracy theory played a role in Crimea's annexation . The thesis will examine how and how the Anti-West Conspiracy Theory played a key role in the annexation .
 Focusing on a few sources will allow for an in depth study on specific diction used by Russian governments to spread the anti-West conspiracy theory .
 This thesis aims to understand how conspiratorial discourse serves as a successful tool for controlling and influencing the post-Soviet sphere . Through this analysis, this thesis aims at understanding how conspirators can control and influence post- Soviet sphere .
 This research will begin with pertinent background information on this topic, including the long-standing relationship between Russia, Ukraine and Crimea specifically .
 A literature review will serve as a summary of conspiracy theory discourse in the post-Soviet space . This will be followed by a literature review, which will be a review of conspiracy theories .
 This will be studied by way of an outline on conspiracy theories as a discipline, followed by methodology and analysis of the primary sources .
 conspiracy theories are not a marginal topic, but a powerful tool used to control the masses and seduce citizens into submitting to the whims of their government . As it stands, it can be concluded.
 By studying the 2014 annexation of Crimea in regards to the anti-West conspiracy theory, this thesis will contribute to the discourse about conspiracy theories in the post-Soviet space .
 The West has gradually become an enemy of the Russian government, as it’s seen as a menacing body with no specific country of origin .
 Scholar Ilya Yablokov argues that this constructed image of the West as an eternal, single enemy to the Russian government has had deep effects on Russian national identity .
 The thesis will discuss the evolving idea of the West in Imperial, Soviet and post-Soviet Russia . To understand this transformation and its significance, this thesis will be discussed .
 Westerners wanted to look to Western Europe for a more liberal, reformed Russia with a Constitutional Monarchy . Westernizers wanted a more democratic Russia, a more constitutional Monarchy.
 Peter the Great and his reforms were hailed from decades earlier, and believed it would benefit Russia to implement Western institutions . They hailed Peter's reforms from decades before, and thought it would help Russia implement West institutions .
 Slavophiles instead argued that Russia has its own unique story that gives Russia a special path in history .
 Slavophiles believed that Russians should look inward at their own folklore and tradition to determine how to best rule Russia .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 5. At the time of the nineteenth century and Westernizer versus Slavophile debate, there were other additional actors at work .
 Mikhail Katkov was a conservative conspiracy theorist who focused on the Western plot . The theory is that the West continually tried to undermine and usurp Russia as a world power .
 Russia’s anti-Western sentiment has been present for centuries, and has been an integral part in determining Russian identity .
 The plot has been ingrained in Russian identity to such a extent that part of Russian culture now entails being suspicious of the West . It is significant to note that this anti-West plot is in Russian culture .
 The anti-Western sentiment is important because it identifies two different versions of Russia . Imperial Russia is important for the origins of the anti-West sentiment .
 During Soviet times, the outcomes from Imperial Russia continued and were built upon by the Bolsheviks and the Cold War . The outcomes of Imperial Russia continue and were build upon by Bolsheviks .
 In order to be superior, the Bolsheviks needed an inferior, different system to demonize . The Bolsheviks had to change the system in order to become superior .
During the Cold War, the Central Intelligence Agency was a chief antagonist in Soviet propaganda . This opposition helped to create a general atmosphere of skepticism and paranoia during The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 6 Soviet times .
 The Cold War was a conflict between the Eastern and Western bloc . The tensions between the two blocs were never fully resolved .
 That feeling is shared among many Russians, and is a bitter sentiment that permeates Russian culture today . The feeling is common among many Russian people, but it is also shared among others .
 Russia’s relationship with Ukraine is dense and complex. Russia's relationship with the country is complex and dense, says CNN .
 To understand it for the purpose of this thesis, a timeline of Ukraine’s history will be discussed in its relation to Russia .
 Ukraine and Russia’s history both began in the 9th century with the founding of Kievan Rus’ by the Varangians .
 Kyiv began as Kievan Rus’ first capital, which is now the capital of Ukraine . Kyiv was the first capital of the country .
 Both Ukrainian and Russian cultures share the same founding place and history . This is significant to note because both cultures share same founding places and history.
 In the 10th century Prince Vladimir accepted Orthodox Christianity into Kievan Rus’, adopting it from Byzantium .
 Throughout Ukraine’s history it has been ruled by other states not including Russia .
 For two hundred and fifty years, part of Ukraine at the time named Kievan Rus’, was under control by the Mongols .
 The Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland are under control of two other parts . Two other parts were under control by Lithuania and Poland .
 During the twelfth through seventeenth centuries, different parts of Ukraine were occupied and conquered by numerous states including Poland .
 The Russian Empire gained southern Ukraine via the annexation of the Crimean Khanate in 1783 .
 Ukrainian intellectuals had to advocate for their own language and cultures even though they did not yet have independence . Given these shifts in power, Ukrainian intellectuals pursued nationalist goals .
 Ukrainian nationalists began to ponder the idea of Ukrainian history as its own, separate story . For centuries, Ukrainian history was a part of Russian history, but it was a separate story.
Historian Vera Tolz argues that the historical paths of Russia and Ukraine diverged . Tolz: It is at this time, it is at the time, that the history of the two countries has diverged.
 In the Westernizer versus Slavophile debate mentioned previously, Ukrainian intellectuals felt underrepresented . Ukrainian intellectuals feel underrepresented.
Ukrainian intellectuals felt simultaneously ignored and oppressed by Russian leadership . Ukrainian intellectuals felt both oppressed and ignored by Russian leaders .
 The creation of the Soviet Union also increased conflict between Russia and Ukraine . Russia and the Ukraine have been involved in conflict for years .
 Ukraine's independence from Russia would shrink Russia's size, but impact Russia's sense of itself . By this time, Russians saw Ukrainian history as intertwined with Russian history .
 Many other events during Soviet times have left Ukrainians with historical trauma due to actions by the Soviet government . There were many other events in Soviet times that have since left Ukrainian people with historic trauma .
 The Holodomor, a man-made famine, took place in Ukraine in 1932 . The famine was caused by a famine that took place during the 1930s .
 This famine came as a result of Stalin’s collectivization policies, and killed millions of Ukrainians .
 200,000 Crimean Tatars were deported from their indigenous land of Crimea, Ukraine, due to false allegations of Nazi collaboration . Another shocking event was the deportation of200,000 Tatars from Crimea .
 Ukrainians were scarred and fearful of brutal government regimes, and deepened their desire to declare independence . They did from 1918-1922 and in 1991, they did from 1919-1991 .
 Ukraine is seen as a direct threat to Russian culture and identity . Ukraine seems to be drifting toward Western institutions and ideals, says Peter Bergen .
 Russian and Ukrainian interpretations of history began to diverge in the 1840s . Russians still view Ukrainian history and culture as integral to Russian national The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory .
 Russia’s relationship to Crimea and the 2014 annexation of Crimean Peninsula. This portion of the background serves to outline Crimea's history and its relationship to Russia . The 2014 annexation and the immediate implications of this event are included .
 The Crimean Khanate felt Russian aggression in the mid-1700s . Russia was attempting to access the 'warm seas' including the Black and Mediterranean Seas .
 Russia has access to naval ports in the Black Sea for centuries . Russia has been critical to their security, trade and transportation networks for centuries. Russia has had access to its naval ports for decades .
 Crimean history became even more complex in 1954 when Nikita Khrushchev decided to ‘give’ the peninsula to Ukraine .
 Krushchev believed that the Soviet Union would exist indefinitely, and thus viewed Crimea being a part of Ukraine as trivial .
 Khrushchev was attempting to reorient the centralized system of the Soviet Union and move on from the collective trauma of the Holodomor .
 Russia has strong historical and political ties to both Ukraine and Crimea itself . Russia has a long standing interest in Crimea .
 The Crimean peninsula had been part of Russia for centuries . After the forced removal of the indigenous population, the peninsula is now home to majority ethnic Russians .
 The Russian government had the right to invade Ukraine, but it is helpful to understand the connection between the peninsula and Russia, and how that history played into the 2014 annexation of Crimea .
 In 2014, Ukrainian citizens went to Maidan, the central square in Kyiv, to protest widespread government corruption . The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 11 from power .
 President Yanukovych was removed from power and replaced with an interim government . This protest succeeded, and the interim government was replaced by a government .
 Russian separatists took control of different Crimean government buildings on the Crimean peninsula of Ukraine . They declared independence from the government in Kyiv .
 The Russian government formally annexed Crimea in March of 2014 .
 Russian soldiers were already occupying the peninsula . This annexation came quickly and abruptly, entering the world stage .
State-sponsored Russian media became pervasive in state-sponsored media at the time of the 2014 annexation . This is a serious accusation, and is aserious accusation, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Russian elites said Ukraine had become a ‘puppet state’ of the West . Russia's actions in the Crimean peninsula was a defensive operation to prevent escalation of the war against Russia itself .
 The Russian government viewed the ousting of Yanukovych and replacement with a pro-Western government as an attack to Russian security .
Each of these scholars are continuing to add crucial new research to the discourse . As this is an up and coming field, each of them have, and are still adding new research .
 The literature provides a foundation for understanding conspiracy theories, their importance and their salience in the post-communist world . The literature is being reviewed by the Russian government .
 Conspiracy theories are not a fringe topic, but a tool that governments can use to manipulate their population, assert power and promote their own ideology .
 This literature review focuses on conspiracy theories within the post-Soviet space . The review is based on a study of conspiracy theories.
 This study does not include literature on conspiracy as a broad concept, or studies pertaining to conspiracy in other regions of the world . Thus, this study did not include studies on conspiracy.
 These ideas are mentioned in the literature, but they are not the focus of the book .
 Additionally, pre-Soviet times are not within the scope of this review .
 Discourse exists on that part of history and the importance of conspiracy theories, but are not relevant to the review .
 This will be followed by different themes found in the discourse to orient the reader to the discourse in regards to the post-coomunist space . This is the first time this will be used to help readers understand the discourse .
 Several scholars use Mark Fenster’s definition for a conspiracy theory . The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 13 is a conspiracy Theory .
 Mark Fenster argues that conspiracy theories unite their audience as ‘the people’ against an imagined other that acts as a secretive power bloc .
 Scott Radnitz provides a useful guide for identifying conspiracy theories that relate to Fenster's definition .
 To be a conspiracy, the idea must have a small number of actors that were or are acting secretly with a malicious goal . There must be a conflict with a plausible explanation and must lack credible evidence .
Nearly every scholar in this discourse makes it clear that conspiracy and conspiracy narratives are not unique to Russia. Importantly, nearly every scholar says that conspiracy is not a Russian phenomenon .
 The U.S. and Middle East have had their own rise in conspiracy theories in recent years . No country is immune to the creation of alternative histories for political gain .
 Eliot Borenstein points out that the proliferation of conspiracy theories after the collapse of the USSR is what makes them important to study . However, he says, that it is not the only reason to study conspiracy theories .
 Borenstein argues this historical time makes ‘fertile ground’ for the rise and use of conspiracy theories in the post-Soviet space .
 A consensus among scholars that the study of conspiracy theories is not a marginal topic . It is a consensus among scholar that the research is not the marginal topic.
 Ilya Yablokov argues that Russian political authorities have transformed conspiracy theories into political discourse . Marlene Laruelle argues that conspiracy theories and the rewriting of history is a main instrument for spreading nationalist theories in Russia .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 14 are trusted in society . Scott Radnitz claims that conspiracy theories are meant to leave people confused and paranoid .
 Stefanie Ortmann and John Heathershaw claim that conspiracy theories shed light on mainstream culture, social and political change within the Eurasian sphere .
 The conspiracy theories are being used by the Russian elite and government to assert power and dominance in the Eurasian region .
 scholars demonstrate that studying topics where conspiratorial discourse is present is an important aspect of understanding Russian disinformation . Through their work, scholars demonstrate.
 The 2014 annexation of Crimea will contribute to the discussion of conspiracy theories and their importance in Russian policy .
 There is an understanding of the underlying concepts of the discourse, the author says .
 The specific wording of ‘fertile’ is an interesting word that is repeatedly mentioned in the discourse .
 The post-Soviet space is a ‘fertile environment’ for the proliferation of conspiracy theories . It is referenced when writing about how the post- Soviet space is.
 conspiracy theories find ‘fertile ground’ where history is being rewritten and where there have been sharp reversals, such as the fall of the USSR, have changed Russia’s role in the post-Cold War environment .
 Another theme that arises throughout the discourse of conspiracy theories in the Eurasian space is the idea of parallel, or alternative histories .
 A Nationalist Equation for Success?” is also discussed by other scholars .
 Parallel and alternate histories suggest that elites in power use conspiracy theories to discuss why Russia has been denied its greatness by outside actors .
 In these histories, Russia is an empire by destiny, and is the victim of a global conspiracy . Russia is a victim of the global conspiracy, the author says .
 In this framework, Ukraine only exists as a piece of Russian history and it has no unique history outside of the Russo-centric framework . The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 15.
Fomenko’s New Chronology. In regards to parallel histories, scholars such as Laruelle and Borenstein point to Fomenko's New chronology .
 Fomenko is a Russian mathematician who claims to have statistically proven that the current timeline of mankind is incorrect . He claims to be the first person to prove that the timeline is wrong .
 Russia is at the center of world history, and Russia is the world's oldest country . Russia's time on Earth has been shorter than previously thought .
 This piece has not entered academia and is not taken seriously, but there are some institutions in Russia that use and study these works .
 PB Craik writes how alternative perspectives are a feature of postmodernism in Russia today .
 Elites promote insecurity among their populations by undermining trust between them and the information they receive . Elites are creating space to conjure up alternative histories .
 Russian people question what is true or false, which creates an atmosphere of skepticism and uncertainty .
 There are different plots or stories that underlie Russian history . In sum, there are different stories that are different.
 These plots structure discrete events into sets of trends and motifs that all suggest there is a guiding hand directing the narrative .
 These plots put Russia at the center of world history, and whenever things get bad, elites can claim that it is because ‘others’ are plotting against them .
 Examples of these plots that Laruelle mentions are the Christian plot against Russia, and the worldPlot against Russia .
 This thesis will look in depth at a few key sources involved in the 2014 annexation . This close analysis will allow for the tracking of these plots and narratives, and how they were used for justifying the annexation .
 An additional theme with conspiracy theories is the idea of information overload . Different scholars address this from different angles .
 Ilya Yablokov argues that Russia Today’s goal is to counteract the information monopoly of the West by overloading their audience with their own information . Russia Today is a government-controlled media outlet in Russia .
 PB Craik also looks at how the Russian government uses information warfare to establish Russia as a global superpower alongside the U.S.
Information overload is a common thing in conspiratorial discourse, says David Frum . Frum: It will be useful to look at specific sources related to the 2014 Crimean annexation to understand how this information overload is portrayed to their audiences .
 This thesis will study how this information is used to muddy the political environment . It will be difficult to differentiate between what is true or false .
 Study of conspiratorial discourse is a relatively new discourse, meaning that there is adequate knowledge on the subject . But there still needs to be research to better determine their salience in foreign policy, especially in the post-Soviet space .
 Conspiracy theories work well in the post-communist space given the recent collapse of the USSR . They play on people's distrust of outside groups and forces in their society .
One large gap in the existing knowledge is a study of conspiracy theories in areas that are not democratic. This being said, one large gap is in the current knowledge .
In general, scholars concur that there is a lack of academic and systematic research on the issue . In general, the issue is not a problem.
 Many journalists, newspapers and other media outlets have written pieces about conspiracy theories in the Eurasian space . Not much research has been done in the academic field on the importance of conspiracy theories .
 The 2014 annexation of Crimea is a case study to examine the power of this theory . The thesis will focus specifically on the anti-West conspiracy theory .
 This thesis will have a narrower focus on four specific primary sources . In addition, this thesis will focus on the four main sources .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 17. Other scholars tend to look at large amounts of data and sources, such as Scott Radnitz and his database .
 This thesis will look at fewer sources with an emphasis on studying specific terminology and rhetoric that relates to conspiratorial thinking .
 Russian government used the anti-West conspiracy theory in discourse relating to the 2014 annexation . This will allow for the study on how different plots and alternative histories are used .
 The case study of the annexation of Crimea will provide specific evidence as to how and why the Russian government uses the anti-West conspiracy theory in their political discourse and media to control and manipulate their population .
 A conspiracy theory is an idea where a small number of actors behave with malicious intent, causing problems on both small and large scales . As stated earlier, a conspiracy theory was based on the idea of a small group of actors behaving with maliciousintent .
 In this theory, there must be a conflict with a plausible explanation, and any credible evidence must not be available at the time of the theory . The theory is based on a theory that is not true .
 conspiracy theories function as a way of offering simple explanations for complex issues . Leaders have the power to dictate what they do and do not tell their audience about events and their relationship to conspiracy theories .
 Conspiracy theories allow those in power to manipulate evidence and create a useful dynamic between leaders and perceived enemies .
 leaders are able to create enemies, and they use these enemies as scapegoats . The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 18 15 was a justification for their own retaliatory actions .
 conspiracy theories allow leaders to demonstrate their power by providing their audience with oversimplified explanations of political events . Furthermore, conspiracy theories let leaders show their power.
 Russians look to their government for an explanation when an event like Crimea annexation occurs . The anti-West conspiracy theory allows for a simplified justification for the annexation .
 The Russian government can lean into the longstanding anti-West sentiment to somehow relate Western powers to the annexation .
 conspiracy theories aim to instill fear about the out-group so that the in-group follows the orders of their leader . In simple terms, conspiracy theories are a form of propaganda.
 Leaders take advantage of situations where citizens do not have all the information about a topic . They use that lack of knowledge to create their own narratives to suit their own needs .
 Conspiracy theories tend to become prominent in societies that undergo destabilizing events . For example, the collapse of the Soviet Union was one example .
 Another characteristic of societies prone to conspiracy theories are those that undergo large amounts of competition . Another characteristic is that societies are prone to Conspiracy theories .
 States that are used to foreign countries interfering in their actions have lots of complicated events to draw from when creating conspiracy theories .
 The type of conspiracy theory that will be studied is sustained official conspiracism, as this is the kind of conspiracy that the Russian government relies on . For the purpose of this thesis, this thesis is to be studied .
 This type of conspiracy imposes an overarching conspiracy narrative over an extended The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory . One example is the anti-West conspiracy theory, which is the focal point of this thesis .
 The creation of the USSR was violent and based on the fear of perceived internal and external enemies . In addition, the creation of Russia was violent .
 The West is an internal and external threat to Russia, according to Russia's history . This fear of an ‘other’ group has persisted throughout Russia’s history .
 During the Cold War, fear of a capitalist takeover of Russia in connection with the arms race villainized the West . Later leaders used this fear as a reason to believe the anti-West conspiracy theory .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union left millions of citizens confused about their identities and role in the Eurasian space .
In this atmosphere, conspiracy theories give citizens an enemy, the West, to blame for the collapse of the Soviet Union . The West has been blamed for the fall of the USSR .
 The loss of the Soviet ‘empire’ left many feeling powerless, and Putin has been able to capitalize on this feeling by blaming the West for Russia’s current issues . Putin has claimed that he is powerful enough to protect Russia from the power hungry West .
 Conspiracy theories have continued to gain prominence in Russia in recent years for a number of reasons .
 Some scholars believe that Russia has attempted to Westernize over the course of its history, but has been rejected by Western powers . The Russian government now has such a heavy anti-Western sentiment .
 The thesis will conduct a case study focused on the illegal 2014 annexation of Crimea by Russia .
 The Russian government will attack sovereign nations if it thinks it will benefit them in the long run . This event demonstrated that the Russian government would attack sovereign countries if it thought it would benefit them .
 Ukraine's recent leanings towards the West and Russia’s tenuous relationship with the West make for an interesting case study . Russia's long standing relationship with Ukraine makes for a case study.
 The study of the illegal annexation of Crimea in 2014 will begin by collecting an array of sources that originated from the Russian government or Russian backed media sites .
Russian state officials put out documents put out by Russian state officials as well as state-owned media companies such as Rossiya 1.ru . To do this, I will look at sites like Kremlin.ru, which includes state- owned media companies .
 Next, I will condense the amount of sources I study by only choosing to analyze sources that specifically pertain to the involvement of the anti-West conspiracy theory and the annexation .
 Once I have a list of sources that meet that criteria, I will analyze these sources from two lenses .
Rhetoric can be used to justify annexation via anti-West conspiracy theory, says author . He will look at specific words and phrases used within the sources .
 Putin is able to construct his own version of reality to explain the illegal annexation of Crimea . At the same time, I will look at how phrases and ideas work together in the different sources to create plots and alternative histories .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 21 sources in two ways . Russian disinformation techniques play into larger anti-Western plots that allow Putin to legitimize his illegal actions .
 The Crimea case study is a case study on annexation of Crimea . The findings are based on a study of Crimea's annexation . The study will conclude that the annexation is applicable to broader issues, not only Crimea .
 The Kremlin used certain, repeated buzzwords in their political discourse to both directly and indirectly allude to the conspiracy that the West is scheming against Russia .
 The Kremlin used the anti-West conspiracy theory to deflect attention from the Russian government onto the U.S.
 leaders use anti-Western conspiracy theories to maintain their own power . They use them to create an enemy in order to maintain power .
 Putin shifted blame from his own aggressive actions onto the United States . Putin used the U.S. as the eternal enemy of Russia, he said .
In conspiratorial discourse, it is common for actors to use conspiracy theories to prove that their opinion is correct . Some other opponent is wrong, and some other opponents are wrong, according to some actors .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory argues that Putin used the United States as an alternative actor to remove Russian aggression from the spotlight and highlight the wrongdoings of the U.S.
 The Kremlin used conspiracy theories to promote a negative narrative of the U.S. that justified Russian aggression in Crimea . The Kremlin said it justified Russia's aggression in the Crimea .
 The hypothesis follows the thinking that the Russian government uses sustained official conspiratism in their policy actions . Scott Radnitz says this hypothesis is based on the theory of Russian government conspiratism .
 Putin continues the plot that the U.S. is out to conquer the Eastern world, and to corrupt all Russians . By relying on this type of conspiracism, Putin continues to continue the plot.
 Terms commonly used alongside conspiracy theories are plots, alternative histories and narratives . Terms that are commonly used include conspiracy theories and alternative histories .
 The Kremlin is able to depict the U.S. as a seemingly legitimate enemy to Russia . The anti-West plot developed in Russia centuries ago .
 The Kremlin is acting as the protector to the Eastern world from the threat of the U.S. Going off of this narrative allows the Kremlin to act.
 Textual Analysis of Two Sources Directly Pertaining to President Vladimir Putin .
 This chapter will be a close analysis of certain terms, context and general phrasing of two primary sources involving the 2014 annexation of Crimea . The chapter will also be an analysis of some of the key sources involved in the annexation .
 Putin's interview with Putin from March, 2014 about Ukraine situation, followed by Putin's address about the annexation on March 18, 2014 .
 We will examine the parts in which there is a mention of the anti-Western sentiment . We will look at the parts of the country's anti-western sentiment .
 Vladimir Putin answered journalists questions on the situation in Ukraine, March 14, 2014 2. 2.
 Putin’s March 18 address was a widely circulated address . It contains numerous references to the anti-West conspiracy theory .
 The Kremlin publishes dialogues in English that include the anti-West conspiracy theory . The Kremlin wants that conspiracy theory promoted and circulated beyond Eurasian borders .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin met with Russian media representatives2 to answer their questions regarding the Crimean annexation . The Russian President met with media representatives on March 4, 2014 .
 At this time, Russian military troops had entered Crimea, but Crimea had not been formally annexed into the Russian Federation .
 The majority of journalists' questions toward Vladimir Putin were about Russia and Ukraine . No mention of the West was mentioned .
 There were six questions that mentioned the West or the United States . Those questions and their answers will be analyzed .
 Putin asked questions in a way that would allow him to paint the Russian government in a positive light . It should be noted that all the questions posed to Putin were asked in a manner that would allowed him to villainize anyone who disagreed with actions .
Only a photo of Putin meeting with a small group of representatives was provided . Only a photo was provided.
 The first question posed to Putin was whether he expected such a harsh reaction to Russia’s actions from Western partners .
 Russia's parliament had authorized Vladimir Putin’s request to use force in Ukraine to protect Russian interests . By this time, the Maidan Revolution had already occurred, President Yanukovych had fled .
 Putin provided a brief summary of how conversations go with his Western colleagues . Putin's response to the question was a brief brief summary .
 Putin said that Russia’s actions are often characterized as illegitimate . But when he asked the West if they think that their actions are legitimate, they said yes .
 Putin used this statement to then provide examples of United State’s actions in Afghanistan, Libya and Iraq where it acted illegitimately and caused unneeded discord . This is an exaggeration, but Putin used it to then give examples of U.S. actions in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 leaders take advantage of the things that their populace does not know about, and give irrelevant information to justify themselves . As is the case with conspiracy theories, leaders takeadvantage of things that they know about .
 The average Russian most likely does not have an in-depth understanding of past U.S. actions in Afghanistan . For example, the average Russian does not know whether the U.N. actions were legitimate or not .
 Putin was able to give three seemingly relevant examples to support his claim, even if they are not valid examples or an accurate claim .
This feeds into the anti-West sentiment that has been an underlying piece of Russian culture for centuries . This feeds into an underlying part of the Russian culture that has long been a part of Russia .
 Putin claimed that the U.S. creates their own rules in the international environment . He also said that the United States creates its own rules, and then uses the principle, ‘You’re either with us or against us’
 Any states that do not adhere to these self made rules will get “beaten’s until they do, according to the law .
 Putin designed the narrative that in a world run by U.S. ideals and agendas, of course Russian actions in Ukraine would be deemed as illegitimate .
 The use of the word “beat’ when referring to how the U.S. will beat countries into submission, added to the portrayal of the United States as power hungry and violent actor, rather than protectors of democracy and freedom . The word ‘
 Putin was able to create alternative histories that categorize the U.S. as a criminal entity set on disrupting the order that the Russian government keeps in Eurasia . This is inaccurate, but in a country so highly regulated by censorship, Putin was successful, he says .
 Putin's Russia serves as the protector of Eurasia against the Western plot to overthrow their freedoms . In contrast, Putin’s Russia has been seen as a protector of the West .
 The journalist asked Putin how he would assess the reaction from the West in regards to Ukraine . The journalist also asked Putin if Western countries would pull out of the G8 and place sanctions on Russia .
 Putin began with a threat-like statement, saying that countries that put sanctions on Russia would need to consider the consequences . "We live in a globalized world where everything is interconnected," Putin said .
 Putin downplayed his threat about the consequences of sanctions, because he made it seem like the result of the sanctions would hurt the West . The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory was not due to intentional Russian retaliation .
 The use of the word “consequences’ in his response was still intimidating, which was likely Putin's goal .
 Putin said Russia's main motivation was to act in accordance with international law and provide those who want their freedoms, the power and resources to do so .
 He claimed that Russia must help Crimeans find their voice and seek independence from Ukraine if they felt the desire to do so . This would later become one of his justifications for the annexation of Crimea .
 Russia is motivated by advocating for the freedom of Crimeans, according to Putin . Putin claimed that the West was motivated by supporting unconstitutional actions abroad that benefit Western powers .
 Putin claimed that Russia had tried to be cooperative and respectful of Ukraine's autonomy . In his line of reasoning, Putin said Russia had been cooperative andrespectful of Ukraine’s autonomy .
 The contrasting adjectives of “reasonable” versus “counterproductive” and “harmful” added to the narrative that Western countries aimed to cause conflict in the Eurasian world . Russian actions aimed to promote freedom of will.
 Putin created a narrative wherein Russia was being unfairly targeted by Western powers who seek to create conflict, even when conflict is not necessary . By using phrases such as the one mentioned, Putin created the narrative.
 Putin said Russia would be ready to host the G8 summit even if other members did not want to join . Putin finished his response to this question by stating that Russia will be ready for the summit .
 Putin solidified his plot that Russia was acting legally and legitimately in the international environment . Western colleagues preferred to create conflict for ‘petty’ reasons, such as annexation of Crimea .
 The journalist turned attention away from the West for several questions before circling back with their third question involving the West . The journalist then turned attention towards the West.
 The journalist asked if Putin wanted to pull the Russian ambassador out of the United States following the harsh statement made by the U.S. Secretary of State .
 Putin responded by saying that he did not want to pull the Ambassador because he still wanted to facilitate cooperation between Russia and the U.S. Putin said that he still wants to help facilitate cooperation .
 He inadvertently asserted that if cooperation between Russia and the United States were to halt, it would be due to U.S. actions, not Russia .
 The fourth question involved the West involved the Paralympics that were to begin in Sochi in a few days . The fourth issue involving the West was to start in Sochi.
 The journalist asked Putin if these games ran the risk of being disrupted in terms of international media coverage . Putin said the games were not disrupted by the games .
 Putin says Paralympics are a time for people with disabilities to show their capabilities . Putin responded by saying it would be if games were to be disrupted .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory says Russia is not a country that caters to people with disabilities . This response is full of irony, one of the anti-Western conspiracy theories .
 Russian people with disabilities have very limited access to everyday items like basic transportation . This is not to say that all Western countries have better accessibility features than Russia .
 Putin feigned empathy for those with disabilities performing in the Paralympics to continue the narrative that Russia is a role model for other countries . Putin feign empathy.
 If any Western country were to interfere with Russia’s push toward better representation of those with disabilities, then that Western country would be characterized as an ableist country .
 Putin redirected the focus from the illegal annexation of Crimea to the Paralympics, an entirely different event . Putin is smart of Putin, because he redirected his focus from Crimea to Paralympic events .
 Paralympics are more important than defending Ukraine over the illegal occupation and annexation of Ukraine . By doing this, he created an alternative version of history where the Paralympic is more important.
 Putin used Paralympics to shift focus from Russia’s illegal actions to something positive occurring in Russia . The annexation was condemned by the international community .
 Putin’s response to this question perpetuated the anti-Western plot that Russia is trying to be the hero in the international community . Western countries like the United States attempt to usurp Russian power for their own gain, even if it meant disrupting the Paralympics .
 Putin wanted his audience to believe that the West is always able to sink to new lows, including disrupting the Paralympics in Sochi . This question relates to the anti-West conspiracy theory in Putin's anti-west conspiracy theory .
 This develops the theory that the West is an eternal enemy of Russia, and would hurt innocent people if it meant hurting the Russian government as well .
 The characterization of ‘brief’ is illogical, as this question was not simple . The characterization is not simple.
 The beginning of Putin’s response said that this coup was well-prepared, and that “Western instructors tried hard,” to make the coup efficient . The beginning. of Putin's response was that he was well prepared, and the beginning of
 There is a kernel of truth in this statement, according to the author .
 NATO wanted to see Ukraine shift more towards a democratic nation independent of Russia . It is true that Western countries and institutions like NATO wanted Ukraine to move more towards democratic nation .
 Western countries and diplomats worked to try and help Ukraine foster more democratic values, and this is also what many Ukrainians wanted .
 It is inaccurate to say that the West initiated the protests and the resulting Maidan Revolution . However, it is incorrect to say the West started the protests .
 Ukrainians saw their president submitting to Russia when they had wanted a future in which Ukraine would be independent from Russia’s grasp .
 When they saw that history was guiding them again into Russia’s hands, they protested, demanding that their voices be heard and respected .
 For Putin’s purposes, it was more beneficial to say that the West was behind the coup, and thus were the puppet masters behind any conflict that opposed Russian power .
 Putin also discussed the different standards of living between Russia and Ukraine, and how Ukrainians have lower living standards than Russians .
 He ended his response by saying that a change of power was probably necessary in Ukraine, but it should have been done through legitimate means . He said that it was probably needed to change power in Ukraine .
 Putin is well versed in making it seem like the Russian perspective is the rational perspective . Ukrainian and Western perspectives are motivated by conflict .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory claimed that he thought a change in power was necessary in Ukraine . But he acknowledged the tensions and issues that had been occurring in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 30 Ukraine .
 The Maidan Revolution is a change in leadership to a positive leader would most likely only come out of a Revolution . In truth, the issues in Ukraine stemmed from constant oppression and bullying from the Russian government .
 Putin painted Russia as a protective body attempting to improve Ukraine, but was met with chaos from the Maidan .
 The entire interview was created in a way where Putin painted his actions in a valiant light while pushing the plot that the West is an immoral civilization .
 Putin avoided the need to explicitly talk about the illegality of the Crimean annexation and general Russian interference in Ukraine . The Russian leader avoided talking about the Crimea annexation .
 Putin used the anti-West conspiracy theory to play on already existing negative stereotypes about the Western world . He used this to create his own alternative history, with himself as the protagonist .
 The 15.50 minute address was aimed at State Duma deputies, Federal Council Members, heads of Russian regions and civil society representatives .
 The Crimean peninsula was annexed between February 20, 2014 and March 26, 2014 . This address took place near the end of the event .
 For the purpose of this analysis, this 2014 address was divided by topic into seven different sections . Five of the sections pertained to the anti-Western sentiment and were therefore included in this analysis .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 31 1. 1. 2. 3. 2 . 1. The anti-Western conspiracy theory in the Crimea annexation is based on the Russian annexation .
 Discussion on international law with the 2009 Kosovo incident as an example 3. The Kosovo incident is an example of 3.3 .
 The Ukraine situation as an example of the world run by the U.S. and Western institutions such as NATO and the UN 4.3 . The situation is a sign of the militaristic U. S. and West's militaristic approach to the Ukraine situation .
 Wants cooperation between Russia and Ukraine that fit Russia’s interests 7.5% of Russia's interests . Russia's interest in Ukraine is at a high level, according to the Russian government .
 The aim of this address was to justify the Crimean peninsula being annexed into the Russian Federation . The 2009 Kosovo incident was an example of this.
 Putin claimed that Russia attempted to help Crimea express their free will by choosing to rejoin Russia . He said it was the West that inappropriately interjected themselves into the situation .
 The use of the word “good thing’ is an example of sarcastic rhetoric, as is true of the claim that it is “better late than never” that Western countries decided to follow international law standards in the case of Crimean annexation .
 Putin attempted to trivialize the concern of the Western The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea . The West only adhered to international law when it involved their adversaries .
 He also did this to portray Russia as a victim of international law and Western power . He also said Russia was a victim.
 Putin talked about the U.S. stance that the United States took on Kosovo incident in 2009 . Moving forward through the address Putin spoke about the stance.
 This portion of the address will be analyzed in depth in this section of the thesis . The address is part of a section of a thesis that will be analysed in depth .
 NATO's intervention in Kosovo to prevent more attacks on the local Kosovar Albanian population. This acknowledgement came nine years after NATO’s intervention.
 Kosovo had a fair amount of autonomy, despite not being an independent state . The history between Kosovo and Serbia is long and complex, but in short, it is not as complex .
 When Milosevic came into power, he moved quickly to suppress the autonomy of Kosovo . He sent in troops to disband their government, sending in troops .
 In the early 1990s, the world witnessed what could happen when international institutions do not step in to improve the situation in Bosnia . The world witnessed in Bosnia what could happened in Bosnia.
 Putin did not mention any context as to why the U.S. supported Kosovo, and how if the West had not stepped in, another atrocitry such as the genocide The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory could have occured .
 Crimean authorities referred to the Kosovo incident as a precedent for their own legitimate separation from Ukraine . Putin said that Crimean authorities refer to the incident as an example of a precedent .
 The UN International Court’s ruling on the incident was ‘crystal clear’ to the Western world, according to Putin .
 Putin's use of the word ‘precedent’ as justification for Crimean authorities comparing their situation to the Kosovo incident is interesting because it is in common law that precedents are used as legal justification . Russia follows civil law practices, and it is a common
 Whether or not this word was intentionally used by Putin because he knows Americans follow common law is unclear .
 Putin’s anti-West stance throughout the whole address would not be a stretch to infer that his use of the word “precedent” was intentional . However, given Putin's anti- West stance, it would notbe a stretch.
 Putin may have used the word to demonstrate how the U.S. and Western institutions create precedents for their allies to follow . But when it comes to Russia, it is not able to follow those same precedents .
 Putin: "I do not like to resort to quotes, but in this case, I cannot help it" The United States submitted a statement to the United Nations in 2009 saying sometimes declarations of independence such as that from Kosovo violate domestic law .
 Putin feigned guilt in his address, as if he really did not want to point out the flaws of past United State’s actions .
 He said he had no choice but to mention past U.S. actions in foreign countries like Kosovo . This allowed him to come across as apologetic, and suggested that he had a choice .
 It is as if he had exhausted all options of cooperating with the United States, and was forced to “resort” to expose the written statement . The statement was never a secret, even though the statement was not a secret .
 U.S. judged Crimeans and Russians in ways it does not judge other states, he says .
 Putin failed to mention the difference in the ethnic makeups and historical histories of Kosovo and Crimea .
 In the situation on the Crimean peninsula, over 200,000 ethinic Crimean Tatars were deported by Stalin in 1944,3 and many Ukrainians fled Crimea once they sensed aggression from Russia .
 Putin did not touch on these questions because they would invalidate his argument that the U.S. is out to oppress Russians, wherever they may be .
 Putin knew that many Russians lack the education to fully understand U.S. statements about Kosovo .
 Putin used it as evidence for U.S. hypocrisy on the annexation of Crimea .
 Crimean Tatars The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 35 Serbia did in fact occur in 2009 . U.S. did indeed make a statement supporting this separation .
 The U.S. supported Kosovo Albanians but not Crimeans is an oversimplification . However, to condense the whole event down to claiming that the United States supported the Albanians is an overimplification.
 Putin still made the comparison. As stated earlier, the ethnic composition and history of these regions could not be more different, yet Putin still makes the comparison .
 The demographics of the Crimean peninsula have shifted overtime and eventually became majority Russian . Those shifts in the demographics did not occur in the Kosovo region .
 Putin shifted the narrative to make it seem like Kosovo in 1999 was similar to Crimea in 2014 . The United States’ and NATO intervened in Kosovo in order to prevent possible ethnic cleansing .
 This is a common characteristic of conspiracy theories in that complex situations are able to be simplified and therefore used by specific leaders for their own political gain .
 The West wants to help certain communities, but not those who are aligned with Russia . The oversimplification and comparison of the Kosovo incident creates a narrative that the West wants the West to help some communities, not others .
 The United States had a specific, unknown vendetta against Russia specifically . This rhetoric of “some’s infers that the U.S. had a particular, unknown, vendetta. This rhetoric is part of a campaign against Russia .
 The U.S. supported certain actions like Kosovo separating from Serbia, but when Russia is involved like with the Crimean annexation, the United States is difficult .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory was created in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 36 . It claims that the West is not only a hypocrite, but also tends to over react .
 The U.S. media is painting the annexation as some sort of aggression, Putin creates that narrative that is ridiculous . Even though the American media is painted the annexation by Putin as some kind of aggression.
 He wanted to take away Western credibility by circulating a narrative that not only has Crimea always belonged to Russia, but that the West does not understand the annexation . The West is calling it an aggressive act and calling it a 'aggressive act'
 Kosovo Albanians are not allowed to call for freedom, but they were, he said . He also ended his questioning with “Again, one wonders why, one wonder why,’s why, he added .
 Putin made the audience question Western motives by allowing space for skepticism . By using rhetorical statements Putin made a rhetorical statement that questioned Western motives .
 The West is upset about the Crimean annexation, when it supported Kosovo Albanians and their calls for independence in 2009 .
 The U.S. has a secret, he said . He said there is no answer why the West is so enraged by the annexation of Russia .
 Putin meant that there is no longer stability in the international community, and that the U.S. intervened in the ‘legal’ annexation of Crimea . The United States does not follow international law but rather acts in whatever way will benefit them the most .
 The U.S. acts aggressively toward their adversaries, making situations tenuous for no reason, he says .
 Putin connected the collapse of the Soviet Union to the Kosovo incident . The United States is now able to act however it pleases in foreign policy .
 Putin capitalized on the historical trauma that the dissolution of the USSR caused many people . This accusation was smart, as Putin capitalizes on the history of the Soviet breakup .
 He then instilled fear by claiming the United States is not run by law, but by gun . He then claimed the U.S. is not running by law.
 Crimea had been littered with armed, Russian gunmen when he made the statement . This statement is ironic because at the time he made this statement, Crimea had a history of armed gunmen .
 Putin had previously mentioned the specific Kosovo incident as well as specific United Nation charter statements and the United State’s involvement . He then felt that he had the credibility to make sweeping statements .
Political leaders use one specific example to then make broad claims that need not be accurate, but can be connected to an event that happened in order to make their false claims about other events valid . This is a common trait of conspiracy theories.
 Putin equated any American intervention as a symptom of their superiority . He used buzz words like "exceptionalism" that is a common American stereotype .
 Putin used the narrative to accuse the U.S. of intervening in order to hurt Russia, not to help the Ukrainians . This narrative worked well with the annexation of Crimea, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin was able to portray America not as a country looking to aid others, but rather to look for opportunities to weaken Russia . In other words, by continuing this narrative, Putin was unable to portray the U.S. as looking to help others .
 Putin also believed in Russian exceptionalism and exclusivity, but in this scenario decides to paint America as a villain that is backing Russia .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 38 says that past U.S. actions in Kosovo, the color revolutions, the Arab spring and the Ukrainian presidential elections in 2004 were all aimed at preventing Eurasian integration at the hands of the United States .
 He said Russians understand this is happening despite Russian attempts at cooperation . He said that Russians understand it is happening. He said Russian attempts to cooperate with Russia are failing .
 The U.S. continually berates Russia, making Russia the victim, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This created a sense of victimhood in the audience"
 Putin could make the U.S. out to be the aggressor in the Crimean annexation. These examples were all mentioned so that Putin could made the United States out of the Crimea annexation .
 He must save the Crimeans from the U.S. who are now running freely around the world exercising their rule of gun .
 Putin's address was evident in Putin’s address. Having an eternal enemy that can be used as rationale for leaders committing illegal or questionable acts is another characteristic of conspiracy theories .
 The infamous policy of containment, led in the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, continues today . In short, we have every reason to assume that the infamous policy continues .
 They are constantly trying to sweep us into a corner because we have an independent position, because we maintain it . We call things like they are and do not engage in hypocrisy, says the author .
 Putin made a summative statement to explain Western and U.S. actions in Ukraine . The phrase ‘in short’ made it seem that Putin made the statement .
 The U.S. condemnation of Crimea annexation to a policy of containment is ill founded, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea. During this time Russia expanded into central Asia and the Caucasus region . During this the Anti- Western Conspiracy Theory.
 Putin claimed that the West had been containing Russia for centuries, it was actually preventing Russian expansion . At times it was aligned with Russia in order to prevent other powers like France from expanding past their own borders .
 Putin leaned on the narrative that Russia has been taken advantage of for years by the U.S. and invading Crimea was Russia's final straw with them .
 This rewriting of how events unfolded directly relates to Marlene Laruelle’s concept of alternative histories . This rewriting is a rewriting of the events unfold directly, and how these new narratives are used to convince the populace that certain actions like the annexation of Crimea were not only valid,
 Putin still attempted to appeal to the U.S. people, he said .
 Americans could understand the fallacies of their government, maybe then they would understand the pleas for Crimean independence from Ukraine .
 The comparison of freedom from Britain and the Crimea situation are not valid comparisons . As was the case with the Kosovo example, the comparison is not valid compared .
 Putin took advantage of traditional American values of freedom and attempted to manipulate them to demonstrate that U.S. foreign policy is hypocritical .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 40 of this group. This is interesting in that if there were a secret, elite group within the U.S. plotting against Russia, then average American citizens would have no idea about the existence .
 Putin furthered the anti-West conspiracy theory by demonstrating that he was reaching out to American citizens who were ‘oblivious’ to actions being committed by an elite group within the United States against Russia .
 Putin tells Putin that Americans value freedom above all else . In reality, Russia is trying to ‘help’ the Crimean people express their free will .
 Putin’s illegal annexation of Crimea went against American pillars of freedom in every way, as it was an attack on the independent state of Ukraine .
 Putin demonstrated to his audience that the United States is the villain, and Putin is the savior . He used two examples of past U.S. interventions in Kosovo and Yugoslavia .
 He related U.S. actions to containment, since that is a phenomenon that many Russians alive today still remember . He related United States action to containment .
 Putin was able to create a narrative that the United States wants to specifically target Russia to limit its power . The U.S. wants to target Russia.
 Putin says he had no other option than to invade Crimea to protect the Eastern bloc from the U.S. According to Putin, this gave him no other choice than to invasion Crimea .
 This argument is somewhat illogical, as he goes from wanting what's best for the Crimean people and the unique area of Crimea, to using the United States as a major reason for annexing Crimea .
 Putin does not explain well, but he does not need to have a good explanation when he relies on the existing anti-Western sentiment in Russia . This is a leap that Putin doesn't explain well. This is not a good reason for Putin to rely on anti- Western sentiment .
 Putin's March 2014 address relied heavily on the anti-West conspiracy theory . Putin’s March 2014 speech relied heavily.
 The U.S. has been accused of being the aggressor in the 2014 annexation of Crimea . Russian President Vladimir Putin made an illogical leap from Crimea to the United States in 2014 . He focused on demonizing the US using historical narratives and plots .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory used the conspiracy theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 41 behind backing Ukraine . The intention is to take Russia’s power for itself .
 Putin had no choice but to annex Crimea to protect Russia from the power-hungry U.S. With this threat, Putin decided to annex the Crimea .
 The Russian Government has been accused of corruption in the past . The Russian government has been blamed for the alleged corruption .
 This chapter will follow the same structure as chapter one, but will look at two sources originating from the Russian government or the state-sponsored media outlet, Russia 1.
 Crimea, The Way Home, is a 2015 Russian pseudo-documentary that premiered on the state run channel, Rossiya 1, and on YouTube, on March 15,2015 .
 It offers an alternative history of the 2014 events in Ukraine, including the Maidan Revolution and events leading up to the annexation of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 This analysis will begin with the plot of the pseudo-documentary, followed by a discussion of important themes . The analysis will be based on the plot.
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory was present in the annexation of Crimea 42 where the anti-West conspiracy theory was present . The theory played a role in the pseudo-documentary overall .
 The pseudo-documentary was a mix of interviews and overdramatized reenactments of contentious events within Ukraine in 2014 . It was a mixture of interviews, interviews and reenacts of the Maidan Revolution and the alleged Korsun Massacre .
 One interview underlined the whole film was between the main interviewer, Andrey Kondrashov,4 and Vladimir Putin .
 Kondrashov traveled to different sites in Crimea and interviewed different citizens . All of whom were sympathetic to Russia’s version of history .
 Interviews were developed by over-dramatic reenactments of events in order to provide visuals for the audience . These interviews were developed for the purposes of providing visuals.
 The pseudo-documentary began with Putin discussing how he was asked to save President Yanukovych’s life amidst Maidan protests .
 Helicopter reenactment of helicopters attempting to save Ukrainian President from Ukrainian nationalists .
Throughout the film the Ukrainian ‘nationalists’ were characterized as violent criminals . Throughout the film, the Ukrainian 'nationalists' were characterized by violent criminals.
 The majority of the ‘nationalists’ that the film talked about were patriots who wanted a Ukraine free from Russian corruption . In reality, the majority of 'nationalists' in the film are patriots .
 Ukrainian patriotism did not fit the narrative that Russia wanted to create of Ukrainians, so they were instead made out to be criminal nationalists . This Ukrainian patriotism didn't fit Russia's narrative, so it was made out of Ukrainian patriotism .
 The film laid the foundation for Putin’s main argument, that the violence during the Maidan Revolution forced him to begin work on returning Crimea back to Russia .
 Kondrashov traveled to what appeared to be an exploded bus, where he conducted his next interview .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 43 portion of the pseudo-documentary was dedicated to the Korsun Massacre, an event that is heavily disputed .
 In this interview, the Korsun Massacre was recapped by Roman Yakovlev, a pro-Russian Crimean citizen .
 He had been part of a bus convoy from Crimea that had gone to Kyiv in order to protest the Maidan Revolution .
Bus stopped by Ukrainian ‘nationalists’ and ‘barbarians’ upon returning to Crimea . They were forced to sing Ukrainian national anthem .
 The Russian flag was found in their bus . They feared that they would be shot if the flag were found in the bus .
 Korsun Massacre/Pogrom was created as a propaganda tool to create the fear that Crimeans were in danger from ‘nationalists’ as long as they were part of Ukraine . There is very little evidence that this event occurred at all,5
 The pseudo-documentary continued with interviewing pro-Russian citizens throughout Crimea . All who claimed to fear Ukrainian ‘nationalists’ were grateful for the “polite, little green men,’ that came to save them from the masked, violent, ‘barbar
 NATO was demonized as attempting to interfere with Russian interests . About an hour and a half into the pseudo-documentary, the maritime situation was discussed .
 The interviewer also met with Vitaly Punko, a Ukrainian citizen part of a pro-Russian biker gang .
 Ukrainian man says he is Russian at heart, despite American attempts to break the brotherly bond between the two countries .
 The pseudo-documentary focused on a few disputed events, followed by lengthy, repetitive interviews with citizens who looked fondly towards Russia .
Several themes arose that alluded to the anti-West conspiracy theory . Kyiv Post The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 44 .
 Putin claimed that he needed to help save the Ukrainian President, this was supported by over dramatic scenes showing Ukrainian nationalists hitting passers by and creating unneeded violence .
 Crimean military commander Sergei Aksyonov claimed Crimea needed Russia to intervene and serve as the protector . He said the Crimeans were scared of the Ukrainians .
 A second theme throughout the pseudo-documentary was that Russia was not an aggressive power, but rather a virtuous nation looking to make sure that everyone's voice is heard .
 Putin repeated that it was not he who wanted to invade Crimea. Throughout the pseudo-documentary, he repeated that he was not trying to invasion Crimea .
 The Crimeans pleaded for Putin to come in and help defend them from Ukraine and from the West . In the end, it was the Crimeans who pleaded to Putin to help defend their country .
 By the end of the pseudo-documentary, the viewer has seen hours of dramatic, violent scenes in Ukraine . The viewer has heard heartfelt interviews of Crimean families who felt they would be better off as part of Russia .
 Putin was able to demonstrate that it was not only Russians who wanted intervention, but non-Russians as well . By including pro-Russian Ukrainians and Crimeans, Putin showed he was willing to intervene .
 There is no way to research if the people in the interview were Crimean or truly pro-Russian . Of course, the people interviewed in the pseudo-documentary are non verifiable .
 The end result gives the illusion that Putin needed to intervene to help innocent people like those in the pseudo-documentary .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 45 . The other two themes present in the pseudo-documentary are related to the anti-West conspiracy theory .
 The film spent large amounts of time developing the narrative that the Ukrainian nationalists were targeting the Crimeans . Russia needed to step in to prevent conflict and bloodshed, the film says .
 The pseudo-documentary hinted that it was not only the Ukrainian ‘nationalists’ who wanted this tension between Russia and Ukraine, but there was an external actor, the West, present as well .
 The film developed the idea that many Ukrainians did not want conflict with Russia, but were forced into it . The film did this by developing the idea.
 Putin told Putin that his main goal was to prevent bloodshed, not to illegally occupy nations . This was demonstrated more so towards the end of the pseudo-documentary .
 Only 2,500 Ukrainian troops returned to Ukraine by the time Crimea was annexed into Russia .
 Putin hoped to demonstrate that once Ukrainians were shown the truth about Russia's intentions, they would end up supporting Russia instead of Ukraine .
 The oversimplification of a statistic, one that would be hard to know if it's true from an outside perspective, is a common characteristic of authoritative leaders, as it allows them to use it to explain their actions .
 The U.S. were the masterminds behind the Maidan Revolution as well as the conflict between Crimeans, Ukrainians and Russians, according to a report .
 Nuland and Pyatt spoke about what a new Ukrainian government should look like if and when President Yanukovych was removed from power . In this phone call, they spoke about the new government.
 The leaked phone call demonstrated that the U.S. was more involved in the Maidan than it publicly wanted to let on . The phone call showed that the United States was more involvement than it publicly wanted toLet on .
 Putin: U.S. was involved in pushing the Maidan Revolution into full effect . Putin: There is the kernel of truth.
 Putin made it seem that the United States were not only involved in the revolution, but they also spearheaded it . Putin’s alternative history, he made it seems that the U.S. was also involved .
 The idea that the United States were ‘puppeteers’ of the revolution directly related to conspiracy theories . The idea is that within the U.S. there is a small group of people pulling the strings of weaker nations .
 NATO trains foreign troops, but this is not a secret, even though the film makes it seem like they are exposing hidden aspects of American policy .
 Putin put his own spin on things by saying the U.S. trained the 'nationalists' who were deemed as 'violent barbarians' set on hurting anyone who was not pro-Maidan .
 Putin refers to those who oppose Russian occupation as ‘nationalists’ or ‘barbarians’ When a better term for most of them would be Ukrainian patriots, they would be Ukraine patriots .
 Putin created an alternative history where it was not really the Ukrainians behind the revolution or subsequent actions, but rather the elusive United States . In addition to connecting the ‘barbarians’ and ‘nationalists’ to the Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory, Putin created a alternative
 There is a theme of the U.S. being unnecessarily militarily aggressive, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the West is being unnecessarily aggressive in Ukraine .
 Putin spoke about the maritime situation surrounding Crimea, and how Russia involved itself in Crimea, NATO and the United States became aggressive .
 NATO has announced naval exercises in Black sea, a US destroyer approached the Romanian Coast . The USS Donald Cook, a cruise missile destroyer headed toward Crimea, was seen as heading toward Crimea .
 NATO and the United States could have been seen as measures intended to prevent war and conflict . With no context, these actions by NATO and U.S. could have had no context .
 Any group that supported the Ukrainian revolution was seen as supporting violent criminals . However, throughout the pseudo-documentary, any group supporting the revolution was also seen as support for violent criminals.
 NATO and the U.S. put ships near Crimea, the Russian narrative had been made to see these actions as aggressive towards Russia, not an act of defense and protection .
 The U.S. follows the rule of gun mentality, and acts with military force, even when that is not necessary . These actions furthered the stereotype that the United States follows the rules of gun culture .
 Putin claimed earlier in the pseudo-documentary that the U.S. was behind Ukrainian actions during the Maidan Revolution and events in Crimea . Later actions of deploying ships near Crimea could be seen as evidence for the anti-West conspiracy theory in Russia .
 This pseudo-documentary has been viewed over 13 million times on YouTube . It has also been viewed on Rossiya 1 and Rossiya 2 .
 The comments are turned off, which leads one to believe that many people would have called out the many blatant lies in the film .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 48 create the pseudo-documentary . The film shows the amount of time and effort that went into the film .
 There are enough alternative history sources like Crimea, the Way Home, that circulate the Russian sphere that make it difficult to discern fact from lies .
 The film is saturated with falsities, in a country full of disinformation, it can be difficult to pick apart this film and see it for what it is, propaganda .
 The focus of this conference was on security and instability in North Africa, the Middle East and South Asia . There was still inclusion of the ‘Ukraine Situation’, the pro-Russian term for the Maidan and annexation of Crimea .
 Crimea had already been annexed at this time . Security in Ukraine and Crimea would have been the topic of conversation among Ministers of Defense .
 Ukraine was only mentioned at times when the West could be convicted of villainous actions towards Russia and the world as a whole . However, this was not the case, and Ukraine was not mentioned in the past .
 No Western actors were present at this conference . It consisted mostly of key actors from Russia, Belarus, Iran, India and China .
 Only dialogues and sections regarding Ukraine, the West and the United States’ interactions with one another will be analyzed .
 The Middle East conference had a focus on instability in the Middle East . Most of the conference was about terrorism within the Arab world .
 Several actors provide in depth discussions on how the U.S. and Western institutions have harmed attempts for peace and security in the Middle East and Ukraine .
 This analysis will be divided into subsections based on actor who spoke about specific issues . This analysis is based on the actor who speaks about specific topics .
 Shoygu spoke The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea . He spoke about the approach of the Ministry of Defense of the Russian Federation to global security and regional security .
 His dialogue will have its own section and analysis in this study . Hence, his dialogue will be his own section .
 Army General Shoygu, the Minister of Defense of the Russian Federation, was the first to speak and is the first actor after the introductory messages .
 General Shoygu touched on the “color revolutions’ that had been occurring in the former USSR in recent years .
 He said that this had happened in Central Asian countries as well as Georgia, and was now happening in Ukraine . He said this had been happening in Central Asia and Georgia .
 The country hurtled towards civil war after the removal of the incumbent president, says the president .
 The term 'external forces' directly relates to the West, as it had already been established by Russian media that the West had an influential hand behind the Maidan Revolution in Kyiv earlier that year .
 General Shoygu put blame on external forces that caused Ukraine's revolution, the West . He also blamed the West for Ukraine's civil war .
 General Shoygu played into the narrative that not only was the Maidan Revolution not needed, but it was intentionally created by external forces to hurt peace and global security .
 Lavrov, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, was the next to speak . Lavrov was the first to speak to Lavrov .
 Instead of Europe attempting to create peace in the world, they were focused on creating conflict within itself, he said . He said that Europe is focused on Ukraine, rather than creating peace .
 The phrases ‘not a coincidence’ and ‘predictable’ are conspiratorial language . Lavrov insinuated that the crisis in Ukraine was directly driven by Europe’s desire to focus on itself rather than attempt to build peace in foreign regions .
 Lavrov artfully created the narrative that the Ukraine crisis was intentional, building on General Shoygu’s argument that the Maidan Revolution was fueled by external forces . By framing his discussion in this manner, Lavrov artly created the story.
 The West intentionally created the Revolution in order to keep power and resources within Europe . The plot had already begun within the conference .
 The plot made the West out to be selfish to the point of causing unneeded conflict . The West could refrain from devoting resources to regions in the Middle East, South Asia and North Africa .
 The plot set the stage for the Russian government to characterize itself as the nation that would promote international cooperation, as opposed to the West . The plot was a plot to characterize Russia as a nation that was opposed to West .
 Including the word Nazi in anti-Ukrainian rhetoric is not a new phenomenon . The word Nazi is not new phenomenon.
 calling Ukrainians Nazis is a popular trope that is a surefire way to gain Russian people’s attention . Despite this, calling Ukrainians Nazi is a common trope, it is a good way for Russian people to gain attention .
 The Immortal Regiment is an annual demonstration called the Immortal Regiment . Family members carry portraits of family members that died in World War Two .
 The government has since co-opted this event, and used it as a way to keep the fear of Nazism alive .
 The Russian government is able to justify any action in Ukraine as protecting Russia from Nazis, which was once a valid fear .
 Using the word Nazi was a buzzword in Russian media portrayals of the Maidan Revolution and surrounding events in Ukraine .
 Russian media sites and the government created the narrative that they needed to intervene to prevent neo-Nazi attitudes from spreading . By comparing pro-Revolution Ukrainians to Nazis, it allowed the government to create the narrative .
 The world could help Ukraine by abandoning xenophobic values and superiority complexes was a pivot from acknowledging that the conflict was in large part due to Maidan in February of 2014 and the following illegal annexation of Crimea .
 The Russian government recently illegally annexed a foreign country, Ukraine . Preaching peace could be reached by behaving properly created the illusion that the Russian government was the moral actor in this situation .
 The West was pushing back by supporting the Maidan Revolution and opposing the illegal annexation of Crimea . This idealistic vision for Europe to enact equal and undivided security as well as common economic and humanitarian space furthered the narrative that Russia was seeking to better the world .
 Lavrov set the stage for the Russian government to act as the savior and promoter of peace and stability, despite attempts against this goal . Lavrov has been accused of trying to be the savior of peace in Russia .
 The Russian government's vision of implementing principles of equal and undivided security were good in theory, but in practice that meant occupying foreign nations in order to promote the Russian government’s version of security .
Speakers such as Lavrov only had to talk about certain ideals like equal and undivided security .
 The best way to promote security would be to prevent intervention from the West, says the U.S.
 This is an oversimplified solution, but one that gained power when it was repeated by different actors continually . This is a solution to the problem of repeated actors repeating the same thing . The solution is not a solution that would have been more effective, but it is a
 Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, was the next to speak . He was the first to speak to the Russian military .
 He tells how the collapse of the Soviet Union had not made the world any safer .
 Putin has told in previous speeches that the collapse of the USSR was a catastrophe . This is a popular plot in the post-Soviet space, as Putin had told in earlier speeches .
There is some truth to conspiracy theories, but there is a truth to this sentiment, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As a world leader, the U.S. has the power and resources to act in ways that weaker states can not .
 The U.S. government acts in ways that serve its best interests, as does the Russian, Chinese and every other government . The United States acts on behalf of its own interests, including those of Russia, China and other countries .
Since the collapse of the USSR, the U.S. has not only increased its power, but was now able to use this power with no other state powerful enough to keep the United States in check .
 Gerasimov referenced the 1991 Gulf War, Yugoslavia in 1999 and Afghanistan in 2001 . To back up his claims, Gerasimov referenced the 1990s Gulf War and the 2001 Gulf War .
Military actions were used in all of the mentioned scenarios . This is not a false claim, as military actions were not used in any of the scenarios .
 The U.S. has been criticized for its militaristic actions in Russia . The Russian government has been accused of being hypocritical . The United States has not been criticized by the Russian government .
 The Russian government had used direct military force to illegally annex Crimea . It was especially hypocritical at the time, given that just months prior to the conference, the Russian government was using direct force to annex Crimea.
 The Russian government was able to keep the conference centered on the anti-Western sentiment, not their recent actions in Ukraine . By shifting the focus onto the U.S. and their past actions, the Russian government kept the focus on the United States .
 When General Gerasimov did eventually talk about events in Ukraine, it was from an anti-Western, pro-Russian perspective .
 General Gerasimov: "Under these The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 54 circumstances, we cannot remain indifferent"
 NATO troops were not approaching Russian and Ukrainian borders in order to prevent total war . Instead, they were acting in a predatory, hostile way that forced the Russian government to retaliate .
 The West wanted to capitalize on any conflict near Russia to limit their power in the Eurasian space . This pushed the narrative that the West was not out to help the international community, but rather to capitalize.
 Bordyuzha, the Secretary General of the Collective Security Treaty Organization, directly blamed events in Ukraine on the United States .
 No time during this conference was there speech about how the Ukrainians themselves wanted a revolution or change in political structure . It is important to note that no time was there at this conference.
 Ukraine events in Ukraine were seen as negative events, artificially created and instigated by the West, specifically the United States .
 General Bordyuzha bolstered his argument that the U.S. has consistently created conflict and inhibited peace all over the world .
 The U.S. is power hungry, and non-Western countries like Ukraine fall victim to violence in the United States’ struggle for world power . This furthers the plot that the U. S. isPower hungry.
 Ukraine is being used to create a proxy between the West and Russia, Bordyuzha said . Ukraine is disregarding any voices from Ukrainians themselves and their desires to become a more democratic country .
 The Russian government likes to act as the protector of Eurasia . But they also act like a victim when deemed fit, he says .
 Bordyuzha attempted to use ‘the Ukraine situation’, the illegal annexation of Crimea, as an example of how Russia is victimized on the international stage .
 The claim in itself does not make sense, but within the context of the entire conference, it continues the narrative that the only reason the West was involved in Ukraine was in order to limit Russian power .
 Russian government is better able to justify their actions in Crimea as attempts to prevent Western powers from unfairly taking advantage of Russia . By characterizing Russia as the victim in international politics, the Russian government has been better able.
 The West is not attempting to drive Russia to the ‘fringes of European civilization’ But rather prevent the Russian government from invading and occupying sovereign nations like the state of Ukraine .
Military officers portrayed Ukraine as a victim of Western aggression towards Russia . The conference was held in Kiev, Ukraine's capital .
 At no point was mentioned that the Ukrainians may have wanted Western aid, or wanted less influence from the Russian government within their borders .
 The plot was that the only way to achieve stability in Eurasia and the Middle East would be to limit Western involvement and critique their foregin policy initiatives .
 The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 56 the West acts as an aggressive military power . As was the case with other sources, the same examples of American actions in Kosovo and the Middle East are mentioned with no context .
 The actors did not talk about the aggression of the Russian government as well, which in turn made this source one sided against the West .
 It is unfair and inaccurate to claim stability would be brought to the Eastern world simply by excluding the West from participating in the region. It's unfair to claim that stability would have been brought to Eastern world by excluding West .
 The Ukraine crisis created the false idea that the West was only intervening for its own gain, just as it had done in the Middle East, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 This oversimplification of history by these generals echoed that of Putin as well . This overs Implication of history echoes that of Russia as well as Putin .
Several findings will be discussed in their relation to the research question and argument portions of the thesis . The research question is ‘how and why the anti-West conspiracy theory was used in the illegal annexation of Crimea’
 The Russian government made illogical comparisons and used kernels of truth to connect the anti-West conspiracy to the justification of the annexation .
 The Russian government created the narrative that Russia needed to protect Crimea from the West .
 The Russian government alluded to their unique history, and how the West continually violated this history, alongside Russia’s unique destiny in the world order . In all of the sources analyzed, the Russian government hinted to theirunique history .
 The U.S. is allowed to act internationally as they please, but Russian international actions are deemed illegitimate .
 Putin The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 57 repeatedly used the Kosovo example where NATO intervened in 1999 to prevent an ethnic cleansing campaign .
 Putin created a narrative that Russia is unfairly treated by other states, and therefore chose to annex Crimea despite international criticism . By using the kernel of truth that the West did illegally intervene in Kosovo, Putin created the narrative.
 Putin continually said he wanted to cooperate with the West, but was forced to act against them when Russia was backed into a corner . Putin also continually said that he wants to cooperate.
 Putin said he did not want to pull the Russian Ambassador out of the United States . He said he didn't want to resort to quoting international law that pointed out the West's illegal actions in Kosovo .
 Putin said Russia was forced to retaliate due to Western aggression . However, Putin said it was due to Russia's response to the West's aggression .
 As the sources created Russia to be a victim of Western power, they simultaneously made Russia out to be the savior of the Eurasian world . Russia is now a member of the European Union .
 Putin developed the plot that the Russian government did not annex Crimea because they wanted to . But the Crimean people were worried that the Ukrainian ‘Nazis’, backed by the West, were going to overrun the peninsula .
 The Russian government was able to attract more support to their disinformation campaign . By calling upon dual myths, Russia as the victim and Russia as a protector, the Russian government has attracted more support .
 Russia could be both the benevolent protector of ethnic Russians and the state suffering from the West . Russia allowed the Russian government to justify the 2014 annexation of Crimea .
 The Russian government used false comparisons and kernels of truth to explain the annexation of Crimea .
 Kosovo was brought up numerous times, along with comparing living standards in Crimea to Russia . The Paralympics were at risk due to Western intervention, containment policies in past centuries . Crimeans who supported Russian occupation were interviewed .
 The diction used in all sources worked to develop the alternate history where Russia was the righteous protagonist in the world, working hard to prevent a global takeover .
 The anti-West conspiracy runs deep in Russian discourse, and is so common that their audience may not be aware of the indoctrination . The West was explicitly spoken about in the sources .
 Russian government discourse slowly worked to develop the plot to prevent the West from overrunning the Eurasian sphere, argues the thesis .
 Russia needed to intervene in order to prevent Western backed Ukrainian ‘Nazis’ from attacking local Crimeans . The Crimean annexation was justified in the case of the Crimean annexation .
 The Russian government was then able to characterize themselves as the saviors . By characterizing the U.S. and the West as the aggressors, the Russian government is now able to portray themselves as saviors.
 The anti-West conspiracy theory allowed for the creation of an enemy, the West . As is the case with many conspiracy theories, the anti- West conspiracy theory allows for the created an enemy .
 As long as the Russian government had an enemy, they could rationalize their actions, such as the annexation, as protecting their people from an eternal enemy .
 The Russian grand narrative has in large part been centered on being different and better than the West . Since Imperial times, the Russian grand narratives have been different .
 This idea has been present in Russian culture for centuries . It was a somewhat easy issue to capitalize on in order to justify the annexation .
 It is true that the West was somewhat involved in the Maidan Revolution, as it would benefit the West to have a democratic Ukraine . It is The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory .
 The Ukrainian people wanted the revolution, and the West helped to facilitate this desire. To reiterate, the Ukrainian people want the revolution .
 The Russian government was able to create an alternative history where the West was the antagonist . By using these kernels of truth, the Russian government created a new history .
 The West had been an antagonist in Russian culture for generations . It was logical and expected that Russian government would somehow tie actions in Ukraine and Crimea to the West .
 The anti-West conspiracy theory was used to justify the illegal annexation . It was an already widely circulated idea in Russian culture that has existed for generations .
 The fact that the Russian government was able to successfully annex the Crimean peninsula, partially on the basis of protecting Crimea from the West, demonstrated the power of Russian disinformation, says the author .
 The anti-West conspiracy theory is so deeply rooted in Russian history, it is easy for Russian government officials to allude to Western collusion to justify their actions . It showed that the anti-west conspiracy theory has been rooted in Russia's history .
 Russian officials had to mention contentious American actions in order to rationalize their own actions in Crimea . It was not necessary for Russian government officials to provide evidence or context of past American actions .
 The Russian government was good at combining anti-West sentiment with diction that alludes to the Western plot to overthrow Russia in the Eurasian space . This further exemplifies the power of words and rhetoric, as the Russian government is good at combine the anti- West sentiment with
 This thesis concludes that the anti-West conspiracy theory was heavily present in sources regarding the 2014 illegal annexation of Crimea . The two ideas expressed in the Argument portion of the thesis are correct .
 The Russian government used the West, specifically the United States, as an alternative actor to shift attention away from the Russian Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory . The 2014 annexation of Crimea 60 government and onto the West during the 2014 annexed of Crimea .
 Russian government used anti-West conspiracy theory to promote negative perception of the United States in Russia in order to rationalize the illegal annexation of Crimea . Second, the Russian government also used the anti- West conspiracy theory.
 The findings are significant in that they prove how powerful rhetoric can be when it works with the anti-West conspiracy theory .
 The analysis of specific words within the sources from the Russian government demonstrate how crucial it is that citizens are well informed on how to identify and refute disinformation .
 The Russian government is well versed in disinformation, and how to form it in a way that makes it look like the truth . The government is known for its use of disinformation to create fake news .
 Putin's 2014 address would be difficult to find the fallacies if one was not educated on Russian, Ukrainian and American history .
 The rhetoric used in the sources that were analyzed in this thesis go hand in hand with propaganda and disinformation . The rhetoric in the thesis goes hand inhand with propaganda.
 The thesis concludes that the anti-West conspiracy theory was used to justify the annexation of Crimea . More research needs to be done on conspiratorial discourse in the post-Soviet space .
 Putin and the Russian government have a certain toolkit when it comes to disinformation . Using the anti-West conspiracy theory is within that toolkit .
 Putin often resorts to sarcasm or rhetorical statements and commonly refers back to Russia’s uniqueness in the international order .
 Russian government uses anti-West conspiracy theory in order to hide their authoritarian actions . Putin The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory in the 2014 annexation of Crimea 61 .
 Putin tends to pull the same examples and use the same phrases when attacking Western actions . It would be beneficial to study the sources in this thesis to better understand how to counter and prevent Russian disinformation from circulating .
 On February 24, 2022, the Russian government invaded the state of Ukraine . The Russian government invasion took place in February 2014 .
 Tensions have been escalating between Ukraine and Russia since 2014 . Putin's decision to invade Ukraine has shocked the international community .
 If the rhetoric surrounding the Crimean annexation of 2014 had been better researched and followed, it is possible that the international community would have better understood the magnitude of Russian disinformation and been more prepared for the invasion.
 The gravity of certain phrases, connections and examples came to light. By doing narrow analyses of a few sources, the gravity of some phrases, thegravity of certain words and connections were revealed .
 Putin skillfully created an alternative history where he was the hero, and the U.S. was the villain . The anti-West conspiracy theory underpinned all of the sources analyzed in this thesis .
 Ukraine is suffering the consequences of an authoritarian ruler whose rhetoric needs to be studied with a critical eye at all times .
 The international community should listen to all of Putin and the Russian government's words very closely, as they are good at creating plots and narratives that slowly gain weight and momentum .
 Citizens must be cognizant of where they retrieve their news from, and should fact check all sources, especially when they hear news from world leaders .
 In a hyper-globalized world where information overload is used as a weapon to confuse people, citizens should educate The Anti-Western Conspiracy Theory .
 In post Cold War era, military force is far from only weapon states have to inflict violence and pain on other states .
 The Russian government has successfully weaponized words, and it is the responsibility of both the international community and individual people to combat the weaponization of words by recognizing propaganda and understanding the power that disinformation holds .
 Putin claims “denazification’ to justify Russia’s attack on Ukraine, experts say .