 The first round in Ukraine's presidential election has ended in victory for the populist candidate Volodymyr Zelenskiy . The actor and comedian was the bombshell of the campaign .
 President Petro Poroshenko will now face off in the second round against the incumbent, President Poroshenko . Former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko managed to see off competition from former prime minister.
 The new populism of Zelenskiy is leading to a partial resumption of the old standoff between the two Ukraines . In the current post-Crimea conditions will not lead to anything good.
 The period until the runoff on April 21 will be a time of coalition and behind-the-scenes negotiations . The runoff will be the time for coalition talks .
 Poroshenko became president in 2014, when a significant portion of the Ukrainian elite coalesced following the annexation of Crimea by Russia and the Maidan uprising .
 Poroshenko's mission was to stop the disintegration of Ukraine, organize its defense, and use the energy that fueled the Maidan revolution to carry out reforms . Poroshenko’s mission is to stop disintegration.
 The situation was complicated by the military conflict raging in Ukraine’s Donbas region . The ensuing flow of refugees from the war zone was also complicated .
 Poroshenko's failings were bound to prompt a wave of anti-establishment populism . Poroshenko’s failings have not brought about tangible change, according to a report .
 Tymoshenko tried unsuccessfully to harness that wave, as did her presidential rival Anatoliy Hrytsenko . Zelenskiy rose up on its crest, but ultimately it was Zelenkiy who rose up.
Russian-speakers who are loyal to Ukraine's integrity and independence are tired of Poroshenko’s militancy . In addition to his image as the “against all’ candidate, he tried to represent the interests of those living in Ukraine's southeast .
 A politician about whose team little is known. Yet he remains a figure in a vacuum, a politician about his team .
Before the second vote, there will be immense pressure on Zelenskiy from various influence groups to enter into an alliance with Tymoshenko or to concede the election .
 Zelenskiy knows this perfectly well. Such an agreement would mean political death for him, and the end of his career .
 His main weapon is to continue to fight against the establishment, appeal directly to the people, and turn his lack of experience into his advantage . He has been accused of corruption and corruption associated with experienced politicians .
 President Poroshenko can be pleased with his showing in the first round of the presidential election . Meanwhile, President Obama is pleased with the results of the election .
Back in autumn 2018, it seemed he was a deeply unpopular lame duck, with no chance of getting reelected . Back in October 2018, he was an unpopular candidate, but was not re-elected .
 Tymoshenko and her allies had accused Poroshenko of “doing blood-soaked business’ in Russia . They stopped being perceived as an alternative to him .
 In the first round, Poroshenko won support in western Ukraine, above all in the symbolically important Galicia . It plays an equally legitimizing role for politicians who position themselves as patriots .
 Votes for Poroshenko were primarily a way of showing support for the path of breaking off relations with Russia, and moving closer to Europe and America .
 Galicia was never entirely Sovietized and preserved its connections with Europe . The country was never completely Sovietized .
 Ukraine’s independence is seen as an act of decolonization . Ukraine's independence has been seen as a form of emancipation from temporary occupation .
 Poroshenko has a good head start in the second round of Ukraine's presidential election . Ukraine's national nucleus votes mobilizes all of western and central Ukraine, which gives him a good start .
 Poroshenko has managed to recreate a mirror image of Russian propaganda on Ukrainian soil . Paradoxically, Poroshenko is trying to recreate the image of Russia in Ukraine .
 Poroshenko is adamant that in these elections, his real enemy is Russian President Vladimir Putin . But his opponents inside Ukraine are either involuntary or ill-advised henchmen of that enemy .
 In this worldview, Poroshenko is the only guarantor that the Ukrainian army will be strengthened . Poroshenko also is the international initiator of an anti-Russian coalition .
 Zelenskiy will have to face the full power of the presidential apparatus in the second round . Poroshenko and his politics are firmly embedded in the political standoff .
 Tymoshenko’s defeat in the first round by no means signifies the end of her political career . Theoshenko's defeat is not a sign that she will leave the country .
 Zelenskiy failed to turn central Ukraine and Kiev into her support base . But the number of votes she won provide her with a decent negotiating position in talks with Zelenkiy .
 Interior Affairs Minister Arsen Avakov has the support of the security services, including the Azov paramilitary groupings .
 His position will be an important bargaining chip in backstage negotiations . He will be a key part of the backstage negotiations.
 In their favored scenario, the outcome of the presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019 should be a strong prime minister based on a broad coalition . In their favorite scenario, they say, under a weak President Zelenskiy.
 At the same time, the demoralizing effect of her defeat on Tymoshenko herself should not be underestimated, says the author .
 This is the third campaign in which she has been one step away from the country’s power in its entirety . This is now the third time she's been in charge of the campaign .
Former energy minister Yuriy Boyko led a parliamentary campaign overseen by Putin associate Viktor Medvedchuk . He aspires to the role of the creator of a broad coalition.
 Medvedchuk is an unofficial intermediary between the Kremlin and Poroshenko . At the same time, he remains an unofficial intermediary between the two .
 Moscow is staying out of the fray until the results of the elections are known . This is all the more likely given that official Moscow itself is taking a break from events .
19 will be an endurance test of Ukraine's democracy, and of the judgment of its elites . It has its reasons for suspecting that the elections will only add to the chaos in Ukraine .