 Syria has once again captured the world’s attention, casting a long shadow over the ongoing war in Ukraine .
 In early 2014, Ukraine’s east fell into turmoil after a wave of demonstrations hit the main square of Kiev .
 This agreement would distance Ukraine from Russia, a nation with which Ukraine has close historical and physical ties . The agreement would be a step closer to Russia .
 With this agreement, Ukraine would inch ever closer to the European Union . The agreement would eventually push Ukraine to war, eventually pushing the country to war .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia in March 2014 after his efforts to quell protests using snipers enflamed the situation . He fled to the country in March 2013 after his attempts to quelted protests with snipers .
 'self-defense' militias formed in the east striving to form Novorossiya . The situation escalated into an armed conflict .
 Since the conflict’s start, the European Union and the United States have backed Ukraine, providing non-lethal military support for the country's collapsing economy .
 Russian ‘volunteers’ are fighting in Ukraine to ‘defend’ Russian speakers from Kiev’s ‘fascist junta,’ side by side with the self-proclaimed republics in Lugansk and Donetsk .
Muslim Cherberloevky, leader of Chechen Battalion in the name of Sheikh Mansur, sits with leader of the ultra-nationalist militia Pravy Sektor, Dmytro Yarosh .
 Ukrainian nationalists together with Chechen Islamists. A number of factions from different geographic regions and identities have coalesced around similar interests .
 Two recent gastronomic incidents highlight the micro-level aggressions of war . The incidents are the latest in a series of incidents that have occurred in recent months .
 A Ukrainian ambassador deliberately spilled hot coffee on the Vice-Premier of Crimea Dmitri Polonski at a meeting of the OSCE in Poland in a sign of protest against the occupation of the peninsula .
 Another scandal occurred when Vladimir Putin and former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi tasted a 1775 vintage wine in Crimea causing outrage in Ukraine . The former Italian PM and Putin tasted the wine in the Crimea .
 French President Francois Hollande hosted the latest talks between Russian and Ukrainian leaders in Paris . The talks would discuss options for a peace accord, which would end violence in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia’s military expansion in Syria led the discussion away from the topic at hand . Yet, Russia's military expansion led to the topic of Syria being discussed .
 Russian diplomats played hooky during Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko's speech . President Vladimir Putin attempted to regain a place on the world-stage by lambasting the United States .
 focus shifted from Russia's involvement in Ukraine to Syria in the days approaching the Assembly .
 Russia's deployment of troops and military buildup in Syria is a welcomed lull in fighting in Ukraine's east . This wasn't only a reaction to Russia's presence of troops in Syria but to a welcome lull in the fighting .
 September 11 witnessed the first day with no incidence of shelling in 18 months . September 11 has rekindled hopes that an end to the conflict is possible and near .
 Donetsk People's Republic Chairman Denis Pushilin threatened Ukraine with a “big war’ if it did not fully implement the Minsk agreement, signed in September 2014 and February 2015 .
 The second accord, penned in Belarus by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Francois Hollande, Vladimir Putin and Petro Poroshenko, would extend greater autonomy to the eastern oblasts of Lugansk and Donetsk and consider asylum for separatist fighters .
 The Minsk negotiations are “an opportunity for us through political, peaceful means, and without arms to return Ukraine,’s Pushilin said .
 Integration on the Donbass's terms has translated into problems for the country's nationalists .
 Ukraine's parliament passed the first reading of legislation that would grant more autonomy to the east . The Verkhovna Rada passed the bill August 31 .
 A massive protest of nearly 1,000 demonstrators opposed to the bill erupted outside of the legislative headquarters .
 Ukraine's general prosecutor says the attack could be classified as terrorism . The attack was carried out in Ukraine's capital Kiev .
 Even if a resolution to the armed conflict comes about, Russia will remain in perpetual struggle with the West .