Ecuador Halts All OIl Operations amid Escalating Protests. The Ports Receiving Most Russian Oil And Gas . Home Energy Energy-General RFE/RL journalists report the news in 21 countries where a free press is banned by the government .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea in March sparked the worst East-West showdown since the Cold War . Moscow was prepared to use force to achieve its ends in Ukraine - and perhaps elsewhere - while the West was not .
 The Russian currency -reeling from the combined effect of sanctions and falling energy prices -experienced its sharpest one-day drop since the August 1998 financial crisis on December 1 .
 Russian firms owe $700 billion to foreign banks and are largely blocked from any additional Western financing . Capital flight is forecast to reach $128 billion .
 Scrapping South Stream Underscores Russia’s Weakness and then there was oil .
After Malaysia Airlines Flight 17, it was no longer possible for Western leaders to continue to pretend that Russia is a respectable member of the international community . And by manufacturing a pro-Moscow insurgency, he effectively invaded Ukraine .
Russia became a rogue state. Instead, Russia became a problem they needed to confront . Russia is now a rogue nation .
Western sanctions and isolation of Russia from the world economy might not have been enough to contain Moscow in the short term . Once it did, a crucial source of its strength began to melt away .
 The Russian government acknowledged what has long been obvious that the economy would slide into recession in 2015 . But with an assist from falling energy prices they are more than enough to cripple it in the long run .
 Putin appeared to be running circles around his Western counterparts . He managed to thwart United States air strikes against his ally, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad .
Putin has had a strong year. He strong-armed Armenia -and temporarily, Ukraine -into abandoning plans for a free-trade pact with the European Union in favor of Russia .
 You really need someone from outside the U.S. State Dept to write your articles on Russia .
 The email address is already in the database. Leave a comment First Name.
 The Daily Discussion is a weekly feature on CNN.com's iReporter's weekly, off-beat look at the weekly news stories . Please submit your photos and videos of the week's featured news stories for next week . Click here for more stories .
 The daily OilPrice.com account is a free, free and free form . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on the site . At the bottom of the page, please share your comments .
 Your details will be stored in our database and shared with our third party mailing list provider . Your details are stored in the database and will be shared with your third party.
 The OilPrice account will be activated by a link that will ask you to generate a new password . You will be sent an email containing a link to complete your account activation .
 If approved, your data will then be publically viewable on this article . The data will be publicly viewable if approved .
 Nothing contained on the Web site shall be considered a recommendation, solicitation, or offer to buy or sell a security to any person in any jurisdiction .
 Trading and investing carries a high risk of losing money rapidly due to leverage . Trading and Investing carries a risk of loss of money due to Leverage .