 As tensions between Russia and Ukraine intensify, the G.O.P. nominee's pro-Russian rhetoric could become an even bigger liability .
 Tensions between Russia and Ukraine have reached a fever pitch amid heightened rhetoric and recriminations between the two countries . The two countries have been involved in a series of bitter disputes between them .
 The escalation has prompted both governments to shore up military and security resources surrounding the Crimea peninsula in the Black Sea .
 The military buildup has sparked concerns that another Russian incursion could be imminent . Donald Trump has taken an increasingly pro-Russian stance and claimed that Russia isn’t in Crimea at all .
 The G.O.P. nominee has continued to use his campaign pulpit to push for thawing relations between the U.S. and Russia .
 Trump first stunned national security experts when he suggested that should he become president, he might not come to the defense of America’s NATO allies in the event of a Russian invasion .
 Trump accused the media of misconstruing his comment and proceeded to blame President Barack Obama .
 So far, it's not clear how much Trump's pro-Russian rhetoric has hurt him in the polls. So far.
Real estate-mogul's foreign policy stance could become particularly vexing if fighting between Russia and Ukraine does break out .
 Vladimir Putin accused his neighbor of using “terror tactics’ in an effort to stabilize Crimea . Two Russian soldiers were killed in Crimea this week, Putin said .
 Poroshenko put the Ukrainian military on high-alert along the Crimean border and in eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian military is on high alert along the Crimea border and eastern Ukraine.
 Putin met with his Security Council to talk about “anti-terrorist security scenarios at the land, border, sea and in the airspace of Crimea, the Wall Street Journal reports .
 Putin is just trying to display strength and improve his bargaining position with U.S. and other western countries . Other experts argue that Putin is trying to improve his negotiating position with the United States .
 As many as 40,000 Russian troops are believed to be stationed along the Crimea-Ukraine border .
 Either way, the latest geopolitical intrigues aren't exactly a boon for Trump .
 Trump’s remarks are likely to backfire on the Republican nominee and give Hillary Clinton another edge in an already lopsided race .