Members of Ukraine's National Guard at the opening ceremony of a sniper's training centre near Kiev, Ukraine, March 18, 2016 .
 The author argues that only a secure Ukraine will put its name to grand bargains crafted by Russia and the West .
 Russia brazenly invaded Crimea and eastern Ukraine in complete violation of the memorandum . Russia's invasion was a violation of a memorandum signed by Ukraine's president .
 Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity proved hollow. Ukraine's assurances of Ukraine's sovereignty and sovereignty proved hollow . Ukraine's territorial integrity and sovereignty were found hollow .
Sanctions are nice, but hardly an adequate response to Russian imperialism . Sanctions areNice, but not adequate response. Sanctions in Russia are nice.
 The violation and non-enforcement of Budapest underpins Ukraine’s approach to the Minsk accords and to any peace deal . The violation is a violation of Budapest's approach to Ukraine.
 As constructed, Minsk institutionalizes Russia’s invasion and meddling in Ukrainian affairs . Minsk also institutionalizes Russian invasion and permanent meddling in Ukraine .
 It doesn't matter whether Ukrainians do or do not make constitutional changes providing the occupied Donbass with autonomy . It doesn’t matter whether fair and free elections are held in the region, says the author .
 Minsk guarantees that Russia’s proxies will remain in control of the occupied Donbass . Russia will use whatever arrangement exists to infringe on Ukrainian security, stability and sovereignty .
 Ukraine to live in the shadow of Russia or be mindful of Moscow’s security concerns . It was for the last 25 years for the country .
 Ukraine’s security and survival to be permanently hostage to an imperialist power that routinely invades its neighbors and has annexed Ukrainian territory . It's quite another for Ukraine to be temporarily hostage to the imperialist power .
 The failure of Budapest means that formal international security assurances are effectively meaningless . Ukraine’s first priority has to be preserving its own security .
 Ukraine would be crazy to believe a second Budapest. No one can or will guarantee it, and even if they did, it would becrazy to believe it .
 Ukraine could not accept Putin's word. Even if Putin were to sign a document guaranteeing Ukraine's security with his blood, Ukraine would not accept his word .
 U.S. indifference to independent Ukraine's security does not inspire confidence that this time the United States and the United Kingdom will really mean it .
 membership in NATO won’t do the trick either, both because it’s not in the cards for Ukraine anytime soon, and because Article 5 is squishy . NATO membership won't do the tricks either, either, because it's not on the cards.
 Ukraine will be secure only if it can guarantee its own security. In short, Ukraine will only be secure if it is able to guarantee its security .
 Ukraine has the requisite armed forces to guarantee its own security . Since nuclear weapons are out of the question, Ukraine’s security can be assured only if Ukraine has armed forces .
 Ukraine must have the capacity not to defeat Russia but to deter it from further imperialist encroachments on Ukrainian territory . Ukraine must be able to deter Russia from further imperialist encroachments .
 Once Ukraine is certain that its security is assured, all manner of negotiations and compromises become possible . Once Ukraine's security is certain, all way of negotiations will become possible.
 Ukraine will put its name to grand bargains crafted by Russia and the West . Only a secure Ukraine will be the only secure Ukraine, Russia and West will be at risk .
 No Western deal with Russia can possibly work if it fails to take Ukraine and its justified security concerns into account . No deal could be done if it doesn't take Ukraine's security concerns to account .
 Ukraine has made enormous progress since the spring of 2014, when it had no more than 6,000 battle-ready troops to face Putin and his proxies . Ukraine has already made huge progress.
 Minsk's "cease-fire" mandate is routinely violated by Russian troops and results in daily Ukrainian deaths . It represents a tactical victory for Ukraine’s army, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine has won the war by stopping Russia's armed forces and Putin’s 35,000 proxies . Despite defeats in several key battles, Ukraine has actually won the battle .
 Ukraine needs to gain the capacity to stop a full-scale Russian invasion. Now Ukraine must gain the ability to stop the Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 A massive land war would produce savage Ukrainian partisan resistance and lead to enormous losses for Russia . It would be far better to deter Russia than to embroil it in a costly quagmire, writes David Frum .
 Ukraine needs to have clear ability to stop Russian air power and tanks, says the Ukrainian government . Russia needs to be deterred by Ukraine, it says .
 Ukraine is building up its military to the point that it can defend itself, but not threaten Russia . Arming Ukraine is the only way to secure a durable peace there, according to the U.S.
 The sooner the West learns this lesson, the sooner Budapest will fade as a bad memory . The sooner Minsk or its successor will have a realistic chance of resulting in peace, the West says .
 President Mr Poroshenko stay strong, show to all of those who try to discredit you .
 Sakvarelidze, Kasko and all the team must finish what they started . It is in your power so, do not delay get Sakvareidze back to the game . Do not delay getting Sakvarezidze and Kaskso back to their game
 If you do, in his humble opinion, people may ignore reports from Panama, because that report does make sense . If you don't, in my humble opinion.
 con artist or snake oil salesman induces the ""mark"" to give up something of value by leading him to believe that he is getting something ofvalue in return . Bully for and but they are nothing more than the marbles of an ordinary ""shell game"
 Russia was militarily prostrate in 1994 and it would not have imperiled the U.S. or UK to have provided such assurances . Russia would have provided assurances in 1994 .
 Ukraine's surrender of its status as the world's third largest nuclear power would have justified such strong and unequivocal language . Ukraine is now the third biggest nuclear power in the world .
 Russia encouraged to move forward as a consequence of a toothless document . Russia would not be looking at the devastation wrought by a Russia's actions .
 Kuchma will be judged very harshly by history in agreeing to such weak terms, says historian . Kuchmma will not be judged by history.
 Ukraine had only begun to open its eyes 3 years earlier after decades of complete isolation from the world . The word of these two super-powers was as good as gold and their good intentions were beyond question .
 The western partners fully recognized Ukraine's naivete and took advantage of it by oral assurances that the language of the memorandum would guarantee Ukraine's security .
 Had Kuchma held out for NATO membership, it is likely that he would have received it .
 Bill Clinton and John Major are silent while John Major is silent . In either instance the price is being paid in blood .
 Ukraine must never again rely on anybody's assurances for its security, says Ukraine . Ukraine must not rely on anyone's assurances.