FA essay on Putin losing control of nationalists should have been written 3 years ago . FA essay on the Russian leader should be written three years ago, according to the article .
 Russian Senate names nine main threats to Russia – every single one is provably self-inflicted .
 Gudkov and Pastukhov on reversion to the Soviet, while Russia promotes bitcoin in Transnistria, it aims to ban it in Russia .
Fedyk on Russian Zapad 2017 play to assume control of Belarus military . Fedyk has been in charge of the Belarus military since 2009 .
 Poroshenko attends PACE summit in Strasbourg . He presents an excellent speech .
 Multiple IMINT from Kyiv Arms & Security 2017 show . Yastreb FAB-250 LGB kit, Karasyuk 122mm Precision Guided Artillery Projectile, inertially guided 152mm Kvitnik PGAP variant, 80K6T AESA, Arsenal
 Igor Girkin of Slavyansk fame tells media of heavy Russian body count in Syria . Girkin says he is proud of his work in Russia .
 LRM promotes female friend to key propaganda role, trial of clueless assassins continues . L RM promotes female friends to key role in propaganda role .
 Kaspersky backdoor discovered by Israelis during penetration of Russian sites . Israelis discovered the backdoor during penetration by Israelis .
 Cyberwarfare has made traditional rules governing armed conflict irrelevant. Beyond elections, cyberwarfare is making traditional rules irrelevant .
 Russia has targeted NATO soldiers’ smartphones in order to gain information about troop activity and intimidate soldiers, it has emerged . It has emerged that Russia has been targeting soldiers' smartphones to get information .
 The response to cybercrimes must be international and must be broad-based . Social media must be regulated to guard electrical grid and electoral systems . The response must bebroad-based, ranging from regulating social media to guarding electrical grid .
 NATO was called into being only after successive communist coups in Eastern Europe . The founding of NATO itself was only after the first communist coup .
 The ban serves to corroborate reports of Russian troops’ activity denied by the Kremlin . The ban “confirms the value, and the power, of open-source research,’ says Nimmo .
 The draft of the law would prohibit Russian professional military personnel from uploading to the internet . The law would go into effect in January 2018, according to the initial draft .
 The Kremlin “knows this is a problem that they face, and they’re grasping at how to deal with it,’ says Brookie .
In the past, the private posts of Russian soldiers have made public the details of troop movements in Ukraine and Syria . Nimmo described how, in thepast, the posts have been made public . The private posts have also made public.
 The DFRLab and Bellingcat leveraged the publicly available information to reveal a cohesive picture of Russian military activity abroad .
 A report by the DFRLab, Hiding in Plain Sight, presented evidence to the contrary . Russian President Vladimir Putin denied reports of Russian military involvement in the invasion of Ukraine .
 The report accumulated open-source research, largely consisting of information available on the social media platforms of Russian soldiers in Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin hasn't stopped the anti-Matilda campaign . The fact that Putin hasn’t stopped the campaign reveals a paradox at the heart of his authoritarian rule .
 Moscow's case against Kirill Serebrennikov is not the sideshow many assume, Vladimir Pastukhov says .
 The Kremlin's approach to the intelligentsia marks a fundamental and even dangerous change in the Kremlin’s approach. Instead, it marks the very possibility of any kind of aesthetic freedom in Russia .
 The question is ‘not abstract but very concrete’ and requires consideration of the motives of particular individuals in particular government agencies .
 Serebrennikov's case is a classic example of the legal arbitrariness of the Putin era, Pastukhov says . He says it says more about where the Kremlin is heading than many acknowledge .
 The charges against the director reflect a distortion of the law itself, a perversion of what the statutes actually say . More evidence may come out in the trial.
 This is not a case of some “abstract confict of the spirit and the letter of the law’s law. This is a conscious use of a law that is not at all appropriate, says the author .
 Serebrennikov may be guilty of many things, including misuse of funds or not paying his taxes . There is no possibility that he engaged in fraud, but he may have engaged in a fraud .
 "In long-term historical perspective, it is more dangerous than the ante-diluvian Stalinist model," he says . The current version of terror is less bloody, he adds .
 The fabric of law is being destroyed, says CNN's John Sutter . "Today, the very fabric of Law is beingdestroy," he says .
 The Serebrennikov case is to be found in another place, Pastukhov argues . But the most important lesson of the Serebrannikov case, he says, is to come from another place .
 historian says Serebrennikov is “suffering not for the law or for politics but for aesthetics. In reality, he says, he is ‘suffering for aesthetics’ and not for law .
 The artist's non-traditional art became aesthetically alien to the powers that be, he says . He had to be suppressed via the use of the criminal code .
 It demanded loyalty from those artists it supported but did not dictate the content of the work . It was not required to dictate what the work was done .
 Russian society's "most marginal and reactionary elements" were forced to stylize their worldview, he says . That is because, he argues, they gained support from “the most marginal and conservative elements of Russian society, he said .
 Under new conditions, the powers weren't prepared to allow an artist to do what he or she wanted on government money .
 "The government has sent a signal that it will no longer be indifferent" about what is on stage, Pastukhov says .
 The relative freedom of the first two “post-communist decades is coming to an end’s end, says the author .
At least in the next months and years, they will resemble “the ideological and aesthetic standards’ many will remember from Soviet times .
 The relative paucity of detentions in Moscow during the anti-Putin Navalny demonstrations has generated a lively discussion as to why the Kremlin didn’t come down harder .
 Yekatarina Vinokurova of Znak and Dmitry Travin of St. St. Petersburg are commentators . They are the two commentators for the St.
 Political scientist Abbas Gallyamov says authorities may have reacted as they did because they saw that the latest demonstrations attracted far fewer people than earlier . He says they may have felt that they were "winners" and could afford to be generous .
 Authorities have a limited number of instruments for reacting to any public manifestation, repression or non-repression, he says . What is disturbing, he continues, is that the authorities have such a limited amount of instruments .
 Yevgeny Minchenko, head of the International Institute for Political Expertise, agrees that the Kremlin's response reflected the smaller number of protests as well as problems within Navalny’s own command .
 The fact that there was so much variance in the ways officials reacted shows that no common approach was planned in the Kremlin .
 Konstantin Kalachev of the Political Expertise Group said that the softer approach reflected an appreciation within the Kremlin that harsh measures would only lead to further radicalization and the growth of the opposition .
 He says authorities would have acted exactly the opposite to the way they did in Moscow and a softer one elsewhere . He says if the authorities were really afraid of a challenge, they would have taken a hard line .
 The Kremlin showed its confidence that everything is under control . But the Kremlin showed it is still in control .
 Putin doesn't see Navalny as a competitor or a threat, Travin says . Putin doesn’t see navalny as competitor or threat.
 The Kremlin is not a single thing but a collection of competing groups who make use of whatever they can to advance their interests . One cannot understand what happened, he suggests .
 Navalny can be used by some because he threatens others or at least can be made to look that way .
 Navalny has only minimal impact on that goal, he can be allowed to function, he says . He has proven incapable of mobilizing the population for something rather than just against corruption .
 If it were otherwise, he would not have been sentenced to 20 days but perhaps to 20 years . He would have been jailed for 20 days or 20 years.
 In absence of specific goals, his protest will peter out just as others have over the last two decades . But in the absence of goals, he will continue to protest .
 Travin says Navalny's position has been weakened by what occurred last Saturday . He says one can conclude, that Navalny’s position is weakened.
 At some point that may grow into a political movement but not immediately, the commentator suggests . The commentator suggests that there may be a potential political movement .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin warned about the risks of cryptocurrencies on Tuesday . He indicated regulators in Moscow were ready to crack down on the boom .
 Software produced by Microsoft Corp has been acquired by state organizations and firms in Russia and Crimea . U.S-based companies are not allowed to do business with them .
 The carrier's long delayed deep refit and modernization program has had its budget slashed in half . The carrier’s long delayed refit program has put in question its future relevance .
 The Ratnik-3 is a future infantry combat suit with a built-in exoskeleton, state-of-the-art reconnaissance and weaponry . Now, a nuclear-resistant watch .
 At the same time, the Zapad drills had important political and informational overtones aimed directly at the West . The Zapad drill was held in the United States at the time .
 The military tasks accomplished within the scope of Zapad 2017 were typical for maneuvers of such scale .
 The Russian military top brass was using the joint drills to check the readiness of the Belarusian army to act under the command of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces .
 The same compatibility and chain-of-command checks were carried out during the joint Russian-Belarusian operational exercise Union Shield 2015 .
 The Russian side specifically sought to evaluate how smoothly the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation could bypass pre-existing layers of command and control . Zapad 2017 and Union Shield 2015 before it, the Russian side said .
 The Russian General Staff would need to be certain that all its orders will be carried without question by Belarusian soldiers . It highlights the thinking in Moscow that in the event of an offensive operation in the western strategic direction, the Russian general staff would be certain .
 Russian commanders also want to be sure they will not encounter any obstacles or push back from individual patriotically-minded Belarusian military leaders .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed his gratitude to his Moldovan counterpart Igor Dodon for his efforts to boost relations between the two countries .
 Russia's hybrid military forces attacked Ukrainian army positions in Donbas 15 times in the past 24 hours . Four Ukrainian soldiers were reported wounded in action .
 Ukrainian civil volunteer Yuriy Mysyagin claims an enemy reconnaissance group has been destroyed at the Svitlodarska Duha bulge in Donbas .
 Oleksandr Turchynov has said that the latest samples of weapons and military equipment will soon be used on the front line .
 Kyiv hosts the XIV International specialized exhibition ‘Arms and Security – 2017’ in Kyiv . The XIV International Special Exhibition is held in the city of Kyiv.
 The tests showed that a half of items failed to meet the requirements for protection classes .
 It permitted to avoid supply of bad items for the Armed Forces and other security institutions of Ukraine .
This year, the university laboratory can become the single laboratory in Ukraine issuing the quality certificates under NATO standards to defence industry manufacturers . This year, Ukraine's university laboratory will be one of the single laboratories in Ukraine .
 If we compare first Ukrainian anti-tank systems Stuhna and Korsar and their current versions, we'll see the difference .
Air defence equipment, anti-tank equipment, electronic warfare equipment, unmanned aerial vehicles, will boost combat capabilities of our Armed Forces, the Minister informed .
 National Police of Ukraine will purchase professional communication systems from Turkey's leading defense company Aselsan . The National Police will purchase the systems from the Turkish defense company .
 Ukraine is sending to Krasnodar a group of doctors to check on the health condition of an illegally detained 19-year-old Pavol Hryb . Despite Russia not having issued a relevant permission, that&rsquo;s.
 Investors from Singapore and the United States plan to invest about US$300 million in the construction of two vegetable oil extraction plants, a grain terminal, and a grain terminals .
 The Association of the United States Army’s Annual Meeting is the largest landpower exposition and professional development forum in North America .
 The Annual Meeting is designed to deliver the Army’s message by highlighting the capabilities of Army organizations and presenting a wide range of products and services .
 AUSA provides informative and relevant presentations on the state of the Army, panel discussions and seminars on pertinent military and national security subjects . AUSA accomplishes this task throughout the entire event .
 Ukrainian military experts and visitors of the Ukrainian stand at the AUSA 2017 saw promising Ukrainian armored vehicles, including BTR-4 8×8 wheeled armoured personnel carrier and updated Phantom-2 unmanned tactical multipurpose vehicle .
 Spectechnoexport, Promoboronexport, Progress, Ukroboronservice and Ukrinmash are among the names of the companies involved .
 The Ukrainian military industry is increasingly getting integrated into the Western model . All the equipment has been tested in combat conditions .
 Domestic machinery and weapons are officially represented by the Ukroboronprom State Concern . Domestic machinery, weapons and weapons is officially represented.
 The Phantom-2 unmanned tactical multipurpose vehicle was unveiled at the AUSA 2017 Annual Meeting & Exposition . The vehicle provides more firepower and a stand-off capability .
 The ‘Phantom-2’ is based on 8×8 wheeled chassis and is designed to support tactical level operations on the battlefield . The “Phantom’s’ “ Phantom- 2’ has been designed to be
This modification allows for bigger payloads and, correspondingly, for more powerful weapons on top of the carrier . This modification allows the carrier to carry more powerful payloads .
 One of the key features of the Phantom is its anti-tank missile system, called Barrier . Another is its new rocket launcher turret for RS-80 rockets .
 The ‘Phantom-2’ is equipped with a remote weapon station that can carry a weapon fit as per an operator’s requirements . One such configuration features an armed with a 30mm cannon. Also, the ‘ Phantom- 2’
 The UGV is intended to perform a variety of tasks in complex urban environments . UGV was built in the 1970s and is based in New York City .
 Its mission capabilities include combat, reconnaissance, ammunition transportation to forward operating bases, and evacuation of wounded soldiers from the battlefield . Its mission capability includes combat and reconnaissance, and ammunition transportation .
UkrOboronProm has taken the opportunity at the Arms and Security exhibition to unveil a prototype wheeled armoured fighting vehicle . The BTR-4MV1 is presently known as the B TR-4V1 .
 The new BTR-4MV1 is the latest generation of 8×8 APC armoured personnel carrier . It was developed and produced by the Kharkiv Morozov Machine Building Design Bureau .
 It differs from the previous versions mostly in a modified configuration of the vehicle’s hull . It makes it possible to install additional types of protection to reach the fourth and fifth protection levels .
 The hull rear is fitted with a ramp that enables troopers to enter and leave the vehicle . It also enables the armoured personnel carrier to transport various large-size cargoes, including additional ammunition, spare parts, etc.
 President Donald Trump is expected this week to ‘decertify’ the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action . The agreement reached in 2015 by the United States and five other international powers is not in America’s national interest .
Senior U.S. officials previewed a new offensive against Iranian-backed Hezbollah . They claim the group aspires to conduct attacks against the United States homeland .
 The lira erased gains against the dollar after the White House backed its ambassador’s decision to suspend visas from the country . A Turkish court convicted in absentia a journalist from The Wall Street Journal .
 Air Force Central Command figures show that more bombs are being dropped than in nearly seven years . More bombs are dropped than have been in almost seven years, figures show .
Data stolen in a hack last year was a plan to remove the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un . It was referred to as the “decapitation plan’s” plan .
 Hyon Song-wol is the leader of the Moranbong Band . He was falsely rumored to have been executed for starring in a pornographic video .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin promised German Foreign Minister that turbines would not end up in Crimea . The turbines were produced on factory jointly owned by Siemens and the Russian company Power Machines .
 Siemens claimed it had been duped by its Russian partner OAO Technopromexport .
Siemens chose to ignore the obvious. We decided to fact-check his statements with the help of our open-source investigation .
 Catalonia’s leader spoke of new republic but also raised prospect of delay for dialogue with Spain .
 The decision will do much to delay a looming constitutional crisis as well as to calm European nerves . While he reasserted the region’s right to independence, his decision will be delayed .
 The world marks the centenary of the Russian Revolution this autumn . The international media will embrace all things Bolshevik this autumn.
 Audiences can expect everything from gushing feature articles about Soviet cinematography to edgy op-eds on the place of propaganda posters in twentieth-century art .
 Ukraine’s 1917–21 statehood bid and its considerable relevance to the geopolitical tensions of today . We are unlikely to see a serious analysis of Ukraine's 1917-21 state bid .
 Raytheon Missile Systems has presented its offering for the U.S. Army’s Long-Range Precision Fires program, a precision-guided missile aptly named DeepStrike .
 The weapon is competing against an alternative by Lockheed Martin to succeed Lockheed’s MGM-140 Army Tactical Missile System . The weapon was developed in the 1980s .
Raytheon and Lockheed were awarded contracts in May to develop competing prototypes under a 34-month LRPF technology maturation and risk-reduction phase . Raytheon was awarded contracts to develop prototypes in May .
 Raytheon presented a mockup of the DeepStrike missile at the Association of the United States Army exposition in Washington this week .
DeepStrike has passed through an initial design review and the prototype is now being developed for first flight in 2019 . Raytheon's advanced land warfare systems group said during an Oct. interview that DeepStrike has been developed for the first flight .
 The goal of the LRPF program is to field a smaller, longer, longer range Atacms successor . The goal is toField a larger, longer-range Atacm successor .
 The TMRR phase of the program will culminate in a live-fire test of one prototype missile . The test is probably at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico .
 The Russian cybersecurity firm is in the spotlight because of suspicions its products facilitate espionage . The firm's products are suspected to have been used for espionage .
 President Trump said he wanted what amounted to a nearly tenfold increase in the U.S. nuclear arsenal in a meeting with military leaders this summer .
 Former Trump foreign policy adviser Carter Page says he is going to plead the Fifth Amendment to keep from turning over documents the Senate Intelligence committee requested . Page says the documents are “beyond the charter” of the inquiry .