 Russia's Ambiguous Warfare and Implications for the U.S. Marine Corps. Mary Ellen Connell and Ryan Evans Abstract.
 The Russian Federation used ambiguous warfare strategies to annex Crimea in 2014 and propagate Ukrainian instability . The Russian government used ambiguous Warfare strategies to take Crimea in Crimea .
 Russian forces on the ground in Ukraine unofficially coordinated with pro-Russian separatists to conduct psychological operations, intimidation, and bribery among the population to undermine nationalist resistance .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization traditionally uses to identify the need for the cooperative defense of a member nation . Illustrating warfare’s expanding reach, these activities obscure the factors that the organization uses .
 A CNAorganized meeting of experts captures these topics and their implications on the U.S. government’s current warfighting strategy .
 “little green men’s” drove out all elements and symbols of Ukrainian authority . ‘Little green men,’ —strongly suspected to be Russian Federation soldiers—surged into Crimea and drove out. ‘little greenMen’
 Mary Ellen Connell is a research scientist with CNA’s Center for Strategic Studies . She is a graduate of the National War College . The research scientist is a researcher at the CNA's Center for strategic Studies .
 Ryan Evans is a research analyst at CNA’s Center for Strategic Studies . Evans is the founder and editor in chief of War on the Rocks .
 Gerasimov Doctrine involves rapidly generating highly trained and disciplined forces . They enter the battlespace out of uniform and in coordination with local supporters, using psychological operations, intimidation, and bribery .
 The U.S. Marines and Russian Federation forces are closely observing Russia’s use of ambiguous warfare .
 The Corps must also understand the lessons from Crimea and Ukraine and how other adversaries might militarily adapt as a result of Russia’s success .
 Connell and Evans 31 MCU Journal nonstate belligerent actor deploys troops and proxies in a deceptive and confusing manner with the intent of achieving political and military effects . Connell, Evans 31MCU Journal, was the first person to take part in Ukraine's 2014 annexation of Crimea
 Russia’s actions in Crimea and Ukraine clearly align with this concept, according to experts . Participants pointed out it was not a new concept for Russia .
 The events in Crimea and Ukraine were foreshadowed by an article published by the Russian Chief of the General Staff Valery Gerasimov .
 In the 21st century we have seen a tendency toward blurring the lines between the states of war and peace . In the 20th century, the lines have been blurring.
 The role of nonmilitary means of achieving political and strategic goals has grown . In many cases, they have exceeded the power of force of weapons in their effectiveness .
 The focus of applied methods of conflict has altered in the direction of the broad use of political, economic, informational, humanitarian, and other nonmilitary measures . The focus has been changed in coordination with the protest potential of the population, says author .
 All this is supplemented by military means of a concealed character, including carrying out actions of informational conflict and actions of special-operations forces .
 Experts in the CNA discussion agreed that the Gerasimov Doctrine evolved out of necessity, driven by Russian vulnerability rather than strength .
 In December 2014, President Vladimir Putin signed the revised Russian Military Doctrine . It identifies NATO and its enlargement as a fundamental threat to the Russian homeland .
 The Gerasimov Doctrine advocates the use of a modern version of partisan warfare that targets an adversary’s weaknesses and avoids direct, overt confrontations .
 The nonmilitary measures in Gerasimov’s doctrine include efforts to shape the political, economic, and social landscapes of the adversarial state through subversion, espionage, propaganda and cyberattacks .
 The Soviet doctrine of denial and deception keeps opponents wondering and hesitating by resolutely denying Russian involvement .
 In Ukraine, for example, third-party deniable agents included pro-Russian loyalists and local paramilitary commanders . Local gangsters spotted an opportunity for profit and power .
 In the emergence phase, Russia uses ethnic and pro-Russian populations within the target state to foment protests and resistance to the government .
 Potentially, these actions initiate tension in the target country by generating backlash and discrimination against ethnic Russians by the government .
 Russia activates a self-reinforcing mechanism to escalate conflict. In essence, Russia activates the self- reinforcing mechanisms to escalate conflicts .
 In the sharpening phase, Russia uses economic warfare and political pressure to intimidate, coerce, punish, and undermine governments in target states to further weaken them . Russia is using economic warfare, political pressure and economic warfare to intimidate.
 Russia uses ambiguous military and security personnel to infiltrate the target country and activate criminal networks to further foment unrest and ignite open conflict . In the initiating phase, Russia using ambiguous military, security personnel.
 The military isolates government positions, seizes key terrain, and destroys the defense and security apparatuses of the target country . In the crisis phase, the military isolate government positions.
 In the resolution phase, Russia conducts information operations to deny involvement and sow doubt and discord in the minds of foreign governments about the developing situation and possible responses . In the Resolution phase, Russian information operations are conducted to deny any involvement .
 The restoration phase concludes the offensive . Russia consolidates its gains within the target country, takes actions to de-escalate the conflict . Russia installs a government amenable to Russian influence .
 ambiguous warfare requires the deliberate integration of military and nonmilitary forces . While it is a less expensive form of warfare than open war, it does not always lead to a clear military outcome .
 Russia has maintained a carefully calibrated balance between low-intensity, ambiguous actions and credible, high-intensity threats . Another expert commented that credible escalation dominance is key to making ambiguous warfare work .
 Russia's military has put Gerasimov’s ideas to good practice in Crimea and Ukraine . But overwhelming success in Crimea has not been replicated in eastern Ukraine to date .
 Russia's Military and Special Forces met to discuss Gerasimov’s Doctrine . Meeting participants discussed the structure of the Russian military generally, as well as its special forces .
 nuclear weapons still play a central role in Russia’s strategic thinking, says one expert . Russia has put forth a significant threat as part of the fourth phase of ambiguous warfare .
 Russia maintains a considerable military force with a sizeable reserve . Russia also maintains a sizeable military force .
 In less than one week, Russia could mobilize about one army and one airborne brigade . One expert noted that in less than a week, one army could mobilize one brigade .
 Russia's military is spread thin over the longest land border of any single country . That said, however, Russia’s military is spreading thin over any country .
Experts discussed how Russia's military is aligned into different military districts . As such, they discussed how the military isaligned into different districts .
 The Western District has a large share of Russia’s air force and air defense assets arrayed against possible NATO air threats .
 Southern District forces are based in the volatile Caucasus region, which includes Chechnya, Dagestan, and Ingushetia .
 Russians may now consider Crimea to be part of the Southern Military district . The United States does not recognize the incorporation of Crimea into the Russian Federation .
 Eastern District forces protect the largely unpopulated eastern flank of Russia against potential threats from China .
 The Central Asia District largely serves as Russia’s strategic reserve . It is Russia's strategic reserve.
 This posture provides Russia's military with a limited ability to mass forces in any one direction without leaving gaps in the nation’s defense elsewhere . This posture gives Russia a limited capability to mass force in any direction .
 The Russian armed forces find it an attractive option to mitigate the impact of overextended border defenses . ambiguous warfare does not require the higher resource demands of a sustained conventional campaign .
 Russia does not think about employing its military forces in terms of Services, such as army, navy, or special operations forces . One expert noted that, unlike the West, Russia doesn't think about using military forces .
 Rather, its forces are primarily geared toward “fighting power” or “political impact’s. Rather, they use organizational constructs that place fighting power in support of political impact, according to CNN .
 The Spetsnaz played a significant role in the government's actions in Crimea and Ukraine . It is one of Russia’s major forces for political impact .
 The Spetsnaz have historically conducted deep reconnaissance and nuclear missions, as well as disrupted adversary command and control structures in the context of large-scale conventional warfare .
 More recently, the force has gone through a painful but successful adaptation process to fight small wars more effectively . The force has also gone through the painful but ultimately successful adaptations process .
 In the past, the Russian military lacked a doctrinal base for small wars . In the wake of significant challenges in Russia’s wars in Afghanistan and Chechnya, the military purposely evolved the Spetsnaz .
 Russia created its own special operations command in 2012 . Komanda Spetsialnogo Naznacheniya was given oversight of the Spetsnaz for a time .
 The 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics and threats of terrorism were used to justify a major expansion of the Spetsnaz . All of its units were brought to full strength .
 The Spetsnaz may be the GRU's most important political asset to their risk-taking organization . The GRU is known for employing unorthodox agents, such as private sector individuals, warlords, mercenaries and organized crime syndicates .
 All Spetsnaz are Tier 1 operators similar to personnel in U.S. military units, including the Army's Delta Force, the Navy's Seal Team 6, and the Marine Corps’ Special Operations Command . All present at the discussion agreed that not all Sp
 In essence, these special purpose forces closely resemble U.S. light infantry intervention forces .
 Russia’s Crimea operation in late February 2014, apparently long considered a viable military option, went relatively smoothly . Russia's Current and Future Application of the Gerasimov Doctrine of the Crimea Crimea operation went relatively smooth .
 Russia’s normal resupply activities for its naval base leased in Sevastopol formed a convenient cover for the insertion of elite forces and equipment . Russia's naval base is leased by the Russian military in SevASTopol .
 Russian forces maintain strict radio silence, thus foiling NATO monitoring efforts . Russian forces maintained strict radio Silence .
 Ukrainian troops isolated Ukrainian bases by cutting communications and disorganizing the Ukrainian troops’ support systems .
 Russia applied information warfare techniques to persuade Ukrainian forces to switch sides . Simultaneously, Russia used information warfare tactics to persuade Ukraine forces to turn sides .
 Russia's operations in Crimea resulted in the annexation of key terrain for the Russian military at very low cost . Ultimately, Russia’s operation in Crimea led to the annexation. The annexation of Crimea was a low cost.
 The operations surprised the West and served as a wake-up call regarding Russia’s future intentions in the region. Certainly, these operations surprised.
 In April 2014, a pro-Russian insurgency erupted and quickly intensified within the Donbass coal mining region in Ukraine . The insurgency began in April 2014 .
 Donbass borders the Russian Federation and most of the population speaks Russian . The heartland of former Ukrainian president Viktor F Yanukovich is Donbass .
 Russian GRU officers took control of government institutions and infrastructure in Luhansk and Donetsk . They proclaimed the cities independent people’s republics .
Experts doubt it went exacdy as planned. Despite many factors favoring Moscow’s design for the Donbass operation .
 The Russians found less support for the separatist agenda in Donbass than they had expected .
 The deniable agents who first assumed power in the Luhansk and Donetsk People’s Republics were harsh, erratic administrators who often alienated the local population .
 Donbass residents able to escape the fighting did so by either going to Russia or moving to safer areas in Ukraine .
 Military coordination among separatists was poor, and they used sophisticated Russian-supplied equipment recklessly, as seen in the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight MFU 7 on 17 July 2014 .
 Moscow massing 40,000 troops on the Russian side of the border. Moscow heightened uncertainty and temporarily paralyzed decision making within the Kiev government . Moscow also deterring the West from offering significant military aid to Ukraine .
 Russian forces crossed the border at will, frequently under the cover of white-painted humanitarian convoys .
 Ukrainian military regrouped, closed in on separatist strongholds in Donbass, and reclaimed 65 towns and villages . In August 2014, the Ukrainian military closed in, and regained 65 towns, villages .
 The Russians were forced to take on more visible roles to prevent the defeat of the self-proclaimed republics . At that point, the Russian government was forced to do more to prevent defeat .
 Moscow continues to deny Russian military presence in eastern Ukraine . The Russian-speaking population needed to be rescued from right-wing fascist extremists and chaos .
 Representatives from Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the Donetsk People's Republic, and the Luhansk People’s Republic signed a cease-fire protocol known as Minsk I It failed .
 In February 2015, a second cease-fire agreement known as Minsk II was negotiated under OSCE auspices . It remains imperfectly observed, though it is still imperfectly recognized .
 Ukraine is unable to control its border with Russia, and Russia continues to resupply the separatists . Ukraine has been unable to take control of its border.
 Some experts predicted further escalation of tensions in the coming months . Russia's renewed push to create a land bridge to Crimea is a prelude to Russia’s renewed push .
 Others believed that Russia does not have the wherewithal to expand the conflict zone substantially but will continue engaging in low-intensity conflict in the Donbass region .
 Russian separatists not only abduct torture, assassinate, kill en masse, rape, and execute prisoners . They also record their activities and post the videos on the Internet .
 Ground maneuver units employ a combination of contract and irregular forces . The ground maneuver units are called ground maneuver Units .
 The T-90’s reactive armor deters most singlewarhead infantry-fired antitank weapons used by NATO forces . The armored raids are prevalent on the dispersed battlefield .
 These weapons become more effective when used in combination with remotely piloted vehicles’ target acquisition capabilities . These weapons can be used to target targets and target acquisition capability .
 Russian-sponsored operations in neighboring lands have been more successful with support from large ethnic Russian populations . But they have fallen short in areas where those conditions do not exist .
 Moscow may have similar plans for other former Soviet states . With operations in Ukraine planned and prepared well in advance, Moscow may be prepared well .
 Russia's residual fear of NATO means the government avoids a blatant Article V trigger . Russia’s residual fears of NATO mean the government avoided a blatant trigger .
 Russia’s lack of traditional state power should not be equated to a lack of serious threat . Ambiguous warfare stems from this weakness, but Russia's lack of state power shouldn't be attributed to this weakness .
 A nation-states’ national defense depends on credible, integrated military and security forces . The U.S. military is the nation’s national defense.
 Ukraine has underfunded its military since the end of the Cold War, failed to modernize its forces, and constantly hobbled its own security efforts by tolerating corruption .
 Additionally, steps taken to eliminate conscription negatively impacted military morale and effectiveness . The steps were also taken to reduce conscription .
 Potential target states should foster collaboration, cooperation, and connectivity among their own military and security forces, but also allied forces . Potential targets should foster cooperation, cooperation and connectivity .
 Russia's political stability requires integration of Russian descendants and immigrants into the national identity .
 Dissention develops among pro-Russian population that creates an entry point for Moscow to influence the internal affairs of neighboring states .
 Russia's Next Moves Russia aspires to replace the current Western-dominated world order with one in which great powers divide the world into internationally recognized spheres of influence .
 Seizing pieces of Ukraine will probably not be enough to achieve this goal. Seizing parts of Ukraine won't be enough for Ukraine's goal, according to experts .
 Russia is likely to shift its aggression toward the Baltic States and Black Sea region, experts say . In the near term, experts agree that Russia will shift its aggressiveness toward the region .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were part of the former Soviet Union . The Baltic States are home to sizable Russian-speaking populaConnell and Evans 39 MCU Journal tions .
 Russian aggression would likely take the form of ambiguous, destabilizing operations to avoid triggering NATO’s Article V . This strategy sows doubt in the minds of the Baltic States about Western resolve to defend them .
 Baltic republics joined NATO in 2004. They were encouraged to develop niche military specialties rather than worry about territorial defense . The international community thought it was unnecessary .
 Each nation's government is addressing this mistake, but finding a solution will take time . Each nation’s government is address this mistake.
 The national armed forces of Lithuania have no current mandate to intervene in internal affairs . The police and the ministry of interior of the Republic of Lithuania share responsibility for domestic security .
 Lithuania's efforts to develop a more comprehensive defense plan involve coordinating all national bodies of executive power . Lithuania’s efforts to developing a more complete defense plan include coordinating all National bodies of Executive power .
 A January 2015 pamphlet written by the Lithuanian Ministry of Defense titled How to Act in Extreme Situations or Instances of War even instructed Lithuanians on surviving foreign occupation and organizing nonviolent resistance .
 Black Sea Region Russia’s seizure of Crimea and its continuance of military operations in eastern Ukraine changed the strategic balance in the Black Sea region .
 Russia can fully exploit Crimea and its former Ukrainian air bases, using both as a platform to project power . Moscow's military presence is no longer constrained by former legal agreements with Ukraine .
 The Russian Defense Ministry has access to a base in Russia to deploy conventional and nuclear capabilities . Tupolev TU-22M3 Backfire-C medium-range bombers and Iskander-M short-range ballistic missile systems to the peninsula .
 The Russian Black Sea Fleet in Sevastopol will add six new frigates, six new submarines, several smaller naval vessels, and possibly a Mistral-class amphibious assault ship .
 The fleet and other military units enhance Crimean antiship and antiaircraft capabilities . The fleet is based in Crimea, Crimea, and the Crimean Republic .
 Russia’s air defense systems in Crimea reach nearly half of the Black Sea . surface attack systems reach almost all of theBlack Sea area .
 These military systems create a strong line of defense for the Russian homeland . The Russian military system is designed to protect the nation's security .
 A Russian military build-up of this magnitude on the northern shore of the Black Sea would be of great concern to Turkey . Historically, a Russian military building-up on the north shore would be a great concern .
 The prospect of Russian-Turkish energy collaboration may prove a critical factor toward mitigating Turkish concerns . The prospect may prove to be critical factor to mitigate Turkish concerns.
 Russian companies are investing in shipping companies and port facilities on the Turkish Black Sea coast . In contrast, Russian companies have invested in shipping firms and facilities on Turkish coast .
 Romania and Bulgaria and Moldova and Georgia look to NATO and the European Union for security support because they are also targeted by active Russian influence operations .
 Romania’s foreign minister, Titus Corlajean, openly expressed concern over Russian pursuits in the region .
 Bulgaria depends heavily on Russian energy supplies and military equipment maintenance . The country was subject to intense Russian pressure to go forward with its long-planned role as the entry point for the South Stream pipeline .
 The EU demanded Bulgaria suspend construction on the pipeline while it investigated the way contracts were awarded . Russia announced that the South Stream would not be built .
 Moscow hobbles Moldova and Ukraine by controlling pro-Russian enclave of Transnistria and trammels Georgia . Moscow formally controls foreign and security affairs of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Transnistria, Abkhazia, and South Ossetia are also focal points for Russia-linked organized crime in the region . Local gangsters meld with Russian-backed forces to metastasize organized crime, Ukraine says .
Social and political evolution suggests that we can anticipate further strengthening and utilization of criminal networks around the Black Sea littoral region . This social and political evolve suggests we can expect further strengthening of criminal network around Black Sea .
 The Gerasimov Doctrine has been applied to ambiguous warfare in Crimea and Ukraine . The Marine Corps must be able to view the strategy more conceptually .
 The ongoing conflict in eastern Ukraine has shown that ambiguous warfare can be highly kinetic and extremely intense . The assembled experts noted that battalion-size forces have been rendered combat ineffective in a single wave of artillery strikes .
 Moscow has displayed its ability to launch covert and overt information operations on a mass scale to global, regional, and local audiences .
 It has shown the ability to rapidly spread carefully crafted lies and disinformation to generate discord at local and international levels . It has also shown how quickly it can quickly spread lies and misinformation to create discord .
 Marines must begin framing Military Information Support Operations by answering how the Corps will counter hostile messaging in an ambiguous warfare theater . Marines must overcome political and strategic decisions that limit and constrict the use of Military Information support Operations on the battlefield .
Experts agreed that nation-states might maintain a persistent presence in at-risk countries as one way of sensing the application of Gerasimov's concepts .
 The complicated network of ambiguous actors Russia employed in Crimea and Ukraine intertwined irregular and proxy forces, special forces, militias, criminal syndicates, and unidentified military forces .
Future adversaries will challenge and exploit U.S. rules of engagement by incorporating nonofficial and official forces. These relationships necessitate an examination of how future adversaries will exploit and exploit the United States.
 Russia’s use of population shaping measures before the hostilities phase included leveraging Russian-speaking populations in target countries . Russia's use ofPopulation shaping measures in the past included leveraging Russia's population in target nations .
 A melange of ambiguous actors, including special forces, militias, and criminals, is part of Russia’s ambiguous warfare strategy . It is also part of a deliberate disinformation and misinformation about events.
 In addition, reactive armor, horrific violence, and advanced munitions were particularly effective tactics on the ground to intimidate and subdue local populations .
Experts considered how these elements of Russia’s strategy and tactics could be generalized to other regions of the world . They could be employed by potential U.S. adversaries, such as China and Iran, they said .
 The implications of Russia’s ambiguous approach are mostly at the Marine Corps’ strategic level . Russia's ambiguous approach is mostly at a Marine Corps strategic level.
 The actions of Russia’s panoply of forces are no less ambiguous than other forces have faced during the insurgencies in Iraq and Afghanistan .
Panel participants felt that the basic principles of Marine Corps warfighting remain valid in this kind of environment . As such, panel participants said, they felt that basic principles remain valid .
 The situation in Ukraine looks significantly different from Iraq or Afghanistan, says Connell and Evans 43 MCU Journal .
 Marines consider how to apply their warfighting principles on a battlefield that may include the instantaneous loss of air, fire, and information superiority .
 A CNA report published in 2015 titled Russia's ‘Ambiguous Warfare’ and Implications for the U.S. Marine Corps, coauthored by Mary Ellen Connell and Ryan Evans .
 CNA followed the Chatham House Rule of nonattribution to encourage a candid exchange of ideas . It summarizes a discussion among experienced regional specialists, senior military officers, and internationally renowned security experts .
 Experts did not quote official sources during the meeting . supplemental information has been added to expand readers’ purviews .
 Russia began staging logistical support for military operations in the Donbass region of eastern Ukraine at least as early as December 2014 . Russia has already staged logistical support in the region .
 Article V of the Washington Treaty signed in 1949 establishes that NATO will view an attack on one NATO nation-state as an attack . NATO will see an attack against one nation- state as a attack on all members .
 The NATO Security Council strives for peace . NATO nations may come to the defense of other members, the council says .
 A narrow strip of land bound between the Dniester River and the Ukrainian border . Transnistria initially declared its independence from Moldova in 1990, but has never been recognized by the international community .
 A 2006 referendum brought the issue to bear again, with the additional intention to join Russia . The issue was brought back again in a 2006 referendum .