 Ukraine is gearing up for a presidential election that will set its course for the next five years . The country's relations with Russia are likely to be key to the country's future .
 Zelensky topped this poll, but the majority suggest an eventual run-off between Poroshenko and Tymoshenko . Zelenksy and other candidates most likely seeking to increase their visibility ahead of the parliamentary election later this year .
 Zelensky's popularity has increased in recent years . The possibility of a victory can not be ruled out, following the increase in his popularity .
 It is important to consider what a Poroshenko, Tymoshenko or a Zelensky victory could mean for the countrys engagement with Russia . It is also important to see if the election will bring any change to the ground reality in the country .
 Poroshenko came into power following the 2014 revolution, which saw Victor Yanukovychs Russia-friendly government ousted from power .
This revolution was spurred on by the publics public resentment towards the Yanukovych government and the economic and political direction of their country . This revolution was sparked by public resentment against the Yanukovychgovernment .
 Five years later, despite Poroshenkos reform efforts, public resentment still lingers . Five years after, despite reforms, the public resentment remains .
 Some Ukrainians feel they have seen little improvement in their living standards or in the governments efforts to fight corruption . Poroshenko has undertaken changes to modernise the economy and strengthen the army .
 The economy is fragile, with high levels of emigration, inflation, poverty and foreign debt . The country's economy is also suffering from emigration.
 Poroshenkos approval ratings have lagged behind other candidates in the upcoming presidential election . This largely explains why Porosenkos approval rating has lagging behind other presidential candidates .
 Kiev has consistently increased military spending from $1.1 billion in 2013 to $2.35 billion in 2017 . In 2018, Kiev has spent $3.02 billion in the past year .
 Ukraine's parliament has approved a law on national security and revised the country's military doctrine . The law is aimed at countering Moscow .
 This will make annual defence spending at least 5 per cent of the country's estimated GDP, including 3 per cent for the Armed Forces alone . This will be made up of 5% of the nation's GDP .
 The Poroshenko government has made conflict with Russia a key talking point in the election campaigns . Russia is a key point in election campaigns for theoshenko government .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin wants to destroy Ukrainian independence, labelling the election a general battle for Ukraine. Asserts that Putin wants the election to be held in Ukraine .
 Poroshenkos aim is to project an image of a strong leadership in confronting Russian aggression . Poroshenskos aim has been to project a strong leader in confronting Russia .
 The continuous playing of the Russia card to garner support both domestically and internationally is a key element of the Poroshenko governments strategy . Russia is a genuine threat, but it is a real threat, according to the Russian government .
 The incident occurred when Russia blocked three Ukrainian naval vessels from crossing the Kerch Strait into the Sea of Azov . Russia blocked the Ukrainian vessels.
 Ukraine accused Russia of blocking its access to the sea, while Russia accused Ukraine of illegally entering its territorial waters . Ukraine accuses Russia of blocking its access.
 The fallout resulted in Ukrainian ships being seized and its sailors arrested . Ukrainian ships were seized and sailors were arrested .
 The Ukrainian government made it a point to draw global attention to the incident . The incident happened in Ukraine on Sunday .
 Both EU and U.S. officials have agreed on an agreement to impose new sanctions against Moscow . The EU and the United States have agreed to impose the sanctions .
 If Poroshenko remains in power, efforts to stand up to Russia are not expected to change . Russia's president is expected to remain in power .
 He has criticised Russia for annexing Crimea and continuing its destabilising efforts and support for separatists in the Donbas region .
 Vladimir Putins' approval rating skyrocketed following the annexation of Crimea . His efforts to counter Russian aggression are the basis for his support .
 One candidate may be willing to negotiate with the Russian government . However, there is one candidate who may be interested in a deal .
 Tymoshenko is a seasoned politician and holds a strong approval rating in most of the opinion polls . Tymenko is a veteran politician .
 She has been critical of Poroshenkos economic reforms . She has accused him of fake patriotism .
 At the same time, her Russian links both in business and politics are well known .
 In 2008, during her time as prime minister, she made every effort to prevent Ukraine from receiving a NATO Membership Action Plan, provoking a conflict with then-President Viktor Yushchenko . She made every attempt to prevent the Ukraine from getting a NATO membership Action Plan .
 She also refused to condemn Russias attack on Georgia and prevented Ukrainian warships from blocking Russian vessels in the Bay of Sevastopol in Crimea .
 In 2009, she concluded a gas deal with Putin that was ultimately unfavourable for Ukraine . She concluded a deal that was eventually unfavourably for Ukraine.
 The Kremlin would opt for her over the incumbent president. It is no surprise that the Kremlin would choose her over him .
 She offers anti-Russian rhetoric, but her victory could be beneficial to Moscow, particularly if she opts for a quick deal to settle the countries differences .
 Zelensky is a comic actor by profession and has no political experience . He is a strong contender to win against both Poroshenko and Tymoshenko .
 Zelensky has declared that negotiations with Russia are inevitable if the conflict in eastern Ukraine is to be brought to an end . He has also declared that talks with Russia will be inevitable.
 Zelensky comes from the eastern region of Dnipro and his television show is quite popular among the Russian speaking population in the region .
 The will to negotiate with Russia and his political inexperience would make him a favourable choice for the Kremlin . But the direction in which he will lead Ukraine remains ambiguous and hard to predict .
 No matter who wins the election, confrontation between the two nations will continue . Similar to that which sparked the Kerch Strait incident, confrontation will continue.
 This year will also see the completion of two gas pipeline projects . Nord Stream II and Turk Stream will allow Russia to supply natural gas to the EU and Turkey without having to go through Ukraine .
 Ukraine will lose control over transiting pipelines as the Gazprom-Naftogaz transit agreementm is set to expire in January 2020 . Ukraine will not only loose on transit revenue, which is roughly estimated at $2-3 billion annually, but also lose control of the transiting
 The two countries strategic interests will continue to diverge . In other words, the two countries' strategic interests are still diverging .
Ukraines concern is protecting its sovereignty and safeguarding against Russian aggression . Ukraines is concerned about its sovereignty.
For Russia, the geopolitical importance of its neighbour cannot be overlooked . For Russia, however, the importance of Russia can be overlooked.
Strategic depth provided by buffer states is the basis of the country's national security strategy .
 A buffer with Europe has enabled Russia to absorb, weaken, and destroy numerous attacks . Napoleon and Hitler served as the most prominent examples of such attacks .
 Ukraine and Belarus would not be in Russias interests if Ukraine or even Belarus followed the same path . It would clearly not be a Russias interest in Ukraine or Belarus .
 Russia may not wish to conquer Ukraine, but it also wants its neighbour to join NATO . It will seek to make that process difficult and cumbersome, at the very least .
 These security and sovereignty issues can best be understood by examining the situation in the Donbas area .
 The Donetsk and Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine are currently under the control of separatist rebels . The Ukrainian government has little to no control of the region, over whom it has little control .
 Skirmishes between the Ukrainian Ground Forces and the rebels continue, undermining the progress of the Minsk II agreement .
 In November 2018, Donetsk and Luhansk held an election that was denounced by the Ukrainian government . The election was held in November 2018 .
 The United States special representative for Ukraine, Kurt Volker, labelled it a sham . France and Germany issued statements condemning the vote and calling for the parties to adhere to the Minsk II agreement .
 Russia recognised the vote as legitimate, arguing that it would stabilise the rebel-held regions . However, Russia recognised it as legitimate and said it would stabilize the rebel regions .
 Donetsk and Lugansk are bargaining chips that can be used to increase influence over the Ukrainian government . For Moscow, the two cities are a bargaining chip for Ukraine .
 Russia is spending EUR1 billion annually on public service salaries and pensions alone in the separatist region . German newspaper Bild reported in 2017 that Russia was spending EUR 1 billion annually.
 Russia knows that Donetsk and Lugansk are not going to march on Kiev and bring Ukraine back into Moscows sphere of influence . Russia knows it will not be able to take Ukraine back to Moscow .
 Kiev cannot exercise complete control over the region with Donbas in its current state . However, it also understands that Kiev can't exercise full control over Donbas .
 The options are to either accept the status quo or negotiate some kind of settlement . The options include to accept thestatus quo or to negotiate a settlement .
 The outcome of the presidential election is sure to bring interesting results for the future engagement between Ukraine and Russia .
 A win for Zelensky or Tymoshenko could create an opening for Putin to exert greater influence in Ukraine . A win could create a greater opening for the Kremlin to exert more influence in the country .
For Russia, the focus would be on having a less anti-Russian government in power . For Russia, it would be to have a lessAnti-Russiangovernment in power.
 Ukraine would continue its efforts to limit Russias influence and forge deeper ties with the West . A Poroshenko victory would mean Ukraine would be able to limit Russia's influence in Ukraine .
 Ukraine is standing at a crossroad with one candidate devoted to bringing Ukraine closer to the West . Another has a history of pro-Russian leanings, and a fresh newcomer who lacks any political experience .