 He fled from Kyiv, as did many of his supporters, and protestors took over Kyiv . He fled as many supporters took over the city .
 Russia annexed Crimea on March 18. Ignoring U.S. and international condemnation, Russia annexed the Crimea in Crimea .
 Ukrainian officials charge that Russia is also trying to stir unrest in eastern and southern Ukraine . Many Russian-speakers live in those regions, perhaps in order to provide a pretext for an invasion .
 The Ukrainian government is currently discussing the terms of an IMF loan for Ukraine . The loan could amount to $15 billion, the government says .
 The Administration has requested funding from Congress for $1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine .
 U.S. aid will help Ukraine stabilize its finances and hold free and fair elections in May 2014 . Other United States aid will also help Ukraine stable its finances .
 The Administration has announced visa bans and asset freezes against 16 senior Russian officials . 4 wealthy figures from Putin's “inner circle,’s ‘inner circle’ and one Russian bank are among those banned .
 Congressional action has focused on providing assistance to the new Ukrainian government . Since the overthrow of the Yanukovych regime, Congressional action is focused on helping Ukraine .
 The bill funds the loan guarantees requested by the Administration for Ukraine from amounts already for provided FY2014 and earlier years . The bill Funds the loan guarantee requests from previous years .
 The bill includes sanctions against Russia and approves $1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine . The bill also includes sanctions on Russia and approving loan guarantees .
 For Ukraine’s 2004 presidential elections, the oligarchs chose Viktor Yanukovych as their candidate to succeed Kuchma .
 Former Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko was a pro-reform, pro-Western figure . He was a former Prime Minister of Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s Central Election Commission proclaimed Yanukovych the winner of the election .
 Yanukovych’s government was criticized over its human rights record and massive high-level corruption, in part committed by his own family and associates .
 U.S. and EU officials expressed concern over government's targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution .
 Yanukoyvch and scores of his supporters fled the capital by February 21 . Many heading for the eastern and southern parts of the country, while others continued into Russia .
 Policy Current Political Situation Ukraine’s new government faces serious political challenges .
 Throughout the protests, opposition parties were playing catch-up with sentiment .
 Many Maidan protestors view the new governing parties very skeptically . They suspect that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime .
 Three members of parliament from Freedom and others broke into the office of the head of Ukraine’s main television station, beat him up, forced his resignation . In one of several incidents that have occurred in the past month, on March 18, three members of Parliament broke
 Government officials hope at least some of the men will join the army or a new National Guard that the parliament recently approved .
 Ukraine's new government faces other serious political and economic challenges . Ukraine’s new government is facing other political and financial challenges .
 The most urgent issue is Russia's invasion and seizure of Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula . The most important issue is the Russian invasion of the peninsula .
 The troops did not wear insignia of the Russian armed forces, leading them to be referred to as the “little green men’s’ from the color of their uniforms .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin claims that the troops were not Russian Federation military forces, but only local Crimean self-defense forces . Putin claims the troops are not Russian military forces.
 Policy training, equipment, vehicle license plates, and even statements by the soldiers themselves all point to the Russian armed forces, not unofficial, local militia .
 Ukrainian, U.S., and EU officials have flatly rejected Putin's statement as a falsehood . Russian Federation military forces have in fact invaded and occupied Crimea in a clear violation of international law .
 On March 11, Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry said there were nearly 19,000 Russian troops in Ukraine .
 Until March 18, the takeover had been achieved with no bloodshed with the Ukrainian government forces on the peninsula . Russian troops have forcibly seized Ukrainian installations .
 One Ukrainian soldier was killed when Russian forces stormed a Ukrainian base in Simferopol . However, on that day one Ukrainian soldier died .
 Ukraine announced that it would withdraw its remaining military personnel from Crimea on March 24 . The move was due to threats against them and their families made by Russian forces .
 The move was also denounced by Ukraine, the United States, the EU, and other countries as a blatant violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and a violation of international law .
 The Ukrainian government is struggling to establish control over eastern and southern Ukraine . The government is trying to establish controls over the region .
 Thousands of pro-Russian protestors have demonstrated in the Donbas region and Kharkiv .
 The Ukrainian government complains that many of the most militant demonstrators have come from Russia . The Ukraine government complains many of those demonstrators are from Russia.
 The government says that it is tightening border security to stop the Russian demonstrators from entering Ukraine . The government said that it will also stop Russian demonstrators entering the country .
 Ukrainian police have generally tried to avoid conflict with both pro- and anti-government demonstrators . Ukrainian police are perhaps suffering from low morale due to the events of the past three months .
 The new government in Kyiv has tried to enlist the support of some of the oligarchs of the old regime to try to quiet the situation in the Donbas, Kharkiv .
 Vitali Klitchko and Yuliya Tymoshenko have expressed their intention to run . They have said they want to run for theoshenko government .
 Another possible candidate is pro-Westem wealthy businessman Petro Poroshenko . Another possible major candidate is Pro-Westam wealthy businessman.
 Dymytro Yarosh has said he will be a candidate, but he is not expected to mount a serious challenge . Pravy Sektor leader DymyTro Yarosh says he will not be a serious challenger .
 One possible Regions candidate could be Sergei Tihipko, who is not part of the Donbas “clan of former President Yanukovych’s former president . He is not a member of the ‘clan’ of Yanukovych .
 There is currently debate among Ukrainian political figures on whether to hold early parliamentary elections as well . There is also debate on whether the country will hold early elections .
After the fall of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, Russia stopped further bond purchases .
 Ukraine’s currency slid by nearly 30% between the start of the crisis on November 21, 2013, and February 2014 .
 It has dropped further since then, as the government lacks the reserves to support the currency . It has also dropped further. It has fallen further.
 Ukraine's new government is in negotiations with the IMF over the loan terms . Ukraine’s new government has been in negotiations over loan terms with IMF .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has said that his government is a "kamikaze" government . Some of the decisions that will be required as part of a reform program are unpopular .
 Loans from other sources may have to wait until Ukraine’s reform program receives the seal of approval provided by an IMF loan agreement .
 Yanukovych’s foreign policy appeared to fit into this pattern, although he broke with previous Ukrainian presidents by rejecting NATO membership for Ukraine .
 Yanukovych’s last-minute decision in November 2013 to decline to sign an Association Agreement with the EU touched off a popular revolt that led to the collapse of his regime .
 Ukraine's new government's main foreign policy priorities are to secure international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, and non-recognition of Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 Kyiv is seeking urgent international assistance to ameliorate the country’s dire financial situation .
 The government says NATO membership aspirations are not a current priority . The government also strongly supports European Union integration for Ukraine .
 Ukraine may face further pressure from a hostile Russian leadership, which does not recognize the legitimacy of the new government . In addition to the annexation of Crimea, Ukraine could face more pressure from Russia .
 Russia has implemented some de facto trade sanctions against Ukraine . Russia has used natural gas prices and debts as a weapon against Ukraine.
 Russia could harass or expel Ukrainian citizens working in Russia . Russia could also expel or expel Ukrainians working in the country .
 Most EU countries have opposed raising this issue, in part due to the huge burden a large, poor country like Ukraine coiddes place on already-strained EU coffers .
 The parts of the A A dealing with economic issues would be signed later this year, after the new Ukrainian President takes office .
 The EU will establish a High Level Investment Forum/Task Force and help modernize Ukraine’s natural gas transit system . EU will also work on reversing the flow of pipelines through Slovakia .
 Analysts noted that senior Russian leaders were lacking from the list, which nevertheless included several members of the Russian parliament and Russian military commanders in Crimea .
 The EU imposed sanctions on 12 additional Russian leading figures after President Putin signed an agreement with Crimean leaders incoiporating the region into Russia . The EU stopped short of sanctioning leading business figures who support the Russian regime or key Russian banks and other firms .
 Some EU countries may have been reluctant to do so given the important economic ties many EU countries have with such persons and institutions .
 Observers have speculated about Russia’s goals and next moves with regard to Ukraine .
 The seizure and annexation of Crimea appeared to surprise some policy makers by its speed and brazenness . The seizure of Crimea appears to be a surprise to policy makers .
 Russia’s moves in Crimea could be one stage in a multi-stage effort that could involve an effort to seize control over eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian officials say they have proof Russia is playing a key role in stirring up demonstrations in eastern Ukraine . Ukraine says it has proof that Russia is helping to stir up demonstrations .
 Russian officials have said the situation in eastern Ukraine is “chaos,” which could provide a pretext for invasion . Russian officials say the situation is "chaos"
 Ukraine’s armed forces have only 6,000 combat-ready soldiers at present, says acting President Turchynov .
 Flowever, Ukraine is mobilizing what forces it has to resist a potential Russian invasion . Ukraine has been preparing for a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 Russia has taken other steps against Ukraine, including imposing some de facto trade sanctions against Ukraine . Russia has also imposed some trade sanctions on Ukraine .
 Key European countries may feel they have less of a stake in Ukraine’s future, if they are no longer dependent on Ukrainian gas transport infrastructure .
 In March 2014, Oettinger said only 14% of the EU’s natural gas consumption came from Russia via Ukraine . That fact, along with ample gas in storage in EU countries, has diminished Russia's leverage over the EU .
 If relations between EU and Russia continue to deteriorate, South Stream could be scrapped . Western European countries could be more serious in taking effective actions to find alternatives to Russian gas .
 Gazprom warned Ukraine that it coidded off supplies to Ukraine if it did not pay debts it owes .
 Russian Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev has said Russia will renounce the Kharkiv agreements . Ukraine provided Ukraine a natural gas price discount in exchange for basing rights for Russian Black Sea Fleet in Crimea .
 Ukrainian leaders say Gazprom could start charging Ukraine as much as $500 per thousand cubic meters of gas . That's about a third more than it charges any other country in Europe .
 Ukrainian government wants to import gas from western Europe through Slovakia . One plan currently pursued by the Ukrainian government is to import the gas .
 Ukraine could develop its own shale gas reserves, import liquefied natural gas or import gas from Azerbaijan, Central Asia, and elsewhere via pipelines .
 The U.S. policy makers focused on improving cooperation with Ukraine in such fields as nuclear non-proliferation and energy .
 Obama Administration officials urged Ukrainian leaders and protestors to find a peaceful, democratic solution to the crisis .
 Vice President Biden telephoned Yanukovych repeatedly and at length to urge him to pursue a peaceful settlement .
 The agreement was rendered moot within hours by the collapse of the Yanukovych regime .
 Administration officials have stressed that the IMF will provide the lion’s share of the rescue package for Ukraine . The IMF is expected to provide about $ 15 billion to Ukraine .
 Policy is also providing technical advisors to help the Ukrainian government deal with its financial crisis and to implement energy sector reforms . Policy also provides technical advisors.
 The U.S. has strongly condemned the Russian military intervention in Crimea .
 The President added that he has heard a lot of talk from Congress about what should be done .
 President Obama has warned that there will be costs for Russia if it does not withdraw its troops from Ukraine .
 The Administration has decided that it will not participate in the G8 summit in Sochi, Russia, in June 2014 .
 The United States has suspended military cooperation with Russia and talks on economic issues . The U.S. has also suspended talks with Russia over economic issues.
 The United States has imposed additional sanctions on Russian officials as a result of Russia’s seizure of Crimea .
 On March 17, the Administration announced visa bans and asset freezes against several senior figures from Russia and the Crimean government .
 So far, there are 16 high-ranking Russian government officials subject to U.S. visa bans and asset freezes . There are 16 Russian government officers subject to visa bans, asset freezes.
Leadership figures in the Russian parliament, and government, include top-ranking aides to Putin . They include leadership figures in Russia's parliament, government, and the government .
 One bank, Rank Rossiya, is also sanctioned due to its role as the personal bank of senior Russian officials . One bank is also sanctioned due to the role as a personal bank.
 Russia responded to the sanctions by imposing its own visa bans against Speaker of the House John Boehner, Senator Reid, Senator Landrieu, Senator Coats, Senator Menendez, and Senator McCain . The sanctions include a visa ban against Speaker John Boehner .
 Of this amount, $53,957 million is in the Economic Support Fund account, $4.41 million in the NADR account, for nonproliferation, antiterrorism, demining, and other programs . $28,704 million in A
 A significant portion of U.S. aid to Ukraine in the ESF account is dedicated to improving the safety of the Chernobyl nuclear facility . A significant part of the aid is to secure and storing spent nuclear fuel .
 Global Health funding helps Ukraine fight its H1V/A1DS crisis, which is the most severe in the region, as well as Ukraine’s serious tuberculosis problem .
 In its FY2015 Congressional Budget Justification, likely drafted before the crisis in Ukraine, the Administration requested $57 million in Economic Support Fund assistance for Ukraine .
 Ukraine is also expected to receive $6. million in USAID Global Health funding, $22 million in State Global Health Funding, $2 million in INCLE law enforcement aid, $1.1 million in 1MET military training assistance, and $2million in Foreign Military Financing
 The bill funds the loan guarantees requested by the Administration for Ukraine from the amounts appropriated for FY2014 for the Economic Support Fund . The bill also funds State Department and Foreign Operations funding for prior years .
Press reports claim it may include an IMF quota increase, which could be controversial among some Senate and House Members . However, press reports say it may also include a quota increase .
 Policy intervention and interference in Ukraine, majority state-owned banks and commercial organizations, as appropriate . Calls on the United States to work with its allies and other countries to aid Ukraine’s economic recovery efforts .
 The bill also “encourages’ the President to impose these sanctions on Russian figures responsible for corruption in Russia . It requires an annual report by the Secretary of Defense on military and security developments involving the Russian Federation .
 Representative Royce introduced H.R. 4278, the Ukraine Support Act on March 21 .
 $50 million in appropriations to aid Ukraine’s political and economic reforms . $10 million for increased broadcasting by Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and Voice of America to Ukraine and surrounding countries . $8 million for law enforcement reform in Ukraine .
 The bill also includes sanctions against persons responsible for violence or undermining the peace, security, stability, sovereignty, or territorial integrity of Ukraine . The bill was issued by the President as of March 20 .
 It calls for additional sanctions against person responsible for the acts mentioned above . It also calls for those responsible for corruption in Ukraine or human rights abuses .
 The legislation requires reports to Congress on those sanctioned, as well as reports at the request of the chairpersons and ranking members of the appropriate committees .
 Report required on foreign financial institutions involved in activities illegal under U.S. law . Report also required on financial institutions that are involved in illegal activities . Report is required on international financial institutions.
 The bill also calls on the Administration to greatly expand the number of Russian officials sanctioned under the Sergei Magnitsky Rule of Law Accountability Act of 2012 .
 The United States and its NATO allies have limited their military actions so far to a modest increase in air assets to the Baltic states and Poland . The U.S. has limited its military actions to a small increase in military assets .
 Many believed or hoped that Russia would not take the steps that it has already taken, for fear that the Russian elite could lose its vast assets in Europe and elsewhere .
 The deterrent effect of possible sanctions has failed, policy makers may be faced with the possibility that the implementation of sanctions may not be powerful enough to compel Russia’s compliance .
 The sanctions would then be mainly a mechanism to show Russia the “cost’ of its violation of international norms or deter it from occupying additional Ukrainian territory .
 Cooperation between Russia and the U.S. on other issues could also come to an end . The withdrawal of United States military cargoes from Afghanistan could also be an end.
 The prospect of an open-ended deep freeze in relations with Russia may be enough for U.S. and EU policy makers to decide to not impose serious financial sanctions, or to weaken them later .
 A key issue is whether to attack key Russian businessmen and companies, which could have a serious impact on Russia’s economy, or to limit sanctions to a few of Putin's most outspoken advisors .
 U.S. and EU policy makers might feel compelled to keep sanctions in place once they are imposed, even if they seem unlikely to achieve their goals . EU policymakers fear loss of credibility that could result if they do not .
 Some observers continue to call for trying to work with Russia to stabilize Ukraine . Some observers say there is a lack of workable alternatives .
 The U.S. and EU should at least be willing to discuss issues raised by Russia, they say . They say the United States and the EU should discuss issues such as dangers to Russian-speakers in Ukraine .
 Some are skeptical that close cooperation with Russia on Ukraine is possible . Others are skeptical of close cooperation on Ukraine .
 Many of Russia’s stated concerns as bogus, and meant to conceal other designs which are presumably unacceptable to U.S. and EU policy makers .
 Another issue is whether to provide military aid to Ukraine, and if so, whether it should include lethal aid . Another issue: Whether military aid should be included in lethal aid, if so .
 The U.S. needs to show resolve in the face of Russian aggression against Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty .