Russia-Ukraine relations have soured for years and could further deteriorate after Moscow rolled out large-scale economic sanctions against Kiev on Thursday .
 The sanctions include freezing non-cash funds, uncertificated securities and property controlled by the blacklisted in Russia . The sanctions were ordered by Russian President Vladimir Putin last month .
 The sanctions target Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko's elder son Olexiy, Ukrainian Parliament Speaker Andriy Parubiy, key ministers and important businessmen . The sanctions also target the Ukrainian President's son and key ministers .
 The blacklist includes EastOne Group and Toledo Mining Corporation registered in Britain and Ferrexpo registered in Switzerland . The blacklist also includes East one Group and Ohio mining company .
 The Russian government said it could lift the sanctions if Ukraine cancels its own restrictive measures against Russia . Russia said it would lift sanctions if its own sanctions were lifted .
 Relations between Kiev and Moscow have been deteriorating since early 2014 over Crimea and armed conflicts in eastern Ukraine . Relations between Moscow and Kiev have been deteriorating since late 2014 .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov says Ukrainian steps were taken by the Ukrainian side . It is a response to the steps taken by Ukrainian side, he says .
 Most of the targeted individuals are officials and they have no business ties with Russia . The Russian sanctions will unlikely affect Ukraine's macroeconomic stability, says Kateryna Rozhkova .
 Russian political analyst Maxim Zharov said the sanctions were too late and the Ukrainian side may have braced themselves and withdrawn capital from Russia .
 Russia's Financial and Economic Analytics Agency says measures will "painfully" affect the economy of Ukraine . But Mikhail Belyaev says the measures will drive the economy into a more difficult situation .
 Ukraine is experiencing tough economic times, he says . There is no visible sign that this situation will be remedied in the near future, he said .