 Five years ago, Russia’s aggression against Ukraine morphed from economic and political threats to outright military aggression . Russia's aggression against the Ukraine morphed into military aggression.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin had begun to put all screws possible on the country to force it off its Western path . It had all started in late summer 2013 as Putin had started to pressure it into the Eurasian Economic Union .
 Russia's aggression escalated until a fragile cease-fire was achieved in the late summer of 2014 . Russia’s aggression was escalated until the end of 2014.
 Putin repeated the performance with the annexation of Crimea and the project to divide the rest of Ukraine . Georgia was truncated in 2008 .
 A decade of mismanagement, in combination with massive corruption of the Yanukovych regime, has left the country in a state of near-bankruptcy .
 The country united through presidential and parliamentary elections . Instead, the country demonstrated a resolve to root out corruption and mismanagement .
 Ukraine is now facing presidential and parliamentary elections that will chart its course for the next five years . Now, Ukraine is facing presidential, parliamentary elections.
 Crimea is under increasingly firm Russian military control, and the corrupt and semi-criminalized Russian-supported state-lets in parts of Donbas are still there . Crimea is now under increasingly Firm Russian control .
 More than 1 million Ukrainians have been displaced, and around 13,000 have lost their lives in the conflict . More than one million Ukrainians are displaced .
 The losses from the conflict and crisis years haven't yet been fully recovered. But the losses have not yet been recovered, according to experts .
 Putin was ready to go to such extreme lengths to stop is ratified and in force. Deficits have to a large extent been eliminated, the thoroughly corrupt gas sector has been fundamentally reformed .
 45 percent of Ukraine’s trade is with the E.U., and only around 7 percent is with Russia .
 The record is impressive. Add to that fundamental reforms in the health sectors and in the pension system and a far-reaching decentralization .
 Corruption is widely perceived as still being rampant, although it has reduced some . Corruption is still perceived as being rampant.
 The gap in living standards has led to a wave of migration of talent, according to experts .
Around 1 million Ukrainians are now supporting the growth of the Polish economy . For instance in Poland, around 1million Ukrainians are supporting the economy .
 There is little doubt that there is widespread dissatisfaction with the economic and social situation as the country enters its election season .
 The Kremlin will do whatever it can to influence the elections and their aftermath in its favor, we can rest assured . The Kremlin effectively lost the confrontation in 2014.
 If meddling in the U.S. presidential election was a priority, this is very much more so the case in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The basic Kremlin message is that Ukraine is a hopeless case of mismanagement and incompetence . Only Moscow can govern the wider Slavic world, the Kremlin says .
 It throws around accusations of “coups’ and “fascists’ in the hope that they at some time will stick. It throws out accusations of 'coupping' and ‘fascist’
There is no way of knowing whether sitting President Poroshenko, former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko or TV presenter Volodymyr Zelensky will emerge victorious in the final round on April 21 .
 There is no reason to believe that any of the few candidates questioning the pro-Western orientation of the country will get out of single-digit territory in terms of votes .
 Tymoshenko has been following the siren song of populism with a series of promises that would derail the economic reform trajectory and potentially bring problems back .
 The composition of the parliament to be elected in October will be important . And the composition of Parliament will be key to the election .
 It will take until at least the end of the year until a new government can be formed and continue to reform the country .
 Ukraine is a significant European country with an impressive economic potential . If it continues on its reform trajectory, Ukraine could become a major European country .
 The information technology sector is growing quickly, and the country sits on some of the most fertile soil in the world .
 Ukraine will require continued attention and help from the rest of Europe in its reform efforts. But Ukraine will need continued attention from the other European countries .
 The U.S. and E.U. policies must withstand Russian attempts to destabilize the efforts. Firm United States and U.N. policies are needed to withstand Russian efforts to destabilise the efforts, according to the Russian government .