 Russia falsely blames Ukraine for starting war with Ukraine . Russia's Foreign Ministry said Moscow was acting to end the "systematic extermination of the Donbas population" that had been supposedly ongoing since 2014 .
 In doing so, she framed the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine as part of the wider Donbas conflict, which has been raging for years .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin had argued similarly at the outset of the Russian attack, when he falsely justified Russia's offensive as an act of self-defense in line with Article 51 of the UN Charter .
 The current armed conflict began when Russian troops entered Ukraine on February 21 . Shortly after Putin announced a "special military operation" in Ukraine .
 Russia started the fighting and triggered an ongoing escalation when it crossed into Ukrainian territory . The fighting started when Russia crossed into the Ukrainian territory.
 There is no evidence whatsoever that there was a "systematic extermination" of people in the Donbas .
 Russians started the armed conflict back in 2014 Ukraine and Russia disagree on who provoked the conflict in 2014 .
Pro-Western demonstrations eventually forced Yanukovych to flee the country . An interim government took over the country, after which an interim government was formed .
Soldiers in green uniforms but without insignia occupied Crimea . It was then that soldiers in green uniform but without uniforms occupied Crimea.
 At the time, Russian officials said these troops were not acting on orders from the Kremlin . But many Western observers doubted this claim .
 That same year, a referendum was held on the occupied peninsula over whether it should join the Russian Federation .
 A majority of voters voted in favor, thus paving the way for Russian annexation . The vote is expected to lead to Russian annexation of Crimea .
 At the same time, Russia began supporting separatist movements in Ukraine's eastern Donbas region, which was met with military action by Kyiv government forces .
 The point at which this conflict turned into all-out war is disputed among the parties involved and scholars .
 Donetsk and Luhansk declared themselves a "people's republic" in 2014 . The contested areas of Donetsk andLuhansk declare themselves a people's  republic .
 Moscow recognized them as independent on February 21, just days before this year's invasion . Moscow recognized the group's independence on February 20 .
 Russian troops crossed the border of eastern Ukraine on February 21, 2022, entering Ukrainian territory . The conflict escalated into interstate war when Russian troops entered the Ukraine in 2022 .
 Maria Zakharova also said that at least 13,000 people had been killed in the war in eastern Ukraine since 2014 . No evidence of planned genocide, she said .
 There is no evidence, however, that proves a "systematic extermination" of the civilian population is occurring .
 An OSCE monitoring mission active in Ukraine since 2014 has found no evidence of mass targeted killings of civilians in the Donbas region .
 The Minsk ceasefire agreement was repeatedly broken by both sides, it says . It also says the Minsk agreement was also broken by the sides .
 It is true that at least 13,000 people have been killed in the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Up to 13,200 people died in the conflict until early 2020, according to the United Nations report .
 It says 4,100 of those killed were members of the Ukrainian military . It says that 4, 100 of the dead were Ukrainian soldiers .
 The Russian Federation illegally annexed the Crimean Peninsula in 2014, sparking broad international condemnation . The Crimean Peninsula was annexed in 2014 .
 On February 21, 2022, Russia invaded Ukraine from the north, northeast, and from the Crimean Peninsula in the south . The war began in February 2012, when Russia invaded the country from the south to the north .
Russia's invasion of Ukraine is the latest in a series of events in Ukraine . Send us your feedback to CNN.com/Crimea.com .