 Some think the referendum in Crimea was illegal because there were no dabates and so on . Some think that the referendum was illegal. Some think it was because of the lack of dabates .
 Having a couple of friends and relatives in both the European countries near Russia and some areas in America .
 News in both countries are highly different from each other. I can speak out for a fact that news in both nations is highly different .
 News everywhere in the world states that Russia is attacking Ukraine . News from the countries around and in Russia are stating that some other country is attacking it . Ukraine is asking for aide from Russia .
 Normal people will never know what's really happening between these countries . But it sure is looking like someone wants to start another Cold War .
 The Ukrainian army retreated from key strongholds at the Donetsk airport, an epicenter of fighting in the country’s conflict-battered eastern region . Pro-Russian rebels handed a symbolic victory to the rebels amid a surge of violence .
 Kiev government steps up its war against pro-Russian separatists in Ukraine’s eastern Donbass region . U.S. and NATO forces in Poland and the Baltic states have been positioned in the region .
 The National Guard was reestablished in March of last year in the aftermath of the U.S. and EU-supported coup that ousted President Victor Yanukovych .
 The new National Guard is being developed as a light infantry, rapid response force . It is aimed at assisting the suppression of the anti-Kiev, Pro-Russian separatists in Donbass region .
 The U.S. has also been supplying Ukraine with heavy military equipment necessary to fight separatists .
 The U.S. also recently delivered 35 smaller armored trucks as well as personal protective gear for use by the SBGS along the eastern border with Russia and against separatist held areas .
 armored vehicles will "depart to the eastern border area for patrolling between checkpoints" SBGS spokesman Andriy Demchenko told the Southeast European Times the vehicles will be used to patrol between checkpoints .
 I have this... stigma of articles and world wide news, always being so overtly emphasized as if trying to strike fear in the hearts of the readers . I have the stigma of article and worldwide news,Always being so blatantly emphasized as to try to strikeFear in the heart of the
I honestly wish there were some people in that area who could actually enlighten me on the situation . I honestly wish some people would have been able to help me out .
 Poroshenko responded angrily to the fighting in Mariupol, a city the rebels tried to capture last autumn before a fragile ceasefire was agreed in eastern Ukraine .
 Kiev fears rebels want to build a land bridge from Russia to Crimea to Crimea . Kiev fears the rebels are trying to build the land bridge .
 NATO says it has indications that a major rebel offensive is coming, due to heavy weapons moving in from Russia . Previous rebel pushes have been prior to previous rebel pushes .
 The UN human rights agency says the overall death toll in the conflict has risen above 5,000 .
 Separatist leader Alexander Zakharchenko says rebel fighters will continue to fight for more territory . The rebels are advancing in five directions to push back Ukrainian government forces to the limits of the Donetsk region .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin blamed “criminal orders’ by Ukrainian leaders for a surge in fighting in east Ukraine . Russian-backed separatists struck a bellicose tone in ruling out seeking more peace talks .
 The result is tens of killed and wounded, Putin told senior state officials in televised comments .
 Putin chided Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko for not responding to his proposal to withdraw heavy weapons from the demarcation line between government forces and separatists . Putin also chided President Poroshenko.
 Poroshenko said this week Russia had 9,000 troops inside Ukraine . Poroshenko called on Moscow to withdraw them, blaming it for an armed aggression .
 Moscow denies sending forces and weapons to east Ukraine, despite what the West says is irrefutable proof . The West says the evidence is ir Refutable .
 Poroshenko said his troops were holding the line against the separatists after withdrawing this week from the main terminal at the airport in Donetsk, the biggest city in the east .
 Any rebel advances would further undermine a tentative peace deal forged this week in Berlin .
 negotiations concluded with an agreement to uphold a demarcation line defined in September after talks in the Belarussian capital, Minsk .
 The plan calls for Ukrainian troops and Russian-backed separatists to pull back their heavy arms 15 kilometres on either side of the line . There was no agreement on a withdrawal of troops .
 The town is a road and railway hub to Donetsk, the stronghold of rebel forces in Eastern Ukraine . The town has been the focus of rebel attacks in recent years .
At least 19 people have been killed and dozens wounded in fighting in eastern Ukraine over the past day, reports show .
 Intense fighting is still taking place in the main rebelcontrolled Donetsk city and near Debaltsevo town, which lies on the highway . The highway links Donetsk with another insurgent stronghold of Lugansk .
 shelling in Donetsk overnight killed three civilians and wounded ten others . According to Donetsk municipal council, three civilians were killed .
 In Debaltsevo, a child and two women were killed, Interior Ministry says . Proindependence insurgents launched an assault on Ukrainian military in the outskirts of the city using heavy artillery .
 Another victim was a woman who died when a mortar shell hit a flat where she lived in Avdeevka .
 Five Ukrainian servicemen have been killed and 29 wounded in the past 24 hours, a government military spokesman says . The fighting across the restive region has killed five servicemen and wounded 29 .
Seven soldiers from the rebel forces died and 41 injured in the previous day's fighting, says Eduard Basurin .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine started in April 2014, and has become increasingly violent this month . Rebels launched an offensive against government troops after scheduled peace talks in Astana were cancelled .
 Ukraine, Russia, Germany and France were due to take part in the negotiations . They delayed their meeting in the Kazakhstan capital, Kazakhstan, due to the lack of progress in implementation of the previous peace deal .
 Insurgents have been long seeking direct talks with the Ukrainian government over the crisis . Kiev has repeatedly rejected the calls .
 Pro-Ukraine leader of Crimea Tartar group arrested in Simferopol for organizing riots . The group is based in Crimea, Ukraine's Crimea region .
 At least 12 civilians have been killed in a rocket attack on the Ukrainian city of Donetsk, a local news agency reports .
 Two civilians were killed at a trolleybus stop, and five others died while waiting in a line for humanitarian aid .
 Angela Merkel has said the crisis in Ukraine will not be solved by military means . She said the peace agreement struck last September needs to be implemented .
 Sending military equipment to Ukraine would be nothing more than adding fuel to fire . The move would be a waste of time and time.
 NATO chief says that military intervention still remains an option . NATO chief: Military intervention still an option. Meanwhile NATO chief said military intervention is an option for the future .