 Putin's war cost Russia its centuries-long shared identity with its neighbour . Putin’s war cost the country a century.
 President Vladimir Putin lost Ukraine after a millennium of shared east Slav identity .
 Ukrainian inquest into who lost the ­Euromaidan’s ‘Revolution of Dignity’ finally comes . The answer, on the present evidence, will also be clear .
 It was an elite core of politicians and oligarchs who first worked a miracle in fighting Russia’s military Goliath to a stalemate . Only to revert to kleptocratic business as usual when threat eased .
 Ukrainians’ consolidation of a distinct national identity began in February 2014 . Ukrainians have been regarded as a fuzzy subset of the dominant Russians for centuries .
 The victims feel aggrieved and pull together against the attacker. It sounds banal to say that when one nation attacks a neighbour, especially if the two have regarded each other as brothers for a thousand years .
 Putin sent hooded ‘little green men’ to take over Crimea’s regional parliament by intimidation, and then annexed the peninsula . Putin launched his undeclared war on Ukraine.
 The mutation of this early tactical success into strategic failure is best traced by reviewing the players and dynamics as Ukraine held off Russia and crystallised its singular new identity . The mutation was best traced to the players, the dynamics and the dynamics of the Ukraine team .
 When the old Soviet Union split apart in 1991, its kleptocracy was replicated in its two biggest east Slavs successor states .
 A Wild East capitalism prevailed, in which emergent oligarchs carved up the state’s wealth through murky privatisation deals .
 Putin quickly restored the primacy of politicians over Russian tycoons after he became president . He quickly restored his primacy over politicians.
In Ukraine, oligarchs were able to use their new wealth to dominate politics . In Ukraine, the new wealth was able to dominate the country's politics .
 Putin suddenly broke out from Europe's seven-decade peace order in February 2014 . Western policymakers asked the diminished number of Kremlinologists in their midst why he was acting this way .
 Dmitry Gorenburg, an associate at Harvard’s Davis Centre for Russian and Eurasian Studies and a military analyst, pointed to fear as the Russian president's root instinct . Some, such as Dmitry GoreNburg, said he feared the president's instinct .
 Putin has shown little interest in economics. He has not worried about looming inflation or capital flight, or Russia’s distorting reliance on oil and gas revenues .
 In 1989, Putin was a young officer of the Soviet Committee for State Security . He was serving with the KGB's Dresden outpost .
 East Berliners mistakenly thought the Wall had been officially opened . He saw the Berlin Wall fall overnight under the press of the press .
 He watched Moscow’s 20 top divisions, which encircled Berlin for half a century after the glorious Soviet victory over Hitler in 1945, retreat ingloriously a thousand miles to east .
 Putin had to listen to U.S. triumphalism about the series of pro-democracy “colour revolutions’ in the streets of Serbia in 2000, Georgia in 2003 and Ukraine in 2004 .
 Polish Solidarity leader Lech Walesa first phrased it. For him, as a career secret policeman, these revolutions represented no broad social yearning for “dignity’s”
 The Orange Revolution was the Orange Revolution on Kyiv’s main square, or maidan . Protesters demanded and won a repeat of the 2004 election after blatant vote-rigging in favour of then prime minister Viktor Yanukovych .
 Poland uprooted systemic corruption and built robust democratic and judicial institutions . Poland went from having a poverty rate that matched Ukraine’s to a per capita GDP three times the size of its neighbour’'s today .
 The Little Russians rejected Yanukovych and Russia’s network of control in the rerun of the vote in 2004 . It was devastating when the Little Russians, too, began to do so .
 The Orange Revolution self-destructed in the fratricide between its two top leaders . The two leaders forfeited leadership to Yanukovych in the reasonably fair 2010 election .
 On the Ukrainian side of the 2014 Euromaidan revolution, four figures stand out . On the Ukraine side, four people stand out.
 Poroshenko was a second-tier oligarch who had served briefly as foreign minister in the Orange Revolution government . He was minister for trade and economic development under Yanukovych in 2012 .
 Channel 5 gave full coverage to the three-month agora and its estimated one million participants . He helped fund the pro-Europe, anti-corruption protest against Yanukovych’s authoritarian rule .
 He absconded to Russia overnight with an estimated personal fortune of $12bn . He amassed in four years in office, amassed in 4 years in Office .
 Poroshenko was elected president of the new Ukraine with a 54 per cent majority . The ‘Chocolate King’ was nicknamed for his confectionery empire .
 Kolomoyskyi, who also holds Israeli and Cypriot citizenship, was called back to Ukraine from his Swiss residence by the improvised government just as Russia was annexing Crimea .
 He was appointed governor of his own regional stronghold of Dnipropetrovsk with a mandate to mount a defence against Russia-stoked secession brewing in neighbouring eastern Ukraine .
 Kolomoyskyi was famed for his hostile takeovers of rival banks as well as oil, media and other firms . He was also famed for taking over oil and media firms .
 He quickly raised and underwrote several militias among the 40 to 50 volunteer battalions that sprang up to fight against westward spread of the start-up separatist Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics .
 These battalions were instrumental in holding the line against separatist/Russian forces . They gave the Ukrainian state time to rebuild the army that Yanukovych had bled of its budget .
 Two oligarchs who did not cast their lot in with post-Euromaidan Ukraine were Rinat Akhmetov and Dmytro Firtash, whose net worth has fallen to $1bn .
 Both had been leading supporters of Yanukovych and his party . Since his departure they have hedged their bets between Kyiv and Moscow .
 Their recent losses have resulted partly from a redistribution of their wealth to other oligarchs . Their losses have been partly due to the redistribution of wealth to others .
 Putin no doubt saw his annexation of Crimea – and his follow-on campaign to reconquer Catherine the Great’s ‘Novorossiya’ The eastern 40 per cent of Ukraine is part of Russia's “NovorOSSiya”
 Putin's return to a 19th-century concept of “might makes right’s land was a violation of international law and treaties Moscow had signed to respect Ukrainian borders . Europeans, Americans and Ukrainians, on the contrary, saw the first formal takeover of a neighbour's land in
 It baulked at getting sucked into another intervention in a theatre of complicated logistics and little geopolitical interest . It was trying to get sucked into an intervention in the theatre of complex logistics .
 Moscow enjoys escalation dominance in its home region by virtue of geography, its claim to a vital interest in Ukraine that the West lacks, and the Russian president’s willpower in a world of European peace and United States exhaustion .
 It had no desire to put Putin’s repeated brandishing of his nuclear weapons to the test over a second-order confrontation .
 The West responded by imposing financial rather than military sanctions, which Putin prematurely scorned as a pinprick . The West therefore responded by impose financial instead of military sanctions .
Russia's success in Crimea emboldened him to probe further in eastern Ukraine . He was praised for restoring Russia’s greatness in the world .
 Ukraine’s ragtag army had put up no resistance in Crimea, for three reasons . Ukraine's ragtag Army had put down no resistance for three Reasons .
 First, years of embezzlement of defence budgets left it with only 6,000 combat-ready soldiers and two-decade-old weapons .
 Second, it was subverted by many Ukrainian officers who were loyal to Moscow rather than Kyiv . Second, the Ukrainian officers were subverted.
Despite Stalin’s mass starvation of Ukrainian peasants in the 1930s, Russians would actually shoot at their proclaimed younger brothers . Finally, there was Ukrainians’ sheer disbelief, despite Stalin's mass starvation, that Russians would shoot them .
 He seemed to believe his own propaganda that disgruntled Russian-speaking citizens of eastern Ukraine were Russians manqués . He would rush to rebel against Kyiv if only the charge were led by a few Russian commandos .
 Eastern Ukraine was the part of the country in which identity was most blurred . Easterners paid little attention to differences between Ukrainians and Russians in everyday life .
 The region was the ideal test of Putin’s construct of a unifying goal to fill the vacuum left after futurist communist ideology evaporated . In a way, the region was an ideal test for Putin's construct of an unifying goals .
 The campaign was first presented as Putin’s dream of a Eurasian Union, but that was dropped once it became clear that Ukraine would not be a part of it .
 Thereafter it was repackaged as gathering in fellow ethnics left outside the ‘Russian world’ by the Soviet collapse . Then as retaking the tsarist Novorossiya.
 At first, the Russian-backed secessionists took quick control over roughly two-thirds of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts, or provinces .
 Putin overestimated the warrior zeal of the easterners and the usual gripes of any province about the payouts .
 In the early days, local people warmed to the promises of higher pensions made by separatists .
Grandmothers enjoyed acting as civilian shields by surrounding local administration buildings that were occupied by separatists .
 Moscow and the secessionists it sponsored increasingly had to rely on a motley band of mercenaries and Donbas criminal gangs . Russian “volunteers’ and armed with heavy weapons the Russians were shuttling across the border .
 Putin probably could have escalated in the spring of 2014 from the kind of limited, disguised and therefore deniable warfare that the West calls “hybrid’s” The West calls it ‘hybrid,’ replacing the hooded “little green men’
 Russian president massing 80,000 troops on the northern, eastern and southern borders of Ukraine and exercising them on high alert .
 Ukraine's provisional government is still reeling under the Russian show of force . But he did not invade when Ukraine’s provisional government was still shaky – and still reeling .
 Putin's decision not to order an invasion in spring 2014 might be inferred . Three reasons for Putin’s decision to not order a military invasion may have been inferred .
 The first was a tactical reduction of his bellicosity at a time when the European Union was still debating financial sanctions on Russia for annexing Crimea . The first is a tactical Reduction of his Bellicosity.
 The second was the weakness of the novice Ukrainian government, which could foreseeably have collapsed and left Kyiv with a political vacuum the Russians could fill without a shot .
 The third was perhaps a premonition in the Russian army that it was being overstretched . Given Ukraine’s strong military tradition, it might turn into a quagmire of messy guerrilla warfare .
 Putin’s military threats to Ukraine were counterproductive and stoked Ukrainian anger . Putin's military threat to Ukraine was counterproductive, according to the U.S.
 In May 2014 a Pew survey found that 77 per cent of Ukrainians thought that their country should remain united instead of breaking up . The survey also found that 70 per cent lived in eastern Ukraine outside the Donbas war zone .
 60 per cent of Ukrainians had a general negative view of Russia, Pew reported . In early July, the Malaysian Airlines MH17 civilian jet was shot down by a Russian-made missile .
84 per cent of Ukrainians had viewed Russia positively in 2011 . It was a sharp reversal from 2011, when 84 per cent had seen Russia positively .
 The Euromaidan spirit drew in ever more Ukrainians who had been politically passive . Ukrainians had been political passive .
 Volunteers flocked to enlist in the army, in the revived National Guard and in the private militias raised by Kolomoyskyi and other oligarchs .
 Techies designed and built their own surveillance drones from scratch to observe border areas that Ukraine no longer controlled .
 Ukrainian veterans who had once formed the backbone of the Soviet army’s rough equivalent of Western non-commissioned officers . The rookies were given accelerated basic training in the 1980s .
 Weapons factories in Ukraine that once supplied the Soviet army managed to repair 20-year-old tanks and build new ones even as battles raged .
 morale was vastly better on the side of Ukrainian defenders against a threat to their very existence than it was among opportunistic rebel mercenaries .
 By mid-August 2014, Ukrainian troops had recaptured most of the rebel territory . The Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics were reduced to two small pockets .
 He sent elite airborne troops into the Donbas to mount counteroffensive alongside separatist/Russian ground forces armed with Russian heavy weapons .
 The DPR and LPR had ruled at their height . Within days, they broke the Ukrainian siege and restored the secessionists’ control of about half of the territory .
 President Poroshenko understood the message and immediately proposed a truce . German chancellor Angela Merkel brokered the Minsk ceasefire of 5 September .
 The shaky agreement at least reduced the scale of violence for five months, until the separatist/Russian forces made a fresh effort to break through strengthened Ukrainian lines in January and February of 2015 .
 On 1 September 2015 the heavy guns abruptly fell silent and, for the most part, remained silent . The heavy guns fell silent on 1 September.
Overjoyed babushkas in the separatist Donbas enclave could walk across the front lines to reach Ukrainian-held towns seven kilometres away .
Fighting caused 8,000 deaths and forced 2. million people from their homes . They returned to tell journalists that their greatest wish was simply for the fighting to stop .
 Putin was belatedly acknowledging that the war also had strategic costs for Russia . It was clear that Putin had acknowledged that the conflict had strategic cost for Russia.
 He had first lost all of Ukraine, with the exception of Crimea, to the Euromaidan that he despised . He had also lost Crimea, but he had lost Crimea .
 He had failed, too, to maintain the shelled and charred Donbas region in any form . He wanted to annex or subsidise – and keeping it as a zone of frozen conflict for future mischief-making .
 He provoked the West into resuscitating Nato and imposing sanctions that damaged the Russian economy . He had provoked the U.S. to resuscitate Nato and impose sanctions on Russia .
 Belarus, Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan are distancing themselves somewhat from Moscow . He had alarmed Belarus and Kazakhstan, Kazakhstan, and Turkmanistan .
 The Russian war in Ukraine raised the spectre of the failed Soviet invasion of Afghanistan that killed 15,000 Soviet soldiers in the 1980s .
 The Duma passed legislation banning the spread of information about Russian casualties across the border .
 It seemed unlikely that Putin would risk incurring a rise in Russian deaths by resuming heavy fighting in Ukraine .
Ukrainian oligarchs to grow beyond the robber-baron stage and become patriotic philanthropists . This appraisal, however, takes the pressure off the Ukrainian oligarchs. This appraisal takes off the pressure of the oligarch to grow.
 On the present evidence, they no longer sense much urgency with regard to implementing reform legislation, they say . They say they don't feel much urgency to implement reform legislation .