 Ambassador Nuland talks to us about his work in the UK . He says he's been working hard to get the time to talk to us .
 "The trajectory is well known to people in this room," he says . "I think to most of them," he adds . "It's well known"
 You're Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs . You're responsible for 50 countries, as well as NATO, and the European Union .
 From 1993 to 1996, you were chief of staff to Deputy Secretary Strobe Talbott . And, from 1993 to 1997, you was Chief of Staff to Strobe. Talbott from 1993-1996 .
 The note was in Strobe's office, in late January of 1995, when he first met you . It was in the office of Strobe, in the early 1990s .
 One of the first major pieces of negotiation that I ever worked on in my career was the denuclearization of Kazakhstan, Belarus, and Ukraine .
 I continue to think that that was the right decision for those countries to make, to move in the direction of modern European states that secure themselves through their prosperity, through their partnership with other strong democracies .
 All the Budapest powers, notably including the Russian Federation, agreed to keep their hands off the territory of Ukraine . That was part of the deal, as you have underscored, was the commitment of all the Hungarian powers .
Tim Snyder of Yale wrote, "Ukraine has no history without Europe but Europe also has noHistory without Ukraine" Snyder wrote a month later, in a brilliant article in the New Republic .
 Throughout the centuries, Ukraine revealed the turning points in the history of Europe . The history of Ukraine has been revealed in the past .
 Tim Snyder and Tim Snyder are talking about the same thing . Now, it looks like both you and Tim have been talking about it .
 The U.S. has worked for Europe whole, free, and at peace for 25 years . The United States, in a bipartisan fashion, has been working for Europe in 25 years, and in peace .
 Ukraine will impact not only the neighborhood and the space between Ukraine and the European Union and NATO space but will also have an impact on the kind of future that the people of Russia can have .
 The U.S. wants Ukraine to be more prosperous, more prosperous and more European . It is profoundly in the United States' interest that Ukraine succeed in its aspiration to be democratic .
 Congress voted in bipartisan fashion to signal its support for Ukraine . It is why we are working so intensively with our European partners and allies, particularly with the EU on increased economic support.
 I think I've been in Ukraine eight, nine times in the last calendar year in various ways, both with bosses and on his own . I think he's been inUkraine eight, 9 times in last year in different ways .
 This last trip was in November, with Vice President Biden . The last trip in November was with Biden .
 The Ukrainians were working to form a government after the elections, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We were advocating a broad coalition government with a very strong reform program. We were at that point advocating a strong coalition government .
 The government was formed with a large number of technocrats with lots of experience in the economy in particular .
 The government put forward a relatively robust and very concrete reform agenda, including things like cutting the public sector by 10 percent . It also put forward strong measures against corruption .
 The Rada, the Ukrainian Parliament, endorsed that, which was by a very wide margin . It speaks to strong support across Ukrainian parties to deliver on what the people asked for in those elections .
 We have to support them. So now they have to implement, and as they implement, we have to continue to help them . We are supporting them, we say, and we will support them .
 It's been half a year since you spoke there, and outlined that plan . It's almost been half-a-year since that plan was outlined, and it's almost a year.
 The four points that you outlined are still the way we look at the situation. Support for Ukraine, protection of allies and partners, offering an off-ramp, offering de-escalation if the Kremlin is willing . The Minsk peace plan from September that the Kremlin signed onto but
 All of those pieces since the summer continue to accelerate. So I think you've seen all of those things since theSummer continue to Accelerate .
 NATO provides physical reassurance to our allies, NATO says . NATO says it has seen us continue to, on land, sea and air, provide reassurance .
Security support for Georgia and Moldova and Ukraine has increased . Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and Ukraine have seen security support increase .
 The European Readiness Initiative will allow us to preposition equipment as necessary and further strengthen the alliance . The initiative is part of the European Watchiness Initiative .
 U.S. support for Ukraine in 2014 is $320 million plus the $1 billion loan guarantee in 2014 . Ukraine support is conditioned on Ukraine staying the reform course, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The sanctions can be rolled back if the Minsk protocols are implemented, if Russia closes that border with Ukraine, pulls back equipment and fighters in eastern Ukraine, and helps release hostages . In September, the United States and the EU imposed tough sanctions on Ukraine .
We have made clear that sanctions will roll back if they fulfill their obligations, but we haven't seen it yet . Those are the main points that we want to see, and we have made it clear that we have been made clear .
 Some of my colleagues in this town and outside have been suggesting in op-eds that the U.S. should recognize Crimea's annexation .
 President Petro Poroshenko of Ukraine said that one can't fight aggression with blankets .
 The Senate passed a bill that authorizes the president to provide both lethal and non-lethal military assistance to Ukraine . The bill also requires to expand sanctions on Russia . The Senate unanimously passed the bill last week .
 It seems now that the president will sign the bill, despite some reservations .
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act is emblematic of the strong bipartisan, bicameral support for Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the Ukraine Freedom support Act is an example of bipartisan support for the country .
 Ukrainians have been very important to them politically. And I know from talking to Ukrainians that that has been veryimportant to them political .
 It's been important to them as they seek to build their reform agenda. It's important to know that they have the support of the American people and their representatives .
 Congress has sent delegations out to Ukraine during the Maidan period . Since then, there have been a number of congressional delegations .
National support is very, very important. And, you know, when you're trying to do difficult new things, to have that national support isvery important .
 The bill gives us the administration-authorization for a broad set of tools . It also allows considerable flexibility to use those tools in a manner that is flexible as we see how the situation develops .
 AEI pays my salary. So if I could sort of probe a tiny bit - I know the answer but let me do it anyway, you know, AEI pay my salary .
 We're all talking about defensive -you know, anti-tank and anti-aircraft . So lethal assistance, defense of -obviously, we're all talk about defensive-defense .
 The U.S. has given $118 million to Ukraine in calendar 2014 alone . Ukraine needs heavy armor, night vision, communications gear and other things, he says .
We've been doing security support up to the high-end, non-lethal defensive range, and support for border security . We've also been doing support for the border security.
 Ukrainians are doing a huge amount of work now to harden the rest of the border and make it a real border . I don't have the number in my head but it's at least 70 million in border security .
 The White House and Tony Blinken say that we keep this under review. With regard to the question of lethal, I think you've heard the White House says that we keeping this underreview .
 We're in constant dialogue with the Ukrainians about what will make a difference to them . We are in constant talks about what would make a Difference to them, says the author .
 What's most important is that the Russians be deterred in further adventure. The Russians should not be allowed to go on further adventure .
 Ukraine faces many huge problems that Ukraine faces, including Russia's aggression . Ukraine is facing many of its biggest challenges, such as the Russian aggression .
 I just thought that I would just collect it all in one. And you alluded to it, and I justthought that I'd just collect the all inone. And I just said that I just wanted to collect it.
 Ukraine is almost at the bottom of the Transparency International's corruption list . Ukraine is nearly at the top of the list for corruption .
 Its GDP is likely to shrink by 9 percent this year, and, optimistically, by another 3 percent next year . The economy is expected to grow by 8 percent in the next year, according to the IMF .
Hard currency reserves, at $19 billion, are almost incredibly low for a country that size .
 Ukraine has been accused of separatism and outside interference in the medium term . The Senate Foreign Relations Committee is hearing testimony from Ukraine's president . Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin is expected to speak to the committee .
 If Ukraine does not create a clean, transparent, democratic country, it will once again blow its chance, he says . And, you know, we believe, we certainly believe, and I think the broad majority of Ukrainians believe .
 The Maidan was about many things but it was about the Ukrainian people being sick of being ripped off by their leaders, by oligarchs, by a non-transparent system .
Kleptocrats don't want a small handful of kleptocrat running that country anymore . They don't wants a small number of k Leptocrats running that nation anymore .
 The government has committed to the Rada, the government says . That's what the current leadership was elected on, whether it was President Poroshenko or whether it's Rada .
 A good chunk of our technical assistance and the EU's assistance will be earmarked for that kind of work . This is what they're going to have to do, and it's going to be very, very hard work, and they'll need a lot of help .
 The U.S. and its allies remain committed to a diplomatic off-ramp should Russian choose to take it, he says .
 There seems to be a consensus emerging among independent Russian analysts that the Crimean adventure was a classic strategy of authoritarian regimes . The Crimean adventure is to boost domestic legitimacy and popularity and justify repression .
 Shakespeare has Henry telling Harry, the future Henry V this - he advises him to busy giddy minds with foreign quarrels . I think in Henry IV, Henry has Henry told Harry, Henry V, to be careful of his state .
 There's a lot in the way you phrased this so I don't know exactly where to start, Leon says . Well, Leon, there's a a lot of the way he phrased it, he says .
 The Russian economy was already in trouble when the Kremlin chose to bite off Crimea . It was a nice distraction from the fact that economy was not going to grow at that moment .
 The structure of the Russian state, the Russian economy, has changed over the 20 years that Russians have been allowed to vote for their leaders . But it doesn't change the fact that the state's structure has changed, says the author .
 The Russian economy is deeply knitted into the global economy, and that also creates opportunity, but it creates vulnerability for authoritarian regimes .
 Russia's decision to violate international law has a knockoff effect on the environment for investment in your country, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It's the chilling effect it has on willingness to invest further when there's that kind of uncertainty .
 The Russian economy was not diversified away from hydrocarbons. But the largest issue is the broader economic mismanagement over more than a decade .
 The Russian people did not appreciate how vulnerable they were to this lack of diversification, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Kremlin has prioritized their foreign adventures over the well-being of the Russian people now, not to mention all the Russian mothers and girlfriends and sisters and parents who lost children in the east when so many Russians were killed .
 NATO has put a huge amount of effort into making it absolutely clear that NATO space is inviolable. Well, I think you know that we've put a lot of effort to make itabsolutely clear thatNAT space isinviolable .
 Congress has spent almost $1 billion on NATO trips this year, says President Obama . Obama: "You don't mess with NATO allies"
 We've had intensive consultations with the Baltic countries, as have our NATO allies, on an integrated approach to defense . We've also had intensive talks with Baltic countries .
 You see allies from all countries participating there. You see them strengthening border security now, you see them strengthen it now .
 This was not our choice but this is a clear necessity now to ensure that, first of all, those countries feel secure, feel all 28 allies are there for them . We made absolutely clear that this is not an adventure that anybody ought to be going on. Just
 The information gets to every Russian. I'm glad that you mentioned the information that gets to all Russians .
 One of the sources -probably key source of patriotic mobilization - was a monopolistic propaganda . Now, one of the source of that success was, of course, a monopolist propaganda .
 Moscow's youth far surpasses anything that I saw in the '70s, in just in sheer cynicism and not to mention technology and the reach of technology and reach .
 President Putin said the U.S. supports violence, murder and burning people alive in Ukraine . A couple of weeks ago, Putin said that the United States supports violence and murder .
 There have been a private place accorded to you personally in all of this. Now, I'm bringing this up because there have been quite aPrivate place according to you personal in all this .
 This is just a few randomly selected printouts of articles . I brought you, and I'll give it to you as a souvenir .
 The Russian language is fluent in Russian, but for the audience, let me translate just the headlines that were collected here .
 If you do and it's not copyrighted, we'll be happy to post it on the AEI site .
 Sputnik and Novosti have correspondents from both sides of the world . I think we have corresponders here from Sputsnik andNovosti .
 It was December 11th or December 12th, just to tell the story. So, first of all, this happened. It's not the first time this happened .
 Cathy Ashton of the European Union was in Kyiv to try to help foster some dialogue between Maidan leadership, opposition leadership, and President Yanukovych .
 She had spent some four hours with Yanukovych and worked with the opposition . She had worked with Yanukovych for four hours .
 Ashton, of course, is in charge of the European Union's foreign policy . Ashton is also in charge.
 OSCE meeting decided to try to go together and to work in tandem . They had made a decision after the meeting to try and work together .
 Yanukovych was to see Yanukovych the next day . So we were there one night, and then I was to visit Yanukovych . The next day, we were to see him again .
 Yanukovych had order the Berkut security forces onto the Maidan . The Berkut forces were ordered by Yanukovych . The Maidan is a city in Ukraine .
 There were some 2,000 young guys in Adam Ant suits pushing onto innocent demonstrators . Cathy Ashton and Cathy Ashton were there .
 The Maidanchiki started ringing the bells and started singing . It was the first time they had started singing.
 The Berkut retreated at about three o'clock in the morning. And they ended up surrounding the Berkut .
 Secretary Kerry called it disgusting that security forces were putting security forces onto the Maidan .
 The Maidan leaders were all going down to see the Maidan leader regularly during this period, says Ashton .
 I didn't feel, in classic Slavic tradition, that I could go empty-handed, says author . But he says he doesn't feel that he could goempty-handed .
 We brought sandwiches to the Berkut to the protesters who had been ordered by their president to move against their mothers and grandmothers .
 Yanukovych had put Ukrainians in, pitting them against each other . So it was a symbol of sympathy with the horrible situation that Yanukovych put Ukraine in . It was a sign of sympathy for the Ukrainian people .
 The Berkut were equal victims of the authoritarian structure which was also aided and abetted from the north .
 U.S. will never be shy about supporting efforts for more democracy, more enfranchisement anywhere in the world, as you know . That said, the United States will not be shy.
 If you could just -I know who you are but if you could identify yourself. If you can identify yourself, you could do so .
 IMF says at least 15 billion dollars is needed for Ukraine . IMF says that at least $15 billion is needed in Ukraine .
 The IMF should be in addition to the IMF funding committed and more money than this will be needed for the next two years, says the IMF . The IMF will need to spend more money to keep the IMF committed and committed .
 First, there will be an IMF program, we presume, then there will a donor conference . First, the IMF program will be a program, then the donor conference will be held .
 Anders Aslund has been a mentor and a champion for two, three decades for those across the Euro-Atlantic space who have wanted more open, more democratic economies . Aslund, who has been an advocate for more open and democratic economies.
 Ukraine's IMF program agreed last year is going to need a significant adjustment, IMF says . There is a fiscal hole now to the tune of 10 to 15 billion dollars, it says .
 The Ukrainians have been working with senior EU member states and with the commission on the responsibility that we will all have, if the Ukrainians stay on track, to help fill this hole .
 The IMF will come forward with formal conclusions relatively shortly . We anticipate that the IMF will be able to make a formal announcement soon .
 The IMF and the World Bank will have to increase their support for Ukraine . The United States, Europe and other friends of Ukraine around the world will also increase support .
 EU has been in active conversation with the EU asking that they also give a signal of support . But we've also been in very active talks with the European Union .
 President Juncker says there is a need now and beginning to get EU member states ready .
Ukrainian President Poroshenko, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk and the Rada have pledged their commitments to themselves to the international community to get it right .
 Foreign Affairs rewired the whole jalopy of the promises given by the Western powers to Russia 25 years ago about not expanding NATO and Ukraine becoming a NATO member .
 There were no promises made to Russia that it would have a veto at any point, he says . No promises made by any American or European leader that he is aware of over other countries' sovereign choice of alliance .
 Anyone who tells you otherwise doesn't know the true situation doesn't. So, and anybody who tells us otherwise don't know what's happening .
 The U.S. and Europe and others have brought to bear on the Russian economy . The pressure on Russia is having an effect, he says . "The market information that we're seeing from Russia today is a clear indication that the isolation that the Kremlin has wrought"
 The U.S. and Europe had not been completely unified in Ukraine, he says . Australia, Japan, other friends, in our approach, he adds .
 There were even worse opportunities than what we saw over the course of the year . There were more opportunities than the year's best.
 Russia's economy is so heavily hydrocarbon dependent, it is a 'toxic cocktail' with the effect of sanctions, with low oil prices . But now, we have a really toxic cocktail with the effects of sanctions.
 Russian leadership makes decision to prioritize imperial ambition over the needs of your own citizens, says Russian journalist . "It is a point of decision making" for the Russian leadership, he says .
Since June, I spent around seven weeks in battle zone in eastern Ukraine . I'm a Ukrainian journalist, political journalist, and since June,  I am a military journalist to totally I spent seven weeks.
Ukrainian president says he would like to express his regards from the Ukrainian people to everything you do for your country . He would also like to speak out about his country's history .
 "I want just to remind something, really what happened there. And, probably you are more aware than me, but I want to remind you," he said .
 Around 80 percent of vehicles in the Ukrainian Army come from the Soviet past . Most of vehicles are around 40, 50 years old .
 I have-got some like Kalashnikov and some machine guns which had like maybe 60-year history . I've got some likeKalashnikov. I have also got some of the machine guns that had like perhaps 60-years history .
 All modern weapons which we can receive like modern weapons --it goes from Russians as of course .
 In September, President Obama estimated 70 percent of the vehicles were lost in battle zones . He said in September, he estimated they've already lost up to 70 percent in battle zone .
 A veteran who was engaged in the war in Afghanistan during the Soviet Union and now he went to Eastern Ukraine .
 Taliban had, most dangerous it was either Stinger or some rockets or machine guns . They never used missile launchers like Russians do right now in Eastern Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian government has been in discussion with the Ukrainian government on armored vehicles . The armored vehicles were lost after intense fighting in August and September .
 Ukraine to have some of the up-armored vehicles that are coming back from Afghanistan . Ukraine's vice president announced when he was in Ukraine .
 Ukrainians are pretty good at fixing stuff so a lot of that will be repaired and made ready in Ukraine itself . And the Ukrainians are very good.
 European command has been conducting the equipping and training of Ukrainian military units at their request . That is why one of our main lines of work with Ukraine is this bottom-up review of military .
 Russia is trying to fulfill commitments made in Minsk, Russia's capital . Russia will continue to use its diplomatic pressure to try to get Russia to fulfill its commitments .
 The Minsk agreement, signed by Russia, by separatists, by Ukraine on September 5th, is a good and fair deal . It requires the return of that international border to sovereignty, closing it to further transfers of equipment and personnel .
 We will continue to say to Russia that if that is fully implemented, sanctions will be rolled back . We'll continue to says to Russia. If that's fully implemented.
 Lavrov's recent speeches seem to be resurrecting what Putin put on the table at Yalta, back in August . The cutting loose of Novorossiya as an ideological project, pushing Donbas and its costs onto Ukraine and the West, they keep Crimea, and it's sort
 Pskov brigades went in after that Minsk Agreement, you mentioned . And that, after that, they went in. And that's after that.
 I've long since stopped trying to get inside the head of decision makers in the Kremlin. Look, I've been trying to make decisions for years .
 The U.S. and the EU must live up to the obligations that they undertook in September . If de-escalation happens on the Russian side, it will happen on the United States and EU side, says the U.N.
In traditionally, in that part of the world, nobody likes to fight in the deep winter. You know, traditionally, there's no fight in this winter .
 Minsk is implemented piece by piece in a way that brings peace and security and reintegration of Donbas . The question is, can we use this period when fighting is never a good game, and the clear pressure is evident now, to have cooler heads prevail.
 The Ukrainian government understands that if that border gets closed, that there is an enormous reconstruction job to be done, that people have suffered a huge amount . Ukraine's border with Ukraine is closed if it gets closed .
 We have to hope that winter will be cooler and come out of it in the spring in a better place . But that is very much in the hands of those who are fueling this fire .
 Since the beginning of the war for Ukraine, there has been considerable change in the rhetoric of the U.S. with regard to the regime of Lukashenko . There has been no changes in the domestic policies of the Ukrainian regime .
 Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov says Russia has right to deploy nuclear weapons in Crimea . Lavrov says the right to use nuclear weapons is a right to do so .
 Any effort to further militarize that region will be extremely dangerous, I believe . I believe by those of us who also live in that neighborhood. Second of all, any effort will not go unanswered .
On the question of Belarus, I'm not sure quite what you're referring to, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Belarus has had an ongoing dialogue with the government of Belarus over human rights . The government is concerned about the political environment for dissent, says the government .
 Belarus leadership is "uncomfortable being offered a binary choice," says CNN's John Sutter . Belarus is "quite uncomfortable" being offered binary choice, Sutter says .
 The brand Minsk is emblematic of a peace deal than we'd seen in a long time, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Belarus is open to a warmer, more integrated relationship with Belarus as the human rights situation improves . But we remain open to more integrated relations with the country .
 Europe would obviously be able to respond, as would Europe. But, again, it's in the hands of the leadership whether they want to take their country in a more democratic, open direction .
 The letter goes on to say the last person to attack Russia was Hitler and he was destroyed . The letter says that those who would provoke Russia would be the last to attack the country .
Some Germans fear full-on confrontation, potentially nuclear confrontation . This is coming from Germans to evoke the image of Hitler .
 The U.S. and Europe have brought to bear to Russia's aggression in Ukraine, he says . The response has been to use the considerable economic tools at our disposal, he adds .
 What we are doing militarily is protecting allied territory because we have treaty obligation should NATO allies come under attack. What we're doing is protect allied territory.
 We are seeking to change Russian choices, to bring them back into compliance with international law, primarily through political and economic tools . We are trying to change Russia's choices by changing its political, economic and economic policies .
 I regard you as a friend also and a very skillful presenter of the American official position . I regard him as a friends also and as a very skilled presenter .
 propaganda for the Americans is a very important tool which works probably for them better than for the Russians. I think that propaganda for Americans is very important .
 Lavrov said that you had a satellite and an AWACS plane watching what was happening with the Malaysian airline . It obviously is a major milestone in the Ukrainian conflict .
Economic news is in the forefront for all of us now, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Economic news are in the front of the forefront"
 He made clear that we believed it was shot down by a Buk missile from separatist-held territory . And he made clear at that time that we thought it had been shot down .
 There will be, I believe, in the context of the Dutch case, when they roll it out - they are likely to ask us to declassify some of that . I think we will be able to help in that regard .
Best declassified set of information from U.S. assets is still contained in what Secretary Kerry said that day . But best declassified information from United States assets still is not released .
 It is -I believe it was the Saturday the 21st, but I don't have the dates exactly in my head .
 We have been very clear publicly and privately with the Russian Federation with regard to what we know . We have also been veryclear publicly and private with the Russia Federation .
 The Dutch and ICAO are seeking information from Russia . There's been a lot of funky theories, let's put it that way, coming out of Russian propaganda .
 I completely reject your assertion that we seek to hurt the Russian people. I completely rejects your assertion. I totally reject your claim that we sought to hurt Russian people .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in power for 25 years . He says Russia is more democratic, more open, more peaceful . Putin: "We have sought for 20, 25 years to see that Russian people live in a more prosperous, more democratic"
 I have personally committed my diplomatic career to over all these years. That is what I have committed my career to. That's what I've personally committed myself to .
 20 billion dollars in U.S. assistance to Russian Federation over 20 years too. That's what we have committed some 20billion dollars in United States assistance to the Russian Federation .
 Russian leadership is taking Russia back to a place where it is closed off, says CNN . It is not just from clean, democratic, open information by the Kremlin's propaganda campaign but also from their access to Europe, access to markets and access to that opportunity to live in
 Russian flex students say, "Bring it back. And you've seen, on Russian social media both on Facebook and on VKontakte all the Russian Flex students saying, " bring it back"
 That's the Russia that is in our interest, is a Russia that's strong, that is democratic, that's a good partner for us . That's what we want to see, says the U.S. ambassador .
 It is extremely regrettable to us that the Russian people are now paying the price in their pocketbook. It is very regrettable that the Russians are now pay the price.
 We want to go back to a place where we can work together, but it's Russia's choice . Russia's decision is to leave Russia for Russia .
 It's been extremely useful for you to dispel all kinds of things and misinformation and clarify things. Well, it's been very useful, I think for you.