 Moscow sees the illegal crossing by three Georgian television journalists of the South Ossetian border as a provocation ahead of the Prague meeting between Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Karasin and Georgian Prime Minister's Special Representative Zurab Abashidze .
 The violators deliberately and demonstratively crossed over from the Georgian border village of Adzvi to the adjacent South Ossetian populated area where they started filming border infrastructure .
 It is not the first time that such provocations are being organized ahead of a Prague meeting. It is remarkable that this is not a first time.
Georgian government says Russian aircraft violated Georgian airspace by Russian aircraft . The ministry says the incident was pursued by the Saakashvili regime .
 Georgian Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili said he hopes that the arrested journalists will soon be released . Georgian PM says he hopes they will be released soon .
 Georgian prime minister: We need "healthier" relations with Russia .
 This is true for the Russian-Chinese military and military-technical cooperation, Kokoshin said . This is also true for Russian- Chinese military and technical cooperation .
 Russian Permanent Representative to the U.N. Vitaly Churkin dismissed as provocative allegations that Crimean Tatars fear a new act of genocide .
 The new Crimean constitution declares the official status of the Tatar language and assigns official positions for Tatar community . The Crimean constitution also declares the status of Tatar.
 The fears that Russia could take part of Ukraine's eastern territory under control have no grounds, Russian Permanent Representative to the European Union Vladimir Chizhov says .
 The policy the Ukrainian authorities are conducting in southeastern regions may lead to a civil war, Russian Permanent Representative to the U.N. Vitaly Churkin says .
 Report on Ukraine released by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights . Ivan Simonovic criticized the report on Ukraine as "one-sided, politically motivated"
 Crimea cannot be a subject of the session dedicated to Ukraine, says Churkin . Crimea cannot also be a topic of the sessions, he says .
 The Russian permanent representative said the report was undermining the OHCHR's authority .
 Russia has expressed "bewilderment" at the United States' denial of an entry visa to the new Iranian permanent representative to the United Nations . Hamid Aboutalebi is the new U.N. permanent representative .
 The accord says that this provision, which is part of its Section 11, "shall be applicable irrespective of the relations existing between the Governments of the persons referred to in that section and the Government of the United States"
 The Russian Foreign Ministry has branded the delivery of U.S.-made BGM-71 Tow anti-tank missiles for the Syrian armed opposition forces "a dangerous development"
 "We are talking about media reports and video files showing that the U.S. BGM-71 Tow portable anti-tank missile got into the hands of Syrian militants," the ministry's Department of Information and Press said .
 The militants reportedly underwent special training in handling this type of weapon, the Russian Foreign Ministry said .
 Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Karasin and Georgian prime minister for relations with Russia Zurab Abashidze discussed .
 At the sides "concentrated on practical aspects of bilateral relations," he said .
Trade turnover between Georgian commodities grew 50% with exports of Georgian commodities to the Russian market quadrupling. Trade turnover between our two countries grew 50%.
 The crossing of the border of South Ossetian border by Georgian reporters was a provocation, Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Grigory Karasin said .
 South Ossetian court expelled them back to Georgian territory . They were expelled back to Georgia under a judgment of the court .
 The Russian Foreign Ministry accuses the U.S. of approving 'the war against its own people' declared by the Ukrainian authorities . It warns that such 'reckless' support for the regime will have disastrous consequences .
 Washington must realize "disastrous consequences of such reckless support for its dependents," the Foreign Ministry says . The Foreign Ministry information and press department says .
 Questions the Kremlin is receiving for President Vladimir Putin to answer in a planned live television program on Thursday . Some of the messages are anti-Russian and some contain demands that Putin move troops into the east of the country .
 Russia is behaving aggressively, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Russia is acting aggressively, Obama says . Obama says Russia has been acting aggressively .
 They are obviously made ignorant by the information blockade under which they find themselves . They are probably largely made ignorant.
 Dmitry Peskov tells Russia's Vesti 24 television that Russian television channels have been taken off the air . "They are only able to receive information from one side," he says .
 At the same time, people from eastern Ukraine ""complain about Putin's indecision concerning the east of Ukraine," he said .
 Some of the people from the east are wondering what Russia would do if a referendum were held in the east . The latter voted for independence from Ukraine, Peskov said .
 There are "too many such questions to ignore them," a spokesman said . There are too many questions "to ignore them"
 The same goes for questions as to how Russian citizenship can be obtained, he said .
 Russia's position on Ukraine is not reaching European citizens because it faces "concrete wall of censorship" Russian presidential press secretary Dmitry Peskov has said .
 Russia-25 TV channel. "This can be admitted with great regret, nevertheless, it is so," Peskov said .
 They are not going through because they face a crude, concrete wall of censorship, they say . They say they are not doing it because they are being censored .
"We have not seen such things and honestly speaking we have not thought that it could be so apparent," the presidential press secretary said .
"Earlier there were very many signs of a media war, but it was never conducted so widely, on such a scale," Peskov said .
 Russia is censoring all incoming information flows from the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Crimea . It was difficult to imagine that a year or two ago 'sang songs' about the restriction of the freedom of speech in Russia are simply censoring .
 It is curious that "following instructions from their editors TV channels broadcast one information flow, while on the social networks of the same publications spectators leave their comments"
 Putin informed about Transdniestria's request on recognizing its independence, Kremlin press secretary Dmitry Peskov said .
 President of Transdniestrian Supreme Council said he was unaware of channels through which the request had reached the president .
 Members of the Supreme Council of Transdniestria had adopted a request on Wednesday addressed to the UN, the Organization for Co-operation and Security in Europe and the Russian authorities on recognizing the independence of the self-proclaimed Moldovan Republic .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has said there are no Russian Armed Forces units in eastern Ukraine .
 "The fact that these people have taken off masks in the direct sense of the word proves this best of all," he said . The fact that they have takenoff masks "proves thisbest of all" he said.
 The current instability in Ukraine can be settled only through a dialogue, Russian President Vladimir Putin said .
 He said he believes it would be very important to start negotiations with all parties involved . He said it is important to begin negotiations with the parties involved.
 Members of the de facto Kyiv authorities have been coming to eastern parts of Ukraine from time to time . They have met with their appointees rather than with their opponents there, he said .
"It's necessary to speak with the people and their real representatives," he said . "It's needed to speak to the people," he added .
 The decision to send tanks and combat aircraft to eastern Ukraine is another serious crime committed by the authorities in Kyiv, Putin said .
 Putin: "It is another very serious crime on the part of the current Kyiv authorities" Putin said during his annual call-in live broadcast on Thursday .
 Putin says he attaches great importance to the quadripartite negotiations between Russia, the European Union, the U.S. and Ukraine . The talks start in Geneva on Thursday to find a solution to the Ukrainian situation .
 They do not have to travel to Donbas; it will suffice to summon to Kyiv and hold a conference there . It will suffice for Kyiv to hold conference there. They will not need to travel.
 Putin: "It is necessary to speak with people, their genuine representatives, the ones people have faith in" Putin said. "We need to talk with people," he said .
 Russia never planned to annex Crimea but threats to the Russian-speaking population were real, President Vladimir Putin said .
"We intended to build our interstate relations with Ukraine on the basis of the present-day geopolitical realities," Putin said in the Q&A session on Thursday .
 "It was when, not five, ten or 20 years ago, that we decided to support the people of Crimea," the chief of state underscored .
 Putin noted that his decision regarding Crimea was supported by all members of the Russian Security Council . Putin noted his decision on Crimea was backed by all of the Security Council members .
 The decision concerning Crimea's reconnection with Russia was made at the very last moment, Putin said . The results of the March 16 referendum were announced .
 Russian military servicemen were behind the back of the self-defense forces in Crimea, President Vladimir Putin says . They acted in a very correct but resolute way, he says .
 Putin: "They acted in a very correct but, as I've said already, a resolute and professional way" Putin said during a Q&A session on Thursday .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin does not agree that Viktor Yanukovych fled Ukraine during the recent events in Kyiv .
 Yanukovych presumed that an understanding had been reached with the opposition forces, Putin said . Putin said he signed a February 21 agreement guaranteed by the foreign ministers of Poland, France, and Germany .
 Yanukovych agreed to early parliamentary elections, the reinstatement of the 2004 constitution, and presidential elections in December 2014, he said .
 Putin says he pulled Interior Ministry units out of the capital . But no, he says, they immediately went further, seizing his secretariat building and government building . "We staged a coup," Putin says .
 Russia is not considering the possibility of establishing a military-political alliance with China, President Vladimir Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday .
"We are not raising the issue of establishing any military-political alliance," he said . He said .
 "It is absolutely obvious that we will broaden cooperation with China," he said . "We will broaden cooperate with China"
 Russia and China will have a significant effect on the entire system of international relations, Putin says . Russian President Vladimir Putin said .
 Russia and China "have never had such trusting relations in the military field" as they do now, Putin said . The two countries have recently conducted joint war games at sea and on the ground, he said .
 Russian Black Sea Fleet based in Crimea and Sevastopol will be able to benefit from all appropriate social programs that exist in Russia . President Vladimir Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday .
 A compromise regarding Ukraine must be reached by Ukrainian political forces rather than Russia and the United States, Russian President Vladimir Putin said .
 The compromise must be reached between various political forces inside Ukraine, not between third parties, not third parties .
"This is of paramount importance," Putin said in a Q&A session on Thursday . "This is a keynote issue," he said in the session .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says rights of Ukraine's Russian-speaking population will be observed, not the order of holding a referendum and elections, he says . Putin says the rights of Russia's population is vital to settling the Ukrainian crisis .
 Kyiv should be persuaded to give its answer concerning such guarantees, he said . Kyiv must be persuaded by Kyiv to give the answer about such guarantees .
 In tsarist times, a certain part of Ukraine did not belong to Ukraine, but was transferred to it by the Soviet government in the 1920s .
"All this happened after the victories of Potyomkin and Catherine the Great in the well-known wars," Russian president says .
 Putin says Ukrainian citizens should enjoy the same rights as the other citizens of this country . People who live on this territory today are Ukrainian citizens, he says .
 Putin says the answer to the question of guarantees will be found . Putin: "Hopefully, an answer to that question will be discovered"
 Russian President Vladimir Putin hopes he will not have to use the right to send army units to Ukraine he has been given by the parliament . He hopes he won't have to send troops to Ukraine.
 Putin: "We will manage to resolve all pressing, not to say, critical contemporary problems of Ukraine with political and diplomatic means" Putin said in a Q&A session .
 He thinks Russia should do the utmost to help people in eastern Ukraine stand up for their rights . He says Russia should help people stand up to their rights in Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin believes that the current election campaign in Ukraine has unacceptable forms . If it continues to take place in such forms, the Russian authorities will not be able to recognize the legitimacy of the upcoming presidential polls .
 Putin: "We certainly will be unable to recognize the events that will follow May 25 as legitimate" Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday .
 Putin: "Yet we have to bear the realities in mind" Putin said in a Q&A session on Thursday .
 He called for taking a sober view of the situation concerning the further enlargement of the alliance .
 Putin recalled earlier assurances of the NATO administration about the absence of eastward enlargement plans .
 The alliance grew with former members of the Warsaw Treaty Organization, the Baltic and former Soviet republics .
 Russian president: "Security of these countries will be guaranteed" "All right but it will suffice to sign a bilateral treaty of friendship and mutual assistance," he says .
Whenever the infrastructure of a military bloc is moving towards our borders we have certain fears and questions . But this is also true that whenever the infrastructure is moving toward our borders, we have some fears .
 Putin admitted that Russia's decision on Crimea was partially linked to considerations about the possible Ukrainian accession to NATO . The decision was partly linked to the possibility of the Russian military presence from the Black Sea region and the deployment of North Atlantic Alliance forces on Crimea .
 Putin: "If we did nothing Ukraine would be dragged into NATO at some point consistent with the same principles and NATO ships would be deployed in the city of Russian naval glory, Sevastopol"
 Crimea does not have the significance it used to have in the 18th-19th centuries . Crimea has the availability of modern assault weapons, including those deployed on the coastline .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin insists presidential elections in Ukraine are impossible without constitutional reform . Putin insists that presidential elections are impossible.
 Russia has had contacts with all presidential candidates in Ukraine, Putin said . Putin said Russia has been in contact with Ukraine's presidential candidates .
 Putin: "A lot of people here have probably tasted without even knowing that the owner of this enterprise is Mr Poroshenko" He is manufacturing chocolates and caramel candies .
 Putin says Yulia Tymoshenko is for another Ukrainian presidential candidate . Putin says she is running for president in Ukraine .
 She has called for destroying Russians with nuclear weapons . But she thinks this was likely a result of some emotional breakdown . We know each other very well .
 She signed the well-known gas contracts, with which her party associates and those who took part in signing this contract are refusing to fulfill today . By the way, she signed the gas contracts.
 Putin says he personally does not know the rest of the presidential candidates . Putin said he personally doesn't know the other candidates .
Self-defense forces in eastern Ukraine can be disarmed only after Ukrainian Armed Forces units leave the area and Ukraine's far-right movements surrender their weapons, Russian President Vladimir Putin said .
 Putin: "In this case, they ought to drag the army away from the civilian population" Putin said during his annual Q&A session on Thursday .
 They will say afterward that there is nothing they could have done about it . And they will say after that there's nothing they can do about it. And they'll say afterward.
 It is impossible to make people in the east to surrender weapons in such conditions. It is not possible to make anyone in the East surrender weapons .
 Russian president says Berkut soldiers, Interior Ministry officers and even some military units have chosen to take their side .
 Putin: "They should be governed by common sense and today's realities" Putin said: "We are not going to change the world's rules"