 Kyiv insists that the war in the Donbas has been an “anti-terrorist operation’s” The enemy found there are “terrorists’ rather than the Russian soldiers that most of them are .
 Moscow has dropped any pretence and is dispatching battalions across the border essentially openly . In recent days, Moscow has drop any pretense .
 Vladimir Putin feels he no longer needs to hide his aggressive presence in Ukraine . Once commonplace efforts to mask insignia identifying Russian troops have dissipated .
 The Russian artist Ilya Repin was as great in painting as Leo Tolstoy was in literature . Repin's work was a masterpiece of Russian art .
 Repin’s famous work Ivan the Terrible and his son Ivan depicting the historical 16th -century story of the Russian czar mortally wounding his son in a fit of rage .
 The Emperor’s face is fraught with terror, as his son lay quietly dying in his arms, blood dripping down the side of his face .
 You may call them stoical and even, to a certain degree, heroic, but the impression is that they have put up with their fate . The impression of them is that the people who have done so are heroic .
 Two pictures parallel the two nations as they are now, in the beginning of the 21st century . For me, these two pictures parallel both nations as it is now .
 Alexander Bednov was a prominent rebel commander in the separatist eastern region of Ukraine . He was killed when separatist security forces tried to arrest him .
 An arrest warrant for Bednov and several other battalion members had been issued by separatists’ prosecutors’ office for murder, abduction, torture and other abuses .
What happened doesn’t look like a case of mere infighting among rebels. What happened doesn't look like an infighting between rebels, says CNN.com .
 Bednov was too influential and too well-guarded to be done away with so easily . Bednov is too influential. Bednov had been too influential .
 The present-day leader of the separatist region Igor Plotnitskiy wouldn't have dared to dispose of Bednov without the Kremlin’s consent or without, what is more likely, its direct participation .
 Putin's attempt to consolidate the motley rebellion forces before multi-party negotiations on the future of the region . Sooner, it was Putin’s attempt to consolidate the rebellion forces .
 Bednov’s political views are not clear if we consider his political views . However, there is another implication in here.
 Russia's leader is a strong opponent to the Donbass remaining a part of Ukraine . He was an adherent of a new state in the region– Novorossiya .
 Putin would be more preferable for Putin not to “feed the Donbas’s Donbas but to keep it officially integrated in Ukraine, control Ukraine by proxy and have western sanctions cancelled .
 When we look back into history, an analogous case may be traced in the Spanish civil war in the 1930s . The case may have been similar to that of the Spanish Civil War in 1930s.
 Bednov would have accorded more with Ukraine’s interests than Plotnitskiy, says IMHO .
 I don't like the idea of the Donbas being a political hot potato in my country’s hands. I don’t like the concept of the donbas being political hot potatoes .
 Apparently, my colleague was referring to problems other than technical problems . Apparently, the problem was not technical .
 In August 1964 the Soviet government finally gave full go ahead to the lunar landing effort . Two months later, in a palace coup, Khrushchev was forced to step down, which also meant the death of the project .
 At my high school the teachers never missed an opportunity to emphasize the priority of Russian inventors as compared to foreign scientists .
 Our teacher never told us about what used to happen to those inventions after they were made .
 After Ivan Polzunov’s death at age 37, the machine worked three months, then was disassembled and replaced by convenient hydropower . The machine paid off its costs in those three months .
 In 1876, he was awarded French patent # 112,024 for his electric candle . By the autumn of 1875 he had moved to Paris where in 1876 he had move to Paris .
 The first public exhibition of the candle was in London on 15 April 1876 . It was the first public display in London .
 The Yablochkov candle could burn for an average of one and a half hours in a lamp before the candle had to be replaced . The candle is expected to burn for one and an hour before it is replaced .
 The candles rapidly increased in popularity as another exhibition was held in London on 17 June 1877 . The candles were displayed in London at the same time as the exhibition .
 Units were sold in many European countries including Belgium, Spain, Portugal, Sweden and Greece . Units were also sold in cities on other continents including Rio de Janiero, Mexico City, New Delhi, Calcutta and Madras .
 The Shah of Persia and the King of Cambodia used the candles for illuminating their palaces . The Shah used the candle to light the palaces of the two countries .
 At the height of the candle’s popularity, the 8,000 of the candles were produced in France per day .
 Russian government persuaded Yablochkov to come back to Russia after he got rich in France . The Russian government convinced him to do it in Russia .
 Yablochkov set up office where he worked on plans for lighting the city . In the long run, he returned to his home province of Saratov .
 Yablochkov was buried in the village of his parents in the Church of Archangel Michael . He was buried by his parents.
 The church was destroyed by the communist regime in the late 1930s . Sergey Vavilov, then president of the USSR Academy of Sciences, attempted to locate the exact grave site .
 In 1964 two Russians Alexander Prokhorov and Nikolay Basov shared the Nobel Prize in Physics for inventing the laser . Charles Townes was an American who invented the laser in 1964 .
 Russian inventors' heads never went into commercialize the idea . The idea was never commercialized .
 Charles Townes took out a patent on what he had developed, sold it to a business, got his slice and Russia is buying all its cameras, printers, etc. from the West .
A few articles were published in scientific journals and that seemed to be the end of it . A few articles had been published in the scientific journals .
 In 1980 the Americans took it up and now Chevron, Exxon, BP are teaching the Russians how to successfully do fracking . In the 1980 the U.S. took up fracking and the Russians took up it .
 The social and political environment does not contribute to the implementation of ideas, according to a study by the University of Cambridge .
 Steve Jobs, Thomas Edison, Bill Gates and Thomas Edison have iconic status . Some of them were even drop-outs at school .
 In Russia scientists shun away from business which is considered by them to be dirty, corrupted and criminal . But they rose to the heights thanks to their brilliant acumen .
Knowing the lines and the authorship, I – to my embarrassment – didn't know in what connection the poet had used the words . However, knowing the lines, I didn’t know in the words.
 Robert Browning put these words into the mouth of a Renaissance painter Andrea del Sarto, who lacked the spirit and soul of his contemporaries Raphael and Michelangelo .
 The protagonist admits that being faultless as a painter, he is only a craftsman, but a real talent is able to glimpse heaven .
 Let’s not be afraid to reach for something we won’t probably catch. So, let's not be scared of reaching for what we won't probably catch .
 That was a 7th form course book, and I have been keeping it on my shelf until today . I have kept it on the shelf until now .
 Even though it is already worn and shabby, it remains so much dear to me, it is still so much beloved to me .
 You enter your data in there . fix the device somewhere on your clothes and you may forget about it . fix it . Fix it .
 The pedometer performs all the necessary calculations while you move about . Each time you decide to look at it tells you how many calories you have already spent .
Duolingo is a popular Spanish language program that teaches Spanish language skills . Duolingo has been used in more than 1,000,000 lessons .
 At 00.00.00 exactly my wife, my daughter and my daughter were holding their glasses toasting each other and the future .
 A most significant political result of 2014 for Ukraine was the grown national maturity of the people . Ukraine's political result was the most significant result of the year for Ukraine .
More and more people started to identify with this country and with its European future as opposed to what had been prepared for them by the ex-President Yanukovych .
 Putin's visit to Ukraine brought Putin to his senses for the time being, he says . He is thankful to those people and governments all over the world who, by their decent and sober stand, managed to bring Putin to their senses .
 The Soviets were split into patriots and nationalists . Regarding their national sentiments, the Soviets were divided into nationalists .
 I told him that a son had been born into our family and added that the son’s name was Bogdan . The son's name is Bogdan, and his name is also Bogdan.
In this view he would like to make a line of division between a great-power nationalism and an oppressed nation . He says he wants to see one's country independent and just, free and prosperous, godly and civilized . In this view, he says, the nationalism of an oppressed
 The Soviet Union left no unturned stone to discredit their names and the ideas of Ukrainian nationalism . The Russian government left no unurned stone.
 Stepan Bandera was accused of collaborating with Hitler during the Holocaust . He was also accused of working with Hitler .
 Bandera got imprisoned by the German fascists, while lots of Jews were fighting alongside with the Banderovites against the Germans . Just as seventy years later they were fighting against the Putin-backed Yanukovych .
 Jewish people should learn from Jewish people how to love one's native country and build it, he says . "I always advise my compatriots to learn from the Jewish people"
 The first book of Jewish nationalism is the Old Testament itself . It is also the first book on how to be nationalists .
 During the latest parliamentary elections in Ukraine the whole of the Obolon disctrict in Kyiv was flooded with leaflets and billboards promoting the candidacy of a local money-bag .
 The victory was gained by a person who was a Maidan activist and a participant in the ongoing war with Russia .
 You are currently browsing the BLOGGING IS LIVING blog archives for January, 2015 .