 I advise law firms and corporations, and once helped to get a famous Russian oligarch out of Putin’s jail . I advised law firms, corporations and was once a famous oligarch .
 For 22 years, he was the Heritage Foundation’s leading Russia/Eurasia and international energy expert .
 My consultancy focuses on political risk, national security, and energy policy, especially in Russia/Europe/Eurasia and Middle East .
 The firm’s interventions span international security, economics, law, politics, terrorism, and crime and corruption .
 In addition to consulting for both the public and private sectors, I testify regularly before the U.S. Congress .
 Merriweather,serif;margin:0;text-align:center .
 Work Sans,sans-serif, is a word-shopping tool for Work Sans .
 Work Sans,sans-serif;height:112px;opacity:0;padding:12px;position:absolute;text-align:left;top:45px;-webkit-transition:opacity .3s.3s;-o-
 Ukraine’s Energy Minister, Stepan Kubiv, tells you to look towards the sea . Crimea's annexation in 2014 will see long-term economic losses as a result of the annexation . Ukraine's Energy Minister says Crimea's economic losses will be as a consequence
 The announcement comes on the heels of a continuing standoff in the adjacent Sea of Azov . 24 Ukrainian sailors and three navy ships were seized last November .
 Moscow's brazenness in Ukraine's territorial waters since 2014 serves as a reminder that the Kremlin views these areas and their associated hydrocarbon resources as its exclusive war booty .
 Ukraine has made an effort to resist Russia’s irredentist aspirations . At the cost of more than 10,000 soldiers and civilians since 2014, her position continues to deteriorate .
Western military support has been muted and economic sanctions against the aggressor are proving inadequate means of deterrence . Western military support is muted and the sanctions are proving an inadequate means.
 Ukraine does enjoy as a transit hub for Russian natural gas is fading fast . Meanwhile, the little leverage Ukraine enjoys as a transport hub for Russia is fading quickly .
 The controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline may be launched as early as December 2019 . The controversial pipeline is Russia’s latest attempt to strengthen its grip over Europe's energy supplies .
 Ukraine’s oil and gas sector is plagued by corruption, red tape, and dominance by state monopolies . To make matters worse, Ukraine's oil sector is also plagued by red tape and red tape .
 Kiev has struggled to attract outside investment in its energy resources . The country is in an increasingly perilous economic position .
 Any legal actions to gain reparations for the oil and gas assets lost after the capture of Crimea will take many years . As collecting compensation from a belligerent a nuclear power can be complicated .
 Russia's Resource Grab Russian Black Sea EEZ claims StederGroup The Black Sea contains a wealth of hydrocarbon resources . Russia's resource grab Russian Black sea EEZ says Steder group has more hydrocarbon than ever .
 The northwestern portion holds estimated reserves of 495. bcm of natural gas and 50. million tons of oil and condensate . The northwestern part of the region has an estimated 5.5m of oil reserves .
 The Prykerchenska zone holds about 321. bcm of gas and 126. million tons of oil and condensate . The continental slope has an estimated 766. b cm of gas, and 232.m tons of gas .
 Russia's energy ambitions in the Black Sea region are further helped by circumstance and geographical luck . Russia’s energy ambitions are also helped by geographical luck and circumstance and geography .
 Moscow's intent to exploit Ukraine’s natural gas deposits is not just idle speculation; it is currently underway . Moscow's intention to exploit the country's natural gas deposit is not only idle speculation .
 Russian forces annexed Crimea in 2014 . They seized subsidiaries of Ukraine's state energy conglomerate Naftogaz operating in the Black Sea .
 The Kremlin appropriated these companies — and billions of dollars of equipment — and delivered them to Gazprom, Russia’s state-owned energy giant .
 In one fell swoop, Russia ended Ukraine’s offshore oil and gas operations and bolstered its own .
 Russia has sought to gain de-facto control over Ukraine’s territorial waters . Moscow exercises indirect control in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov Russia .
 The seizure of Ukraine’s offshore oil and gas assets and capture of Ukrainian sailors in November . This was seen with its occupation of the strategic port of Sevastopol .
 Ukraine's Domestic Energy Mess Major international energy conglomerates have noticed Ukraine’s energy potential before . Ukraine's energy potential has not been seen before .
 Shell, Chevron, Eni and ExxonMobil have entered the Ukrainian market before and committed to invest millions of dollars .
 Ukraine is still unable to meaningfully expand its domestic hydrocarbon production due to over-regulation, corruption and the dominance of state monopolies . Despite measurable progress with internal reforms, Ukraine is not meaningfully expanding its domestic production .
 UkrGasVydobuvannya, a 100% subsidiary of Naftogaz, controls 75% of all domestic natural gas production .
 The dominance of UGV and Naftogaz has led to valuable private leasing contracts being given to those connected to the highest echelons of government .
 Mykola Zlochevsky served as Ukraine’s natural resource minister under Yanukovych . The best example of this is the former natural resource Minister of Ukraine .
 During his time in office he would issue extraction licenses to his own company . Despite numerous criminal investigations he has successfully escaped all charges levied against him .
Key oil and gas players met in London at Ukraine’s E&P forum to discuss the auctioning of licenses for rights to 30 onshore hydrocarbon deposits .
 The licenses to be awarded March 6th would allow investors to take part in production sharing agreements with up to 70% private ownership . The licenses would be awarded to investors to be given out March 6.
 Still, questions about Naftogaz dominance, fiscal regime and regulation left most attendees skeptical .
 Today, only small operators with high tolerance to risk are willing to invest in exploration and production in the embattled country .
 The question is by whom the energy resources in the Black Sea will be extracted and produced . That is not the question .
 The rightful beneficiaries of Crimea's offshore oil and gas should be the Ukranian people . The rightful beneficiary should be Ukranians, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine cannot hope to develop its domestic energy sector without getting its regulatory and legal house in order . Beyond the Black Sea, Ukraine can't hope to get its regulatory house in place .
 Russia will need to find an effective strategy to fend off Russia’s creeping annexation. At the same time, it will needs to find a strategy to fight the annexation .
 A war-torn country dominated by corrupt state monopolies is not an attractive destination for private investment . The country is not attractive for private investors .
 She supports the project management and content strategy for Grads of Life’s DEI . She previously served as a marketing writer/editor for Faegre Drinker .
 Jaleesa operated as the go-to consultant for the pro bono and community service team . Before that, she worked as a digital marketing coordinator for American College of Education .
 She particularly has the interest to support homeless populations and children who are raised in single-parent households . She particularly wants to help homeless populations.
 Her passion developed early on as she was raised by her single mom, alongside her younger brother and sister . She was also raised by a single mom.
 Imani recognized at a young age the opportunity gap amongst young people of color . She wanted to make an impact in the world to close that gap for others as much as possible .
 David has enjoyed a 40-year career in the oil and gas industry . He has spent 23 years in the public policy arena, managing regulatory and legislative issues .
 David has led numerous industry-wide efforts to address a variety of issues at the local, state and federal level . From April 2010 through June 2012, he served as the Texas State Lead for America's Natural Gas Alliance .