 February is a brutal month for events in and around Russia and Ukraine . February is the worst month of the year for Ukraine and Russia .
 You need true grit to get through all the painful anniversaries of recent injustices and tragedies . You need to be true grit for all the tragedies and injustices that have occurred .
 February is the anniversary of the tragic deaths of protesters killed in Ukraine’s Euromaidan Revolution .
 After two years, not a single person has been brought to justice . New General Prosecutors are appointed and fail to deliver, even as new General Prosecutors have been appointed .
 It's also the anniversary of the Minsk Accords which brought together the leaders of France, Germany, Ukraine and Russia in the Belarus capital in February 2015 .
 Putin had played Merkel, Hollande, and Poroshenko into a collective checkmate, resulting in an incomplete halt to the fighting in the pro-Russian Donbas region of Ukraine .
 Soldiers are still dying, POWs are still being held, war crimes are being documented . The humanitarian crisis has deepened, and war crimes have been documented .
 February is the anniversary of the horrific battle for Debaltseve, the critical railway hub in eastern Ukraine . Russia claimed it was not subject to the Minsk agreement they had just helped to author .
 The brutal fighting raged on, thanks to Russia’s endless supply of heavy weaponry to their separatists . Ukrainian forces were surrounded, then defeated .
 Combined Russian and separatist forces occupied the devastated city to this day .
 Thousands of Russian troops descended on the peninsula in February 2014 . They took over media, internet, internet and cell phone towers .
 Ukraine was forced to abandon Crimea as Putin's balaclava-clad gunmen stood outside the Crimean Parliament . Those inside were shown how to vote for secession from Ukraine .
 The leaders of the indigenous population of Crimean Tatars refused to acknowledge Russia’s illegal annexation . Most of the rest of the civilized world did not .
Relations between Russia and the West have only grown worse since sanctions were imposed . Europe and the U.S. imposed sanctions, and relations between the two countries have grown worse .
 Last year, I spent the day thinking about the Russian invasion of Crimea, how quickly Russia had moved to both seize and annex Crimea . How Russia had left the democracies in the West, slow by nature and design, in the dust.
 raw footage from closed-circuit cameras located inside the Belbek Airport terminal in Sevastopol, Crimea .
 Soldiers clad in full military gear streamed through the turnstiles of the airport . People who obviously expected their arrival were greeted by people who expected them .
 Russian soldiers who descended on Crimea were but one part of a Russian campaign to undermine Ukraine’s new post-Maidan government . Russia leaned West to Europe rather than toward Russia, as Putin had planned .
 Putin moved quickly to tear Ukraine apart. Having failed to keep pro-Russia kleptocrat Yanukovych in power, he moved quickly .
 The invasion of Crimea which began at the end of February 2014 was the first of many shocking actions by Russia in Ukraine and elsewhere .
 Russians who had opposed Putin’s growing autocratic rule found yet another powerful reason to oppose him .
 Putin’s brazen seizure of Crimea was a shameful betrayal of ‘brotherly’ neighbor Ukraine . Putin's brazen seizure was a ‘shameful betrayal’ of “brotherly ‘ neighbor Ukraine’
 Putin’s aggression was causing an economic crisis inside Russia, whose economy was deteriorating from a global oil glut exacerbated by Western sanctions .
 Russia instituted retaliatory sanctions on Western imports, which only increased Russian suffering . The sanctions only increased Russia's suffering . Russia's response to Western imports only increased the Russian suffering.
 The Russian opposition, made up of a variety of pro-democracy parties, began uniting to hold rallies against Putin and against Putin .
 Nemtsov was instrumental in organizing large anti-war rallies in March 2014 and again in September 2014 . He was also a key figure in organizing anti- war rallies in Russia .
 For the first time since the mass protests against Putin’s re-election in 2012, aggression on Ukraine brought tens of thousands of people to the streets of Moscow and St. Petersburg .
 Opposition parties plan another mass demonstration for March 1, 2015 . Russian soldier “volunteers’ had begun coming home in body bags .
 It was to be an anti-war protest but a broader anti-crisis protest, connecting Putin’s seizure of Crimea and his subsequent war in Ukraine to the growing social and economic crises in Russia .
 Boris Nemtsov called it the ‘Spring’ March, cleverly recalling pro-democracy Spring revolutions around the world that had passed Russia by .
 Nemtsov was campaigning with Alexey Navalny and others to spread the word of the Spring March 1 protest .
 Russian television systematically excluded the opposition, so their efforts were largely grassroots–social media, independent radio interviews, word of mouth .
 Winter was nearly over, a new symbolic Spring was just around the corner . Winter was almost over, but it was just about the corner.
 Russia's propaganda campaign against Ukraine and Russian supporters of Ukraine reached a fever pitch in the weeks leading up to the Spring March .
 Fascists, Nazis, ultra-nationalist Ukrainians, Russian haters had taken over Ukraine . The nonstop and shameless propaganda broadcast on every Russian-language channel .
 Russian patriots were taking to the streets, holding rallies to support Russian volunteers going to fight fascists in Ukraine .
 Russian nationalists and pro-Kremlin groups now called themselves Anti-Maidan . The disinformation campaign turned Ukraine’s “Maidans’” into a dirty word .
Only in Russia would a pro-democracy protest of ordinary people be a bad thing . Only in Russia, only in Russia will a protest be a good thing .
 The Kremlin presented Maidan as dark, evil, violent and destructive, bombarding TV viewers with frightening images of fire and clashes . The Kremlin presents Maidan.
Nevermind that the fires were started to protect protesters from riot police who attacked and beat them. Nevermind that they were started by riot police to protect them from them .
 Russians with pro-Ukraine sympathies were now routinely called traitors . Russians with anti-Ukrainian sympathies are now called 'traitors'
 Putin even referred to a Stalineque “fifth column’ of “enemies of the people’s’ who seek to overthrow Russia .
 Banners began appearing in Moscow with portraits of leading opposition figures as traitors and aliens, not true Russians . Banners are now appearing in the capital with portraits.
 A year ago today, pro-Kremlin groups held a large pro-Putin Anti-Maidan rally in Moscow . The rhetoric echoed Kremlin propaganda bashing Ukraine, the U.S. and Europe .
 Among the many banners praising Putin for standing up to the evil ones, there were some very ugly signs .
 A placard with a portrait of Boris Nemtsov named him as an organizer of Ukraine’s Maidan . The placard clearly suggests he was working to do the same in Russia .
 Boris Nemtsov was assassinated in central Moscow, on a bridge within a stone’s throw from the Kremlin walls . One week later, on February 27, 2015, on the one-year anniversary of Russian troops streaming through Crimean airport .
 If Crimea was Putin’s first shocking punch against the accepted world order, the assassination of Boris Nemtsov was the knockout .
On the day we should have been scrutinizing the events in Crimea, we learned the horrific news that Nemtsov was dead .
 The assassination of Boris Nemtsov was the ultimate Kremlin hybrid war “distraction,’s focus away from Putin's actions in Crimea . The assassination is the most prominent of Russia's opposition leaders .
 Boris Nemtsov’s assassination last February was a game-changer inside and outside Russia . It resulted in more scrutiny of Putin, not less .
 It unmasked the veil of a seemingly normal civilized post-Soviet Russian government under Putin .
 The annexation of Crimea, the war in Donbas, and the MH17 disaster all were shocking violations of international law . The annexation, the Crimea war and the Donbas war were all shocking violations.
 The Kremlin’s true colors under Putin have only become more transparent since his murder . The investigations that had been gathering dust for years have begun receiving renewed attention .
 Putin and his circle of Kremlin elites will abide by no embarrassing criticism that could shake their grip on power . Like a mafia family, Putin and the Kremlin elites are not likely to be criticized .
 The world's powerful propaganda media will clean up the mess with disinformation, obfuscation, and outright lies . They will find a way to silence critics one way or another, in Chechnya, London, Ukraine and Moscow .
 Russia’s opposition has valiantly carried on, speaking out, attempting to participate in elections, documenting government corruption and nepotism . Without the irrepressible and dynamic spirit and wit of their friend and leader Boris Nemtsov, the opposition has carried on .
 A system that’s closing off the few remaining civic spaces for independent voices. But their work has become harder than ever against a system that's increasingly closing off a few remaining Civic spaces .
 Putin has had a smoother path to continue his destructive policies . Without Nemtsov’s thorn in his side, Putin's policies have been smoother .
 Only one large protest has been held in Russia since his death, and it was nowhere near the scale of previous years .
 Putin's move on to making new enemies in Turkey and Syria, aggravating Europe's refugee crisis . Russian airstrikes continue to wipe out Assad’s opposition and any civilians who happen to be in the way .
 Putin has made life more miserable and more unpredictable for many Russians through harassment, intimidation, even prison . At home, Putin has only made life even more miserable for many Russian people .
 Putin has succeeded in silencing some, but others have continued to speak out about the hypocrisy and corruption of Kremlin elites . Putin himself, even Putin, has said he wants democratic change .
 Kremlin's “signal’s violence tactic of murdering Nemtsov has not only failed, but it's had the opposite reaction . It seems that the Kremlin’'s ‘signal violence tactic’ has not just failed, it has also failed .
 Boris Nemtsov's struggle for a new Russia has strengthened commitment to his memory . Officials have rejected people's attempts to commemorate or even remember him in any public or private way .
 Boris Nemtsov, a larger-than-life figure in life, has become a revered symbol of the struggle for a decent, predictable, rule of law-based, free and democratic Russia .
 As the first anniversary of Nemtsov’s brutal assassination approaches, people around the world are planning demonstrations in his honor .
So far, the list includes some 61 cities, from Kyiv to San Francisco, and throughout Russia . So far, there have been 61 cities on the list .
 Below are translations of the recorded announcements from Vladimir Kara-Murza, Ilya Yashin, Mikhail Kasyanov, Gennady Gudkov, and Alexander Ryklin, Sergei Parkhomenko .
 Each appeal to join the February march is also a moving and personal tribute to Boris Nemtsov . Each appeal is a moving tribute to the Russian leader .
Before this miserable February is over, people all over the world will remind Putin that neither Boris Nemtsov nor his fight to free Russia from the repressive, belligerent, failing security state it has become is forgotten .
 One year ago, Boris Nemtsov was killed at the Kremlin’s walls .
 Day in and day out they allow the people’s memorial on Bolshoy Moskvoretsky Bridge to be destroyed and vandalized .
 On February 27, 2016, we are holding a march in his memory in Moscow . The one-year anniversary of his murder is February 27 .
 A march against the war in Ukraine in September 2014 will take place in the same way as the last march of his life .
 We’ll be gathering on Pushkin Square on Saturday, February 27 after 1 pm .
 The organizers and those who ordered this crime have been allowed to walk freely . They feel very comfortable, the government is protecting them . We now understand that the organizers and the organizers are now able to walk free .
 If they’re allowed to remain free, then the policy of political assassinations in Russia will continue, says CNN’s John Sutter .
 The only way to stop this is together, you and I. We can't count on the Kremlin or the security services, says Putin . "We can’t count on Kremlin or security services," he says .
 Many people reject political violence, who reject the atmosphere of hatred that’s developed in Russian society, Boris Nemtsov says . The event will be held on Feb 27th to show that we are many, he says .
 On February 27 will be a march in honor of Boris Nemtsov, my friend, colleague, Opposition leader, an activist for a new Russia .
 I ask you all to come to our demonstration to say "no" to lawlessness, to say “no” to political assassinations, and “yes’ to a democratic Russia,’s President Vladimir Putin says .
 One year ago a horrible terrorist act was committed at the walls of the old Kremlin . The attack was carried out at the Kremlin in Russia .
Five bullets in the back killed Boris Nemtsov, a prominent Russian politician, a public governmental figure, and a very responsible individual .
 The actual people who ordered the crime aren’t found, the organizers have yet to be determined . The organizers are still trying to determine who ordered it .
 It’s also to unite in a patriotic civic stance, and to demand that our government conduct a real investigation . It's also to demand the true murderers accountable for this crime, says author .
 I'm not prepared to accept the conclusions of the so-called investigation without establishing the organizers and those who ordered his killing . I'm attending this march this year on February 27 because I’m not prepared. I'm going to attend this march.
I'm going to the march because I want to express what I think about what's going on in my country, which for an intents and purposes, has ceased to be a normal country. I'm going on the march. I’m going to march because he wants to
 This Saturday February 27 is exactly one year to the day that Boris Nemtsov was murdered . This Saturday, February 27, is the anniversary of the murder of the Russian politician .
 The mayor of Moscow thinks that the anniversary should be observed somewhere else, not at the bridge, but on a boulevard .
First we have a procession down the boulevard, from Pushkin Square to Sakharov Prospect, that'll be our route . First we have to go through the streets of Pushkin and Sakharova .
 The report is a sobering report summarizing the evils that have transpired over the past few years of Putin's regime .
Every person worldwide who values democratic freedoms and human rights should register their support for those brave and honorable citizens of Russia . Boris Nemtsov will be marching in Moscow on Feb 27th to honor his memory .
 Many U.S. citizens are feeling insecure after our recent election was hacked by Mr Putin . Many Americans feel insecure after the recent election.
 Some people disparage our feelings and there is so much controversy I wonder if we will recover . There is a lot of controversy, but I wonder whether we'll recover .
 President-elect has become friends with Mr Putin, says Mr Putin . He says he has become close friends with the Russian leader .
 It is 3:45am here in California, as I write and I have not been able to sleep . It is a good time for a good night, but it is also a bad day for a bad night .
 It's important to know how we got here, and that's mostly what my blog traces. It’s important toknow how we get here, says the author .
 Russia's aggression in Ukraine and crackdowns on human rights in Russia. I never in my wildest nightmares thought we’d be where we are now .
 Our institutions have been subverted, using hybrid psychological propaganda and cyber warfare . Our institutions are being used as a tool for cyber warfare, according to reports .
 Those who haven’t been brainwashed are now struggling to get the truth out. Those who have been brainwashing are now trying to get it out .
 Anthony Bourdain interviewed Boris Nemtsov and visited with others around Moscow . Bourdain also visited with other people in Moscow .
 Mr Nemtsov’s friend lies in a Moscow hospital after his second poisoning .
 It is amazing how powerful people can always rely upon their complete and utter complacency and willingness to look the other way .
 They actually condition themselves to vote against their own best interest and to ignore murder right before their eyes . They actually vote against themselves and ignore murder before they see it .