 John C. Kornblum, former Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs, and former U.S. Ambassador to Germany, Berlin, Germany, 47 Prepared statement . Senator Bob Corker 67 Mckeon, Hon. John C Korn Blum,
 Robert, United States Senator from New Jersey 3 Prepared statement 5 Nuland, Hon. Robert, U.S. Senator.
Sen. Corker, Risch, Rubio, Johnson, Gardner, Perdue, Isakson, Barrasso, Menendez, Cardin, Shaheen, Murphy, Kaine, Kaine .
 This meeting of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee will come to order . The meeting will be held on Tuesday .
I want to begin this hearing by expressing my condolences to the family of Boris Nemtsov and the people of Russia . I want to start the hearing by saying his condolences to Boris NemTsov .
 The murder of Russian opposition leader, Boris Nemtsov, just outside the Kremlin appears to be an attempt to silence those in Russia who want to see their country move away from authoritarianism, corruption, and lawlessness .
 Boris Nemtsov sought a better future for his people, and we must remain committed to his vision for a democratic Russia at peace with its neighbors .
 Russia has continued its occupation of Crimea and destabilization of the country's eastern regions . He was especially critical of Putin’s aggression in Ukraine where, for over a year now, he said .
 Ukraine made a commitment in 1994 to defend Ukraine’s sovereignty and its territorial integrity . Russia has been under a near constant assault by Russia for more than a year .
 More recently, we lured Ukraine West by supporting their desire for closer association with Europe . More recently we lured the West by support for closer ties with Europe, we said .
 The refusal of the administration to step up with more robust support for Ukraine and further pressure on Russia is a blight on U.S. policy and 70 years of defending a Europe that is whole, democratic, and free .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine, started by Russian-backed mercenaries, now directly involves thousands of Russian military personnel . The conflict has resulted in over 6,000 deaths and generated 1. million refugees and internally displaced persons .
 The Russian-backed rebels continued their offensive activities after the second Minsk cease-fire agreement was signed on February 12 . The rebels acquired the strategic railway 2 hub, Debaltseve .
 The Minsk cease-fire agreement required the rebels to withdraw to a demarcation line established last September . Putin has no intention of honoring the cease- fire, says Putin .
 The Minsk cease-fire is far from being a success. While the violence has subsided since the rebels achieved their short-term objective and acquired Debaltseve, the violence is still ongoing .
 The second Minsk agreement is burdened by the failure of the first Minsk deal as it stands . In addition to the ambiguous constitutional conditions required of Ukraine to regain control of its borders, the second agreement is also burdened .
 administration officials have repeatedly referred to the recent Minsk accord as an implementation agreement of the first Minsk agreement .
 Russian-backed rebels have agreed to cease-fire in hope of convincing them to fulfill the same commitments they continually renege on . But jumping from cease-fires is not a strategy for success, it's not a Strategy for success.
 Any strategy will not be effective unless the U.S. begins to provide Ukraine with the ability to inflict serious military cost using defensive weapons on thousands of Russian troops .
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act, passed unanimously by Congress, authorizes $350 million in lethal military assistance to Ukraine . The bill was signed into law by the President .
 President Obama privately pledged to Chancellor Merkel in February that the U.S. will not deliver lethal military assistance to Ukraine . Obama and other administration officials continue to tell the public that they are seriously considering this policy .
 Deputy Secretary of State Tony Blinken argued last week that no amount of lethal military assistance for Ukraine will be sufficient to defeat the rebels and Russian sponsors .
 Ukraine is not to provide Ukraine with enough weapons to overwhelm the Russian military in a direct confrontation . But our objective is to give Ukraine more weapons, not enough weapons.
 The provision of lethal assistance aims to increase Ukraine’s defense capabilities in a way that will give Kyiv the ability to produce conditions on the ground favorable to a peace process .
 The U.S. will be contributing to a quicker, fairer, and more stable settlement of the conflict . By equipping Ukraine with the means to impose a greater military cost on Russia, the United States will be helping.
 Ukraine must go beyond simply imposing cost on Russia, says U.S. ambassador . But our support for Ukraine should go beyond just imposing cost, says ambassador .
 Ukraine's foreign currency reserves have diminished to a month's worth of imports . Ukraine’s foreign currency reserve has been reduced by a month .
 The Ukrainian currency has lost 80 percent of its value since April 2014 . Ukraine's economy continues to teeter on the brink of collapse .
 Ukraine's energy sector is where corruption siphons billions of dollars away from the budget each year . At the same time, while the government in Kyiv is genuinely committed to reform, more needs to be done .
 The U.S. does more to help Ukraine and Kyiv defeats the Russian-backed rebels . But the Ukrainian economy im3 plodes in the process, we have failed and Putin has succeeded, he says .
 He has had an even greater success if that occurs, he says . As a matter of fact, he has had a great success if it occurs .
 U.S. must have a comprehensive strategy that will counter Russian aggression but also drive political, economic, and anticorruption reforms in Ukraine. This is why the United States must have an comprehensive strategy .
 The U.S. has failed to provide Ukraine with lethal military assistance since the Minsk cease-fire agreement was signed . The United States is considering additional ways to support Ukraine with its economic challenges .
 I will turn it over to our distinguished ranking member for his opening comments . And now I will give it to ouringuished ranking member .
 Menendez is a U.S. Senator from New JersEY Senator Menendez . He is a member of the United States.
 Mr. Chairman, for holding what is an extraordinarily important and timely hearing on countering Russia in the Ukraine. Well, thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman .
 Let me join you in very heartfelt condolences to someone who was a courageous opposition leader, and sometimes true patriots pay a price. Let me joined you in a very heartfelt condolence .
 Boris Nemtsov led efforts in which he passionately believed in a different Russia . He led efforts to change the way he believed in Russia .
 The latest narrative that is being portrayed that an Islamist plot is the reason why he was assassinated. And I find it pretty outrageous to see the latest narrative, he says .
 To his family, his friends, and his followers, we have our heartfelt thoughts and condolences . But to his family and friends, we are sorry for his death .
Experts say the complexity of the geopolitics that led to the U.S. retreat from Europe created an opening for Putin in the Ukraine .
 The U.S. must closely coordinate with European friends for the sanctions against Russia to work. Clearly, we must closely coordinating with our European friends to work .
 The U.S. must take the lead, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Without any doubt, we can all agree on one point"
 The President signed into law on December 18 . I believe the administration should fully implement measures in the Ukraine Freedom Support Act .
 The legislation passed with unanimous consent in both Houses of Congress . The legislation was passed in both House of Congress.
 It authorizes the President to provide muchneeded military and humanitarian aid to Ukraine . It imposes additional sanctions against Russia .
This legislation was necessary in December, and it is certainly necessary today . This legislation was needed in December .
 Putin believes that the cost of continuing to ravage Ukraine is simply too high . Now, we all want a diplomatic solution, but I believe this can only come about when Putin believes the cost is too high.
 Ukrainians can see Russians coming but not the weapons to stop them is not the answer . Providing nonlethal equipment like night vision goggles is all well and good, but giving the Ukrainians the ability to see Russians is not a good answer .
 The night vision goggles are one thing, but providing antitank and antiarmor weapons, tactical troop-operated surveillance drones, secure command and communications equipment would be far better . The goggles would provide antitank, antiarmor and surveillance drones .
 The administration has yet to send a report to Congress on its plan for increasing military assistance to Ukraine on February 15 . I'm disappointed that the administration has not sent a report on the plan .
 I was glad to join with Senator Corker in sending a letter to the President yesterday on the importance of providing defensive weapons . I was pleased to join Senator Corker on the issue .
 Russian energy sector is already costing the Russian economy about $140 billion per year, or about 7 percent of its economy . In his view, it is time to impose additional targeted sanctions on the Russian energy industry .
 The administration should tighten restrictions on the development of shale deposits or to drilling and offshore drilling .
 I think the last thing we want to do is use American technology to create a Russian shale revolution . I think it could only extend its reach into Europe and beyond. I think we need to use U.S. technology to help create a shale revolution.
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act called for the administration to impose sanctions on other defense industry targets . It also called for sanctions on special Russian crude oil projects by January 31 .
 At the end of the day, the most effective sanction is an economically viable and stable Ukraine . Ukraine is a stable and economically viable Ukraine .
 The United States may provide an additional $1 billion in loan guarantees toward the end of this year . On top of the $2 billion in guarantees already provided, the U.S. may provide another $1billion .
 Ukrainians need to invest in Ukraine, says Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin . In his view, this is a worthy investment, and it needs to be matched by continued reforms by Ukrainians .
We must take a more strategic approach in facing this resurgent Russia. We must take more strategic approaches in facing the resurgent Russian state .
First, we need to reinvigorate the institutions that have for so long contributed to the transatlantic relationship and peace and stability . First, first, we must reinvigate the institutions.
 We need to sharpen our arsenal of response options, and that means NATO and EU integration and adapting them to today’s realities . We must adapt our response options to today's realities .
 Europe's east needs to focus on the south, also vulnerable to undue Russian influence . In his view, the attention on Europe’s east in confronting the threat from Russia has been necessary .
 We need to strengthen secure and economic relationships in the Balkans, especially in Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, and Bosnia . We need a stronger security and economic relationship in the region .
 The intelligence community also needs to reprioritize the Russian threat in Ukraine, and across Europe. Second, our intelligence community needs to re-evaluate the threat in Europe .
 The administration is working with the Broadcasting Board of Governors to commit a little over $23 million to Russian language programming . This is a 49-percent increase over fiscal year 2014 .
Public diplomacy funds are incredibly important to counter Russian propaganda, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There is one key point, and at the end of the day, that is that strong American leadership is what will matter, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Strong U.S. leadership will matter"
 Mr Chairman, I would ask that the totality of my statement be included in the record, and I thank you for the opportunity . Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman,. I would request that the entirety of his statement be added to the record .
 The administration should fully implement measures in the Ukraine Freedom Support Act, the President signed into law on December 18 .
 It authorizes the President to provide much-needed military and humanitarian aid to Ukraine .
 Putin believes that the cost of continuing to ravage Ukraine is simply too high . This legislation was necessary in December, and is even more necessary today .
 Ukrainians can see Russians coming, but not the weapons to respond, is not the answer . Providing nonlethal equipment like night vision goggles is all-well-and-good, but giving Ukrainians the ability to see the Russians coming is not an answer .
 Night vision goggles are one thing, but providing antitank and antiarmor weapons, tactical troop-operated surveillance drones, and secure command-and-communications equipment would be better .
 Tm disappointed that the administration has yet to send a report to Congress on its plan for increasing military assistance to Ukraine on February 15 .
 Putin has used his military power to impose his will in Ukraine, but he is also using every economic tool at his disposal . We must do the same.
 Russian energy sector sanctions are already costing the Russian economy about $140 billion per year . Russia's energy sector is about 7 percent of the country's economy .
 The administration should tighten restrictions on the development of shale deposits, Arctic drilling, and offshore drilling, it says .
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act called for the administration to impose sanctions on other defense industry targets . It also called for sanctions on special Russian crude oil projects by January 31 .
 The sanctions are necessary, but at the end of the day, the most effective sanction is an economically viable and stable Ukraine . The most effective sanctions are needed for Ukraine, says the author .
 The Chairman of the House of Representatives called the hearing . He thanked the Chairman for calling the hearing, and he thanked witnesses for taking time to be here .
 Victoria Nuland, Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs, is the first witness on our first panel .
 Brian McKeon, Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, is the second witness today .
 Ramin Toloui, Assistant Secretary of Treasury for International Finance, is the third witness . He is the assistant secretary of the Treasury for international finance . He was also the Treasury's assistant secretary for international Finance .
 Frank Pandolfe is the Director for Strategic Plans and Policy at the Joint Staff . He is also the Director of Strategic Plans for the Joint staff .
 Your full statement will be entered into the record, without objection . I will remind you that your full statement is entered in the record .
We look forward to our questions. And so if you would please summa6 rize your statement, about 5 minutes or so, and we would like to ask you about your statement .
 The Ukraine crisis has been described as the worst in the country's history . The situation in Ukraine is described as a 'human investment' in Ukraine .
 Ukraine is central to our 25-year transatlantic quest for a Europe whole, free, and at peace . Ukraine is a key part of our quest for the future of Europe, and for peace .
 U.S. efforts to support Ukraine as it works to liberate the country from its corrupt, oligarchic past . The United States is working to chart a more democratic European future .
 Russia is ready to impose further costs on Russia if the commitments Moscow made are further violated . Second, I will give an update on our efforts to support the implementation of the February and September Minsk agreements .
 Ukraine’s leaders in the executive branch and the Parliament know that they are in a race against time and external pressure to clean up the country . Ukraine's leaders are in the race to meet commitments to their own people, to the IMF, and to international community .
 The package of reforms already put forward by the government and enacted by the Rada is impressive in its scope and in its political courage .
 Ukrainians passed budget reform last week . It is expected to slash the deficit significantly this year and give more fiscal control to local communities and spur economic and political decentralization .
New banking provisions to stiffen penalties for stripping assets from the banks at the public's expense . They have created new banking provisions.
 Ukraine has passed laws cutting wasteful gas subsidies and closing the space for corrupt middlemen who buy low, sell high, and rip off people .
 Ukraine will use the $400 million in increased revenue from these measures to care for the 1. million people who have been driven from their homes by the conflict . Ukraine will also use the money from the increased revenue to help those driven from homes .
 Ukrainian Government is improving energy efficiency in homes and factories with metering, consumer incentives, and infrastructure improvements . U.S. support includes a $1 billion loan guarantee last year and $355 million in foreign assistance and technical advisors .
 Kyiv is putting a newly trained force of beat cops on the streets in Kyiv . They will protect not shake down the citizens, they hope to do nationwide .
 The Prosecutor General's Office is reforming the Prosecutor General’s Office, supported by U.S. law enforcement and criminal justice advisors to help energize law enforcement .
 USAID experts are deregulating the agriculture sector and allowing family farmers to sell more of their produce in local and regional and wholesale markets .
 Those forced to flee Donetsk and Luhansk with new jobs and skills training in places like Kharkiv . And they are helping those who were forced to fled with new skills training .
 The President's fiscal year 2016 budget request includes $513 million to build on these efforts . The President’s fiscal year 2015 budget request is $513. million .
 Ukraine’s hard work must continue, says Ranking Member .
 Between now and the summer, we must see continued budget discipline and tax collection enforced across the country . Some of Ukraine's richest citizens have enjoyed tax impunity for far too long .
 We need to see continued reforms at Naftogaz and across the energy sector. We need more reforms at the energy industry, says the author .
 We need to see final passage of agricultural legislation, full and impartial implementation of anticorruption measures . We need a commitment to break the oligarchic, kleptocratic culture.
 Ukraine to succeed as a democratic, free market state, says Putin . Ukraine should be a democratic state, he says . Ukraine is a free market nation, he adds .
 Ukrainian Government promises to its own people and keep the trust of the international financial community . For this to happen, we have to help ensure that the Ukrainian Government lives up to its promises .
 The U.S. and Europe and the international community must keep faith with Ukraine . Russia's aggression and meddling cannot crash Ukraine’s spirit, its will, or its economy, before reforms take hold .
 Crimea and parts of eastern Ukraine have suffered a reign of terror . Ukraine is building a more peaceful, democratic, independent nation across 93 percent of its territory . Crimea and eastern Ukraine are also suffering from terror .
 In eastern IJkraine, Russia and its separatist puppets have unleashed unspeakable violence and pillage . The violence has been reported in the region as well as in Russia .
This is a manufactured conflict, controlled by the Kremlin, fueled by Russian tanks and heavy weapons, and financed at Russian taxpayers’ expense . This is a made-up conflict, financed at Russia's taxpayers' expense .
 More than 6,000 Ukrainians have lost their lives in eastern Ukraine . Hundreds of young Russians have also been sent there to fight and die by the Kremlin . It has cost the lives of more than 6k Ukrainians .
 “Cargo 200’ is the Russian euphemism for war dead, which is a Russian euphemist for wardead . Mother and wives and their children are told not to ask too many questions or raise a fuss if they ever want to see death benefits .
 U.S. and EU have worked in lockstep to impose successive rounds of tough sanctions on Russia . Russia and its separatist cronies as the cost for their actions .
 Our unity with Europe remains the cor8 nerstone of our policy toward this crisis, says the European Union . Europe's unity with the EU is a "fundamental source of our strength"
 German Chancellor Merkel and French President Hollande in Minsk on February 12 to try again to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine . It is in that spirit that we salute the efforts of Germany and France to end fighting in Ukraine .
 The Minsk package of agreements, the September 5th and 19th agreements, offer a real opportunity for peace, disarmament, political normalization and decentralization in Ukraine . The return of Ukrainian state sovereignty in the east and border control is the key to peace .
 The OSCE reports that the cease-fire is holding on many parts of the line of contact . The cease-fires are still in place, the OSCE says .
 There have been significant withdrawals already of Government of Ukraine heavy weapons . Some separatist heavy weapons have also been withdrawn, although that process is incomplete, as is OSCE access .
 The little village in southeast Donetsk of Komintermove demining has already begun under OSCE auspices .
 shelling continued in Shyrokyne, a key village on the way to Mariupol, and outside Donetsk over the weekend .
 OSCE monitors, particularly in separatist-controlled areas, remain spotty. As I said, access for monitors, especially in separatist areas, remains spotty .
 New transfers of Russian tanks, armored vehicles, heavy artillery, and rocket equipment over the border to separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 If fully implemented, this will bring greater peace and security in eastern Ukraine for the first time in almost a year . If fully implementation, this would bring greater security and peace in the eastern Ukraine .
 President has said we will judge Russia by its actions not by its words .
 U.S. will roll back sanctions on Russia but only when the Minsk agreements are fully implemented . The United States will start rolling back sanctions, with international partners .
 If Russia fails to implement Minsk, there will be more sanctions, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "We have already begun consultations with our European partners on further sanctions"
 America’s investment in Ukraine is about far more than protecting the choice of a single European country .
 It is about protecting the rules-based system across Europe and globally . It's about protecting rules- based system across the world .
 It is about saying no to borders changed by force, to big countries intimidating their neighbors or demanding a sphere of influence . It is not about changing borders by force .
 The committee's bipartisan support and commitment to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We thank this committee for its bipartisan support .
 Ukrainians deeply appreciate this committee's support for their country’s security, democracy, sovereignty, and future prosperity .
 U.S. efforts to support Ukraine as it works to liberate the country from its corrupt, oligarchic past . Ukraine is a more democratic, European future, and bring an end to Russian-fueled violence .
McKeon and Pandolfe will address our security relationship in greater detail . McKeon is Principal Deputy Under Secretary of the Department of Defense .
 A/S Toloui will speak more to our macroeconomic assistance in coordination with our international partners . The French government will be speaking more to their macroeconomic help .
 Sixteen months ago, the K 3 dv Maidan and towns across Ukraine erupted in peaceful protest . Ukrainians fed up with a sleazy, corrupt regime bent on cheating the people of their sovereign choice to associate with Europe .
 The leader of that rotten regime fled the country, and he was voted out by the Parliament . Most members of his own party were also voted out .
 Ukraine began to forge a new nation on its own terms — signing an Association Agreement with the European Union . It also began to hold free and fair elections — twice — even as fighting raged in the east .
 Russia's situation in the country remains precarious, according to Russian media . Russia has been accused of aggression against Russia in recent months .
 Ukraine's leaders know they are in a race against time to clean up the country and enact the difficult and socially painful reforms required to kick start the economy .
 The package of reforms already put forward by the government, and enacted by the Rada, is impressive in its scope and political courage . The package is impressive, says the government .
State-owned gas companies to help care for the poor including some of the 1. million people driven from their homes by the conflict . These laws will also enhance corporate efficiency, incentivize domestic production, and use $400 million in increased revenue .
 The President’s budget includes an FY16 request of $513 million . It is almost six times more than our FY14 request for $513. million .
 Between now and the summer, we must see budget discipline maintained and teix collection enforced . Some of Ukraine’s richest citizens have enjoyed impunity for too long .
 We need to see continued reforms at Naftogaz and across the energy sector, we say . Full and impartial implementation of anticorruption measures, including a commitment to break the oligarchic, kleptocratic culture have decimated the country .
 Ukraine to succeed as a democratic, free market state and to beat back the corruption, dependence, and external pressure that have thwarted Ukrainians’ aspirations for decades . The most lasting antidote to Russian aggression and malign influence in the medium term.
 Ukrainian government must live up to its promises to the people, and keep the trust of the international financial community . For this to happen, we must ensure that the government lives up to their promises, and keeps the faith of the world .
 The United States, Europe, and the international community must keep faith with Ukraine, and help insure that Russia's aggression and meddling can't crash Ukraine’s spirit, its will, or its economy before reforms take hold .
 Ukraine is building a peaceful, democratic, independent nation across 93 percent of its territory . Crimea and parts of eastern Ukraine are suffering a reign of terror, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Crimea remains under illegal occupation and human rights abuses are the norm, not the exception, for many at-risk groups . Crimean Tatars, Ukrainians who won’t surrender their passports, journalists, LGBT citizens and others .
 In eastern Ukraine, Russia and its separatist puppets unleashed unspeakable violence and pillage .
 This manufactured conflict has cost the lives of more than 6,000 Ukrainians, but also of hundreds of young Russians sent to fight and die there by the Kremlin, their government denies . The conflict is fueled by Russian tanks and heavy weapons; financed at Russian taxpayers’ expense
Mothers, wives, and children are told not to ask too many questions or raise a fuss if they want to see any death benefits .
 The U.S. and the EU have worked in lock-step to impose successive rounds of tough sanctions on Russia and its separatist cronies . The United States and the European Union have worked to impose tough sanctions .
 In Crimea, Crimea, we have shown through our investment sanctions that if you bite off a piece of another country, it will dry up in your mouth . Crimea has shown through its investment sanctions.
Our unity with Europe remains the cornerstone of our policy toward this crisis . Our unity with the EU remains the centerpiece of our policies.
 German Chancellor Merkel and Erench President Hollande are in Minsk on February 12 to try again to end the fighting in Ukraine’s East .
 The Minsk Package of Agreements offer a real opportunity for peace, disarmament, political normalization and decentralization in eastern Ukraine . The agreement includes the return of Ukrainian state sovereignty and control of its territory and borders .
 Russia and Ukraine agreed to it; Ukraine agreed. Russia agreed to the deal, Ukraine agreed with it . The separatists agreed to a deal with Russia .
 The cease-fire has taken hold in Luhansk Oblast . Some weapons have been withdrawn; some hostages have been released . Some hostages have also been released.
 The OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has recorded hundreds of violations . Since February 15 cease-fire, the mission has recorded dozens of violations.
 Debaltseve, a key rail hub beyond the cease-fire lines, fell to the separatists and Russian forces 6 days after Minsk was signed and 3 days after it was signed .
 In Shchastya, in villages near the Donetsk Airport, in Shyrokyne and other towns around Mariupol the shelling continues . OSCE Special Monitor Authority verified the shelling as verified .
 Ukraine will once again have unfettered access to its own people in the East . The opportunity for dialogue and political normalization with them will be seen .
 Russia's commitments under the Minsk agreements are crystal clear and again the choice is Russia’s . Russia's commitment to Minsk agreement is crystal clear, says CNN .
 President Barack Obama has said he will judge Russia by its actions, not its words . President Obama said Russia's actions will be judged by the President .
 The United States will start rolling back sanctions on Russia only when the Minsk agreements are fully implemented . The U.S. will start roll back sanctions only when Minsk agreement is fully implemented.
 We have already begun consultations with our European partners on further sanctions pressure on Russia . Russia should continue fueling the fire in the east or other parts of Ukraine, we have said . We have also begun consultations.
 America’s investment in Ukraine is about far more than protecting the choice of a single European country .
 It’s about protecting the rules-based system across Europe and globally. It's about protecting rules- based system across the world .
 It’s about saying “no’t to borders changed by force, and to big countries intimidating their neighbors or demanding spheres of influence . It's about saying no to borders change by force .
 It’s about protecting our 25 year American investment in the prospect of a Europe whole, free, and at peace . It's about protecting America's 25 year investment in Europe, says John Sutter .
 BRIAN P McKeon, PRINCIPAL DEPUTY under SECRETARY of Defense for POLICY, U.S. DEPUTy under SECretary of Defense For POLICy, United States DEPARTMENT of Defense, WASHINGTON, DC.
Former Senator Biden's former staff on the committee is back in the witness table . He spent nearly half of his professional life on the staff of this committee under then-Senator Biden .
 The statement I have submitted to the committee, which I will now summarize, is on behalf of myself and Admiral Pandolfe . The statement is on the behalf of himself and AdmiralPandolfe.
 Nuland has just summarized the state of play on the Minsk agreement . I will not repeat the State of play, which Nulan has just summed up .
 The U.S. has pursued a multipronged approach in response to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine .
 We have raised the cost to Russia for its actions, reassured allies of our unwavering support to their security . We have provided tangible support to Ukraine to help it through the crisis .
 The administration has imposed real costs on Russia for its aggressive actions . The administration is working closely with Europe and other partners .
 The Department of Defense has halted defense and military cooperation with Russia . The Pentagon says it will not cooperate with Russia in the future .
 The administration has also banned exports of sensitive technologies that could be used in Russia’s military modernization . 18 Russian defense technology firms have been hit with sanctions .
 Second, we are taking visible, concrete measures to reassure our allies and partners in Europe, and to deter further Russian aggression . We are also taking visible and concrete measures, including to deter Russian aggression, to reassure allies .
 The European Reassurance Initiative, or 12 ERI, is helping the Department to increase and sustain an enhanced U.S. air, sea, and ground presence in Europe .
 ERI funds will be used to bolster our assistance to Ukraine and to the Baltic partners . Eri funds will also be used for Ukraine and Baltic partners.
 U.S. military forces in each of the Baltic States, Poland, and the Black Sea since April of last year . The United States has maintained a persistent presence of United States military forces.
 NATO Airborne Warning and Control System missions have increased training flights in Poland . U.S. Navy ships deployed to the Black and Baltic Seas 14 times, and increased training flight flights .
 In the coming year, using ERI funds, we will increase our reassurance and deterrence efforts with additional measures .
 NATO has taken concrete steps to reassure the allies and to deter Russia .
 North Atlantic Treaty aims to provide for collective defense of the alliance . Measures are defensive, proportionate, and fully in line with obligations under the treaty .
 Allies have also agreed to measures as part of NATO’s readiness action plan . NATO will improve its long-term military posture and capabilities and ensure it is ready to respond swiftly to new security challenges .
 NATO Defense Ministers decided to enhance the NATO response force by creating a very high readiness joint task force . The force will be able to deploy on very short notice .
 The task force consists of a land component of around 5,000 troops with an appropriate mix of air, maritime, and special operations units .
 NATO aims to strengthen the alliance’s collective defense . It aims to ensure that NATO has the right forces in the right place at the right time .
Third, we are providing substantial support to Ukraine as it deals with simultaneous economic and military crises . Third, we're providing substantial help to Ukraine .
 Ukraine has been a strong partner of the U.S. and NATO since independence . Ukraine's security cooperation with Ukraine dates back to 1992 .
 During this period, the United States provided Ukraine with military training, professional education, communications equipment, and support for border control and counter-proliferation efforts .
 Yanukovych regime starved Ukraine’s Armed Eorces of resources. Unfortunately, the corruption of the Yanukovych regime has starved Ukraine's armed forces of resources .
 The neglect of the armed forces by the regime did not strip the military of its professionalism or its determination to fight .
 The U.S. has increased its security assistance to Ukraine since the beginning of the crisis .
 $118 million in material and training assistance to the military, the national guard, and border guard service . We have committed, as you know, $118million in material, training assistance .
 ERI will dedicate at least another $120 million to security assistance programs in the coming year .
 Our assistance has been consistent with identified Ukrainian needs and priorities . It is vetted by our country team in Kyiv and a flag-level United States-Ukraine joint commission .
 Key areas of assistance include sustainment items. 13 medical support, personal protective gear, secure communications, and perimeter security .
 We have provided countermortar radar capabilities, which Ukrainians tell us they have used to good effect . We have also provided counter-mortar Radar capabilities .
 Rapid Trident last September included a multinational field training exercise . The most recent iteration of Rapid Trident saw the participation of 15 countries and approximately 1,300 personnel .
 Other measures remain under active consideration, including the provision of additional security assistance .
 President has said most recently this weekend that we are looking at all our options, including the possibility of lethal defensive weapons .
 Nuland: We do not believe there is a military solution to the conflict in Ukraine . We are working actively to support the diplomatic track, as Assistant Secretary Nulan outlined .
 Russia’s aggressive actions in Ukraine are a threat to the bipartisan objective of U.S. policy since the end of the cold war of seeking a Europe whole, free, and at peace . In conclusion, Russia's aggressive actions.
 The United States will continue to work closely with our Ukrainian and European partners to counter these actions . The U.S. will provide reassurance and support to our partners and NATO allies .
McKeon: "I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today. Prepared Statement of Brian P McKeon Chairman Corker, Senator Menendez, members of the committee"
After more than a year of aggressive Russian action, the situation in Ukraine remains unstable . The situation remains unstable, according to the Russian government .
 Russia occupied the Crimean Peninsula last year and has attempted to annex it . As a committee is aware, last year Russia occupied Crimea .
 Russia continues its participation and active support to separatists engaged in violence in eastern Ukraine . Today, Russia continues to support the separatists in Ukraine .
 The cease-fire under the terms of the Minsk Implementation Plan may be holding in many areas of eastern Ukraine . Some progress on withdrawals of weapons, says Nuland .
 cease-fire violations continue, almost all of them on the Russian and separatist side . This is not an “immediate and comprehensive ceasefire’s” as called for by the plan .
 We remain concerned that this may be a period of strategic pause . The most recent Russian and separatist assault in January was a stalling tactic as a precursor to more violence .
 We call on Russia to stop “moving the goalposts, to uphold the cease-fire, and to allow Ukraine the freedom to choose its own path . We also call on the Russian government to stop moving goalposts .
 The United States has pursued a multipronged approach in response to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine . Nuland: Since the beginning of the crisis the U.S. has vigorously pursued a multi-nation approach .
 We have raised the costs to Russia for its actions, reassured allies of our unwavering support to their security . We have provided tangible support to Ukraine to help it through the crisis .
 I wish to highlight the measures taken in each of these three areas, including actions taken by the Department of Defense .
 The administration has imposed real costs on Russia for its aggressive actions . The administration is working closely with Europe and other partners .
 Russia's participation in the G-8 has been suspended by the U.N. Security Council . Russia has worked diligently to isolate Russia at the United Nations Security Council.
 The Department of Defense halted defense and military cooperation with Russia . The Pentagon also halted military cooperation.
 The administration has also banned exports of sensitive technologies that could be used in Russia’s military 14 modernization . It has imposed blocking sanctions on 18 Russian defense technology firms .
 The United States and its European allies have imposed a series of sanctions to raise the costs for Russia and Ukrainian separatists . The sanctions include targeted sectoral sanctions in the Russian finance, energy, and defense sectors .
 We are taking visible, concrete measures to reassure our allies and partners in Europe and to deter further Russian aggression . We are also taking visible and concrete measures.
 ERI funds will be used to bolster our assistance to Ukraine and to the Baltic allies . Eri funds will also be used for Ukraine and Baltic allies.
 U.S. military forces in each of the Baltic States, Poland, and the Black Sea since April 2014 . As part of our reassurance measures, we have maintained a persistent presence of United States forces .
 U.S. Navy ships deployed 14 times to the Black and Baltic Seas . NATO Airborne Warning and Control System missions also increased training flights in Poland .
 NATO has taken concrete steps to reassure allies and deter Russia . Similarly, NATO has also taken steps to deter Russia and reassure allies .
 The measures are defensive, proportionate, and fully in line with obligations under the North Atlantic Treaty to provide for allied defense . These measures are also in line to the obligations of the Treaty on allied defense.
 NATO Defense Ministers in February decided to enhance the NATO Response Force by creating a “spearhead force,’ known as a Very High Readiness Joint Task Force . That will be able to deploy at very short notice .
 The VJTF consists of a land component of around 5,000 troops with an appropriate mix of air, maritime, and SOF units .
UKRAINE Third is providing substantial support to Ukraine as it deals with simultaneous economic and military crises . We are providing substantial help to Ukraine.
 Ukraine has been a strong partner to the U.S. and NATO since its independence . Ukraine's security cooperation with the United States and NATO dates back to 1992 .
 Ukraine has been a steadfast coalition partner in Afghanistan, Iraq, Kosovo, and Bosnia, as well as in counter-piracy operations off the Horn of Africa . Such cooperation over the past two decades has paid dividends, says Ukraine .
 The U.S. provided Ukraine with military training, professional education, communications equipment, and support for border control and counterproliferation efforts .
 Yanukovych regime 15 starved Ukraine’s Armed Forces of resources. Unfortunately, the corruption of the Yanukovych regime is a problem .
 The neglect of the Armed Forces by the regime did not strip the military of its professionalism or its determination to fight . But the neglect did not remove the military from its professionalism .
 Since the start of the crisis the United States has increased its security-related assistance to Ukraine . The U.S. has increased security- related assistance to the Ukraine .
 We have committed $118 million in material and training assistance to Ukraine’s military, National Guard, and Border Guard service .
 ERI will dedicate at least another $120 million to security assistance programs in FY 2015 . Under ERI, the State Department will spend $45 million on security assistance.
 The U.S.-Ukraine Joint Commission assesses how to maximize the effect and impact of our security assistance . Our assistance has been consistent with identified Ukrainian needs and priorities, the commission says .
 Key areas of material assistance include sustainment items, medical support, personal protective gear, secure communications, and perimeter security . Key areas include medical support and secure communications .
 The most recent Rapid Trident iteration in September 2014 included a multinational field training exercise and saw the participation of 15 countries and approximately 1,300 personnel .
 President has said we are looking at all our options, including the possibility of lethal defensive weapons . President Obama has said he is looking at the possibility.
 We have made clear that we do not believe there is a military solution to the conflict in Ukraine . We are working actively to support the diplomatic track, we say .
 Russia’s aggressive actions in Ukraine are a threat to a bipartisan objective of American policy since the end of the cold war of seeking a Europe whole, free, and at peace .
 The United States will continue to work closely with our Ukrainian and European partners to counter these actions . The U.S. will provide reassurance and support to our partners and NATO allies .
 The first day of this week's show was held in New York City, New York . It was the first time the show had been held in the U.S. since 2008 . The show was a special event for the first year of this year's show .
 Mr Toloui is a former secretary of state of Washington, DC. He is a member of the National Security Council . He is also a former Secretary of State for the United States .
 The objective of the U.S. and international economic assistance has been to support the efforts of President Poroshenko’s government to stabilize, revitalize, and restructure Ukraine's economy . The objective is to support Poroshenko's government.
 My remarks today will elaborate upon the strategy and its evolution over the past year in response to the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Treasury Department's efforts to mobilize international effort to support Ukraine financially have been complemented by the work of others at the Treasury Department to impose costs on Russia for its aggressive actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 Last spring, the United States, together with international partners, supported an international assistance package totaling $27 billion . The United States and international partners supported the package .
 This assistance centered on a 2-year $17 billion IMF pro16 gram and also included a $1 billion U.S. loan guarantee and $2. billion from the European Union .
 The IMF and other donors agree that Ukraine has lived up to its economic reform commitments made in exchange for the support .
 The Ukrainian Government has initiated steps to reduce the deficit and distortionary natural gas subsidies, improve targeting of social assistance .
 Treasury advisors are providing the Ukrainian Government with technical assistance . In support of these efforts, they are providing technical assistance to Ukraine .
 This was always going to be a challenging program of reform and adjustment, says the author . "This was alwaysgoing to be ... a challenge," he says .
 The intensification of Russian aggression has created significant additional pressure on Ukraine’s economy . Unfortunately, the intensification has created further pressure on the government . The Russian government is seeking to bolster its reform efforts .
 The international community has mobilized the international community to increase Ukraine’s support package by at least $10 billion . In the past few months, we have mobilized the world to increase the support package .
 The IMF now plans to support Ukraine through the end of 2018 with a larger gross financing package . Further, the IMF now wants more time for economic reforms to bear fruit .
 If Ukraine continues making concrete progress on its economic reform agenda, the U.S. administration will also be willing, working with Congress, to consider providing an additional up to $1 billion loan guarantee .
 The next step in further driving this augmented international assistance effort is to secure IMF board approval on March 11, tomorrow, for the new IMF program . The new program is to be approved for the first time in four years .
 The Ukrainian Government has passed meaningful reform measures to improve public financing and reduce inefficient energy subsidies .
 The IMF projects that Ukraine’s economy will expand in 2016 and foreign exchange reserves will rise substantially .
 In view of the inherent uncertainties in the security situation, there continue to be risks, says the U.S. government .
 This year’s intensification of the conflict has imposed severe damage on an already fragile economy . This year's intensification has imposed serious damage on a fragile economy.
 Currency depreciation and deposit flight have put a strain on the banking sector . Significant structural damage has occurred within Ukraine’s economy .
 Ukraine’s ambitious reform agenda deserves our continued support, says Ukraine's president . Ukraine's ambitious reforms deserve our support, he says .
 Core U.S. and global security interests are at stake in Ukraine . providing economic support to the Ukrainian Government is an essential part of our strategy to respond to Russian aggression .
 Ukraine’s Government continues to undertake difficult reforms. 17 community must do all it can to help Ukraine succeed and be prepared to adapt its assistance strategy .
 The costs for Russia will continue to rise. At the same time, the international community must continue to ensure that as long as Russia disregards its commitments and fuels violence and instability in Ukraine .
 The path to success is not without obstacles, particularly amid the current security backdrop, says Sen. Menendez .
An ambitious reform program, a government and country committed to change, is currently in place . However, critical elements needed for success are still in place, according to the author .
 Ukraine will continue to work closely with international partners to provide Ukraine's support. To that end, we will continue the support it needs .
 The strong backing of Congress has been a critical foundation to the efforte to support Ukraine . We look forward to working closely together in the months ahead .
 My remarks today will elaborate upon this economic and financial strategy, and its evolution over the past year in response to the conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Treasury Department's efforts to mobilize international effort to support Ukraine financially have been complemented by the work of others at the Treasury Department to impose costs on Russia for its aggressive actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 Last spring, the United States supported an international assistance package totaling $27 billion . The United States, together with international partners, supported the package .
 $17 billion International Monetary Fund program includes $1 billion U.S. loan guarantee and $2. billion from European Union . $2 billion from the European Union is also part of the 2-year program .
 Ukrainian authorities committed to an ambitious economic reform agenda to reduce vulnerabilities and increase economic growth potential . In exchange for this support, the Ukrainian authorities agreed to a reform agenda .
 The IMF and other donors agree that Ukraine has lived up to its economic reform commitments . The IMF, other donors have agreed that Ukraine is living up to their commitments .
 Treasury technical advisors are providing the Ukrainian Government with expert assistance in bank supervision and bank resolution, and government debt and liability management .
 The fragile security situation has eroded confidence, increased capital outflows, weakened the currency, and depleted foreign exchange reserves . The situation has also eroded confidence and eroded the security situation .
 The destruction of economic capacity in eastern Ukraine has driven a deeper and longer economic recession than previously estimated . Ukraine's economic capacity has been destroyed by the destruction of its capacity .
 The IMF now plans to support Ukraine through end-2018 with a larger gross financing package . The IMF plans to help Ukraine through 2018 with more time for economic reforms .
 Ukraine has indicated that it will seek to work with creditors to adjust the profile of its debt to provide additional financial breathing room . Also indicated that the country will work to adjust its debt profile to provide more breathing room.
 The new IMF program will unlock a large disbursement of IMF financing . The next step in further driving this augmented international assistance effort is to secure IMF Board approval on March 11 .
 Ukraine's foreign exchange reserves are set to increase significantly over the next few weeks . Based on international support pledged to date, Ukraine’s foreign exchange reserve will increase significantly . It will provide the authorities with space to further execute their ambitious reform agenda .
 Ukrainian Government passed meaningful and difficult reform measures to improve public finances and reduce inefficient energy subsidies . To meet its reform requirements in advance of the IMF Board meeting, the Ukrainian government passed meaningful reform measures .
 Ukraine’s currency and capital markets have rebounded significantly since the measures were taken . Since these measures, Ukraine's currency, capital markets has rebounded dramatically .
 The IMF projects that Ukraine’s economy will expand next year and foreign exchange reserves will rise substantially .
 This year’s intensification of the conflict has imposed severe damage on an already fragile economy . Ukraine's economy is particularly the export-oriented regions of eastern Ukraine .
 Currency depreciation and deposit flight have put a strain on the banking sector . Significant structural damage has occurred within the Ukrainian economy .
 Overcoming these impacts and restoring market confidence will be challenging . Overcoming the impacts will be difficult, according to experts .
 Ukrainian Government continues to demonstrate a strong commitment to an ambitious reform agenda . Ukraine's government deserves our continued support, says Ukrainian PM .
 Ukraine’s Government continues to undertake the difficult reforms required to restore economic and financial stability . The international community must do all it can to help Ukraine succeed.
 The costs for Russia will continue to rise as long as Russia disregards its commitments and fuels violence and instability in Ukraine . The international community must continue to ensure that the international community continues to ensure Russia does not disregard its commitments .
 The path to success is not without obstacles, particularly amid the current security backdrop, says Sen. Menendez .
 An ambitious reform plan, a government and country committed to change, is currently in place . However, critical elements needed for success are still in place, including a sizable international support package .
 Ukraine will continue to work closely with the international financial institutions and our partners around the world to provide Ukraine the support it needs . Ukraine's people are seeking to achieve their economic aspirations .
 The strong backing of Congress has been a critical foundation to Ukraine's efforts to support Ukraine . We look forward to working closely together in the months ahead .
 Admiral Pandolfe is a former president of the United States. We thank each of you for your testimony and for being here to answer questions .
 I know in the past you have characterized what Russia has done in Ukraine as an invasion, I know. I know it's not what it has done, but it's what Russia is doing in Ukraine, I think it's an invasion .
 Russia's efforts to mask its dead, but we estimate it is The Chairman. Well, as you can imagine, it is pretty difficult to have a completely accurate assessment .
 Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin has been a strong advocate for support in Ukraine . Putin has spoken to both by phone and here as a witness .
Debaltseve has been flattening after the signing of the Minsk agreement . Chairman: "We were extremely concerned to see the flattening of Debaltseves"
 Under the Minsk agreements, there is supposed to be a complete withdrawal to the lines agreed on September 19 . The Minsk agreement is expected to be complete withdrawal on Sept 19 .
 The implementation agreement of February 12 calls for the full pullback of heavy weapons and military equipment within some 16 days . Well, the implementation agreement is in place .
 OSCE has seen incomplete compliance in terms of OSCE access, including in Debaltseve . OSCE is able to verify the pullback of separatist heavy weapons, according to testimony .
 The political jurisdiction of the special status zone does not include the town of Debaltseve . Minsk is to follow the political phase of Minsk.
 If separatists comply, they should not insist on having political control of that area by spring . If they comply, the separatists should not be insisting on havingPolitical control by spring.
 McKeon: "We appreciate you coming here today and sitting on that side. Secretary Mc Keon, we appreciate your coming here"
 Carter and Dempsey have talked about the fact that they would like to see defensive weaponry supported . Secretary Carter and Joint Chief Dempsey have said they want to see more defensive weaponry.
 At least 20 unanimously passed it 20 unanimously out of the Senate . We have passed that unanimously . It is the first time we have done so .
 The German Ambassador thinks the President has made quiet commitments that we are not going to do that . There seems to he some debate within the administration .
 Senator Corker cannot speak to what happened in the bilateral meeting between the President and Chancellor Merkel .
 We are still working in the interagency on reviewing a number of options, including lethal defensive weapons . I cannot give you a timetable on when we might have a decision on additional assistance .
 It is my understanding we have committed $118 million or $120 million. But it's my understanding that we've committed $ 118 million or £120 million .
 This feels like 3 years ago the Syrian opposition where basically we were going to help. So just for what it is worth, this feels just like three years ago, this feeling just like3 years ago .
 It is incredibly frustrating for all of us to think the administration truly supports Ukraine . Yet, it feels like they are playing footsy with Russia .
 Senator Corker: We share your frustration about the speed of delivery of our commitments . The new Secretary has pressed us on this.
 In one of his first meetings with him, he said to us let us start a new policy. In fact, in one of our first meetings, he told us that he would allow us to start new policy .
 Some of the U.S. military stocks are in the stocks of the United States military . Some, it is a case of finding it in the military stocks .
 In the case of some equipment, we are purchasing it off the production line . We are purchasing some of the equipment we need to use .
 Defense Security Cooperation Agency chief says he is pushing him all the time . He says the agency has made this a high priority .
We got approval for those in late October, and we got them delivered, trained, and fielded within 2 months . We got approval. We got those delivered and trained in 2 months, and they were fielded within two months .
As Russia has invaded, we are still not willing to give defensive weapons. And now, as Russia has invasion, we're still not ready to give them .
 McKeon has said we have provided some significant defensive systems, including counterfire-mortar radars which have saved lives in Ukraine .
 Minsk has been in talks with the Russian government over the past two years . The Russian government has said it is looking at the situation on the ground and the needs and implementation of Minsk .
Ukrainian National Guard has dropped back from training and put that on hold . It is my understanding that we have also dropped back to training the Ukrainian National Guard .
 Senator Corker: "We had notified your committee I believe several months ago about a program of training for the National Guard" Senator Corker says.
 We have never had a decision on the final timing and scope of it. We have not had a final decision — never had to decide on the timing of it . We've not had an decision — we have not been a decision.
 We had talked about doing it this month, but it is still under consideration as to when we would do that training . We are still considering when they would do it .
 It is pretty evident that the strong statements that we have made are statements. It ispretty evident that we've made strong statements, says the author .
 I do hope that we — and our partners — are committed to providing the financial assistance that is needed to keep Ukraine afloat . I do hopes that we, and our partner, will provide financial assistance to Ukraine .
 I think Putin's greatest victory would be for Ukraine to fall and he not to have to break it . But for it to break by economic conditions there on the ground, he says . I think the greatest victory for Putin — other than certainly making us look really weak to the world right
 I know others may ask you questions about how much we are committed to providing them . I know other people may ask questions about the amount we will provide them .
 Brzezinski, Madeleine Albright testified before the Senate 22 Armed Services Committee . The former Secretary of State testified that the United States should provide defensive weapons to Ukraine .
 Ash Carter says Ukraine needs to support Ukrainians in defending themselves . Carter says he is inclined to support Ukraine in defending itself .
 U.S. Army Europe Commander LTG Ben Hodges recently stated his support for providing weapons to Ukraine in order to provide the necessary muscle for a diplomatic solution .
 Madam Secretary or the Secretary of the Defense Department, whoever wants to take it .
 I mean, you have an overwhelming view from a wide spectrum, and I do not get it, I say . But you have a overwhelming view of the wide spectrum. But I mean. I don't get it.
Interagency discussion on this subject has taught us, he says . There are factors on both sides, and we are continuing to evaluate. I think as the interagency discussion has taught me, there are factors in both sides .
 Minsk agreements offer best hope for Ukrainian people, says U.S. State Department official . "From where we sit at the State Department, if we can see these Minsk agreement," he says .
 Minsk II only went ahead and largely incorporated more territory that the rebels had taken since Minsk I . It was all dependent upon some votes on decentralization of the government .
 That is a commonly referred to number, 1,000 violations of the cease-fire . That is the most common term used to refer to the number of violations .
 Russia works effectively to take more and more Ukrainian land . Russia is working on this aspirational basis while Russia works on this aspirationational basis .
 There is not enough money in the world to help the Ukrainians sustain themselves if they continue to bleed because of the conflict that Russia has created .
 Crimea is gone, and Crimea is now in Crimea . Crimea has been ruled out of Crimea by the Ukrainian government . Crimea is in Crimea's territory .
 I don't know how much the interagency process is going to continue to wait. So I do not know how long it will be until the end of the process .
 According to the law, the administration is supposed to report on its plan for increasing military assistance to the government .
 Senator Menendez, we very much regret that these reports are not yet ready .
 We are continuing to work on some of the programmatic issues that we want to reflect in these reports, including those that flow from our 2015 budget, and speaking for us, we have only just had our pass-back .
 We are hoping to have them up to you in coming weeks if not in coming days. So we are hoping for them to come up to us in the coming weeks .
 The United States was considering a variety of military responses to Russia’s violation of the INF Treaty .
 U.S. ground-launched cruise missiles in Europe would have nuclear capability, author says . U.N. Secretary of State John Kerry says cruise missiles could be placed in Europe .
 Sen. Menendez says he was talking about the issue in the hypothetical sense .
Introducing a GLCM into Europe would not be in compliance with the treaty . Introducing aGLCM in Europe would be a breach of the treaty, according to the treaty.
 Russia would have to withdraw from the treaty or declare it null and void based on Russia’s actions .
I had put that out there as just something we obviously could do if we chose to come out of the treaty. I had put it out there to be something we could do. It was just a thing we would be able to do, I said .
Some of which are compliant with the treaty, some of which would not be . Some of the options are in different buckets, says David Cameron .
 Second would be counterforce capabilities to prevent attacks, and third would becountervailing strike capabilities to go after other Russian targets . Second would also be counter-force capabilities.
 Russia signed the treaty in the first instance . We are still trying to persuade Russia to come back into compliance with the treaty .
 If that does not succeed, our objective is to ensure they have no significant military advantage from their violation of the treaty . But if that doesn't succeed, we will try to stop them from using military advantage .
 So far, we have not succeeded at getting them back into compliance . And so far, it has been hard to get them into compliance.
 Russia extended a $3 billion bond in an attempt to keep President Yanukovych in power . At the height of the Maidan protests in December 2013, Russia extended the bond .
 He fled Ukraine with unknown millions, but Ukraine and its citizens retained the debt . He fled the country with unknown Millions, but Ukrainian citizens retained their debt .
 Russia can demand immediate repayment in full, and if Ukraine refuses to pay, it would trigger default on all Ukrainian debt . Russia can ask for immediate repayment.
 There is precedent for shielding countries from this type of coercion . Now there is precedent.
 U.N. Security Council Resolution 1483 made Iraqi oil and gas assets immune to seizure by 24 private creditors . In 2003, the U.S. and EU, among others, adopted in their legal systems .
 Parliament could also enact legislation to deny enforcement of the bond since it is governed under English law . Parliament could similarly enact legislation.
 "I think you touched on a few points, so let me touch on some aspects that are relevant," says the author . "You touched on some points," he says .
 Russia has not asked for, but has not demanded, socalled acceleration of this payment . First of all, Russia is not asking for, and has not been asked for the payment .
 The Ukrainian Government has indicated that it intends to discuss with creditors, which would include Russia, the rescheduling of obligations falling due, primarily within the scope of the IMF program .
 The IMF program will be approved by the IMF tomorrow . The IMF is expected to approve the IMF program tomorrow .
 Treasury, specifically our FinCEN, is cooperating with the Ukrainian authorities on the recovery of assets that went missing with the departure of the previous regime. Second, let me also mention that Treasury is cooperating.
 Russia has not accelerated this claim, but it is going to be subject to the discussions between the Ukrainian Government and its creditors . The Ukrainian Government is still trying to make a claim to the creditors .
 U.N. Security Council resolutions may be too late to create appropriate protection under international law . But then if it is all too late and the process of doing what is necessary to create the appropriate protection is too late .
 There is no harm in having a discussion to be poised for that possibility so that we are not on the back end of trying to play catchup ball. So it seems to be no harm to have a discussion about it .
 The hearing is being held in New York City, New York . The hearing will be held in the U.S. House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 Secretary Nuland will talk briefly about some of the comments made last week at a hearing . He will also talk about the comments that were made at the hearing .
 The President did not feel that we had lived up to all the promises we had promised to Ukraine, he says .
 The United States had entered into a bargain they had not yet received in terms of promises to them . The bargain that the U.S. entered into — excuse me — the agreement — is the benefits of the bargain, he says .
Former Georgian President Saakashvili says Congress has been enormously generous and responsive to the administration’s request . He says the administration has made more money for Ukraine than we asked for .
 Ukrainians are making very, very tough reforms that they are making, and we will continue to do that. What we have been trying to do, both through the loan guarantee program and through the bilateral assistance, is to support the implementation of these very,very tough reforms.
 We have fielded a huge number of technical advisors into the ministries to help them both with the drafting of legislation and with the implementation of legislation . We have also fielded many technical advisors to help the ministries .
 The numbers are significant as compared to previous support for Ukraine . Under Secretary McKeon said we want to see it move faster .
 The German Ambassador claimed that President Obama agreed not to send arms to Ukraine . McKeon said that the question was probably more appropriate to him .
 President Poroshenko and the Prime Minister are on speed dial. There are conversations going all the time with Ambassador Pyatt .
 I think in general they are getting the same information that I am giving you, that it is under consideration . I think they are get the same info that I'm giving them, that they are under consideration, he says .
 "They would say the same thing to you as well, that they have not heard," he says . "So they would say that they would tell you the same things to you," he adds .
 Sir, getting inside President Putin’s head is an ongoing challenge for the intelligence community, as well as the policy community .
 Assistant Secretary Nuland gave briefly in her testimony . Some of the testimony is unclassified .
 The Russians continue to operate in eastern Ukraine where they are providing command and control support, operating air defense systems, and fighting alongside the separatists .
There are still battalion tactical groups across the border of some significant number . As she said, they are moving military equipment, she said .
Despite some publicly stated concerns, those countries that you mentioned have supported sanctions in the council when the leaders come together .
 I will make another trip out to some of those countries in the coming days and weeks . I will also make a trip to other countries in coming days.
 sanctions have more of an effect on Russia than they do on the European economy or our own economy . But we are also working with the commission itself to continue to design sanctions if needed .
 I think it would be better not to get into the details of potential actions that we could take . I think we should not get in the details about potential actions we can take .
 The framework that we evaluate all potential actions is basically the impact that they would have on Russia and the Russian economy against the spillover or blowback that would occur both to the U.S. and Europe .
Without commenting on specific actions, that would be the prism through which we would be evaluating something like that. So without commenting on any actions, we would not be evaluating anything like that .
 Mr McKeon last week talked about the length of time it would take for NATO to train a capable Ukrainian military . He also talked about how long it would be to train the Ukrainian military to defend its territory .
 Senator says training depends on the type of training and scope of training . "It depends on how many units we were talking about," he says .
 The training that the chairman asked me about was on the books is being looked at for the National Guard Forces . The training was going to be over the course of 6 months, says the chairman .
 If we were to train all of their military, that would take a much longer period of time, sir. We are talking over 100,000 people, he says. So if we are to train the military, it would take more time, he adds .
 I am having trouble with all these Secretaries, and you all could serve extremely well in those positions . You all could be very well in that position, I'm having trouble.
 The Ukrainian military has been taking a long time on providing assistance to Ukraine on the weapons side . The other forms of assistance that would be helpful to the Ukrainian military that is in the field.
 I had a chance to meet with some representatives from Ukraine, a member of Parliament and some others . I had an opportunity to meet some representatives.
President Obama and other Europeans have expressed concerns about weapons in the Middle East . President Obama has said he is concerned about the potential escalation of the conflict .
Ukrainian conflict could be escalated to much worse than they expect it to be, says U.S. ambassador to Ukraine . U.N. officials say there was a real symbolic impact on both the military and the people of Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian government is providing economic and security assistance to the Ukrainians . Senator: All of our assistance is providing not just symbolic but real assistance .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin says any assistance we provide would be of importance to the Ukrainians . He says he is not going to deny that any assistance he provides would be important .
 Ukrainian military needs. What we have already provided is it is meeting real military needs, I would say, though .
 The armed forces were somewhat stripped bare by the corruption of the last regime, says Senator Shaheen . "A lot of it seems rather basic in terms of Senator Sha heen," he says .
 I am expressing my frustration, as others have, with the timeliness of providing that assistance, as well as the decision about whether to provide defensive weapons . I'm expressing my frustrations, as other countries have, to provide that assistance .
Minsk is not where OSCE has access, where it does not, where weapons are being pulled back so that we can measure . Senator: "We are in an intense conversation with our allies about a common standard"
 The village of Shyrokyne which is on the road to Mariupol is a village in the north of the country . The village is in a village on the way to Mari upol . It is on a road to the town of Mariupols .
 There is now this third concern that I also mentioned in my opening, which is the continued resupply over the border which is not compatible with either the spirit or the letter of Minsk .
 A European Subcommittee hearing on Ukraine was held last week on the issue . If the economy of Ukraine fails, then a resolution to the conflict probably is moot, he says .
Ukrainian people continue to support reforms that are being enacted . But one concern was the ability of the Ukrainian people to support the reforms, he says .
 This is a real concern for Ukraine’s leaders, whether they are in the executive or in the Rada . Ukraine's leaders are concerned about their role in Ukraine's conflict with Russia .
 The changes to the structure of the economy are going to have impacts in people's pocketbooks and in people’s lives . The changes include the raising of the pension age, increased energy prices .
 Ukraine's economy has been hit by a series of tough measures in recent months . The IMF and international partners are working hard to help Ukraine's economic recovery .
 The hearing was held in New York City last week . The hearing is scheduled to take place in the next week .
 Admiral Pandolfe is concerned Putin might try to test the Article 5 commitment of NATO countries .
 NATO has enacted some reassurance measures, which include increasing air, ground, and sea forces in the eastern parts of Europe . First of all, our commitment to Article 5 is ironclad, as is all the allies .
 NATO force integration units to facilitate the 29 flow of reinforcements into eastern Europe . They are also adapting their force structure with a very high readiness joint task force .
 NATO is a head of state-level commitment, and NATO is moving forward with that. So it is a state- level commitment, says NATO .
 The ERI monies that were authorized by the Congress are most appreciated and are very much helping in that as well . On the U.S. side, the Eri monies are also helping in the United States .
 The intransigence of this administration seems to be an era where our allies do not trust us, he says . It seems to me that all of a sudden we are in an era when our enemies do not fear us .
 Ukraine unilaterally gave up over 1,000 nuclear weapons on the assurance that their national security would be protected . It was mentioned earlier, as it was mentioned.
 President Obama promised to help Ukraine build up an effective security force to defend themselves from aggression .
More delays in terms of getting that support. And yet, here we are today talking about more delays in the process .
 Kurt Volcker, a former U.S. Ambassador to NATO, has written that this new cease-fire amounts to, “an institutionalization of a frozen conflict inside Ukraine’s Ukraine.’
 Senator's objective is to keep Ukraine destabilized so it does not effectively join the West, says Senator .
 He is trying everything he can to prevent that from happening. He is threatened by progressive democracies on his borders in his opinion, he says .
 Secretary Nuland and Secretary McKeon have pointed out that we have implemented a wide array of initiatives focused on generating pressure, economic, diplomatic, and military .
 Russia has kidnapped an Estonian intelligence officer on Estonian soil . Sweden forced Sweden to reroute a civilian airliner recently to prevent a collision with a Russian military jet . Russia has also flown strategic bombers over the English Channel .
 I would like to follow up on Senator Shaheen’s question about Article 5. I would also like to ask Senator Sha he would like a question on Article 5 . The question is a question of Article 5, which is part of the Constitution .
 Putin would like very much to undermine the NATO alliance, says Putin . "We are working very hard to communicate to him," says Putin. "I think he would like to undermine that alliance"
 NATO is rotating forces through the Baltic States, engaging those states in terms of exercises and training and assistance . The United States is part of this obviously, as well as facilitating additional aircraft being stationed into those countries .
 All of this holistically is designed to bolster and underline the Article 5 commitments . All of the new commitments will be made in the coming weeks .
 All four of you have said in different ways that the solution to the problem is diplomatic, economic, and military .
 Their banking sector can be hit and also their military arms manufacturing sector . Their banking and military arms sector can also be hit .
 The sectors that you mentioned actually have been targeted through the sanctions . The sectors were targeted through sanctions .
 Both the defense sector and the financial sector have been subject to sectoral sanctions . The sanctions restrict the ability of companies in that sector to borrow money, to tap the capital markets, to develop their businesses .
 Russia's currency depreciating by more than 40 percent, the economy expected to contract this year . Inflation rising to over 17 percent .
 The sanctions have been part of our tailored sanctions program, and these are the effects that we have seen, says the U.S. Department of State Department .
 Senator McCain was in Connecticut yesterday, and we held a townhall meeting with Connecticut's Ukrainian American population .
 We had an overflow crowd at the Ukrainian National Home in Hartford, probably around 300400 people .
 If it were not for the U.S. leadership on rallying the international community to the Ukrainian Government to still stand, this story would have played out in a very different way .
 Ukraine is in a dire situation in eastern Ukraine today, says the Ukrainian president . Ukraine is trying to defend itself to the degree that it can, he says . "This is a dire condition in easternUkraine today," he says.
 I support a policy of providing defensive arms, though I support it . I have one specific question, and then I wanted to talk about some of the concerns that many of us have about it .
 I think it is important for us to know exactly what we are obligated to do when we sign these international agreements . I think we should provide defensive weapons to the Ukrainians, notwithstanding our unanimity in our belief that we should give them defensive weapons .
 I just think it is important for us to understand if that is actually the case . I just want to know if it is true. I think it's important to see if it's true .
 Connecticut senator says Ukrainian Americans are active and supportive of Ukraine . Senator: "I am glad to see that Connecticut Ukrainian American are active"
 It was a political agreement among the four signatories, notably the United States, the United Kingdom, the Russian Federation, and Ukraine, to respect Ukraine's sovereignty .
 It did not have legally binding treaty force or legally binding national defense obligations . It was not a national defense obligation . The United States did not comply with the treaty .
 Russia has violated the spirit and the letter of that agreement, it said . That said, it is Russia that has violated that agreement .
 The Ukrainians have been given substantial defensive weapons by the Ukrainian government . McKeon wants to talk about how circumstances would play out in the event .
 The supposition is that Putin is not paying a big enough price simply with economic sanctions . Putin would not be able to cloak in secrecy due to increased United States assistance would change his calculus .
 I have joined with colleagues in supporting providing defensive weapons. That is why I have been involved in supporting defensive weapons . That's why I've joined with my colleagues in support for defensive weapons, he says .
 There is a chance that he will continue his march straight through the lines that we have fortified. But there is also a significant chance that that is not how things will go, says David Cameron .
 Senator Murphy has not gotten into all the specifics of the internal debate in the administration . He has put his finger on the conundrum .
 From the beginning of this crisis, we have looked at ways to increase the costs on President Putin, to deter further aggression, and to change his calculus . We have also looked at how to increase costs on the Russian president .
 The U.S. military is considering whether to add more weapons to its arsenal . It is also weighing whether additional weapons, including lethal defensive weapons, would achieve that .
 I do not want to say does this provoke him because he does not need any provoking. I don't think he needs any provoking, I say . I do NOT want to provoke him, I do. I want him to stop provoking him.
 The second, third, and fourth move on this chessboard is part of the conversation . So it is trying to see to the second and third, third and fourth moves .
 I do not buy this argument that we supplying Ukrainians with defensive weapons is going to provoke Putin . I don't buy that argument, I think it's wrong, I'm not buying this argument .
 I just want to make sure, and I think you are suggesting that you are having these conversations, that we are playing this out not just to step one, but to step two and three and four . I'm just making sure, he says, that I just
 I think very often we supply you with advice that does not necessarily contemplate the follow-on actions of our initial commitment . I thinkvery often we Supply you with Advice that doesnot necessarily contemplate follow- on actions of your initial commitment. I think that is very often
 Russia is using tools to try to prevent the next Ukraine from occurring, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: We are seeing the tip of the iceberg when it comes to Russia's use of tools .
We need to be having a discussion about how we resource State and Defense to help all these other countries that we are talking about, whether it be the Baltics, the Balkans, Moldova, Georgia, or Baltics .
 The Balkans and Central Europe are some of the underresourced parts of Europe . The Balkans, Central Europe and the Balkans are among the areas underdeveloped .
 corruption is a tool of malign influence to undermine sovereignty, says CNN's John Sutter . Corruption can be used to undermine democracy, he says .
We are working with countries to expose corruption in their system, particularly focused on central Europe and the Balkans . We are working to expose that and close the space for corruption in the system .
 The propaganda is not simply what you see in terms of news, but it is also under-the-table efforts to support what looked like legitimate NGOs but are actually agents of influence in countries .
There is a lot to focus on, particularly in the Balkans, where they are not, most of them, cemented into the alliance . Many of them not cemented in the EU, so they are more at risk, but also in allied territory .
Madam Secretary, from a person who helped write the Budapest agreement, apparently it was a superficial agreement, only a political agreement .
 U.K., Russia and U.S. nations are watching that last exchange . The last exchange would be pretty reticent to come to any agreement with the United States .
 The last exchange would be a pretty major setback to anyone who thought we were ever serious about nuclear proliferation, says John Sutter .
 The answer to that question was one of the phrases I heard in the testimony. Yes, that answer does not reassure the allies, he says .
 Senator Gardner and Senator Shaheen mentioned the hearing we had last week in our European subcommittee .
 I called that hearing to try to lay out and describe reality, to really tell the story of what Russia has become under Vladimir Putin . I called it to try and lay out the reality of Russia, and to tell the stories of Russia .
I would refer to my written opening remarks where we laid out a pretty revealing timeline that included 29 political assassinations . I would refer people to my writing opening remarks. I would also refer to his written opening statements .
 The day after we called the hearing, we saw the assassination of Boris Nemtsov . And of course, it was the day after.
 Putin is trying to export police state abroad to Georgia, to Ukraine, to Moldova . Gary Kasparov, who has been a leading voice of the opposition, said Putin rebuilt a police state in full view of the outside world .
 Admiral Pandolfe characterized his motives earlier in this hearing. Well, I certainly agree with the way he described his motives .
 He is looking to keep countries in the former Soviet space under his political and economic control . He is also trying to keep nations in the ex-Soviet space.
 He is looking to roll back the gains of a Europe whole, free, and at peace, he says . He wants to help strengthen and provide more resilience, political security and economic to all the countries in the periphery .
 administration officials say they were trying to offer an off-ramp to Vladimir Putin . Earlier in Vladimir Putin’s aggression against Ukraine, I heard a number of administration officials saying that we were offering a off-Ramp to Putin .
 He is just looking for onramps, strategically pausing, and looking for that next on-ramp. By his evaluation, he is just simply looking for a next onramp .
 Admiral Pandolfe is trying to keep Ukraine out of the West and keep it in a destabilized situation, he said . I think, as AdmiralPandolfe said, he is trying, as he said, to keep the West out of Ukraine . He said he
 Russia is being evaluated by the U.S. administration, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: I want to see if this is pretty much the administration’s evaluation of really what Russia is doing .
 IHS consultancy firm, Ukrainian authorities, and Potomac Institute, say there are currently 14,400 Russian troops on Ukrainian territory . 29,300 illegally armed formations of separatists in eastern Ukraine.
 These units are well equipped with the latest main battle tanks, armored personnel carriers, and infantry fighting vehicles . They also have hundreds of pieces of tube and rocket artillery .
 29,400 Russian troops in Crimea and 55,800 amassed along the border with eastern Ukraine . There are also 29,000 Russian troops on the Crimea border .
 Senator Johnson, without going into the specifics of the intelligence on the number of Russians in eastern Ukraine, cannot comment on the issue .
Russian soldiers in eastern Ukraine have transferred hundreds of pieces of equipment . There are many Russian soldiers in Ukraine, and there is no doubt they have transferred thousands of items .
 There are 11 Russian battalion tactical groups on the Rostov area off of eastern Ukraine . I men35 tioned earlier, the latest information on the border .
 Senator Shaheen was talking about meeting with some of the Ukrainian parliamentarians, he says .
 Russia were concerned about a potential spring offensive by Russia. They were certainly concerned about the potential offensive .
 Secretary Nuland talked about moving heavy equipment into Ukraine . Nulan: "They are amassing"
 The Minsk agreement is being implemented and strengthening the OSCE so it can give us an accurate picture, Senator says . Senator: "We are seeking the greatest degree of fidelity"
 If Minsk is implemented before spring and things pull back, then that will allow space for politics to begin in eastern Ukraine . If not, we have to be prepared to have more sanctions pressure on Russia, and that is what we are preparing .
 A big ‘if’ I would argue sanctions have not worked particularly well, he says . That is a big “if” he would argue. That’s a big "if“if" I would argues sanctions have been not working well
As Russia becomes weaker economically, they become more dangerous, he says . The comment was made in one of his meetings with some of our European allies .
 I believe we have to provide a military response, lethal defensive weaponry . I kind of agree with that assessment which is again why I believe the military must provide lethal defensive weapons .
Georgian President Saakashvili said he would change Putin's calculus . There are a couple quotes about changing Putin’s calculus .
 Senator Menendez said he was there on the front lines when Russia invaded Georgia .
 Bush administration sent in supplies without Russia really knowing what was on cargo airplanes . Russia's aggression into Georgia was one of the factors causing Russia to stop further expansion .
Saakashvili: "If we would show some strength, some resolve, in other words, respond to President Poroshenko’s plea that, yes, they will provide the boots on the ground to fight Vladimir Putin's aggression, but they cannot do it with blankets.
 The hearing was held by the U.S. House of Representatives in New York City . It was the first time the House has held a hearing in the last two years . The hearing is expected to take place in the coming weeks .
 There is no question there is strong consensus on this committee, I think in the United States Senate, that the U.S. needs to do more to help the Ukrainians defend themselves .
 Ukrainians need defensive support so they can defend themselves as far as weapons 36 are concerned . The Ukrainians need to be able to defend themselves.
 The hearing has heen pretty clear about our position in that regard, he says . And this committee has spoken and many of us have voiced this, he adds .
 The tragic assassination of Boris Nemtsov really points out just how extreme the Putin regime has gotten .
 Mr Nemtsov exposed who were committing gross violations of Russian rights. Madam Secretary: I would just urge you to look at the individuals he exposed . He would be looking into the individuals.
 It would he appropriate for us to review whether we should he impose Magnitsky type sanctions against those individuals that he worked on within Russia . It would be appropriate for him to review if he imposed Magnitski type sanctions.
 Nadiya Savchenko was unlawfully imprisoned in Russia today, who was taken from Ukraine by Russia . Savchenko is unlawfully imprisoned.
 There is just continued effort, and Russia’s violations of its agreements, including the Minsk II cease-fire. So there is just continuing effort, according to Russian media .
 "We have to be out there with our European partners, but it is going to require United States leadership," says U.S. officials .
 The protests in Kyiv were as much about basic rights and economic rights as it was about political issues . I want to get to the economic front for one moment, says the author .
 Ukraine is being able to defend its borders and control its territory . Ukraine should have an effective government with the institutions that protect the rights of all of its citizens to express their views. Ukraine should also be able to provide economic opportunities for its citizens .
 They now have a new commitment that they entered into in February this year that looks like it takes this up to maybe $22 billion . The company now has a newcommitment that they enter into this year .
 I could not agree more that what we saw in the Maidan and what we have seen since reflects the desire of the Ukrainian people for a better life, including a better economic life, he says .
 Ukrainian Government has taken a decisive break from the past, he says . Ukraine has been mobilizing large international financial assistance for Ukraine .
Ukrainian Government has put forward actions that the international financial institutions have imposed on Ukraine . 37 and addressing issues related to insider influence within financial institutions, all of these are actions that they have put forward .
 Secretary Lew or Under Secretary Nathan Sheets or myself have visited Ukraine in the last couple of months . The departure from past practices of Ukrainian governments could not be more evident .
 U.S. responsibility is to ensure that the international community is doing everything it can to support this reform agenda, says U.N. State Department . Ukrainian Government embraced by huge legislative majorities in recently elected Ukrainian parliament .
 The U.S. had provided a $1 billion loan guarantee for IJkraine last year .
 Congress to consider another $1 billion loan guarantee at the end of this year . We intend to provide another one in the first half of the year .
 Europe and other bilateral donors have increased their assistance to Ukraine in recent months .
Senior officials within the Treasury, as well as the State Department, have worked on. That is something that the Treasury has worked on and we are going to continue to work on .
 U.S. government merits continued support from other countries and international financial institutions. We think that this government merits support not only from the United States but from others .
 I just urge us — our support for Ukraine must include accountability and progress being made in regards to governance issues and human rights issues . But we have to make that very clear, I just urges us .
 They must demonstrate their ability to carry out their verbal commitments to their people . We have to be tough about that, and we have to show them that they can do that .
I would ask one last question, if I might, and that is an assessment of the OSCE mission. I would ask, if you might, if it was an assessment, of the mission . I would also ask: "If I might," if I may,
One of the hats I wear is the ranking Democrat on the Helsinki Commission . As you know, one of the Hats I wear are the ranking Democrats on the Finnish Commission .
 This is a tool of foreign policy and of European policy that was underutilized until the Ukraine crisis . I think this is atool of foreign Policy and of Europe that was not used until Ukraine crisis.
 The OSCE hearing is taking place in Ukraine . The hearing is being held in Kiev, Ukraine . It is the first time the OSCE has held a hearing in Ukraine.
 Malaysian Air Line 17 has been working in separatist-held areas to get access to the crash site . It has 38 people working in the area, particularly in separatist areas, to get the access they need .
 The OSCE is trying to make sure that every nation carries its weight in terms of fielding monitors . We are trying to work now with European partners to makesure that every OSCE nation carries their weight .
 OSCE monitors now need to know difference between artillery piece and Smerch rocket . We now need monitors who know the difference between an X kind of artillery piece.
Journalist and commentator was asked what is the greatest threat to the United States security . He was asked about what is biggest threat to U.S. security . The individual is a well respected journalist and commentator in America .
 McKeon and Pandolfe: "I would like your opinion on that statement. So, Secretary Mc Keon and AdmiralPandolfe"
 Senator Isakson would defer to the IC and its judgment of current threats to U.S. security .
 Russia is doing not just in Ukraine but along Europe’s borders, it is doing. It is the core of the reason we have taken a lot of reassurance measures that we have and thinking hard about making sure that the alliance commitment can be met not just through the United States
Senator, traditionally degree of threat is defined as capability and intent . Senator, traditionally, is considered a threat of threat to a person .
 The Russians are a world-class state with a World-class military . In terms of capaWlity, you know, the Russian state is a world class state .
In terms of intent, that makes it even more important that we do the kinds of initiatives we have talked about this morning to try to minimize the risk .
 A good benefit of older age, which I am enjoying, is you have a long memory of experiences you went through in your life. You know, one good benefit, which you know, is that you have long memories of experiences .
 Kennedy put a blockade around Cuba and called Khrushchev’s bluff . Kennedy did in response to the Cuban missile crisis in the 1960s .
We need to be able to match the threat with the force necessary to thwart that threat . We need to have the same type of response to match threat with force necessary.
 The Department of Defense is always worrying about the threats right in front of us . Senator: "We do a lot of planning"
Military modernization of Russia and its activities in central Europe have got the mind focus on looking ahead at what Russia might do . Russia's military modernization and activities in Central Europe have, no doubt, got the focus on look ahead .
 The Department is giving a lot of thought and attention to in the Department. It is definitely an area of concern, says the Department .
 I think this committee feels in its entirety for us to look down at possible calculations down the line and be prepared to confront power with power and threat with threat. I think it feels in their entirety for the committee to consider possible calculations .
 Assistant Secretary Nuland has said it is fundamental to what we do, and it is coupled to, as he said . "It is fundamental," he said.
 Those elements together are the best way to buy down risk and ensure stability and security . Those elements are the most effective way to purchase down risk, say experts .
 I do not know if I would call it soft, but it is certainly a tool of its influence . I don't know if it would be soft, or if it is soft. It is certainly an influence of the media, says the author .
 Europe's energy supply to Europe is a factor, says David Cameron . Europe's interest in controlling supplies of energy is a key factor, he says .
 There were many other factors at play in Russia’s decisions that it made in Ukraine .
 Ukraine had been able to be more energy independent earlier in its period since independence from the Soviet Union . I mean, I think if Ukraine had had more resilience, it would have had more ability to resist .
 Ukraine is one of Europe's most important countries in energy diversification, energy security for Ukraine . Ukraine and the rest of Europe are putting much effort in the bilateral program . Ukraine is the largest country in Europe .
 The U.S. needs to understand the national defense interest of developing all the petroleum resources we can in the United States so we have control of what the Russians are able to do in Russia .
 I want to pick up on where Senator Isakson left off, and then I have some questions about the economy and energy issues . I also want to talk about where Senator is now, and where he left off .
 I have been a strong supporter of the economic sanctions against Russia . I understand there have been earlier questions about the possibility of more sanctions in the energy sector .
Russia's energy sector has been hit by sanctions in the energy sector . Russia has been accused of over-rely on Russia to have alternate sources of energy . Russia's energy minister says sanctions are all strategies that he supports .
 Senator Johnson made a comment repeating some comments from a hearing last week . "I am just interested in your theories about it," he said .
 Some testimony in the hearing last week that makes Russia more dangerous militarily. To the extent that we are more successful in economic sanctions, there was some testimony last week .
 Senator Kaine says he does not know that it raises the risks or makes Russia more dangerous .
 It is hard to understate the provocations and dangers of the actions President Putin has already taken, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He is going to face some hard economic choices if oil prices stay down and capital flight continues and the ruble continues in the direction it is going .
 If oil prices stay down, he is going to have to make some hard choices, he says .
 If he continues to sustain those investments, there are going to be some other costs in Russia, he says . The social safety net in Russia is in danger, he adds .
 He is going to have to weigh that in terms of his internal politics. So he will have to decide his political future in the future .
 He does have to pay attention to what is going on in the country and public attitudes . I know it is not exactly a democracy, but he does need to pay Attention to what's going on .
 The internal Russian dynamic is a key issue for the Russian government, according to the Russian media .
 There has been a lot of question of how much are the sanctions having an effect, how much low oil prices have an effect . The sanctions have been criticised for their impact on oil prices .
 The ruble is devaluation of the ruble, and other economic effects. Clearly we have seen statistics about capital outflow, reduction in foreign direct investment, and devaluation .
 Assistant Secretary Toloui has given you some of the facts and figures that this policy has wrought, he says . Russia’s vulnerability to low oil prices because of their lack of economic diversification over the last 15 years, he adds .
 Russian kitchen tables are being hit now by these policy choices that the Kremlin is making . I think we have yet to see what the political impacts will be, but we clearly can see from some of the statistics .
When we see imports way down, it is affecting lifestyles, Toloui says . Average Russians are having difficulty paying for loans for apartments, for cars, and for loans .
 The Kremlin has prioritized their international adventure over the quality of life for their own people, he says . "I think we have yet to see," he adds .
 The question about where will oil prices be in a year is something of which we should be wary with respect to speculating . But there are people who have to make that speculation .
Oil prices have stayed in basically this historically low level, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We can draw the line between that and likely political feelings" He says Russia's internal economic dynamic and political feelings are likely to be seen in Russia .
 Russia's economic outcomes have been an interaction between what we have seen in oil and the impact of economic sanctions . I think it is important to recognize that the economic outcomes that we've seen in Russia have really been a interaction between oil and economic sanctions.
Higher oil prices would definitely be a positive for the Russian economy . Higher oil prices are a good news for Russia's economy .
 Moody's and S&P have done to Russia's credit rating . But I think it is relevant to look at what both Moody’s and S &P havedone to Russia’S rating .
 Moody’s and S&P are not to react to what the oil price is today but to think about how Russia's economy is being managed .
 I am not going to speculate on oil prices like you mentioned. And so I think that if we saw higher oil prices, I'm not going on to speculate . I'm going to be more cautious about oil prices if we see higher prices .
 The impact of sanctions on Russian economic prospects is expected to persist. But even if we see oil prices rise, the shadow on Russia's economic prospects will remain .
 rating agencies have designated Russian debt as junk . Russian debt is considered to be the most expensive in the world .
 First, we want peace, then political normalization, and then return to borders, he says . Then we want a return to Crimea, which he imagine includes Crimea as well .
 The hope is that Minsk would offer that promise with peace coming first as the precondition for all these things to be possible . The question that I have is how realistic is that it would be realistic .
 The question that I have is how realistic is Putin's goal, given the goals he has himself. The question is how accurate is that goal, according to Putin's goals .
 Putin has here is to basically — it is not just about Ukraine, he says . I think the goal, unless any of you dispute this, is to get Ukraine back on the ground, he adds .
 It is about completely reorganizing the post-cold-war, post-Soviet-era order in Europe . It's about completely re-organizing the Post-Cold-war order in the world .
 He wants to weaken and divide and perhaps even force NATO to fall apart . In that context, that is why he wants to strengthen and divide .
 He has questioned why we even need a NATO anymore since there is no more Soviet Union . In fact, he has questioned the need for a NATO since the Soviet Union is no longer there .
 He has openly said that they believe they need to establish a sphere of influence in former Soviet space . He has also said that he wants to influence former Warsaw Pact type countries .
 This is just an excuse that he puts out there as a justification before the international community for moving forward, he says . This whole talk about protecting Russian speakers is just a justification for the move, he adds .
 Russia's goal is to reorder the post-Soviet order in the region and carve out for Russia a strategic space of influence . But ultimately their goal, their ultimate goal, is to carve out Russia's strategic space for themselves .
 The European Union wants to split us off from the European Union . A temporary cease-fire could be a tactical move to split them off, says the British leader .
There have been arguments that we should not go on sanctions alone because it could cause friction with the European Union and split us from them in that regard .
 At the end of the day, he may agree to a cease-fire temporarily or to consolidate gains they have already made . But at the same time, he could also try to create a point of friction between the Europeans and the Europeans .
 Russia is a sphere of influence in the world's most important region . Russia's president is trying to rearrange the order in this area . But ultimately his goal is to completely rearrange this area and carve out Russia's sphere.
 Ukraine's goal is to stabilize the country's borders, but it's not clear what their goal is . So how is it even realistic to think that he is ever going to allow stabilization to return to Ukraine?
 He is a criminal and a thug, but he is also a very determined one who has shown the willingness to act out in furtherance of a strategic goal . I mean, he is a thug and a criminal, but his actions are also determined .
 If fully implemented, it would bring back sovereignty and territorial integrity in the east . It would be the first time it has been fully implemented .
 Minsk has to impose more costs, significant costs, on Russia, with our European partners, if Minsk is violated or not implemented .
 In furtherance of that question, if in fact this is a test, what is wrong with now laying out clearly what we are going to do if that test has failed. So in furtherance, what's wrong with this? If in fact it's a test.
 Ukraine has a right to defend itself not just against Russian aggression or separatist aggression, but any aggression . In essence, if this test fails, we are going to arm the Ukrainians with, as a sovereign country, by the way, according to the Ukrainian government .
 If in fact we are trying to strengthen the writ of that government, part of that is allowing them to provide for their own defense, he says . "If in fact, we are attempting to strengthen that government," he adds .
 Minsk is not implemented or further violated, says Sen. John McCain . He made clear that we are working now with the Europeans to lay out concrete sanctions .
 We generally do not signal those in advance, but we make it clear that we are prepared, and that is what we are working on . We generally don't signal that we're prepared, but that's what we're working on, we say .
 Minsk will be part of Minsk's security assistance, according to the U.S. State Department . Minsk has been a key part of the Russian government's response to the crisis in Russia .
 We generally do not discuss in a public forum any specific measures, but we discuss a whole range of things . We actually do not talk about specific measures in public forum .
 The U.S. and European partners are evaluating the impact that it would have on Russia and the global economy . The United States and Europe are evaluating it .
 "I do not expect you to comment on this. My last question, I guess, is just more of a — maybe I do not Expect you to comments on this," says the author .
 There are other countries that have not been invaded who we provide military assistance to and defensive systems to because we understand that the absence of it invites aggression in the future. In essence, there are other nations that have been invaded.
 I just want to know why is it a bad idea to provide defensive systems irrespective — and I know that is being reviewed . I just wants to know what's wrong to provide them with defensive systems, and I'm not sure why .
 The armed forces 44 were not fully stripped bare, but they were left rather lacking by the corruption of the last regime . Senator Rubio has provided a range of security assistance in the nonlethal categories .
 Nuland said, defensive lethal weapons are being reviewed but it is not something on offer at the present time .
 Putin's critics in Russia say giving Ukraine defensive weapons to Ukraine would lead to the death of Russians .
 The Washington Post reported or had some commentary from some of Putin’s opponents . I think the Washington Post has reported or has some commentary. I think it has been reported or some commentary .
 If Putin says there are no Russian troops in Ukraine, if we provided, he has nothing to worry about . If that is true, he will have nothing to worried about, if it is true .
 Russian forces in Ukraine are responsible for command and control, arming, financing, directing of this conflict, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We also believe that there are many hundreds of Russians dead in Ukraine and that it does pose a vulnerability for the Kremlin politically at home . The Kremlin is denying they are even active there, we say .
I read in your statement — maybe you did not say this publicly because you had to shorten your statement. I read in the statement. Maybe you didn't say that publicly because of the length of your statement, I read .
 At the time the primary intent was to get Russia to assure Ukraine that it would not seek to take advantage of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity if it gave up its weapons .
 Ukraine sought that political guarantee primarily from Russia, and it is that guarantee that Russia has violated . So Ukraine sought a political guarantee from Russia .
 There was never an intent to have treaty obligations — Senator Menendez . There was always an intent for treaty obligations .
 Russia gave up its nuclear arms because otherwise there was no reason for such an agreement . Russia wanted a 45 guarantee from Russia and we just joined with Britain and others to give them further comfort .
 U.S. Senator sought assurance from other nuclear powers that we would not seek to exploit Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity . Senator also sought assurances from the other two nuclear powers, the United States and Great Britain .
 I am not qualified to get into the intricacies of the deal that we are trying to strike with Iran. I'm not, as you know, qualified for the deal, says the Iranian government . I'm just not a good enough person to be able to understand the complexities of the
 I think I will leave that to the folks in the administration who work on Iran. I think that will be left to those who work for Iran . I think it will be a good thing for them to do so.
 The administration has said it is not going to be a treaty, therefore the Congress has no need to have a say . The question is it seems to be that what we have heard from the administration, as it relates to Iran, is to say that it's not going
 If that is the case, then we need to know the nature of what that means, says the author .
 I do not see the difference, and I do think it is very much on point. So I don't see the differences, and it is not a difference, I do see it as much as a difference .
 The U.S. lived up to its commitments under Budapest, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "With regard to the Budapest political commitment, let me just say that with regard to its political commitment," he says .
 The U.S. honors political commitments as it honors treaties . The United States can be reassured by its behavior vis-a-vis Budapest, says Peter Bergen .
 We have no intention of interfering with Ukraine’s territorial integrity. We have certainly, nor did we ever have any intention of interfere with Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The Ukrainians would think that political agreement with these three powers was in fact that we would be supportive of their security and their territorial integrity . I doubt that the Ukrainians ever thought that we were going to somehow invade their territory. The reason that we joined is to give comfort
 Ukrainians would feel far short of what that agreement meant in terms of its actual implementation . But at this point, we have not done anything to interfere with its integrity, I think .
 The political agreement can be interpreted as those who signed it wish to interpret it .
 The ranking member just put forth. I very much appreciate the line of questioning the ranking member . I have been asked to answer questions about his ranking .
I would ask the Secretary who does meet with people constantly around the world. I would ask him to do so .
 This has to have affected our credibility with others around the world. This has been a problem for us, we say . This has had to be seen as a problem with our credibility .
 Congress has been criticized for its lack of ability to make simple decisions . Congress has a history of making simple decisions, but the decisions themselves are relatively simple . Congress is in the process of making a decision to make decisions .
 I would like to get your sense of how badly, on the heels of what we never did in Syria, I would love to see how this is affecting us with others. But I would just like to see what we have done in Syria .
 Chairman says Europeans see strong bipartisan, bicameral support for Ukraine . "We have done far more than most nations to support Ukraine," he says .
 There is also a transatlantic debate on security support questions in the Obama administration .
 The Europeans come at it from both sides depending upon where they sit . But the Europeans come to it from either side.
 We are going to have the record open for questions and move into a second panel . Well, we will have to answer questions.
 Ukraine has been very forward with your statements regarding Ukraine and the things that need to be done, says President Vladimir Putin . "You have been veryforward with your statement," says Putin .
President Obama's administration has been criticized for not taking steps that many people in the administration feel need to be taken . Obama: "I would have, at this point, significant difficulty coming to work each day with these decisions"
 We continue for some reason not to do those things that we have acted as if we might do. And yet, we continue to do some of those things .
 I have a number of other questions that I will send in writing, and I thank each of you for being here. So I have many other questions to answer .
In all cases 47 you all are messengers and not the ones that have these decision memos sitting on your desk unheralded. I realize that in all cases, 47 you are messenger .
 We thank you for your service to our country and appreciate your candid testimony . But we thank you. But we also appreciate your candor in your testimony .
 John Kornblum is former Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs and former U.S. Ambassador to Germany . The first witness is former assistant secretary of state for European affairs, John KORNblum .
 Former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine and Director of the Eurasia Center at The Atlantic Council, John Herbst, is the second and final witness on this panel .
 Ambassador Kornblum will be seated and comfortable at the end of the day .
 Ambassador Kornblum, I do want to thank you for being here in particular, says ambassador .
 "We are always glad to have really bright people from Nashville, TN, here testifying. I know you are a resident of Nashville, Tennessee, and we are always happy to havereally bright people," says John Sutter .
John C. Kornblum, forMER ASSistant SECRETARY of State for State for EUROPEAN AFFAIRs, and forMER UNITED States AMBASSADOR to GERMANY, BERLIN, GERMANy Ambassador KORNblum .
 Chattanooga has had in revitalizing the city and supporting entrepreneurship there . Mayor Berke is going to be at a meeting that he is organizing in Berlin in 3 weeks to talk about the city's success .
Tennessee is a former state of the state of Tennessee . It is the first time the governor has been in the state since the 1990s .
 I was Assistant Secretary during this whole period involved in all these memorandum and these agreements . I was the Assistant Secretary. I participated in the negotiation of most of them, not the Budapest paper .
 Ranking Member Menendez says he is "very pleased to be here" Menendez: "I am very pleased"
 You have heard in extremely good detail if not always satisfying detail about how our Government sees things . You have also heard in very good detail about what our government sees .
 Senator Rubio in particular talked about the direction of this conflict and the definition of the conflict . But I think there is one thing that we need to think about which Senator Rubio talked about, he said .
 The German ambassador has been living in Germany for a long time now after he stopped being Ambassador . His own view is — and I have been living there for years .
 I think that whatever we are doing in Ukraine and with Russia, we are losing the public affairs battle on this crisis, he says . I think with a certain amount of accuracy, I can say with a Certain amount of accurate, he adds .
 Russia is reacting angrily because it was cheated, ill-used, misused by the West after 1990 . The narrative that is most prevalent, in the United States to a considerable extent, is that this is a Russia which is angry .
 Many of the decisions are going to be taken in the future will depend on whether the Russians believe that they have the upper hand on this aspect of the crisis and 48 whether we can maintain a strong situation and a strong direction .
After 1990, we dealt with Russian leadership which saw the collapse of the Soviet Union as a liberation and not as a Western attack on Russia . After 1990, the fact is that after 1990, they dealt with the Russian leadership .
 We did not talk to them about the details of NATO enlargement or EU enlargement, but we certainly told them that our goal for them was to establish democracy, establish free market systems, and allow Russia to join the Western world .
We worked very hard to make this point not only clear but to establish things to make it real . We worked veryHard to make the point. We worked hard to making it clear .
 The situation was 25 years ago. Now, I say this so precisely because we have to remember what the situation was25 years ago . The situation is now 25 years old .
 Twenty-five years ago, we had the western part of the continent democratized .
 The new governments in Poland and Czechoslovakia had hardly any of the basic conditions for modern Western society .
 NATO's strong leadership has in fact succeeded, says CNN's John Sutter . NATO's cooperation with NATO, with strong leadership, has succeeded, he says .
 Many of the reasons that we have this conflict with Russia right now is not because Ukraine violated orders or not because Russia has somehow felt threatened by the West .
 The leadership in Russia has covered its own misdeeds, its own poor performance with an increase in the authoritarian system . Much of their population wanted to join the West and not to maintain an eastern orientation .
 It suggests that entering into negotiations with the Russians over how to conclude this crisis is not very relevant at the moment . It suggests, for example, that entering in negotiations with Russians over what to do with the crisis are not veryrelevant .
 There is not any new security system which we can offer the Russians which would not include giving them a sphere of influence in these very countries we are trying to protect. There is no new system which is not available to the Russians .
 There is not any military arrangement which we can enter with the Russians which would not somehow limit our ability to defend these countries to the east who we have helped become democratic .
 Putin and his cohorts in Russia in general feel threatened at the moment. There is not any new political forum which we can think up which would change the fact that the real reason is that they feel threatened .
 Russia has failed to have the political leadership since 2000 which helped its population come out of the shock of the end of the cold war and to understand how closely its interests are involved with being part of the West . It also has to do with the fact that Russia — Mr Herbst is
 Government officials say they have a situation now which is important for all the reasons they mentioned to you today . The situation is important, they say .
 I have been living in Berlin now for 17 years and I am still very politically active there . But I can tell you with, shall I say, a lot of experience, I can say, that these arguments are also having an effect in Western Europe, as you know.
 Russia is financing, with very large efforts, to undermine the Western system . Western Europe is trying to undermine Western system, one of the Senators said .
 Russia is also continuing to threaten in one way or the other the weakest points of our system, he says . The Baltic States, such as the Republic of Georgia, have worked quite diligently in recent years .
 "It is a very important question. And so we are facing not just the question," says CNN's John Sutter . "We are facing ... not just a question," he says .
 She has been an election observer in Ukraine twice already . She is very oriented toward Ukraine, so she is veryoriented toward Ukraine .
 Russia has broken out of the channel of unity and cooperation among the countries of Europe . But ultimately that means anti-globalization and anti-American approach, he says .
An article in The Washington Post this week talked about the rhetoric that is being used inside China about the West .
 Russia is using the same rhetoric as Russia has been using in recent weeks . It turns out to be almost word for word for the same language that Russia uses .
 Putin has been visiting India, and the Indian leadership more or less agreed with many of the things he was saying .
 Russia has a problem with Russia, which is an important one, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We are talking here not just about Russia, but we are talking about it"
 Senator Rubio is a wearing away at the 50 foundations of the Western community in Europe . He says the West is going to have to influence, control if you will, the new globalized world which is coming up .
 Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe have been more active in recent years . I am very appreciative of your personal efforts to increase our information budgets . And my final point would be I would be very appreciating of yourpersonal efforts.
 Ukraine's military support for Ukraine is a key issue for the country's future, he says . "I think that winning back the narrative is almost as important as considering military support," he adds .
 John C Kornblum Senator Corker has been invited to join a hearing on the Ukraine crisis . Corker: "I am honored to have been invited"
 I was a frequent guest of this committee and its members during the 1990s . I was Assistant Secretary of State and Special Envoy to the Balkans .
 I look forward to our discussion of ways in which Russian strategy can be countered . We will discuss ways to counter Russian strategy in the future .
 In those years, we cooperated to establish conditions for a peaceful, democratic transition for nations of the former Warsaw Pact .
 Congressional support for economic and humanitarian aid to Russia was essential to our success . Senators Nunn, Lugar, and many others to reduce the threat of nuclear weapons in the former Soviet Union were essential.
 The London document also presented ideas for an important strengthening of the OSCE . The document was agreed at the Helsinki summit 2 years later .
 First assessments of conditions in the former Warsaw Pact in 1990 were pessimistic to say the least . First assessments were pessimistic, according to the report .
 These countries had been stripped of their talent and identity and left with few of the structures of modern political or economic life . These countries were stripped of the power and identity of their countries .
 Western assistance and the dedication of their own peoples worked a near miracle . But Western assistance worked a close miracle.
Nearly 1 billion inhabitants stretches from the east of Europe to the tip of Alaska . Today, we can be proud of the secure and prosperous democratic community of nearly 1 billion people .
 Membership of both NATO and the European Union gave these countries the stability and the technical assistance necessary to succeed .
Many of the Russian leaders with whom we dealt in those years welcomed these efforts . Many of the leaders we dealt with in that years welcomed those efforts .
 They viewed the collapse of the Soviet Union as liberation rather than defeat . They viewed it as liberation instead of defeat .
 They embraced hopes for Western democracy as the best path to both security and freedom for their country . They embraced hope for democracy as a best path for security and free speech .
 I repeat this history, because it so contradicts the version of post-cold-war events we now often hear. I repeat it because it is so contradicting what we now hear, I say .
Today it is our economic and political success which threatens Russia’s authoritarians rulers, not our soldiers . Today it's our economic, political success, not Russia's authoritarian rulers, says CNN.com .
 Russian criticism of Western behavior 20 years ago has led to questions about NATO expansion . Residents of Estonia and Slovakia may not have been asked how they feel about the expansion .
 This is why the Russian counterattack, military and digital, has been so vicious, it's so vicious . The Russian counter attack, military, and digital have been so brutal, it is so vicious. This is the reason why the Russians are so aggressive .
 Current Russia leaders appear to view the growing encroachment of the Western way of life as an existential challenge . Current Russian leaders see the encroachment as a challenge.
 I am one who favors military assistance to help Ukraine regain its footing . I'm one of those who favor military assistance for Ukraine .
 A substantially expanded public presentation of the facts could be equally as important as the facts . But I believe that a substantially expandedPublic Presentation of the Facts could be more important than that .
 Putin’s ability to control public perceptions is severely hindering efforts to stop the fighting and restore order in Ukraine . Putin's control of public perceptions has hindered efforts to restore order, according to CNN .
 The West is losing the rhetorical battle, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "For the moment at least, the West is lost the battle"
 Russia has invested immense resources into applying the tools of globalization to a massive program of disinformation . Russia has spent huge resources on disinformation, including money to create fake news .
 Russia has added an extra dose of old fashioned anti-Americanism to shoot an unbroken stream of invective around the world . It has combined nationalism within Russia with the legend of a proud nation humbled by the evil West .
 Bowing to Putin’s imperial pretensions will do nothing to redress the falling oil price, Russia's failure to invest in new technology or the flow of talented scientists and technicians to the West . Russia's lack of investment in technology or flow of talent to the
 The Russian attack on Ukraine has already expanded into what is prohahly the world’s first digitally managed diplomatic confrontation .
 Normal people, rich and poor are increasingly worried that they are losing control of their destinies to globalization .
 Putin has been able to harness these fears in a desperate effort to return the narrative to issues of the past . Putin is trying to bring the narrative back to the past to the present .
 He wants us to believe that the crisis is really about the way in which the West suppresses countries like Russia which don’t follow the American lead .
 The image of Western betrayal is attractive to many non-European and even some European countries who also feel put upon by the West . However farfetched it may seem, this image of western betrayal may be attractive to some .
 The echo has helped Putin justify his unbroken flow of troops and materiel into Ukraine . The echo is helping Putin justify the flow.
 Russian aggression has provided Ukraine one thing which was so far lacking — national purpose. At the same time, Russia has given Ukraine a national purpose . Russia has also provided Ukraine a reason for its aggression .
 Unless the U.S. and its allies wrest the rhetorical high ground from Russia, Mr Putin is likely to become more arrogant and thus more dangerous .
 His sense of media control could ultimately make him overconfident and prone to disastrous mistakes . He could also make him more prone to mistakes.
 Senator Corker congratulates Corker for his efforts to strengthen information activities in the region . Corker: "I congratulate you"
Digital society is today the equivalent of our support for political democracy during the cold war . Championing the need to ensure a democratic operating system for digital society is the same as support for democracy during cold war.
 The radical integration of the world through high speed information networks and modern logistics is redrawing the global geostrategic map before our very eyes . The radical Integration of the World through high-speed information networks.
 Everyone, including Russia, will profit if we ensure that the principles of Western democracy are firmly established as the basis for global integration, says Russia .
 If we allow the debate to lend credence to those who reject the openness of Western values, it won’t stop at Russia or Ukraine, or even in Europe. If we let the debate go, we will be able to give credence.
 We could see digital world rapidly deconstructing into competing cultural fiefdoms . We could also see the digital world quickly deconstructed into competing cultures .
 In a networked world, there are no longer any unimportant far away countries, says David Frum . The crisis demonstrates that in the world, no more unimportant countries, he says .
Every place on earth can become central to our concerns if the factors line up correctly . Every place in the world can be central to the concerns of our concerns .
 A new generation of digital diplomats will be to learn how to judge the factors which influence such network behavior better than we have done so far .
 The U.S. Ambassador to the United States is a former ambassador to the UK . He is also a director and director of the U.N. Embassy in Washington, DC .
 Chairman Corker, Ranking Member Menendez, thank you very much for this chance to testify . Chairman Corker: "Thank you verymuch for this opportunity to testify"
 I have been asked to talk about Kremlin aggression in Ukraine and how to counter it . I've been asked about the situation in Ukraine. I've also been asked how to deal with it .
 There are influential people in the U.S. and especially in Europe who do not understand the gravity of this crisis .
 The crisis is simply about Ukraine and Moscow’s aggression there. They do not understand it because they think the crisis is just about Ukraine .
With that narrow understanding, they oppose the strong measures necessary to counter Kremlin aggression and to secure vital — and I mean vital — U.S. interests, not simply important interests .
 The crisis that we face is, as I think almost every Senator today said, a crisis of Kremlin revisionism . The crisis is a crisis, he says, as he says .
 Mr Putin does want to overturn the post-cold-war order established in Europe and Eurasia . Mr Putin wants to overturn post-Cold-War order established by Russia .
 This order has been the foundation of the unprecedented peace and 52 prosperity that not just Europe but the entire world has enjoyed over the past 25 years .
 Mr Putin has stated that he must have a sphere of influence in the post-Soviet space . His concerns extend into the Warsaw Pact countries and he has the right to protect ethnic Russians and Russian speakers .
 He possesses the world's sixth-largest economy, one of the world’s two largest nuclear arsenals, and far and away the strongest military in Europe . He has the sixth- largest economy, and one of world's two largestnuclear arsenals .
 Mr Putin has committed multiple acts of aggression in Georgia in 2008, in Crimea early last year, and since April of last year he has been conducting an increasingly overt, covert war in Ukraine’s east .
 In this covert war in Ukraine’s east, he has escalated his intervention multiple times . He has been involved in the Ukraine's east.
 He has agreed to two cease-fires, Minsk I and Minsk II, and violated each one of them . He has also agreed to a cease-fire in Minsk, Belarus, and agreed to another cease- fire in Belarus .
 Admiral said earlier today that his goal in Ukraine is to destabilize the country . The Admiral said he wants Ukraine to be destabilized .
 To achieve that — and this is not clearly understood — he cannot settle for a frozen conflict . But to achieve that, and this isn't clearly understood, he can't settle for frozen conflict.
 He needs to be regularly on the offensive, albeit with tactical pauses . He should be regular on the defensive, even with tactical pause .
 He has made clear by his statements and his actions that if he succeeds in Ukraine, there will be future targets . He has also made clear that his statements will be made clear.
 The targets may include Estonia and Latvia, where ethnic Russians and Russia speakers comprise 25 percent of the population . The targets are likely to include NATO allies, specifically Estonia and Latina .
 Recent Kremlin provocations include the kidnapping of an Estonia intelligence official from Estonia .
 The NATO summit ended last September . It was the day that the NATO summit was ended .
 They have also included the seizure of a Lithuanian ship from international waters of the Baltic Sea . The seizure of the ship has also been included in the Lithuanian vessel's seizure .
 Moscow's revanchist policies before they move to other countries, especially to the Baltic States . We have a vital interest — again I use that word “vital” — in stopping Moscow’s revanchists .
 I think it was Senator Isakson who said that the Kremlin menace is the most important national security danger we face today . I think that is what he said.
 ISIL is a ragtag bunch of terrorists, not an existential threat to the U.S. It is a serious danger to individual Americans, not a serious threat to individuals, according to CNN .
 Even Iran with its nuclear program is not the same order of threat as Mr Putin’s Russia .
 If Western leaders understood this danger, they would devote substantially more resources to deal with it . They would draw a bright redline in Ukraine, stop Putin in Ukraine.
 Western policy has been slow, reactive, and all too concerned about giving Mr Putin a graceful way out of the crisis . Not sufficiently focused on imposing costs that would make it too expensive for him to continue his aggression .
 The panel was all too reflective of a slow, reactive approach, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We must persuade Mr Putin by announcing strong additional sanctions for aggression to come, says the Russian president .
 Senator Rubio asked why we cannot tell Mr Putin now what sanctions we will impose if he moves beyond the current cease-fire line . I think it was Senator Rubio who asked why he couldn't tell him what sanctions he would face .
 Such proactive measures may deter aggression, but if he moves, they will impose costs for the aggression . Such measures will weaken his economy, weakening his political support at home, and depriving him of resources for his next aggression .
 The Obama administration is trying to pull along a somewhat reluctant Europe . I give the administration pretty good marks for dealing with sanctions .
 The families of the Russian dead are told that if they tell the neighbors that their sons fought and died in Ukraine, they will not get death benefits from the government . That is why the families are told they are not getting death benefits .
 If we provide defensive lethal equipment to Ukraine, Putin will be deterred from going further into Ukraine . Putin does not want to risk the casualties, and the political fallout of the casualties .
 Some people who argue against supplying weapons say that if we do that, Mr Putin will simply escalate .
 If he escalates, again he suffers more casualties, he weakens his support, and he has fewer resources with which to pursue aggression beyond Ukraine . But if he loses support, he has less resources to pursue his aggression beyond the Ukraine, he will be more vulnerable .
 I was one of a group of eight former officials who produced a report on this issue . I was a member of the group who produced the report. I was also a former official who was part of the report .
 We suggest giving Ukraine $1 billion a year for each of the next 3 years, $3 billion of weapons total . We suggest that Ukraine should spend $1billion a year on weapons .
 The Russians have used mass tanks in order to commit their aggression in Ukraine . One, we should be providing antiarmor equipment because the Russians have use mass tanks .
 Ukrainians have suffered 70 percent of their casualties from Russian missiles . We should also be providing counterbattery radar for missiles because Ukrainians have been hit by Russian missiles.
 The Atlantic Council has released a report on systematic Russian human rights violations in Crimea .
 I would like to briefly mention two other essential elements of our policy . I would also like to mention two more essential elements.
 We need to do more in NATO to bolster the deterrence to Russian aggression against the Baltic States. We need more inNAT to bolster our deterrence to Russia's aggression against us .
 Wales summit talked about creating a rapid reaction force and deploying a company of soldiers to the Baltic States . The Wales summit discussed creating this rapid reaction Force .
 Estonia and the 54 other Baltic States should be properly armed as a serious trip wire against further Russian aggression . We should put a battalion into Estonia and other Baltic states, properly armed.
 NATO has a contingency plan dealing for a possible Russia hybrid war in the Baltic States . We need to make sure that NATO has an emergency plan to deal with the situation .
 Especially vulnerable is Narva in Estonia, which is a Russian-speaking enclave .
 We need to do the right thing in the information war against Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia is the world's most powerful intelligence agency .
 The committee supports additional funding for Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty . I know that this committee supports more funding for the group .
 This is important to offsetting the massive Russian propaganda campaign. This is needed to offset the massive propaganda campaign . This is crucial to offseting the massive Russia propaganda campaign, says CNN .
 These four steps, enhanced sanctions, military supplies to Ukraine, a much stronger military posture in NATO’s east, and a ramped-up information effort, will give us a good, good start in stopping Mr Putin in Ukraine .
 John E Herbst Chairman Corker, Ranking Member Menendez, was invited to speak this morning .
 I have been asked to speak about the Kremlin’s aggression in Ukraine and how the U.S. should counter this . I have also been asked about how the United States should counter it .
 Using these troops over 11 months ago, the Kremlin began its hybrid war in Ukraine .
 The political class in Washington, policymakers, and influence wielders are slowly coming to understand what is going on .
 Poland, Baltic States, Romania, Moldova, Georgia are the only eastern reaches of Europe properly understood . Only in the eastern reaches is the crisis in Ukraine properly understood, says the author .
 Proper understanding of the crisis and an adequate response is essential for the very survival of these states . Proper understanding is essential to the survival of those states, says the author .
 Ukraine, the states of the former Soviet Union, NATO, and the EU face the problem of Kremlin revisionism .
 President Putin has stated on numerous occasions his dissatisfaction with the peace in Europe and Eurasia established at the end of the cold war .
 He has at his disposal substantial means for acting on his dissatisfaction and most important of all, he has used those means . He has used that means to deal with his dissatisfaction .
 To understand the challenges posed by a country, it is necessary to understand its potential, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He has established some stability in the political system . He has set up sound fiscal policies, permitting entrepreneurs to make business decisions .
 He controls one of the world’s two-largest nuclear arsenals, the strongest conventional military in Europe . He controls the worlds’ second-largest arms industry .
 Mr Putin’s revisionist intentions are supported by a substantial economy, says Mr Putin . The Russian president is one of the three most powerful militaries .
 Moscow’s attack on the post-cold-war order purely rhetorical, it would be problematic, but manageable . Moscow's attack on post-Cold-War order would be problemic but manageable .
 It involves Russia’s information apparatus, intelligence services, criminal networks, business community, and military . It involves Russian intelligence services and criminal networks .
 The heavily subsidized Russian media has been conducting a virulent anti-Western and particularly anti-American campaign for years . The heavily-subsidized Russian media.
 Mr Putin’s media have fanned xenophobia and intolerance throughout Russia .
 The campaign is part of Mr Putin’s effort to reduce the chance that the Russian people are attracted to democratic ideas . This campaign has been part of the Russian president's effort to lower the chance for democratic ideas.
 Russian intelligence services and connected criminal networks play an important part in Putin’s efforts to undermine the post-cold-war order .
 The very organization of Moscow's intelligence agencies provides a clue to its intentions. First, we should note that the very organizations of Moscow’s intelligence agencies provide a clue .
 The independent states of the former Soviet Union were the responsibility of the FSB . The FSB tells us what Moscow thinks of their independence .
 The FSB and the GRU, Russian military intelligence are to penetrate the security organs of the neighboring states . They are to ensure that they will promote Russian interests as defined by the Kremlin .
Military, police, and intelligence will not mobilize against Russian-led insurrection or invasion . That includes, as we have seen in Ukraine, making sure that the military, police and intelligence won't mobilize against Russia .
 Corruption is an important tool for the Kremlin in promoting its influence in the Near Abroad . Corruption is a major feature of Mr Putin’s Russia .
 The Kremlin understands that corrupt foreign officials are more pliant . The Kremlin also understands that corruption is more prevalent in foreign officials .
 Russian intelligence services and criminal organizations figures. Cooperation between Russia's intelligence services, criminal organizations are shown .
 The siphoning off of vast resources from the gas sector into private hands has created a huge scandal in Russia and Ukraine .
 Eural Trans Gas, RosUkrEnergo, EuralTrans Gas and Ros UkrEergo were set up as operators in a scheme put together by Semion Mogilevich, a Russian crime boss .
 Mr Putin established that Russian companies were subject to Kremlin control to promote objectives abroad .
 Mr Putin has used these assets to promote his foreign policy in a number of ways .
 Ukraine has built gas pipelines to Western Europe around Ukraine and even ally Belarus . He is maintaining access to his wealthy customers in the West . He has built pipelines to West to use gas as a weapon against these countries .
 He has hired shameless senior European officials to work as front men in his companies . He has also hired shameless European officials for front men.
 Gazprom has established business practices regarding the carrying of Central Asian gas in its pipelines and the delivery of gas to European customers that violate EU energy policy and maximizes Russian leverage in dealing with individual coun56 tries .
 Gazprom practices have made it harder for European countries to supply gas to Ukraine . For instance, Gazprom practice has made it hard for European nations to supply Ukraine gas .
 The Kremlin can punish Kyiv by cutting off the supply of gas. This is done so that the Kremlin can punished Kyiv . This is a move to punish the Kremlin for its actions .
 Lucrative arrangements with specific companies in select EU countries also build constituencies that will support Kremlin foreign policies . Lucrative arrangement with specific firms in select European countries also builds constituencies that support Kremlin policies .
 Putin has modernized and rebuilt the Russian military . He has not hesitated to use it in pursuit of his revisionist objectives in Georgia and Ukraine .
 The crisis in Ukraine originated not in Ukraine, but in the minds of Mr Putin and the Russian security elite that find the post-cold-war order unacceptable .
Russian security circles go back to imperialist thinking in Russian security circles since the dissolution of Soviet Union .
 Russian politicians assert Moscow's right to protect Russians in Ukraine . Putin has been using the same ‘principle’ that Mr Putin has used to justify his aggression . It is worth noting, too, that when the results of the Ukrainian referendum became clear,
 Moscow's security services developed the ‘frozen conflict’ tactic to limit the sovereignty of its neighbors . The tactic was developed from the very first days of the post-Soviet world .
 It supported Armenian separatists in the Azerbaijan region of Nagorno-Karabakh . It supported Armenia in order to exert pressure on Azeris, South Ossetians, Ajarians, and the Abkhaz .
 Moscow had its frozen conflicts policy in place before discussions of NATO enlargement . Moscow had a frozen conflict policy before talks of enlargement, according to a report .
 Russian activity in the Near Abroad in the 1990s was just a prelude to Mr Putin's policies .
 He unleashed a massive cyber attack on Estonia in 2007 to express his unhappiness with a decision to take down a memorial to the Red Army in Tallinn .
 This attack took full advantage of the security service-criminal nexus in Russia . The attack was carried out by a group of Russian agents .
 The West chose not to state this clearly or to make it an issue in its relationship with Mr Putin . It was clear that the attack in Estonia originated in Moscow .
 In 2008, Moscow provoked a conflict with Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili . Moscow used its army to defeat the Georgian military .
 Moscow recognized Georgia’s breakaway regions as independent in the same year . In that same year, Moscow recognized the breakaway region as independent .
 Moscow's aggression was condemned in the West, albeit to varying degrees . Moscow’s aggression has been condemned by the West .
 Nicolas Sarkozy agreed to sell Moscow the Mistral aircraft carrier as a reward for observing the cease-fire that he had negotiated . The episode revealed a weakness of Western diplomacy toward Russia that Mr Putin has been exploiting regularly.
 Mr Putin commits an act of aggression, threatens further aggression, and then graciously accepts Western gifts in exchange for not escalating the violence .
 President Obama launched his naive reset with Mr Putin only a year after the Georgian war . The American response to Mr Putin’s aggression was not craven .
 Moscow strongly opposed NATO membership for Ukraine, but it had not taken a position against EtJ membership for the country .
 The prospective trade agreement was a good deal short of membership . But it was not a great deal, and there was no sign of interest .
 It is important to remember this when reading the arguments of those who claim that this crisis is actually due to NATO enlargement .
 Most Ukrainians, including then President Yanukovych, who was often described as pro-Kremlin, wanted EU deal . Most Ukrainians wanted the EU deal.
 The next day, there were tens of thousands of demonstrators on the streets of Kyiv protesting this decision . It was the first time the decision was made .
 Yanukovych tried to clear the streets with strong-arm policing. He roused hundreds of thousands of demonstrators, tired of his corrupt and increasingly authoritarian rule .
 Mr Putin’s offers of lower gas prices and a loan of $15 billion did not satisfy demonstrators .
 Mr Yanukovych alternated between police methods and inadequate concessions to persuade protestors to go home . For 2 months he alternated with police methods to persuade the protestors to leave .
 Sergei Glaziyev, Putin's principal adviser on Ukraine, was publicly urging Mr Yanukovych to use force to deal with protesters .
 Mr Yanukovych either permitted or ordered the use of sniper fire to terrorize the protesters into leaving the streets .
 The demonstrators did not leave the streets; they were enraged and Mr Yanukovych’s political support collapsed . But the demonstrators didn’t leave.
 The Kremlin launched its invasion of Crimea with “little green men,” who looked like and were equipped like Russian soldiers, but without the insignias and flags of the Russian military .
 The United States and Europe placed some mild economic sanctions on Russia in response to Russia's actions . The U.S. and Europe put some mild sanctions on the country in response .
 Mr Putin was offered an “off ramp’ for the crisis. They were also making every effort in private diplomacy and public statements to offer Mr Putin an ‘off ramp.’
 The West had such a tender regard for Mr Putin’s dignity was not unnoticed in the Kremlin . It made Mr Putin's decision to launch his hybrid war in the Donbass easier .
 Putin has launched his decreasingly covert war in Ukraine’s East, he has escalated his intervention several times . Mr Putin has been involved in the Ukraine's East for years .
 Ukraine launched its counteroffensive under newly elected President Poroshenko last June . The Kremlin sent in increasingly sophisticated weapons, including the missile system that shot down the Malaysian airliner in July .
 Only the use of regular Russian forces stopped the Ukrainian counteroffensive . Only the Use of regular Russia forces stopped.
 The West was slow and weak in confronting the Kremlin. Throughout this period, the West wasslow and weak .
 The G-7 leaders had warned Mr Putin in early June that if he did not cease his intervention in Ukraine by the end of the month, Russia would face sectoral sanctions .
By the end of June, there was no more talk of sectoral sanctions . Despite the introduction of major Russian weapons systems into Ukraine, there were no more talks of sanctions .
 Only the downing of the Malaysian passenger jet in July and the invasion by Russian troops persuaded the Europeans to put those sanctions in place . Only theDowning of a Malaysian passenger plane in July.
 Germany and France helped negotiate the Minsk I cease-fire . Regular Russian forces defeated the Ukrainian Army in early September .
 This escalated aggression did not lead to any additional sanctions last year . This escalated aggressions didn't lead to additional sanctions, according to reports .
 EU foreign policy chief Mogherini was floating the idea of easing sanctions . Russian offensive that greeted the New Year greeted the European Union .
 In February, Germany and France helped negotiate a new cease-fire, Minsk II, with terms far worse for Ukraine . But in February, the two countries agreed to a new ceasefire, but the terms were far worse .
 Mr Putin received a much more favorable cease-fire, which he promptly violated by seizing the strategic town of Debaltseve .
 Western leaders huff and puff at each new Kremlin aggression, they hope out loud that this is the last one .
 Mr Putin has stated clearly what he needs to stop his war against Ukraine . The Russian president has said he wants to stop the Ukraine war .
 Western leaders have fallen all over themselves offering solutions publicly and privately to assuage the Russian strongman . But to no avail, they have not offered solutions to the crisis .
 Mr Putin’s objective in Ukraine is, at a maximum, to establish a compliant regime in Kyiv .
 A large majority of Ukrainian citizens despise him for the bloody war that he unleashed . This is something that he cannot achieve, because he cannot. This is a thing that he can't achieve .
 His minimum objective is to destabilize the country, so that it cannot effectively reform itself and orient its policy toward Europe . He says the country should destabilize itself and focus on Europe .
 Mr Putin has not stated these objectives formally, because they are things he cannot admit in polite society . Mr Putin's objectives are not stated formally .
 destabilizing Ukraine means that he cannot sit still in the territories that have already been conquered by his proxies . But destabilizing the Ukraine means he can't sit in the territory he has already conquered .
 He has to continually stir the pot by military action and/or terrorism/subversion, he says .
 A good example of terror was the bombs set off in Kharkiv that killed demonstrators at last month’s rally honoring those killed by snipers .
 If the West does not stop Mr Putin now, they will find him revising the post-cold-war order elsewhere . If they do not stop him now, he will be revising his post-Cold-war orders elsewhere .
 We do not know precisely where he may move next, we know the candidates . But we know that he may be a candidate for president .
 The Kremlin has proclaimed its right to a sphere of influence throughout the post-Soviet space . It also has the right to protect ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers wherever they reside .
 Some countries that were never part of the Soviet Union, but were members of the Warsaw Pact . This just happens to include the entire post-Soviet space, including some countries that never were in the USSR .
 Kazakhstan's Russianspeaking Slavic community is 25 percent of its population . Kazakhstan’s Russian population is 25% of the population .
 Mr Putin called Kazakhstan an artificial country created by the genius of President Nazarbayev .
 Mr Putin noted that Russians in Kazakhstan faced no ill treatment under President Nazarbayev . He speculated that problems could arise once he passes the scene .
 Kazakhstan's Slavs are located along the border with Russia, in areas that contain a good percentage of the country’s oil resources .
 The West's weak reaction to Moscow’s Georgian invasion emboldened Mr Putin to strike in Ukraine . Too will a Western-tolerated Kremlin victory in Ukraine endanger the former states of the Soviet Union .
 Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were never recognized by the United States . Two of those states have large Slavic communities .
 A good number of serious thinkers and statesmen say that Mr Putin’s reach will not extend to the Baltic States . They are members of NATO and have Article 5 protection under the NATO Charter .
 Mr Putin has wondered publicly, as have other senior Russian officials, why NATO is still in existence .
 The Soviet Union dissolved 25 years ago . After all, it was created to stop the Soviet Union .
 Mr Putin has been playing games in the Baltics to probe for weaknesses and to challenge the applicability of Article 5 .
 The Kremlin seized an Estonian counterintelligence officer from Estonia last September .
 A few weeks later, Russia seized a Lithuanian ship from international waters in the Baltic Sea . The ship was seized by the Russian navy .
 Western leaders need to understand the nature of Mr Putin’s threat to the West .
 In charge of one of the world’s most formidable militaries and a large economy, he is intent on upsetting the post-cold war order .
 He represents a threat to global order far larger than ISIL, and notably larger than a radical-Mullah-run Iran seeking nuclear weapons . He represents the threat to world order far bigger than ISIL .
 NATO statesmen who labeled ISIL and not Russia an existential threat to the alliance will be figures of fun for future historians .
 The intelligence resources that we devote to an aggressive nuclear superpower is significantly less than what we use to monitor a rag tag bunch of terrorists numbering no more than 20,000 .
 It also matters when looking at financial and military support for Ukraine, as we will discuss below . We will also discuss how to look at financial support for the Ukraine .
 Putin's ambitions extend to the entire post-Soviet space, including perhaps our Baltic NATO allies . We recognize that we have significant interest in stopping Mr Putin’s aggression in Ukraine .
 Putin's grasping hand extending to other countries, says Putin . We have a vital interest in stopping him if he moves against Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania . We do not want Mr Putin’s grasping hand extend to additional countries, and we have a key interest in
 It is very much in our interest to make his life so uncomfortable in Ukraine that the Kremlin thinks twice about additional aggression. It is in our interests to make him uncomfortable in his life, says the Kremlin . It is also in the interest to making his life in Ukraine so uncomfortable that the
 Putin's plan is precisely the opposite, to keep the pot boiling . That is not easy to do, since Mr Putin’s plan is exactly the opposite .
 Our policy should not be to refrain from taking any “provocative’ action, in the hopes that this time the Kremlin will actually observe the Minsk II cease-fire .
 Only world leader who believes that there is a military solution to the Ukraine crisis has an office in Red Square . It guarantees that the crisis will escalate, because the only world leader believes that the military solution is a solution .
 To increase the odds that Mr Putin does not move beyond the current cease-fire line, we must address his vulnerabilities .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's implicit deal with the Russian people is that he delivers prosperity and they let him rule the country .
 The Russian economy is under serious pressure today because of the sectoral sanctions levied last summer by the U.S. and EU . In addition to the sharp fall of hydrocarbon prices, the Russian economy has been under pressure .
 The sanctions will bite harder with time, especially if oil prices remain low . The sanctions are expected to hit hard with time if prices continue to fall .
Both the United States and the EU should either level additional sectoral sanctions or extend last year’s sectoral penalties .
 The EU renewed some sanctions imposed last spring early. In response to the latest Kremlin aggression, the EU renewed the sanctions .
 The U.S. and Europe have been hit with additional sanctions for aggression over the past 6 months . It is time for the United States and Europe to take the initiative .
New sanctions will be imposed if the Kremlin's proxies seize Mariupol or any additional territory in Ukraine . They should reach agreement on new sanctions that would be imposed.
 Actually barring Russia from SWIFT would have a devastating impact on Moscow’s economy . It would also be controversial globally .
 U.S. effort to put it on the agenda would create substantial pressure on Moscow . But it would encourage Europeans to be less cautious in applying additional sectoral sanctions .
 The Obama administration has done a good job in regards to sanctions, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the Obama administration is doing a great job in relation to sanctions .
 The key to success is to make sure both the U.S. and the EU sanction Russia . It understands that both the United States and the European Union sanction Russia.
I fully understand that there is reluctance in corners of the EU to do so. I fully understand the reluctance in some corners of Europe to do such a thing . I also understand that the EU is reluctant in corners.
 The administration has worked hard, and largely with success, to impose sanctions in tandem with Europe . The administration's work has been hard and successful .
 Mr Putin’s second vulnerability concerns the use of his army in Ukraine .
 Russian media have spread a sea of vitriol among the people of Russia . But it has not been able to persuade them that Russian troops should be used in Ukraine .
 A large majority of Russian people oppose using troops in Ukraine, according to polls by Moscow's Levada Center .
Since his people do not want Russian troops in Ukraine, he is telling them that no troops are there . Since his people don't want them, he has told them no troops were there .
 Thousands of Russian troops were used in August and September to stop Ukraine’s counteroffensive .
Ukrainian intelligence claims there are as many as 9,000 or 10,000 Russian troops in Ukraine .
 I do believe, however, that since we are not devoting enough intelligence assets to the Russia menace, our numbers are far from certain . If they err, it is likely on the low side, he says .
 What this amounts to is that we should give Ukraine defensive, lethal aid, so that is may defend itself. What we should do is that Ukraine should be given defensive,lethal aid .
Eight former U.S. officials issued report urging Obama administration to provide $1 billion in defensive arms to Ukraine for next 3 years . Obama administration has been criticized for sending lethal equipment to Ukraine .
 For a major national security priority, $1 billion a year is not a great deal of money . For a big national securitypriority, it's not a good deal for money .
 In the first 6 months of Operation Inherent Resolve against ISIL, the U.S. spent $1.1 billion . The United States spent more than $1 billion against ISIL .
 The purpose is to deter further aggression — and to stabilize the situation in the rest of Ukraine . The purpose of the Ukraine crisis is to stop further aggression and stabilize the country .
 Ukraine is more important to Russia than the United States. Opponents of this idea argue that this would not deter the Putin .
 Ukraine is more important to Moscow than Washington, but it is not more important than to 60 Kyiv. It may be true that Ukraine is less important than Washington .
 Some opponents of providing weapons argue that Kremlin military strength means that it can defeat any weapons system we provide . Some opponents argue that Moscow's military strength is more powerful than any other weapons system .
 If that happens, it would be geopolitical defeat for the U.S. It would be a geopolitical loss for the United States .
 Moscow's defeat was Moscow's first defeat of the year . Russia's defeat means it can pursue a policy of weapons supply without taking responsibility for the defeat .
 We can provide weapons while making clear that we have no intention of using American troops . We have no plans to use U.S. troops, but we can also provide weapons .
 Reagan Doctrine challenged Soviet overreach in Third World conflicts by providing weapons . This was the successful rationale behind the Reagan Doctrine, which challenged Soviet influence .
 Putin's aim of revising the postcold-war order may mean aggression in countries beyond Ukraine . It is very much in our interest to make his experience in Ukraine as painful as possible .
 That will make him more vulnerable at home and leave him with fewer resources for mischief elsewhere . That will leave him less likely to get into trouble at home .
 The Obama administration is reviewing its position on weapons for Ukraine . The administration is looking into the issue of weapons in Ukraine .
 It is time for the White House to make the decision to send weapons to Ukraine . The White House has not yet made the decision .
 Chancellor Merkel said she would work to ensure that such a decision by the U.S. did not undermine transatlantic unity . She said she opposes the supply of weapons to Ukraine .
 The massing of Russian tanks was critical as Moscow’s proxies seized Debaltseve in violation of Minsk II . Such military equipment must include light antiarmor weapons and counterbattery radar for long range missiles .
 Seventy percent of Ukrainian casualties come from missile and artillery fire . The majority of the casualties are caused by missile, artillery fire.
 The report also recommends sending armored Humvees, secure communications equipment, equipment to jam Russian unmanned aerial vehicles, and medical supplies .
 Both authorizes and appropriates USD 3B over 3 years . This time it is essential to pass legislation that both authorizes, appropriates 3B .
 This involves both comprehensive reform in Ukraine and Western assistance to help Ukraine pay its short-term international debt . This includes both reform in the Ukraine and West assistance .
I have not dwelt on this here because this testimony focusses on the broader Kremlin danger. I have not dwelled on this this here. This testimony focuses on the wider Kremlin danger, I have said .
 The West needs to encourage the Poroshenko/Yatsenyuk team to implement reform and provide the necessary financing on the debt problem. But it is important to note that the West needs strongly encourage the team.
 The West must not recognize in any way Moscow’s annexation of Crimea . The West is focusing on stabilizing the security situation in Ukraine's East, the West says .
 The U.S. must act in two different geopolitical areas beyond Ukraine to deal with Moscow’s revanchist tendencies .
 Most importantly, we must act decisively to strengthen NATO and deterrence in the new members of the alliance, especially the Baltic States . The Baltic States are the first to join the NATO alliance .
 NATO has taken a number of positive steps in this direction since the Kremlin offensive in Ukraine began last spring .
 NATO Defense Ministers last month placed some headquarters’ functions in Bulgaria, Romania, Poland, and the Baltic States .
 During the cold war, our “trip wire force in Germany was 200,000 troops. During the Cold War, our 'trip wire' force was 200.000 troops in Germany .
 The Baltics should put forward in the Baltics at least a fully equipped battalion . We should also have a fully-equipped battalion .
 Kremlin provocateurs among the Slavic population of Estonia or Latvia . Of even more importance, we need a quickly but carefully worked contingency plan for the appearance of Kremlin provocations .
 This plan should include elements for small provocations, such as the kidnapping of the Estonian intelligence official .
 We should also work within the alliance to achieve agreement to review the NATO-Russia Founding Act if Moscow’s proxies seize significant territory in Ukraine . We should work in the alliance.
 The second area that requires a new policy is that grey zone in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia where Moscow claims a sphere of influence .
 The United States, NATO, and the EU need to consider measures that will strengthen these countries . If not, the U.S. and the European Union should consider measures to strengthen their countries, says the author .
 Countries interested in a stronger United States and/or NATO security connection would welcome more U.S. or NATO military visits .
 Georgia has a more proactive NATO presence in the Black Sea . For Georgia, that might mean more port visits by NATO .
 We might enhance cooperation with all interested Central Asian states in offsetting the potential destabilizing impact of our withdrawal from Afghanistan. We might also enhance cooperation.
 This last initiative need not exclude the Kremlin, says the Kremlin . This may seem counterintuitive, but this last initiative may not be counterintuitive .
 Russia's periphery projects include the Kremlin . We can also help strengthen some nations on the periphery .
 This would also demonstrate that our policies are designed not just to discourage Kremlin aggression, but also to seek cooperation on matters of mutual interest . This would be the first time the Kremlin has shown that it is seeking cooperation with us .
 Policy in the grey zone should also focus on state weaknesses that Moscow exploits in order to exert its control .
 The Kremlin uses its intelligence services to recruit agents in the power ministries of the post-Soviet states . It uses its firms to acquire key sectors’ of these countries’ economies and to buy political influence .
 The U.S. and NATO should offer programs to help vet the security services and military in order to establish that they are under the full control of the political leaders in these states .
 At the same time, the United States and the EU offer programs to uncover corruption in the financial and other sectors of these countries’ economies .
 Mr Putin has gained nearly complete control over the Russian media and turned it into an instrument promoting extreme nationalism . He is an admitted admirer of Nazi propagandist Joseph Goehbels .
 Its disinformation has been successful especially at home, but also in neighboring countries . It has also been successful at home and in neighboring nations .
 The budget for broadcasts by Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty in Russian and other languages was sharply curtailed after the dissolution of the Soviet Union .
 The Broadcasting Board of Governors in FY15 increased its budget for Russian-language programming by 49 percent to USD 23. In response to the crisis in Ukraine, the budget increased 49 percent .
 I would certainly endorse this request for additional funds, but would also suggest that Congress reach out to the BBG to see if more resources are not required . I would definitely endorse this proposal for additional money, but I would also endorse it .
 The challenge that we face is rooted in Mr Putin’s style of leadership, a style which privileges the security services with their neoimperial policy preferences, criminal connections, and disdain for civil society and democracy .
 None of the policies recommended in this paper are directed against the people of Russia .
 The assassination of Boris Nemtsov last month is a reminder of a truth uttered by the great Russian historian, Vasiliy Klyuchevskiy, in his lectures .
 He observed that the expansion of the Russian state abroad is inversely proportional to the development of freedom for the Russian people . He said that the increase in freedom for Russian people is not the same as freedom for Russians .
 Opposing Mr Putin’s aggressive policies is not only vital to our national security, but a service for the Russian people as well .
 It is always a pleasure to welcome another Tennessean here to the hearing room. It is a pleasure for Tennesseans to be in the room .
 You have a great Tennessean here as the chairman, and you should all be very proud of him. You have been a greatTennessean. You should be very Proud of him, he says .
 I think you laid out a pretty compelling case and probably did it better than I have been successful in trying to do in terms of the importance of it. I think it was pretty compelling, I said . It was a very compelling case, I think, and I
 You had a lot of opportunities to observe President Putin’s behavior toward its neighbors, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
With a frozen conflict, Ukraine could develop as a democratic, prosperous state, says Mr Putin . But that is what Mr Putin is against.
 Kharkiv is arguably the second largest city in the whole country, but the Russians have been unable to establish a clear presence there .
 They will move wherever they can with the least casualties to themselves and the least uproar in Europe . They will leave Europe to move where they can. They will be moved wherever they could .
Russia has been accused of using defensive lethal weapons in Ukraine . Russia has said that providing such weapons would just lead Russia to further escalate .
 Mr Putin has escalated half a dozen times precisely because he has not had any pushback . He has not been pushed back by the Russian president .
 Chancellor Merkel's visit to Washington in February was watched very carefully .
 She also said that if the United States were to do that, she would work hard to make sure that there is no transatlantic disharmony . She said if the U.S. were to go that, it would be hard to ensure that there was no trans Atlantic disharm
 The U.S. may ultimately make the intelligent decision to provide Ukraine the weapons needed to defend itself, he says . "I do not have any doubt that we can manage the alliance on this issue"
 I want to thank you both for your testimony, and if you would, we would have some written questions . We would like to ask you to respond to some of our questions .
 Ambassador Kornblum's insights into what is driving Russia were also helpful .
 We appreciate both of you for your service to our country . We thank you for being here as an asset to us as we try to serve our country.
 The record for this hearing will be open until March the 12th . The hearing is scheduled to be held in March .
 If people have questions, they can send those in and hopefully you will respond promptly to those . So if you have a question, you can send them in and they can respond promptly .
 Last year was a period of unprecedented challenges to global order and international law, which Russian aggression against my country brought about .
 It was a time of strong unity of the civilized world in the face of fundamental threat to democracy and peace . But it was also a time for strong unity in face of threat to peace and democracy .
 Threat comes as a response to aspirations of the Ukrainian nation to return to its European roots .
 The Revolution of Dignity on Kyiv's Maidan has evoked admiration around the globe as an unbreakable ambition to break with the past .
 The Russian leadership deems liberty and democracy as obstacles on a path to realization of its goals . At the same time, it was perceived as an existential threat by the Russian leadership .
 A year of Russian aggression has undeniably revealed the true intentions of Moscow’s actions . Russia has been accused of a year of aggression in Russia .
 Russia will use any means necessary to forestall democratic development of Ukraine, says Russia . Western sanctions and international isolation show that Russia will continue to use its influence . Russia will not be isolated by Western sanctions or international isolation .
 The primary goal is to prevent Ukraine's European integration, keep it in Russia’s orbit, or dismember it altogether .
 The Kremlin uses any means to fulfill this task, including the attempted illegal annexation of our sovereign territory of Crimea, according to the Kremlin . The Kremlin is using this task to manufacture conflict, based on false pretext, in eastern Ukraine and directly participating in it .
 The character of Russia’s geopolitical calculation show that despite the central role of Ukraine, it is only one of the key elements in the implementation of its strategic objective . Russia is trying to restore the Soviet Union by creating a circle of instability in the region .
 Russia resorts to force, coercion, intimidation, and violation of international law as the means of imposing its will on the global arena . In the 21st century, when progress is achieved through cooperation and measured by well-being, Russia resort to force and coercion .
 Chances are high that this line of action will not be limited to Ukraine . It will reach other countries such as Moldova, Georgia, and Kazakhstan, and even NATO allies .
 In defense of their land, Ukrainians demonstrated an unswerving will to protect their country . Ukrainians demonstrated a unswerve will to defend their land .
 By countering the forces of oppression and authoritarianism, Ukraine serves as a powerful line of defense of freedom and democracy . Ukraine is a powerful force in the fight against authoritarianism .
 Our success in this struggle today is the guarantee that the full-scale war will not come knocking on the doors of the West tomorrow. Our success today is a guarantee that we will not be knocked out of the door tomorrow .
 We highly appreciate great support of the United States, both the administration and U.S. Congress .
Without independence, the situation for our independence would be much more difficult . Without it, it would be more difficult for us to find a way to get back on track .
 A number of declarative and legislative actions by Congress have created a formidable framework of cooperation between our countries in general and countering the Russian aggression in particular .
 The U.S. administration established the leading 64 role of the United States in this process . Europe's unity with Europe as a major factor in its success .
 Russia’s calculus remains unchanged and the efforts to restore the vision of Europe whole, free, and at peace must be enhanced . Despite the strong counteraction, Russia's calculus is unchanged, according to the Russian government .
 The Freedom Support Act was passed by the U.S. Congress last year . It envisages a number of provisions, which would significantly impact the situation .
 Ukraine shares the view of its Western partners that the diplomatic settlement is the only way forward in terms of resolving the conflict . Ukraine shares a view of the Western partners.
 Ukraine's decision in favor of providing Ukraine with means to defend itself would significantly contribute to this process . But we also believe that a decision in favour of giving Ukraine means to defending itself would considerably contribute to the process .
 defensive weapons in possession of Ukraine would substantially raise the cost of Russian aggression . The concerns associated with such a step are legitimate, but there can be no doubt that defensive weapons would raise the costs .
 Moscow would waive any remaining doubts about its strategic intentions . They would incline Moscow to negotiate or at least waive any remains doubts .
 Ukraine negotiated an agreement with Russia at the Minsk summit last month . Germany and France also participated in the deal .
 The deal can lay a reliable foundation for a peaceful settlement of the conflict . Although extremely fragile, the deal can lie a reliable basis for a peace settlement .
 Russian side and separatists it supports to comply with their obligations. Our major concern in this regard is the inclination of the Russian side .
 The seizure of Debaltsevo raises doubts about Moscow’s inclination to implement the Minsk Agreement . The increasing threat of attack on Mariupol and the continued flooding of Ukraine's territory raise doubts .
 The West has to be robust with all options on the table. If these activities continue, the response of the West will be robust .
 Russia banned from international organizations, SWIFT banking system, and deprivation of the right to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup . New measures include new round of economic sanction, but also new measures .
 In order for good relations to be restored, Russian forces, mercenraries and arms must leave Ukraine’s territory .
 Crimea has become the victim of the initial stage of Russian aggression . This also concerns the Ukrainian region of Crimea, which has become a victim .
 Since the unlawful annexation of peninsula it has turned into a territory of brutal violations of human rights and abuses of individual freedoms . The peninsula has been turned into an area of brutal human rights violations .
 The indegeneous population of Crimean Tatars is constantly harassed by puppet authorities . The mere of expression of support for Ukraine is treated as a crime .
 We believe that this situation can be resolved only through return of Crimea to Ukraine . We will not rest until this goal is achieved. We believe this situation is resolved only by returning Crimea to Crimea .
 preservation of territorial integrity dominates on Ukraine’s agenda . Other challenges are of critical implication as well .
 We are determined to use the chance of truce presented by the Minsk Agreement to make progress with much needed reforms in our country . We are also determined to make a difference with muchneeded reforms.
 Ukrainian Government and Verkhovna Rada took significant steps directed at comprehensive overhaul of the state budget, judicial system, prosecutor’s office and pension system .
 Ukrainians are committed to transforming their country into a modern European state . This incomplete list will be expanded as the Ukrainians are committing to transforming the country .
 Progress in this area would not have been possible without strong financial support of our Western partners led by the United States .
 The Marshall Plan once helped Europe recover from the consequences of a devastating war . We hope that this support will be expanded into a comprehensive program similar to the Marshall Plan .
 Ukrainians have chosen not to give in but to stand up for their rights and freedoms, and to unite to preserve their country’s sovereignty . Ukraine has demonstrated that in face of enormous challenges, the Ukrainians have demonstrated that they have demonstrated they have not given in .
 The EU is determined to build its future on the everlasting principles of accountable government, respect for human rights, civil society, free media and national security .
 It is my strong conviction that sooner rather than later this development will lead us to become an equal and effective member of the European family of nations . It is his strong conviction. It is a strong conviction, he says, that sooner than later.
 Such an outcome would be in the interests of not only the Ukrainian people, but also of Europe as a whole, including Russia .
 This task can be fulfilled through strong and decisive actions of the democratic world aimed at assisting Ukraine . This task is aimed at restoring the stability of the international system and negating the prospects of another 65 global conflict .
 We are looking forward to the continued U.S. leadership in this process, says CNN.com .
 Responses of Victoria Nuland to Questions Submitted by Senator Bob Corker Question. Responses were submitted by Senator Corker .
 Russian-backed rebels launched an offensive to acquire the town after they signed the cease-fire agreement . Dehaltseve should remain part of Ukrainian-held territory, according to the terms of the agreement .
 Combined Russian-separatist forces launched the offensive on Debaltseve before the negotiations in Minsk on February 12, 2015 . Minsk implementation plan — also called ‘Minsk II’ by some — extended the offensive through the negotiations . Ukrainians’ withdrawal of their
 The September 2014 Minsk agreements have the line of contact running clearly east of Debaltseve . The city is firmly in the Ukrainian Government's hands .
 The February 12 Minsk implementation plan links back to the Minsk agreement . The Minsk Implementation plan is based on those agreements .
 We support Ukraine’s claim that Debaltseve lies outside the Special Status Area . The separatists must vacate it as part of the fulfillment of Minsk agreements .
 The commitments contained within the Minsk agreements are supposed to be fulfilled by the end of 2015 . This will require political will on the part of Ukraine, Russia, and the Russia-backed separatists, all of whom signed the agreements .
 The Minsk agreements are the best chance for a durable, diplomatic resolution of the crisis . We stand ready to assist in their fulfillment, as we believe the Minsk agreement is best chance of resolution .
We will judge the separatists and their Russian backers by their actions . We will judge them and theirRussian backers by the actions .
 The main distinguishing feature to date has been the overall reduction of violence along the cease-fire line since the February 15 cease-fires went into effect .
 Attacks across the cease-fire line persist, and their numbers have recently increased . That said, attacks across the ceasefire line persist .
 The OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission has been inhibited by restrictions placed on it mainly by Russia-backed separatists . The SMM has been unable to report on cease-fire violations and heavy weapons withdrawal .
 Ukrainian separatists have attacked Ukrainian positions to the west and north of the cease-fire line . We have seen frequent attacks usually initiated by the separatists .
 A true cease-fire would require full and unfettered access by the OSCE SMM to the entire length of the cease- fire line and separatist-held territory . U.S., our European allies and partners, and like-minded countries, would need to
 We must be prepared to increase the costs on Russia and the separatists if we see continued stalling on fulfillment of the Minsk commitments, or renewed land grabs by combined Russian-separatist forces .
 The Minsk II agreement states that Ukraine will not be able to assume control of its internationally recognized border with Russia until K3dv changes its constitution to include decentralization . The agreement also states that the country will not have control of the internationally recognized borders with Russia .
 Decentralization is defined sufficiently in the Minsk agreements, including the Eebruary 12 Minsk implementation plan . It should be achievable to a standard that is agreeable to all concerned .
 The process of decentralization applies to the entire country of Ukraine . It will require the agreement of the Ukrainian Parliament on its features, not only for the area currently held by the separatists .
 We are confident the Ukrainian Government and Rada can find a solution that will work and have the desired effect . We are also confident that the Ukrainian government can find the solution that can work .
 DOD and the Department of State notified Congress last summer of the administration’s intent to transfer a total of $19 million of available fiscal year 2014 funds to the Global Security Contingency Fund for the purpose of providing training and additional nonlethal equipment to units of the Ukrainian National Guard
 The equipment will begin arriving in early April and the training is scheduled to begin the week of 20 April . The training is expected to begin in the next few weeks .
 Approximately $120 million in nonlethal military assistance has been committed to Ukraine by the United States . Equipment worth only half of this amount has been delivered to Ukraine .
 Ukraine is a top priority and we are working to further expedite the provision of assistance . Ukraine is the top priority for Ukraine, says the government .
 When implementing government-to-government security assistance programs, we must operate through technology, security, and foreign disclosure reviews . We must also arrange for transportation and delivery, and then arrange for delivery .
 We were able to deliver countermortar radars in less than 2 months after the decision was made to provide them . We are constantly working to speed up these timelines .
 We will continue to expedite the provision of assistance whenever possible . We will still be expediting the provision for assistance when possible .
 GSCF training program starts in late April for Ukrainian National Guard . $120 million in assistance has already been delivered to Ukraine .
 The U.S. engages in regular, senior-level discussions with Ukraine to identify gaps in Ukraine’s military capacity and capability .
 The Joint Commission conducted comprehensive assessments of Ukrainian military functional areas over the past year .
 These assessments resulted in prioritized lists of requirements that have informed current security assistance, midand long-term cooperative and institutional reform efforts .
 The assessment and review process, through the commission, is an ongoing process NECESSARY EQUIPMENT for the UKRAINIAN MILITARY Question . The assessment, review process is the ongoing process.
 The President is regularly reviewing options to support Ukraine, including whether the U.S. should provide defensive assistance .
 We have provided assistance to address key Ukrainian capability gaps, such as in communications, mobility, and countermortar radars . We have thus far provided assistance that helps to addresskey Ukrainian capability gap .
 The Ukraine government says it will continue to provide assistance to the country for at least 18 months . It expects deliveries to continue for the next 18 months as funds are allocated and contracts signed .
 U.S., U.K. and France had guaranteed the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine as part of Ukraine’s relinquishment of nuclear weapons it had inherited from the Soviet Union .
 For the U.S. to acquiesce in Russia’s unilateral moves against Ukraine, would mean that we had accepted the end of rule of law in relations with Russia .
 The complex European project, which the U.S. led for nearly 50 years, would be put in question . It would be the first time the United States led for 50 years .
 We would be faced with rogue power playing as desired among several weak and insecure countries such as the Baltics, Georgia, or Moldova .
 The freedom of movement of our diplomacy would be severely limited by the instability throughout the region . The instability in the region would limit the freedom of movements of our diplomats .
This freedom of movement will be especially important to protect in the new international conditions which are emerging in the 21st century . This freedom of freedom will be particularly important in the future of the world, says David Cameron .
 Coming years will be characterized by the emergence of new powers, by new and untested crisis situations and by the rapid spread of high-speed information technology .
 Maintaining a coherent foreign policy will become many times more difficult . Maintained a coherent policy will be many times harder than ever .
 The U.S. will succeed only if it is able to build a sense of cohesion among new powers and old .
 To do this, we must maintain the leading role of Western values and methods in the new information networks, says the author . "To do this," he says .
 We would be unable to take initiatives to maintain our technological advantage . We would not be able to take measures to maintain the technological advantage.
 Russia is spending so much on propaganda and information technology. This is one reason why Russia is Spending so much.
 It wants to steal the narrative and has succeeded already to a considerable extent . It has succeeded to a great extent. It has also succeeded already.
 Chancellor Merkel has taken the lead, because she has the best contacts with Putin and because Germany has serious interests in Russia . Merkel has been in the lead for years because of her contacts with Russia .
 Chancellor Merkel conducts her diplomacy with the closest consultation with the U.S. and European allies . But as her quick trip to Washington in February demonstrated, Chancellor Merkel conducted her diplomacy.
 Germany has been among the strongest supporters of Ukraine’s sovereignty and economic stability . From the first days of post-Soviet Ukrainian independence, Germany has supported Ukraine's sovereignty .
 Ukraine's desire to move closer to Europe was supported by Europe . It believed this was the best way to ensure both the security and economic independence of Ukraine .
 No, Germany cannot take over leadership from the U.S. in Ukraine or elsewhere in Europe. No,Germany cannot take control from the United States.
 The Germans are the first to state that without U.S. support, there could be no European defense or diplomacy with Russia . Germany is the first European country to state without American support .
 The U.S. has put too much burden on Germany during this crisis, he says .
 Chancellor Merkel is a brilliant, dedicated leader, but neither she nor her country have the background or resources to be the major Russian interlocutor with the West .
 Germany would be in a better position if there were a more active American role. Germany would have a better role in the U.S.
 Not taking over the negotiations, but participating in both words and deeds . Not taking control of the talks, but taking over both words.
 It is at this moment not clear whether Putin believes he can push through his goals with the Europeans . The United States stands by, while the U.S. stands by .
 Testing his intentions is too big a risk to take, it is important that he be clear that the U.S. will react if he pushes further forward .
 Response of John Herbst to Question Submitted by Senator Bob Corker Question .
 A revisionist Kremlin bent on overturning the post-cold-war settlement in Eurasia is the greatest threat to global stability and U.S. interests at this 68 moment .
 The U.S. response to this suggests that the White House does not understand this danger . The White House is not aware of this danger, says the president .
 The Ukraine crisis is not a Ukraine crisis, but a crisis of Kremlin aggression which appeared earlier in Georgia and today in Ukraine . It is not the Ukraine crisis but the crisis of Russian aggression .
 To address this challenge, we need a comprehensive policy with at least six elements . To address the challenge, the U.S. government needs to have at least 6 elements .
 Nowhere has laid out the challenge to Eurasian and global stability posed by Putin’s revanchist policies .
 If the administration correctly defines the problem, it will be clear that the U.S. must take the lead in resolving it . The second element of a sound policy.
We cannot subcontract leadership on this issue to Berlin or any other capital because our vital interests are involved . We cannot subcontract Leadership on this matter to Berlin and any other city because our interests areinvolved .
 The U.S. must be part of the negotiating process that produced the cease-fires, the U.N. says . It would insist that the United States must be involved in the negotiations .
We would also develop strong and proactive policies imposing major costs on the Kremlin for its aggression . We would also developed strong and pro-Russian policies imposing big costs on Kremlin .
 The third is to impose economic costs on Moscow for its aggression by economic sanctions . The third has to impose costs on Russia for its aggressive behavior .
 Washington has done a pretty good job on this front in pulling an, at times, reluctant Europe to levy sanctions . Washington has been a good example of the U.S. in pulling a strong stance on the issue .
 Ukrainian forces have done a commendable job fighting the strongest military in Europe . Ukrainian forces are the strongest in Europe.
 We should openly and unapologetically be providing Ukraine substantial military equipment, including defensive lethal weapons, to deter further Russian aggression in Ukraine or if deterrence fails, says Peter Bergen .
 Moscow will have fewer military resources to carry out aggression elsewhere . This cost might help ultimately stop Kremlin aggression in Ukraine . But even if it does not achieve that, it will leave Moscow with fewer resources .
At a minimum, our policy should be designed to make the war in Ukraine so unpleasant for Moscow that it is too expensive to unleash war beyond that country . At a minimum. At a least, we should be designing a policy that makes the war so unpleasant.
 Fifth, we need to exert our leadership in NATO and push for the deployment of far more substantial forces and equipment to the Baltic countries and perhaps other eastern members of the alliance .
 Radio Free Europe and Radio Libert need to increase its Russian language programming to help offset the massive Kremlin propaganda program . We need to provide even more resources to Radio free Europe andRadio Libert .
 These six elements will secure our vital interests against the rogue policies of Mr Putin, says Mr Putin .
 The administration is not devoting sufficient intelligence resources to the Russian war in Ukraine and the broader Kremlin danger . The administration isn't devoting enough resources to Russia's war in the Ukraine and Russia's broader danger .
 This flows naturally, but unfortunately, from the failure to understand the gravity of the danger, says the author . "This flows naturally," says author .
 Response of Victoria Nuland to Question Submitted by Senator James E Risch Question . Senator James Rischquestion was submitted by Victoria NULand .
 A few months after the Russian invasion of Georgia, President Obama was unwilling to provide defensive military equipment to the Georgian Government . European allies refused to provide any level of military equipment.
 The administration has not taken a position on other nations providing security assistance to Ukraine . The administration is not taking a position.
We have worked closely with allies and partners to encourage them to contribute greater security assistance to Ukraine . In fact, we have worked with a number of allies, partners to help Ukraine .
 Solidarity among allies is essential to our response to Russian aggression, says U.S. President Obama .
 Russia’s aggression in Ukraine makes clear that European security and the international rules and norms against territorial aggression cannot be taken for granted .
 Together with Europe, we are supporting the Ukrainian people as they choose their own future and develop their democracy and economy .
 Ukraine has the right to defend itself, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Ukraine has no military resolution to this crisis, he says . Ukraine's government says there is no military solution.
 We have committed significant nonlethal security assistance to help Ukraine sustain its defense and internal security operations . We have also committed significant security assistance.
 The Ukrainian government says it will continue to monitor the situation in Ukraine . It will also explore opportunities for defense cooperation .
 Responses of Brian P McKeon to Questions Submitted by Senator James E Risch EUROPEAN REASSURANCE INITIATIVE Question .
In your testimony you mentioned the European Reassurance Initiative and the success of the ERI among our eastern European allies . In your testimony, you also mentioned the EU's success among its eastern allies .
 ERI was not placed in the Defense Department’s base budget . As a result, it has created some concern among European allies about an enduring United States commitment .
 The European Reassurance Initiative is an important tool for U.S. efforts to reassure our allies and partners . It is critical that these efforts continue for as long as necessary .
 The Department’s FY 2016 Overseas Contingency Operations request includes $789 million in ERI funding to sustain the efforts started in FY 2015 .
 The source of the funds will be considered against competing global priorities, legal requirements, and constraints imposed by the Budget Control Act . The final decision is made for the FY 2017 budget .
 The U.S. is committed to the security of our Central and Eastern European allies in promoting regional security . The United States is committed.
 We will continue our reassurance measures through a persistent presence of air, land, and sea forces in the region . We will also continue to monitor air and land forces, according to the UK .
 The Department's request of $789 million for the European Reassurance Initiative fiscal year 2016 reflects this commitment . The Department’s request for $789. million for this year's fiscal year.
 U.S. plans to increase capability, readiness, and responsiveness of allies and partners by increasing the number of exercises and training events .
 The United States will also participate in NATO’s new Very High Readiness Joint Task Force . The U.S. will assign staff officers to six new NATO Force Integration Units .