 Kremlin-sponsored TV channel releases CCTV footage of terrorist Zakharchenko elimination . Kremlin- sponsored TV channel released CCTV footage.
 U.S. urged Russia to reduce mine threat in Donbas . Russia wants to cancel decision of Stockholm arbitration in the appeal .
 Russia should demand from its mercenaries in the Donbas to reduce the threats of mine the U.S. Embassy .
Foreign direct investment in Ukraine increased by $ 34 million in August . In August, foreign direct investment was $34 million .
 In the Kremlin, they do not know about Sentsov's plans for the exchange of 3 Russians arrested in the United States, Peskov says .
 Russian Church is a daughter-in-law church, not a mother, a Ukrainian church . The church is not a church.
Tomos to be received by newly elected head of single local Ukrainian church, Patriarch Filaret . Tomos is the head of a single local church in Ukraine .
 If Budapest fails to recall its Berehove-based consul, Kyiv to put end to his activities in Zakarpattia on its own .
 British Defense Minister Gavin Williamson said this was in an interview with The Telegraph . This was stated by Williamson in the interview .
 London is doing this as part of a "Arctic defense strategy" against Russia's threat . London is also doing this to protect its citizens from the threat of a terrorist attack .
 London will react to the activity of Moscow in the Arctic region, which has grown in recent years . The Arctic region has seen a rise in Arctic activity .
 Russia has resumed work on military bases that have remained since the Soviet Union . It increased the activity of submarines in the region to a level close to that during the Cold War .
 The British authorities see the need to demonstrate their presence in the Arctic, says the head of the United Kingdom's Ministry of Defense .
 The new military base will accommodate the troops of Norway, the United States and the Netherlands . In addition to the British, the new base will also accommodate the U.S. and Netherlands .
 In October and November, NATO's military training will be the largest ever since the Cold War . NATO's largest ever training will take place in October andNovember .
 During maneuvers, a scenario of an invasion near the Norwegian coast will be worked out . During the maneuvers, an invasion will be working out .
 The Arctic covers the central part of the Arctic Ocean, its regional seas such as Barents, Kara and Chukotka . Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, the Russian Federation, Sweden and the U.S.
 The Russian Ministry of Defense announced in the spring of 2017 that it would rebuild a network of polar airfields in the Arctic . It will also build up military towns .
 Moscow also announced its intention to deploy two new C-400 "Triumph" anti-aircraft missile systems in the Arctic . Moscow also said to be deploying two new C-400 anti-Aircraft missiles in the Arctic.
 In 2016, the construction of a large military base was built on the Land of Franz Joseph . The base will be called "Arctic shamrock"
 NATO says Moscow is building a powerful army along the Arctic coast . NATO says that Moscow has been building a strong army in Arctic .
 President Petro Poroshenko tells CNN about Russian attempts to undermine the situation inside Ukraine . President Poroshenko says Russia is trying to influence the Ukrainian elections .
 Russia spends billions on support for the Sputnik TV, Russia Today and many others, says Petro Poroshenko .
 Ukraine is not a Russian aggression, but a "civil war" and it is not Russia responsible for aggression, the Ukrainian authorities say . Ukrainian authorities deny the presence of Russian troops in the occupied territory .
 Russian authorities are forbidden from Russian social networks, president says . Russian intelligence agencies used social networks to conduct disinformation and subversive campaign, he says .
 Alexander Timofeev aka Tashkent was also severely wounded in explosion . So called "finance minister" of the self-proclaimed republic, he was injured in explosion.
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said this "provocation" was aimed at disrupting efforts to settle the conflict in the Donbas . Lavrov said that this ""provocation"" was intended to disrupt the conflict .
 Petrov and Boshirov have been charged with attempting to murder Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia . They are accused of spraying Novichok nerve agent on the handle of their door .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin said Russia knew the real identity of two men accused of trying to murder Skripals . Putin said the men were civilians with nothing criminal about them .
 The U.S. Embassy in Ukraine has called on Russia to influence militants in order to reduce the threats to the Donbas . Three children died as a result of the explosion in the occupied Gorlovka .
 The conflict that has been sparked by Russia in the east of Ukraine has made Ukraine one of the most mundane countries in the world, a statement said .
 The embassy added that the Russian Federation should insist that its proteges in eastern Ukraine reduce their threats .
 Ukrainians are suffering from Russian aggression, said the U.S. diplomatic mission . "Ukraine is suffering from Russia's aggression," said the United States.
 Three children were killed as a result of an anti-personnel landmine explosion in Gorlovka . Another child was injured, taken to a hospital in a difficult condition .
 The condition of the injured child is stable, its life does not threaten anything, according to the militants .
 Russian monopolist Gazprom at the Swedish Court of Appeal is trying to cancel the decision . He is obliged to pay Ukraine nearly $ 2. billion under the Stockholm Arbitration .
 Lawyers of "Naftogaz" consider their position as strong and ready to substantiate it . Lawyers of "Nftogaz"" consider their position as strong and capable of substantiating it .
 This was in an interview with Censor.NET.NET said the head of the legal department of NJSC "Naftogaz" Yaroslav Teklyuk .
 "Gazprom" was "balance," like selling Ukraine gas at much more expensive market, with the payment for transit services carried out at a level below the market . There is no ""balance" has never been, and that "balance" is never been .
 Naftogaz had to keep the gas transportation system ready to transport the maximum volumes provided for by the contract . Gazprom almost never fulfilled its obligations to provide transit volumes, causing additional losses .
 At this stage it is difficult to talk about the prospects of appeals, according to Teklyuk .
 There are a lot of professional, intelligent and expensive lawyers working to maximize their position . However, it should be remembered that on the other hand, there are many professionals working to maximize their position.
 The expenses of Gazprom for legal and related services, in connection with arbitration, is significantly higher than Naftogaz .
 If they prove there were procedural violations, the arbitral award will go away . The award will be canceled if there are procedural violations . If they are found to have been procedural violations.
"We will return to 2014, which means that we will need to once again understand this issue," says lawyer .
 Gazprom has appealed to the court, and the court has ordered a temporary suspension of enforcement of this decision on the territory of Sweden . The decision was subsequently canceled . Gazprom is now executing in the UK, the Netherlands, Switzerland and the Netherlands .
 Theoretically, they can be voluntarily paid, although, based on their statements, it is unlikely . It is unlikely they will be paid for their statements .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine caused by Russia turned Ukraine into one of the most mundane countries in the world .
 Ukraine does not ask the U.S. soldiers to fight against Russia, but expects United States assistance in building an effective defense system . He stressed that Ukraine doesn't ask the American soldiers to battle Russia .
 The net inflow of foreign direct investment into the Ukrainian economy in August 2018 increased by $34 million compared to July 2018 . In August 2018, it amounted to $176 million .
 40% of these investments were directed to the share capital of foreign companies operating in Ukraine .
 The influx of foreign investment contributed to the reduction of Ukraine's balance of payments deficit . They also note that the increase in foreign investment has contributed to Ukraine's deficit .
 In July 2018, the balance of payments was reduced to a deficit of $170 million . It should be noted that in July 2018.
 Over the past three years, about 1. billion euros of investments have been invested in alternative energy projects in Ukraine .
 Japanese financial company Nomura has classified Ukraine into the list of countries that have the highest risk of a currency crisis . The risk of currency crisis has the highest.
 The NBU was informed about the growth of external risks for the stability of the hryvnia . Also, the NBU told about the growing of external risk for hryVnia .
During August the international currency reserves of the National Bank decreased by more than half a billion dollars due to support of the hryvnia exchange rate . Earlier it was noted that during August the national bank's currency reserves decreased by over half abillion dollars .
 Odessa police chief Ivan Ishchenko reported by the head of the department of preventive activities of the Odessa Police .
 The reaction of the law-enforcers was instantaneous, "Ischenko wrote on Facebook. The reaction was instantaneous.
 Police established the persons of the detainees and set the purpose of their arrival in Odessa, Odessa .
 The adviser to the head of the Police of the Odesa region Ruslan Farostyak said police detained and taken hunted firearms and traumatic weapons in the detainees' offices .
 The police also transmitted information to weapons registration sites with the requirement that men cancel permits . The police said men must cancel permits.
 confrontations took place during the conciliation council in the Verkhovna Rada . Head of the Batkivshchyna, Yulia Tymoshenko and head of the BPP faction Arthur Gerasimov were involved .
 Iryna Gerashchenko was awarded the Order of the Hero of Ukraine, Mr Poroshenko, and that she had taken her from Russia . She was taken from Russia, she said .
 Iryna Gerashchenko flees for some reason not a patriot to the Russian Federation . The Minister of Economy of the Government of Yanukovych Poroshenko will actually surrender Ukraine to the fullest .
 I think all these facts will be brought to the country after the people correctly remove them from the authorities . I think that all thesefacts will be bring to the nation after the person correctly removes them from authorities .
 Tymoshenko: Look for the fifth column Moscow in the administration of the President and""Look for the 5th column Moscow" in the president's administration .
 Earlier on the conciliatory council also there was a riot between the leader of the Batkivshchyna and the head of the faction BPP Arthur Gerasimov . Tymoshenko to eliminate Naftogaz coincides with the interests of the Kremlin.
Gerasimov suggested Tymoshenko is trying to block talks with Europeans in order to give Putin the time for the construction of the North Stream-2 . Gerasimov also suggested that the Ukrainian leader is also trying to blocks talks with European leaders .
 This suggests Poroshenko was determined with the main opponent in the elections . This suggests that Poroshenko is determined to win the election in Ukraine .
 The Kremlin is not aware of the plans for the exchange of Russian sentenced Russians Oleg Sentsov to Russia . Victor But and Konstantin Yaroshenko were convicted in the United States of Russia . Maria Butina is under arrest .
 Russian president Dmitry Peskov announced the news to Censor.NET . This was announced by the press secretary of the Russian president .
Earlier in the media there was information that Moscow was discussing the exchange of Sentsova on Bout, Yaroshenko and Butin . Earlier in the press it was reported that Moscow had discussed the exchange with Bout .
 The head of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate Filaret recalled that it was the Russian Church at one time separated from the Kyivan Metropolitanate . It was the canonical territory of the Ecumenical Patriarchate, which was the Ukrainian Church .
 UOC-KP head says documents undermine Kremlin myth that Ukrainian Orthodox Church is allegedly derived from Russian .
 Kiev, from the church point of view, is the maternal church for Moscow, not vice versa . According to him, on the contrary, it is Kiev .
 Ukraine now has a Ukrainian Orthodox Church, which is a self-governing unit of the Orthodox world of the Russian Orthodox Church . The Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church has not yet been recognized as canonical .
 The Patriarchate of Constantinople, also known as the Ecumenical Patriarchate, is preparing to provide Tomos on canonical autocephaly for the Single Local Ukrainian Orthodox Church which still needs to be created .
 The UOC-KP, the UAOC and part of the U OC-MP, are believed to be united in such a church . They expect the canonical approval of such independence of the Ukrainian Church .
 In the Orthodox world, it is the Ecumenical Patriarchate that has exclusive authority to recognize autocephaly of new local churches .
 Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew has already stated that the process leading to the recognition of the local Ukrainian church is irreversible .
 The Ecumenical Patriarchate recently unveiled a selection of historical documents that must challenge these claims . The documents are reminiscent of Crimea .
 In 1686 the Ecumenical Patriarch Dionysius IV and the Cathedral of the Bishops in Constantinople issued Tomos on the transfer of the Kyivan Metropolitanate . It was part of the Patriarchate of Constantinople, to the subordination of the Moscow Patriarchate .
 The Ecumenical Patriarchate removed Dionysius IV from the patriarchal throne . It did not revoke the decision .
 The Ecumenical Patriarchate has repeatedly spoken of violations of the canonical order during the events of 1686 . It did not abolish the decision to re-subdivide the Kievan Metropolitanate . Since then, the Ecumenicals Patriarchate have repeatedly spoken
 The Kyivan Metropolitanate is part of the Ecumenical Patriarchate . The Patriarchate of Constantinople was once the administrative subdivision of the Patriarchate.
 The Church of Constantinople is authorized, without the consent of other churches, to grant autonomy, or autocephaly, to a church that has requested it . Hierarchs held meetings of the Hierarchy of the Ecumenical Throne Constantinople to confirm the decision .
 Further measures, such as the adoption of documents, are expected to be taken in October .
 Hungarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs fails to recall its consul from the village of Berehove . Ukrainian government is going to suggest him leave the country .
 Ukrainian government offered to recall Berehove-based consul in connection with violation of Vienna Convention on Consular Relations and Ukrainian laws . Ukrainian government was one that offered its Hungarian counterparts to recall .
 Ukrainian Foreign Ministry: "We are going to make a decision on our own that he must leave the territory Ukraine and stop its activities"
 The Verkhovna Rada should develop a law on the protection of state information security . The law should also be developed to protect state information.
Ukrainian GTS is the largest energy company in the United States . The company is part of the Ukrainian GTS, which is based in the Ukraine .
 Joint management of the GTS will allow Ukraine to get strong investments, says Parubiy . "I believe this is one of the key decisions that affect not only energy, but also all spheres of security"
 The United States is one of the most critical critics of the North Stream 2 project . Parubiy says this issue is related to the project, given that the U.S. is a critic of the project .