 It moved to tabloid size and its journalism followed the same trajectory . It followed a similar trajectory. It moved from tabloid size to tabloid.
 Other miscellany includes the weather, public notices, obituaries and the like . Other mis cellany includes public notices and public notices .
 It is almost impossible to trust the first two of these categories . So slanted, ill informed or propagandistic is so much of their content. It's almost impossible.
 There are some honourable exceptions, but like mining for gold, a lot of dross has to be sifted to find valuable nuggets .
 Helen Womack's SMH of 30 March 2017 is published in the Herald . The Herald is please to call “analysis’s” problems with what the Herald isPlease to call .
 A Google search revealed that Gorbachev, Yeltsin, Medvedev and Putin years ended in 2015 . She spent 30 years in Russia, and her time in Russia covered the Soviet Union .
 The Yeltsin years were an unmitigated disaster for most Russians . It included the Yelts in years which were a disaster for many Russians .
 The Russian oligarchs were the principal beneficiaries of those years . Their living standards plummeted, life expectancy dropped and life expectancy fell .
 Ms Womack ignores this history, but it is critical for putting what she later alleges in proper context .
 Her failure to acknowledge the disastrous Yeltsin years means she is unable to attribute credit to subsequent Russian leaders . Putin has led Russia on a remarkable evolution, often in the face of hostility, misrepresentation and sabotage from the west .
 Russia is not only the world’s largest country by a significant margin. Russia is also the world's largest country.
 More Orthodox churches have opened under Putin than at any other time since the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution . More new Orthodox churches are opened under the Russian president than ever before .
 Ms Womack’s view is that Putin has unique qualities that disadvantage Mr Putin .
 She claims that ‘discontented youth’ threaten Mr Putin’s ability to win another election . She says that “discontents youth” threaten him.
 Ms Womack clearly did not follow the results of the 2016 legislative election in Russia, nor is she cognizant of the results .
 The results are unclear how ‘discontented youth’ are a threat to Putin in the light of these results is unclear .
 Ms Womack cites two isolated instances of disaffected youths as somehow conveying a wider truth . She says two isolated cases of disdisaffected youths are conveying the truth .
 According to opinion polls, Putin consistently scores in the 80%+ approval category across all age groups . Putin's approval category is the same for all ages and age groups.
 Ms Womack claims Russian democracy is as managed as she claims it is . The following are drawn only from polls conducted by American companies .
When asked about his handling of relations with China, the US, Ukraine and the EU he scored 90.7%, 85%, 85% and 83% approval respectively .
 A Washington Post poll conducted on behalf of the one of the world’s leading Russophobic outlets in March 2016 had Putin rated as ‘trustworthy’ by 73% of those polled . 65% wanted him reelected compared to 57% a year earlier, according to the
 Other European, North American, and Australasian leaders can only dream about. Those are the sorts of approval ratings that other European and North American leaders can dream about .
 Ms Womack completely ignores the objective evidence because clearly it does not fit her and the SMH’s narrative of a “beleaguered” leader .
 A similar blindness, historical amnesia and geopolitical ignorance marks Ms Womack's description of Russia’s policies viz a viz Ukraine .
 Western media has been misreporting of events in Ukraine and Crimea in 2014 and subsequently, including Russia’s policy responses . If there is any single measure that is a litmus test of western media objectivity it is surely the consistent misreporting.
 Whether or not Russia was “spooked’ by the events in 2014 is a moot point . Russia was "spooked" by the 2014 events in Russia, according to the report .
 The U.S. financed and organized coup that overthrew the legitimate government of Ukraine and replaced it with a right wing cabal that draws inspiration and support from Nazi oriented politicians .
 Ms Womack is in tune with other western media in refusing to even acknowledge that the events in February 2014 in Kiev were a coup .
 One of the many offensive policies that the Poroshenko regime instigated was the banning of the Russian language . Russian language is the first language of a significant majority of Crimean and Eastern Ukraine citizens .
 Crimea had been part of Russia since at least since Catherine the Great defeated the Ottomans in 1783 . Crimea was part of the Russian Republic in the early 1800s .
 Australian troops fought Russians in the Crimean War in the 1850s in an early attempt by the British to seize control of the important port of Sevastopol .
 Crimea remained part of Russia until 1954 when Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev and the Soviet Presidium “gifted’s Crimea to Ukraine without consulting either the Crimean or the Russian people. Crimea was part of the USSR until 1954 .
 There was an 83% turnout and 96.7% voted in favour of applying to be readmitted to the Russian Federation .
 The U.N. Charter recognises the right of people to self-determination . West was eager to embrace in the case of Kosovo, but wishes to deny the Crimeans .
 None of this essential information is allowed to intrude upon Ms Womack’s narrative .
 A majority of people of Donbass wanted to join the Russian Federation, with whom they share linguistic, cultural and family ties .
 Russia refused their wish, a fact that the western press goes to considerable lengths to conceal . Russia refused the request, saying it was a matter of privacy .
Ukrainian government is bombing and firing artillery shells and rockets into civilian areas of Donbass . As for “fomenting war, it is the Ukrainian government that is bombing, firing artillery shell and rockets .
 Russia supplies political and material support to its cultural brethren . Of course Russia supplies Russia's cultural brethren with political support .
 West reserves to itself for the right to intervene when its own geopolitical goals demand, says David Cameron .
 Russia, France and Germany negotiated the Minsk Accords with Ukraine that set out a specific pathway to a peaceful resolution . The conflict in Eastern Ukraine has become a civil war .
 Ukrainian government refuses to comply with terms of settlement that they had agreed to . Ukrainian government has refused to comply.
 Australian media prefer not to publicize. France and Germany have been criticized for their refusal . Australian media prefers not to publicly publicize the news .
 U.S. Senators McCain and Graham travelled to Kiev after the 2016 presidential election and urged Ukraine to keep fighting, promising American support .
 Russia has taken a range of economic and geopolitical initiatives in response to western sanctions . The main victims appear to be the people of Western Europe, says Ms Womack .
 One has only to mention the successful Russian intervention in Syria and the expansion of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation . Ms Womack, along with most of the SMH’s readers one suspects, is simply ignorant .
 SMH does its readers a disservice by promoting what is little more than ill informed anti-Russian propaganda . The SMH has a reputation for being ill-informed.
 Readership is shrinking ever closer to the point of threatening its existence . It is little wonder that its readership is smaller than it is .