 She is a career member of the U.S. Senior Foreign Service, with the rank of Counselor .
 Fitzgerald served at the U.S. Embassies in Port of Spain, Moscow, Minsk, Berlin, Canberra, and Baghdad . Fitzgerald served in the United States.
 Fitzgerald also served as the United States Deputy Permanent Representative to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in The Hague . Fitzgerald served as Arms Control Counselor in the U.S. Mission to International Organizations in Vienna .
 Fitzgerald served as the Foreign Policy Advisor in ISAF HQ’s CJ-9 Civil-Military Affairs Division in Kabul . Fitzgerald worked on governance issues in Provincial Reconstruction Teams . She provided diplomatic guidance to the three-star Commander in Qatar .
 Fitzgerald also worked in the Department of State in the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs, dealing with arms control treaties . Fitzgerald worked for the Department.
 She served in West Berlin in the mid-1980s as a United States Army Russian linguist .
 This case study is published as part of the PKSOI Trends Global Case Study Series by the Peacekeeping and Stability Operations Institute . distribution is unlimited .
 Her research interests include national and social identity theories, ethno-religious conflicts and social relationships in nationalistic societies . Her research interest includes national andsocial identity theories .
 She is a native German speaker and also speaks Spanish, French, and some Modern Hebrew . She is also a fluent German speaker .
Ukraine is a sitting duck, a road apple, it's weak, Newman, it’s feeble, Newman. ‘Ukraine is … a sitting ducks, aRoad apple, and a road apples’ The EU and RUSSIA in UKRAINE’
 Dutchled international investigation concluded in the fall of 2016 that the missile that shot down MH17 was a Russian ‘Buk’ model . The truck carrying the Buk weapons system was seen entering Ukraine over the Russian border the night before and returning to Russia that night .
 CNN reported a recording that day by pro-Russian separatists gleefully reporting that they had destroyed their target .
 The Russian Federation yesterday again claimed that they wanted disengagement .
 The Monitoring Mission asked that the Monitoring Mission spend more time monitoring on both sides of the Line of Contact . They even asked for more time to monitor both sides.
 The internationally unrecognized annexation of Crimea from Ukraine to Russia in March 2014 and the beginning of fighting in the Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts in April 2014 caused the international community to pay close attention to Ukraine .
 The formation of the Trilateral Contact group consists of representatives of Russia, Ukraine and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The conflict parties signed a deal to end the crisis in Ukraine in September 2014 .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, French President Francois Hollande and German Chancellor Angela Merkel signed Minsk I was signed on February 12, 2015 . The deal was signed after 16 hours of negotiations between Putin and Poroshenko .
 The 13-point plan includes agreements for immediate ceasefire, withdrawal of heavy weapons from the front lines under OSCE SMM monitoring, prisoner exchanges, local elections and safe delivery of humanitarian aid . Known as Minsk II, the plan includes an immediate ceasefire.
 Ukraine today remains politically destabilized by civil war, its economy is in tatters, and its territorial integrity is severely compromised . Despite these commitments, Ukraine today is politically destabilizing by civil War .
 As of spring 2017, “little green men’5 (Russian soldiers wearing uniforms without insignia) continue to fight with pro-Russian separatists against the Ukrainian government in Eastern Ukraine .
 Dramatically, it has become a daily routine in the occupied areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine .
 Ukraine has received extensive and irrefutable evidence of direct involvement of Russia, its state agencies and officials in financing, sponsorship, and coordination of terrorist groups which have committed countless crimes against my compatriots . For over two years of this tragedy, Ukraine has gotten extensive and
 The shocking reality is that there is a roughly 38,000-strong illegal military force in Donbas . The large part is regulars and mercenaries from Russia .
 Russia keeps sending weapons, ammunition and manpower to Ukraine through uncontrolled part of the Ukrainian-Russian state border .
 Russian side continues insisting at all forums, including the UN, that it has nothing to do with all of this and that the Russians are not there in Ukraine .
 In July 2014 Reuters published an article in which two journalists reported tracing of a Russian rocket and logbook that was seized in eastern Ukraine .
 The rocket had been signed out at a Russian military base three weeks earlier .
 The U.S. Army's Command and General Staff College says conventional Russian ground forces openly fought with the eastern Ukrainian separatists in five major battles between July 2014 and February 2015 .
 Some BTGs came from as far away as Vladivostok and the Kuril Islands . Some of the BTGs were found in the region of the island nation .
 The BTGs consisted of one tank company, three mechanized infantry companies, an anti-armor company, two to three self-propelled artillery batteries, a multiple launch rocket battery, and two air defense batteries .
 The separatists and Russian forces have yet to withdraw their forces and heavy arms behind the lines of contact drawn in Minsk II and to maintain the ceasefire called for under the Accords .
 Russia on the other hand claims that Ukraine is not fulfilling nor interested in implementing agreed parts of the Minsk agreements . Russia also says Ukraine does not want to implement parts of Minsk agreement .
 They keep twisting the issues coming up with preconditions and things like that, they keep twisting them. They keep twisted the issues.
We call upon all those who have influence on Kiev to make sure that they do what they are supposed to do . We call upon those who are involved in Kiev to be careful .
13 pro-Russian groups began to engage in armed conflict in Luhansk and Donetsk . Immediately afterwards, in protest of the pro-European stance of the Ukrainian Government, and infiltrated by Russian intelligence officers, began to fight .
 In April, Ukraine launched military operations against these Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 Pro-Russian separatists declared independence in Luhansk and Donetsk in May 2014 . However, within two hours of counting the votes, the leader of the newly minted “Donetsk People’s Republic” asked to join Russia .
 Ukraine intensified its military offensives in the east of the country against an estimated 30,000 partisans, organized into BTGs and independent brigades . Ukraine has intensified its armed forces in the eastern part of Ukraine .
 Dutch and Australian experts led an international investigation into the shoot-down that led them to conclude that the air defense weapons system used was Russian .
 The EU and U.S. announced economic sanctions against Russia in July . Three weeks later, Russia was reported to send substantial “humanitarian aid’s’ to Luhansk without Ukrainian approval .
 Reports of hostages, prisoner exchanges, Russian military equipment secretly entering Ukraine and Ukrainian use of cluster bombs surfaced in the following months .
 By March 2015, the UN estimated that 6,000 people had been killed in eastern Ukraine as a direct result of violations of the Minsk agreements .
Ukrainian authorities registered 1. million internally displaced persons and the UN reported 900,000 refugees departing Ukraine in 2014-15 .
 The UN reported 750,000 of them went to Russia, the Russian Federal Migration Service claimed 2 million Ukrainians had fled to Russia .
 Russia’s numbers made it look more sympathetic to eastern Ukrainians . It is unclear what the actual number of refugees was during that time period .
Western countries remain critical of the situation. Despite international efforts to facilitate the two Minsk talks and provide assistance in the implementation of the agreements, representatives of Western countries remained critical of situation .
 For weeks now, we have been working on a framework agreement aimed at easing tensions between the two parties to the conflict .
 It has not been possible to reach agreement so far, as neither side is willing to compromise . Neither side has been able to compromise so far .
 Ukraine was part of the Russian Empire and later of the Soviet Union . Many Russians view Ukraine as part of their identity until this day .
 The derivation of the word “Ukraine” in Russian means “on the edge” or “frontier’s’. In fact, the derivation is ‘on theedge’ or ‘frontier.’
 Repeated invasions from the West over centuries inculcated a strong appreciation in Russia proper for its Ukrainian ‘frontier’ as a buffer zone .
 Ukraine and Russia share not only history but also strong economic, religious and linguistic ties . Russia and Ukraine share strong economic and religious ties .
 The region’s Orthodox Christianity is considered to have originated in Ukraine .
 Most Ukrainians speak both Russian and Ukrainian and family ties expand past political borders . Most Ukrainians also speak both Russia and Ukrainian .
 A 2013 study claimed the Russian-Ukrainian border to be the second-largest migration corridor of the world .
 Many Ukrainians work in Russia and in addition, large investments by Russian businesses in Ukraine intensify the intertwined relationship . Many Ukrainians live in Russia .
 Crimea was a part of Russia proper from 1783 to 1954 when then-Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ceded the territory to Ukraine . Crimea was part of Ukraine from 17 83 to 1954 .
 Crimea has always been an inseparable part of Russia . Each one of these places is dear to our hearts, symbolising Russian military glory .
 We are very concerned about the threat of escalated hostilities in Donbass . We are also concerned about a possible escalation of hostilities in the region .
 The Ukrainian military has seized a “no-man’s land’ along the demarcation line . It dangerously reduce the distance between the positions of the warring parties and provoke clashes .
 The western part of the Ukrainian population is largely in favor of its country strengthening ties with the EU . The more eastern regions see remaining close to Russia as beneficial .
 Several conflicts between the two countries concerning the use, price and transportation of natural gas have simmered for years . The use, use, and transport of the gas has been a source of tension between the countries .
 The vast majority of Russian gas exports into the EU are transported through Ukraine . Ukraine is accused of using gas domestically instead of passing it on to other European countries .
Disagreements on Ukrainian debt and dependency on Russian gas have kept this conflict alive . Disagreements have kept the conflict alive, according to reports .
 A proposed Association Agreement between Ukraine and the EU in November 2013 appeared to cross a Russian redline . Ukraine suddenly signed an “action plan’ with Russia instead that gave Ukraine preferential natural gas prices and a $15 billion loan, but what Ukraine offered is unclear .
 Ukraine seemed to have been surprised by Russia’s stance on the issue, including its taking over Crimea and its covert support for the separatist uprisings that began in April 2014 .
 Kyiv struggled to identify acceptable ways to change Moscow’s calculus and regain Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Minsk Agreements called for a full and immediate ceasefire to take hold . Then it could arrange for local elections to be held in Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts .
 leaders of both separatist movements claimed in 2014 after conducting status referenda that the vast majority of voters were in favor of establishing separate republics .
 Minsk II laid out a clear plan of action that representatives of all parties had initially agreed to . The Ukrainian Government opposed both separatist movements and Russia had shown support for both sides .
 Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts would be reintegrated into Ukraine in exchange for a special self-governing status by late 2015 .
 Ukrainian parliament had not voted on the constitutional reform to allow for such special status . Reports of an ongoing ‘Russianization’ in Luhansk and Donetsk Oblasts raise questions .
 Ukraine was part of the Soviet Union from 1922 to 1991 . Ukraine was one of 15 constituent republics until its breakup in 1991 . The Soviet Union was one.
 Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan gave up their nuclear weapons . The three obtained politically binding security guarantees from Russia, the UK and the U.S. Russia, UK and United States.
 In the immediate aftermath of the 2004 Ukrainian Presidential election, the so-called Orange Revolution took place . The Orange Revolution was called the Orange Revolution .
 Protestors claimed voter intimidation, corruption, and electoral fraud to ensure pro-Russian candidate and former governor of Donetsk Oblast Viktor Yanukovych's win .
 The Ukrainian Supreme Court ordered a revote for late December . Civil disobedience and general strikes eventually led to annulment of the results .
 Viktor Yushchenko won the re-election with 52% of the vote. Widely known as being pro-EU, former Ukrainian National Bank Governor and informal opposition leader Viktor YUSHchenko .
 Domestic and international observers declared the revote “fair and free’ and Yushchenko was inaugurated on 23 January 2005 .
 In mid-November 2013 Ukrainian protesters took up residence on Maidan Square in Kyiv to protest government corruption again . They also demand closer integration with Europe .
Violent clashes with Ukrainian security forces took place in the following weeks . Many violent clashes took place with security forces in Ukraine .
 Yanukovych refused to sign the above-mentioned landmark Association Agreement with the European Union on November 29 . The agreement offered limited financial assistance, closer ties to the EU, and preferential access to European markets .
 Yanukovych signed an “action plan’ with Russia and received a 15 billion dollar loan from Moscow and an arrangement for lower natural gas prices . Instead, allegedly under great pressure from Russia,33 on December 17, Yanukovych signed a ‘action plan' with Russia .
 He stated he would continue to work on more favorable conditions for Ukraine in the EU agreement . Meanwhile, he said he would work on a more favorable condition for Ukraine .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia on February 21 and never returned . Ukrainian security forces began live-firing on the protesters in mid-February 2014 .
 An interim government was formed which Russia refused to recognize . It called Yanukovych’s removal a Western-sponsored coup d’etat .
 The new Parliament also decreed that Ukrainian would be the state’s sole official language from then on . The new parliament also decrees that Ukrainian will be the State's sole language .
 Previously, regions could make use of additional official languages if that language was spoken by more than 10 percent of the region’s population .
 Thirteen out of 27 Ukrainian regions have declared Russian an official second language . Thirteen of 27 regions had declared Russian a second language in Ukraine .
 The vote was overwhelmingly in favor, although some Western media reported that pro-Ukrainian voters were intimidated to vote in favor of returning Crimea to Russia .
 International observers claimed voter intimidation, closure of critical television channels, and a well working Russian propaganda machine to confuse voters . International observers reported voter intimidation and closure ofcritical television channels .
 On 21 March 2014 interim Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko signed the political part of the Association Agreement with the EU . The agreement includes steps towards visa-free travel and equal rights for workers .
 On June 27, after national elections in May, President Poroshenko signed the economic part of the EU agreement .
 It commits Ukraine to econom6 Case Study # 0517-02 PKSOI.
 The EU agreed to provide Ukraine with political and financial support and preferential access to EU markets . The EU also agreed to give Ukraine access to its own markets .
 Pro-Russian leaders in the Donbass in eastern Ukraine began fighting for eastern Ukraine to separate from Ukraine in April .
 Ukrainian authorities repeatedly laid out photos of Russian soldiers’ passports and Russian heavy armaments not contained in the Ukrainian military inventory that it had seized . At various international fora in Vienna from 2014 through 2016, Ukrainian authorities lay out photos.
 Russia has continued to deny direct involvement in the Ukraine crisis . It has made countercharges against Ukraine and Western countries for inflaming the situation and causing massive numbers of casualties .
 Russian shelling and siege operations in the city of 25,000, located on the border between Donetsk and Luhansk, killed some 6,000 civilians, and forced another 8,000 to flee the city . The city is located near the border with Donetsk, and
Ukrainian forces including the 128th Mechanized Brigade, Donbass Battalion, and other units were all but destroyed .
 We once again call on Russia and the separatists to stop the violence . We also call on them to fully implement their commitments in the Minsk agreements .
 Ukraine continued to demand a comprehensive ceasefire first, in accordance with the Minsk agreements . However, Ukraine continues to demand the ceasefire first .
 In December 2016, the EU decided to extend its sanctions on Russia for another six months . Germany and France supported the decision to extend the sanctions . The EU also extended its sanctions against Russia in December 2016 .
 NATO and the EU's encroachment into Russia’s historical sphere of influence or “near abroad,’ and achieving regional hegemony . This means stopping NATO, the EU’S encroachment, and achieving Regional hegemony .
 Russia’s strategy is to use a malleable definition of a victimized “Russian Identity’ of ethnic Russians, Russian speakers, or simply Slavic peoples .
 Russia will remain the enemy of the West in the ongoing World War of this new type of war . Russia will continue to be an enemy in this new kind of war.
In the 21st Century new forms of warfare have been added to the armed struggle, they say . The West’s use of “color revolutions’ in the former Soviet space, as well as in the Balkans and the Middle East, they said .
 Russia will “to escalate hybrid warfare to the use of physical force to take what want,’ authors say . Russia underwrites its military campaigning with a strategy of “localized and temporal dominance” that seeks to keep its neighbors destabilized and weak relative to itself
 Its means are covert action, cyber operations and information warfare, and the use of separatists in order to create zones of frozen conflict .
 Russia commits conventional forces which try to melt into the countryside or back across the Russian border . When all these means, including the use of partisans, are not enough to achieve the objective .
 A version of this phenomenon has worked in the breakaway Georgian region of South Ossetia, as well as in Ukraine .
 Russia relies heavily on air defense systems to keep Ukrainian aircraft out of the battle . A key aspect of Russia’s military involvement in Ukraine is the lack of use of air power .
 The Russians’ ‘reconnaissance-strike model’ relies heavily on drones, rocket and artillery fire, special reconnaissance, cyber capabilities, and geo-locating technologies .
 Russia and separatists have not been reluctant to inflict civilian casualties . As for humanitarian effects, Russia and the separatists are not willing to inflict casualties .
 The political message has been that the government in Kyiv cannot protect civilians, therefore the local population should support the separatists and side with Russia .
 The Ukrainian regime is not seeking to topple the existing regime, but to “perpetually conduct operations aimed at weakening the adversary from the inside out,’ or, put another way, 8 Case Study .
This will be a brainstorming exercise to flesh out the various – and competing – national interests and foreign policy goals of the countries involved . This will be the first time this has been used as a planning exercise .
 Once assigned your roles, you will draft one-to-two pages of notes for yourselves for that role . You will define what you believe the United States should do about Russia .
 Additional actors could include the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, CJCS, the Ambassador to the UN, and the Ambassadors to Russia, Ukraine, the EU, NATO, or even Germany .
 Ukraine, Russia, the U.S., Germany, France, Lithuania, Poland, Sweden, etc. The goal of outlining a new political settlement in Ukraine is to implement or move beyond the Minsk agreements .
 Look at their current actions in the South China Sea and the Persian Gulf, respectively . Look at the current actions.
 Russian special operations soldiers and intelligence officers “on vacation’s vacation. They are wearing green uniforms without insignia . They are Russian special ops soldiers and Intelligence officers ‘on vacation'
Max Boot, “How to Wage Cyber War on the Kremlin,’s Max Boot, is on-line at the Foreign Policy magazine . He's also on the cover of a new book, ‘How to wage cyber war on Russia’
 Beachain, D and A Polese. The Colour Revolutions in the Former Soviet Republics . The colour Revolutions were created in the 1960s and 1990s .
 The majority of ethnic Russians living in Ukraine are in the Donbass region, close to the Russian border . The majority live in the region, near to the border .
 Donbass is the industrial heartland of Ukraine, and also famous for its rich agricultural soil . The 12 Case Study is part of a series of series on Donbass .
 OSCE of the regime of non-use of weapons. Ensure monitoring and verification by the OSCE .
 The OSCE has created a security area in the border regions of Ukraine and the Russian Federation . The Russian Federation has created the security area .
 Law prohibits prosecution and punishment of persons in connection with the events that took place in certain areas of the Donetsk and Lugansk regions of Ukraine .
 Adopt measures aimed at improving the humanitarian situation in Donbass . The region has been hit by violence and violence in recent years .
 Remove unlawful military formations, military hardware, as well as militants and mercenaries from the territory of Ukraine . Remove unlawfulmilitary formations and military hardware .
 Adopt a program for the economic revival of Donbass and the recovery of economic activity in the region . Adopt an economic revival for the region.
 Provide security guarantees for the participants of the consultations . Provide personal security guarantees.
 The stopping of the units and military formations of the sides at the line of contact as of September 19, 2014 .
 The prohibition on the use of all types of weapons and the conduct of offensive operations is in effect . The prohibition is also in effect on all weapons and offensive operations .
 The OSCE has banned the placement of heavy weaponry and military hardware in the area limited by the settlements of Komsomolskoye, Kumachevo, Novoazovsk, Sakhanka .
 The prohibition on the placement of new landmine-­-explosive engineering barriers within the boundaries of the security area .
 The obligation to remove the previously placed landmine-­-explosive barriers within the security area is to be removed .
 Plotnitskiy Minsk, September 19, 2014 Appendix 3 12 February 2015 Package of Measures for the Implementation of the Minsk Agreements 1 .
 The ceasefire in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine has been implemented as of 15 February 2015, 12am local time . The ceasefire has been in place since February 2015 .
 The process will be facilitated by the OSCE and supported by the Trilateral Contact Group . The process shall be facilitated.
 OSCE uses all technical equipment necessary, including satellites, drones, radar equipment, etc. Ensure effective monitoring and verification of the ceasefire regime .
Launch a dialogue on modalities of local elections in accordance with Ukrainian legislation and the Law of Ukraine . Launch a dialogue, on day 1 of the withdrawal.
Ukrainian law prohibits prosecution and punishment of persons in connection with events that took place in Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine .
 This process is to be finished on the day 5 after the withdrawal at the latest . This process will be finished at the end of the day five .
 Ensure safe access, delivery, storage, and distribution of humanitarian assistance to those in need on the basis of an international mechanism .
 Ukraine shall reinstate control of the segment of its banking system in the conflict-affected areas . An international mechanism to facilitate such transfers shall be established .
Full control of the state border by the government of Ukraine throughout the conflict area starting on day 1 after the local elections . The comprehensive political settlement on the basis of the Law of Ukraine and constitutional reform to be finalized by the end of 2015 .
 A new constitution entering into force by the end of 2015 provides for decentralization as a key element . New legislation on the special status of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in line with measures as set out in the footnote until 2015 .
 Questions related to local elections will be discussed and agreed upon with representatives of certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions in the framework of the Trilateral Contact Group .
 Intensify the work of the Trilateral Contact Group including through the establishment of working groups on the implementation of relevant aspects of the Minsk agreements . Intensifies the work. Intensified the work with the Tr bilateral Contact Group .
 Ambassador of the Russian Federation to Ukraine, M. Yu. Kuchma is Russia's ambassador to Ukraine .