 Huge military maneuvers have Western leaders worried another invasion is imminent . Western leaders worry another invasion will be imminent .
 Russia-Ukraine tensions have again reached a boiling point . Russian troops board landing vessels after drills in Crimea .
 Video released on April 23 by Russian Defense Ministry Press Service shows, Russian troops board landing vessels after drills in Crimea .
 Ukrainian and Western officials are worried that a Russian military buildup near Ukraine could signal plans by Moscow to invade its ex-Soviet neighbor .
 It's unclear whether the Russian troop concentration heralds an imminent attack on Ukraine . U.S. military aid has helped Ukraine since 2014 .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has pushed for Western guarantees precluding NATO's expansion to Ukraine . The buildup could reflect an attempt to back up the message .
 Kremlin-leaning Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych rejected an association agreement with the European Union in favor of closer ties with Moscow . The decision sparked mass protests that led to his ouster in 2014 .
 Russia responded by annexing Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula and throwing its weight behind a separatist insurgency that broke out in Ukraine's east .
 Moscow denies that Russians who joined separatists were volunteers . Moscow denies the charge .
 More than 14,000 people have died in the fighting that devastated Ukraine's eastern industrial heartland known as Donbas .
 A 2015 peace agreement brokered by France and Germany helped end large-scale battles . But efforts to reach a political settlement have failed, and sporadic skirmishes have continued .
 Moscow pulled back the bulk of its forces after maneuvers in April . Earlier this year, a spike in cease-fire violations in the east fueled war fears .
 U.S. intelligence officials last week determined that Russia is planning to deploy 175,000 troops and almost half of them are already stationed near Ukraine's border . A possible invasion could begin as soon as early as early 2022, officials say .
 Ukraine has complained that Moscow has kept over 90,000 troops not far from the two countries' border following massive war games in western Russia in the fall .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy visited the war-hit Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy is surrounded by servicemen as he visits the war-hit Donetsk region of eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian Defense Minister Oleksii Reznikov told lawmakers Friday that the number of Russian troops near Ukraine and in Russian-annexed Crimea is estimated at 94,300 . He warned that a "large-scale escalation" is possible in January .
 The commander-in-chief of the Ukrainian armed forces says Russia has about 2,100 military personnel in the rebel-controlled east . Russian officers hold all commanding positions in the separatist forces, he says .
 Moscow has denied the presence of its troops in eastern Ukraine . Moscow has repeatedly denied the existence of its forces in the region .
 Russia hasn't provided any details about its troop numbers and locations . It says that their deployment on its own territory shouldn't concern anyone .
 The agreement was a diplomatic coup for Moscow . It required Ukraine to grant broad autonomy to the rebel regions and offer sweeping amnesty to the rebels .
 Ukraine, in turn, has pointed to cease-fire violations by Russia-backed separatists . Ukraine insists there is a continuing Russian troop presence in the rebel east .
 Russia has rejected a four-way meeting with Ukraine, France and Germany . Russia says it's useless in view of Ukraine's refusal to abide by the 2015 agreement .
 Moscow has strongly criticized the U.S. and NATO allies for providing Ukraine with weapons and holding joint drills . Moscow says Ukrainian hawks are trying to regain rebel-held areas by force .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu attended the Mulino training ground in the Nizhny Novgorod region of Russia .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Russian Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu attended the Mulino training ground in the Nizhny Novgorod region of Russia .
 The Russian president has repeatedly described Russians and Ukrainians as "one people" He has also said Ukraine has unfairly received historic Russian lands during Soviet times .
 Putin has strongly emphasized that Ukraine's aspirations to join NATO represent a red line for Moscow . Putin has also expressed concern about plans by some NATO members to set up military training centers in Ukraine .
 Some observers interpret the troop buildup as a demonstration by Putin that Russia is prepared to raise the stakes to convince NATO to respect Moscow's red lines and stop sending troops.
 Putin noted with satisfaction that Moscow's warnings finally have some traction and caused a "certain stress" in the West .
 U.S. officials conceded that Moscow's intentions are unclear, but pointed to Russia's past behavior as a cause for concern . The United States says Russia's intentions remain unclear .
 Biden pledged Friday to make it "very, very difficult" for Putin to attack Ukraine . He said new initiatives coming from his administration are intended to deter Russian aggression .