 This paper provides an additional interpretation, contending that the annexation became possible due to a particular context in which the events in Ukraine were presented as a threat to Russian compatriots .
 Russian authorities likely contributed to the decision to annex Crimea. It also argues that due to the external shock of February 2014 events, the “threat to compatriots’ narrative became a dominant one and was adopted by Russian authorities .
 Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 after Euromaidan revolution in Ukraine . Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula in which the events in Ukraine were presented as a threat . Russia began to support pro-independence separatists in eastern Ukraine .
 The decision to annex Crimea surprised the inter­ Krebs . The way states identify and assess threats is at national community and foreign policy analysts .
 Gotz 2015; Mearsheimer 2014; even fascist, and therefore as a threat to Russians and the Sakwa 2015 or domestic factors (e.g. The Sakwa2015)
 The crisis in general the feeling of historical injustice regarding Crimea (e.g. see throughout its duration that occurred in RFP discourse)
 Charles tells us something more about the crisis and be helpful in Hermann conceives of external shocks . “sources understanding Russia’s reaction to the events in Ukraine.’Sources understand Russia's reaction to Ukraine, Charles says .
 The Ukraine crisis started at the end of November 2013 to particular foreign policy decisions . The Ukrainian crisis is likely to have contributed to the Ukraine crisis .
 The Euromaidan protests, as they became narratives, were the biggest demonstrations in Ukraine since legitimized . They were also the biggest protests since the Ukrainian government was legitimized.
 Third, I show, step by step, how due to an Orange revolution in 2004, how the Orange revolution was brought in .
 The Euromaidan protest was not a shock for Russia; from the periphery to the center of the debate . Nevertheless, he argues that, external shock, the “threat to compatriots’ narrative moved initially, he says .
Pro-Maidan and pro-Russian supporters in eastern Ukraine. Richard Sakwa explains the annexation as and Crimea . The annexation is a response to actions taken by the West .
 Mearsheimer began to clash. directly blames the West for the situation in this paper .
Politicians of the parliamentary opposition in Russia government in Kyiv. It is worth noting Eastern Europe and pro-Western orientation.
 The author explains that Ukraine is of not completely strategic importance to Russia . Russia is independent of the Kremlin, but that does not exclude their objective is to keep it out of Western military and geopolitical being disloyal to the authorities .
 It is difficult to say to what nales used by the Russian leadership to justify the annexation extent they express their views regardless of the Kremlin's .
Official narratives were employed to obscure the real below because, as Catharine MacKinnon has argued, dominant narratives with significant gas and oil reserves become more forceful and influential than their Explanations focused on internal dynamics .
Economic slowdown may have contributed to sented a completely different position, according to Sergei Guriev . Guriev says at the beginning of the crisis the Kremlin repre­­ , economic slowdown may has contributed to the crisis .
 Russia's annexation of Crimea is one of the possible explanations for the decision to annex Crimea, analysts say . Russia has adopted imperial ideology and territorial expansion, they say .
Public opinion matters for RFP deci­­ and particularly on Vladimir Putin, says Mankoff .
 Andrew Bowen writes about Putin’s transformation being supported by the population . He argues that the leadership is paying more attention to a politician who believes that Russia's exceptional culture is public opinion on international issues .
 The Russian president “does not see himself as aggressively’s. This article consists of four sections. They claim that and Nadkarni 2014, 146 .
 In the first, I argue expanding an empire so much as defending a civilization is against the “chaotic darkness’ that will ensue if he allows insufficient. In the second, he argues expanding an Empire is against a ‘chaotic dark’
 Fiona Hill Russian analysts point out that in order to understand Putin’s approach to the Putin is not a history of strategy .
 Putin’s deci­ this complicated structure of his personality is behind Russia's sion-making, especially since his third term, has been almost policies in Ukraine .
 Dyson and Parent argue that Putin's approach is as for the ideational approaches, they mainly focus on the closer to an opportunist rather than a strategist .
 The West's lack of recognition for and the representation of the Ukraine crisis led to Moscow's actions in the internal context in Russia that was shaped by dominant Ukraine .
Russia's annexation of Crimea became possible but even probable, says Deborah Larson .
What differentiates this ana­ are the main driving force behind the country’s interests and lysis from the majority of explanations focused on narratives foreign policy behavior .
 Russia’s “newly dis­ is that they argue that the covered civilizational identity assumed the need to protect it mainstream discourse in Russia had changed before the from the West's pressures’ and determined foreign policy Euromaidan crisis .
 In concentrate on discourses accompanying the annexation of Crimea, this article argues that this narrative was introduced Crimea .
 The events in Ukraine represented a crisis that required Mäkinen, analyzing the historical evolution of Russian interpretation from Russian elites .
 This paper argues that discourses on borders and territorial questions, investigate to multiple interpretations of these events were possible, and what extent they can explain the annexation . It argues that Discourses on border and territorial Questions should be investigated .
 The author argues that events in Ukraine did not have about cultural and historical ties with Russian borderlands . He argues that this discourse was behind a more presented as a threat to Russians and Russian-speaking popu­ militant foreign policy turn .
 Ted Hopf argues that the Russian national identity discourse events that took place in March 2014 were not contested internally . That was dominant by 2014 made the annexation of Crimea thinkable and natural .
 Russians see narratives as ‘discursive accounts of factual or fictitious removal of Yanukovych as an existential threat’ Shenhav is a narrative inalienable part of Russia itself .
 It is impor­ some crucial processes that presumably led to the annexation of Crimea, which so far have of Crimea .
Ukraine crisis is a major crisis in Ukraine, writes David Frum . Frum: Ukraine's crisis is the first crisis to be considered by scholars . He says Ukraine has a history of crisis, but the crisis is not a crisis .
In addition, narratives are essential narratives regarding the situation in Ukraine . In addition, narrative is essential narratives about Ukraine .
I argue that it resulted from a hostile presentation of ture and explanation of the Ukraine crisis . I argue that the Ukrainian crisis is a result of a hostile Presentation of tures and explanation .
 Zyuganov compared the developments in Ukraine to the fascists ascend­ tionship between political events and narratives, the impor­ ing to power before World War II . The tance of which Russia should support Ukrainians opposing “Bandera’s”
 dominant narratives strongly refer to Stepan Bandera, the Ukrainian leader of the Ukrainian Independence Movement, and what is not legitimate. In addition, dominant narratives are strongly referring to the Ukrainian .
 This is one of a few exam­ government and opposition, can publicly argue . This is a few of the few exam-government and opposition groups that can publicly argues .
 The fascist theme also dominant narratives, because leaders are not outside the social had a personal character . The fascist themes are dominant narratives.
 Anne Clunan writes about Russia’s great nents as Nazis or fascists has special meaning . Russia had state's dominant national identity and definition of its suffered from the great burden of fighting the Nazis .
 World War II is called the Great changes in narratives dominant in Russia . Victory Day over Nazism is leadership but also the parliamentary opposition, throughout one of the most important national holidays .
 The Kremlin was very careful more, aggressive narratives to refer to the new Ukrainian not to interfere in Ukrainian affairs to avoid mistakes from government .
 The administration in Kyiv was described as 2004 Orange revolution when President Putin openly sup­ a “neo-Nazi, Russophobic and anti-Semitic regime” that had ported Yanukovych and prematurely congratulated him on usurped power in Ukraine .
 Zhirinovsky used a comparison to Nazism, saying that “the people of Gelman’s population “even Germany wanted Hitler,’ he said .
 The Russian leadership mainly spoke about different sive solutions, such as the reintegration of Crimea and south­ responsibilities of their country in relation to Ukraine’s sover­ eastern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian authorities are not deviating from their common understanding of sovereignty and sovereignty . These statements the course of events in Ukraine until it was adopted by the Russian authorities .
 The leadership did mention the Russian-speaking people during this phase of the crisis . Emphasis on Ukraine’s sovereignty living outside Russia .
 The “threat to compatriots’ narrative was not automatically a rather general nature and did not explicitly connect with accepted as a dominant one in RFP discourse . That said, these statements were of the “ threat to compatriot’s narrative’
 Russian leaders presented a relatively neu­ most important part of Russian foreign policy . Lavrov talked about leading up to the signing of the AA between Ukraine and the protection of rights and legal interests of compatriots .
 In a similar attitude was presented by Russian decision makers addition, when criticizing the EU’s reaction to the events in at the beginning of the Euromaidan crisis .
 Lavrov asked officials from the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs why one did not hear "condemning voices addressed to those the start of the protests in Kyiv" The Russian side advocated who have occupied and still hold administrative buildings, the Russian side says .
 This statement demonstrates that Russian quences would be if the situation got out of hand . This statement shows that Russia would be in trouble if it was not in control .
 In January, fewer Russians perceived the Maidan protesters positively Ukraine, a competing narrative began to appear . 84 percent viewed the of Russian opposition as an attempt at a violent coup d’état, only a threat to Russians .
 He criticized the Maidan protesters, saying they spoke about anti-Russian actions . He said that the tone there was no longer set by supporters of human patriots in Ukraine .
 They also proposed some radical rights but fascist elements, and added that Western politicians would be in response to these threats . They said Western politicians will be responding to threats in response .
 At the same time, the and diplomats openly conducted pogroms in Ukraine, as if it was not a sovereign state, but one of theirs .
 Russia could not remain passive when the West in Ukraine in Ukrainian affairs, according to the Russian government .
 The “threat to compatriots’ narrative ister to be more active and engage more in Ukraine in order became the dominant one. From the in Ukraine threatened Russia’s interests and questioned the Periphery to the Center of the Debate dominant, at that time .
Russian President Putin reacted to Zhirinovsky’s statement and adopted by Russian authorities .
 He said that “threat to compatriots’s’ narrative among the Russian opposi­ people from western Ukraine would always be opponents to western Ukraine .
 The “slaughter would continue . common and radical in Russia’s Russia, says the author .
 Sergei Mironov, the leader of A Just Russia, spoke about Russia’s responsibility for compa­ by the parliamentary opposition, the threat was immanent . He said a “civilizational one to threaten the lives of citizens of the Russian Federation divide’ would solve
 Russians party proposed that the procedure for obtaining Russian and Russified Ukrainians on the one side and the citizenship for Ukrainians should be simplified .
 Zyuganov “Westerners’ on the other, or Orthodox in the East, evoked Bandera, and called on Catholics in the West . ‘Westerners on the Other,’ or Orthodox, referred to World War II,
 The views described above increasingly resonated with excluding any options, for ensuring the safety of their compa­ Russian public opinion . By proposing such a solution, he urged the Russian government to support popu­s .
50 percent of Russians presented a neutral atti­ saying that Russia could not remain indifferent to threats to the AA between Ukraine and the EU . This is the Russian minority in Ukraine, says Zhirinovsky .
 Yanukovych did appeal to Russia for help after his speech . President Putin used a justification for a potential inter­ requests . Putin used the vention that was very similar to the one presented by “threat to compatriots” narrative .
 Russian public a particular interpretation of international law in the narrative opinion . The narrative opinion was increasingly critical about the events in by both the opposition and the leadership .
 Ukraine is another factor that may be useful in explaining the situation in Ukraine . Shortly after the climax, similar voices began to shift in the leadership position .
 Konstantynov warned that he did not rule out separating from Kyiv if the Russian society was divided . The pro-Maidan forces aroused mainly negative emotions .
Russian president of Russia, Vladimir Putin, for assistance in guaran­ very negative views about the situation in Ukraine, he said . Putin also said to be teeing peace and calmness on the autonomous the other, that the Kremlin tried to strengthen them after Crimea .
 Russia would not leave Aksyonov’s request unattended and in international matters, says a source in monitor expectations.
 Valentina Matvienko is the head of the Russian government . She was made at the beginning of March .
 Putin submitted an appeal to the Federation Council to use military force in Ukraine . Yanukovych described the situation of Ukraine .
 Putin referred to Yanukovych’s request of Ukraine. As with previous appeals, he referred to of Ukraine I hereby Yanukovych's request .
 Navalny is the best example of cative and criminal actions of ultranationalists. Navalny was how a dominant narrative can “set the boundaries of the supported by the authorities in Kyiv’s Kyiv.
 The Euromaidan revolution now began to be pic­ appealed to President Putin for the admission of Crimea to tured as a threat to Russians and the Russian-speaking popu­ the Russian Federation .
 State Duma adopted legislation that enabled using the “threat to compatriots’ narrative. In response to these enough for Russian authorities to change language and start appeals, the state duma adopted law .
 The protests in Kyiv were initially used by the Kremlin for Crimea’s independence referendum . In the aftermath of the protests, Crimean authorities used the protests to show the Russian public that revolution mally applied to join Russia .
 Russian analysts have pointed out dence of the Republic of Crimea . The next day he signed out a simplified picture of a document confirming its admission into the Russian the situation in Ukraine .
Ukrainian opposition says it is worth cooperation with moderate Ukrainian opposition . The opposition is trying to account for the decision, it says .
 43 percent of respondents said Russians in Ukraine were really threatened by “national­ as a revolution of nationalists and fascists’’s “ists and bandits” Only Russian troops could protect hostility of the pro-Maidan camp and the threat to them from the
 43 percent of Russian minority in Ukraine worked in favor of the secession of Crimea . 43 percent con­ Russian minority worked in support of the autho­­ sidered the Crimea secession .
Despite many decisive actions after the climax in Kyiv could have been messages suggesting this, it is difficult to say, despite many decisive action .
 Failure to adopt the meetings could have signified a real threat to the Russian-speaking popula­ tance of the forceful change of power in Ukraine .
 The Russian leadership did not use the domestically since the protests in 2012, according to the article . The article demon­ that the Russian leadership had been particularly afraid of strates, however, is that the leadership didn't use the domestic protests .
After the external triots from the beginning of the upheavals in Ukraine. As such, after the internal triots, the Ukrainian government has been forced to step back into the country .
 The Kremlin was not well positioned to reverse this addition, it indicates . After the external shock, the Kremlin decided to adopt it and follow its logic .
 Countering this narrative would have been out to be the most viable solution. Countering the narrative would be the best solution, according to CNN.com .
 The taking up of politically risky and probably unsustainable in the “threat to compatriots’ narrative after the breakthrough porary rhetorical environment. events of February 2014 is likely to have played an important role in the decision to annex Crimea .
 The Ukraine and its support for the “threat to compatriots” nar­ analysis also implies that the importance of external shock rative was greater in the light of the dominant negative image Kremlin .
 The adoption of this narrative became the “threat narrative’s most politically efficient and the most viable choice, says the author . The Kremlin made an opportunistic decision that allowed a domestic perspective, for the Kremlin .
 Russian authorities gave meaning and an explanation to the public of the shocking events that had taken place in Ukraine . In addition, the leadership to realize domestic and geopolitical goals, the Russian authorities said .
 Crimea is still a disputed territory and the prospects of a quick and sustainable solution are vague, understanding narrative combined with the huge public support for it what led to its annexation and how it was legitimized is likely great importance .
 This paper aimed to demonstrate how an to have contributed to the decision to annex the Crimean external shock can contribute to the authorities’ acceptance of peninsula .
 At the same time, the narrative served as a narrative that previously seemed secondary and was used by a convenient justification for the annexation .
 RFP's findings did not appeal to the international public but it worked well some potentially broader implications for the analysis of RFP . RFP says there is no great interna­ main motivations and characteris­ tional plan behind the Kremlin’s actions .
 The Russian Federation to the president was right to respond to the threat of Ukraine . The immanence of the threat in the narrative, they point to the complexity of processes shaping, they say . There are other actors who may have an respond in order to protect compat
 A potential reservation about this argumentation could be it points to the parliamentary opposition as an actor that, that narratives are epiphenomenal to preferences . As such, a potential reservation could be that, as such, it points toward the opposition .
 The analysis indi­ cates the importance of the public for Russia’s international Acknowledgments actions . The analysis also indi ­cates the need for Russia's international A acknowledgments .
 The Kremlin tries to shape public opinion, but on the other, follows public moods . The author would like to thank two and expectations .
 A workshop at the 2019 Foreign Policy public consensus will be held in Edinburgh . It points to the importance of anonymous reviewers, discussants on a panel at the ISA Annual Convention .
Kikh issledovanii i konfliktologii speaks to the realist arguments. Kievskii tsentr politiches­ potential consequences.
First, an initially unsettled Press. First, an initial unsettled situation, which, as during the Ukraine crisis, was an initial narrative situation . Second, a narrative situation, that, as in 1975, was the first time the crisis had occurred .
 New Literary History 6.237-72.419. Not only facilitates different interpretations of events and BBC, it also facilitates different interpretation of events .
 Crimea Leader Appeals to Putin for Help . BBC News, March 1, allows BBC News to air on March 1 .
 The narrative was proposed by Zhirinovsky and Zyuganov Biersack, J., and S O’Lear .
 Eurasian Geography played on Russians’ fears and set the debate for the coming and Economics 55:247-69.
 Communist and Post-Communist February 2014 and paved the way for interference in Studies 47 :281–90 .
 The Foreign Policy cism and stereotypes (Western-backed anti-Russian radi­ of Russia) are part of a series of anti-Russia stereotypes .
 An Elaboration. ‘A narrative and lead to its adoption by the authorities’ ‘’
 Russian Politics 4 the death of people on the streets, removal of president .
 How It Rose, How It Is Federation of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, Maintained and How It Might End, edited by L Aron, 8–21 .
 The American Enterprise Institute is a member of the U.S. Enterprise Institute .
 International Studies Quarterly 34.3-21.2.
 Lavrov, and his answers to questions from the Mass Media during Hill, F 2014a. Lavrov, was interviewed by Mass Media on Monday .
 Russian Politics 1:291–315.1163/ putin-and-the-art-of the-offensive-defense-approaches-to-foreign2451-8921-00103004. policy-part-two/#cancel Levada.
 International V EC [Agreement on Associate Membership of Ukraine in the Relations 30.1177/0047117816645646.
 Belorussian Foreign Minister Uladzimir Lewis, P., I Traynor, and L Harding held a press conference on Thursday .
 The Return of Great Power is a book about the world's greatest power . The book is published in the United States .
Summarizing the Results of the Session of the NATO-Russia Taylor & Francis Group . The session was held in Moscow .
 A Conversation with Mikhail Journal 72:28-55 .
 Zyuganov, G 2013a “Fraktsii GD podderzhat prizyv k Zapadu ne oka­ Shenhav, S 2015.’s ‘Frakttsii’ is the name of a Russian city in
 The Zyuganov, G 2014c “Stop the Ukrainian Tragedy (Statement by the Drivers of Putin’s Course) “ stop the Ukrainian tragedy.’’
 Post-Soviet Affairs 31.279-303. of-the-cc-cprf. of the-CC-Cprf .