 Ukrainian serviceman stands at the line of separation between Ukraine-held territory and rebel-held territories .
 ABC News contributor Steve Ganyard is a retired U.S. Marine colonel and former deputy assistant secretary of state . "Those two regions have a lot of people who are not just Russian citizens," he says .
 Ukrainian forces put up fierce fight against Russians . Russia sent operatives in, both military and political, to create the appearance of separatist movements .
 An international investigation determined the jet was hit by a Russia-supplied missile fired from the rebel-controlled territory in Ukraine . The jet was struck by the missile fired by a Russian-Supplied missile, the investigation found .
 Minsk agreements called for Ukraine to reintegrate the separatist regions by giving them broad autonomy enshrined in its constitution .
 The Kremlin hoped that by doing so it would create a permanent pro-Russian lever of influence within Ukraine’s government . Ukraine refused to fulfill that part of the Minsk deal while Russian troops remained on the separatists’ territory .
 Donetsk and Luhansk have been legally recognized as part of Ukraine dating back to 1917 . But the Ukrainian government counters that Donetsk andLuhansk are part of the country .
 separatist authorities also ordered mass evacuations of civilians to create the illusion of a large-scale humanitarian crisis . The puppet governments appealed for help from Russia, creating a false pretext for the Kremlin to invade .
 Putin accuses Ukraine of failing to implement the Minsk agreements to justify Russia recognizing the separatist "republics" as independent . Putin accused Ukraine of not implementing Minsk agreement .
 Militants of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic stand in front of an apartment building in the separatist town of Yasynuvata . Residents say the building was damaged by recent shelling .
 Putin is saying that Ukraine is illegitimate in claiming Donetsk and Luhansk as independent republics . When the fighting stopped in 2015, the separatist ""republics"" only held around a third of Donbas that they claim should belong to them .
 Russia has launched a full-scale offensive from the separatist areas that it claims is to retake that territory . Russia's invasion is part of Russia’s invasion.
 Many experts say Russia is using the separatist conflict as a pretext for forcing Ukraine to concede to Russian demands that it never join NATO . The two separatist regions -likely enlarged - could be important in any eventual peace agreement to end the fighting .
 If you’re interested in participating in this study, please take the survey from our recruiting partners . We can contact you about participating .
 Russia denied any involvement in the incident in early 2015, with Russian troops inflicting heavy damage on Ukraine .
 The Kremlin hoped that by doing so it would create a permanent pro-Russian lever of influence within Ukraine’s government . Ukraine refused to fulfill that part of the Minsk deal while Russian troops remained on the separatists’ territory .