 This is the first witness interview as part of the impeachment inquiry . The interview will come to Sraer, who will make a few brief remarks .
 Once a colleague makes some prefatory remarks you'll be given as much time as you'd like to make an opening statement. Once your colleague makes a prefatory statement, you'd be given more time to make it .
 This is a transcribed interview that is conducted by the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence . The interview is pursuant to the impeachment inquiry announced by the Speaker of the House on September 24th .
 Before we begin, if you could just please state your full name and spell your last name for the record, we'll ask for your name .
 This interview will be conducted entirely at the unclassified level .
 It is the committee's expectation that neither the questions asked of you, the witness, nor answers by you or your counsel would require discussion of any information that is currently or at any point could be classified under executive order 13526 .
 EO 13526 states that, "In no case shall information be classified, continue to be maintained as classified, or fail to be declassified" "No case shall be classified," EO13526 states .
 The transcript will be limited to the three committees in attendance, the Intelligence Committee, Foreign Affairs Committee, and Committee on Oversight and Reform .
 In advance of today's interview, you voluntarily produced certain documents to the committees, which you have marked as confidential . The committees have Bates numbers KV1 through KV65 .
 The record will reflect that the witness has been duly sworn. Thank you. 16 17 17 18 18 19 20 21 pe: 23 24 an.
 The Department of State and the Department of Defense have conducted themselves with the highest degree of 20 21 oe 23 24 24 25 professionalism, integrity, and dedication to the national interest .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine negotiations has acted solely to advance United States national interests . He has helped Ukraine better defend itself and deter Russian aggression .
"I have tried to be courageous, energetic, clear-eyed, and plainspoken, always acting with integrity to advance core American values and interests," says U.S. Ambassador to NATO .
 I would not have been true to myself, my duties, or my commitment to the people of the U.S. If I did not dive in and try to fix problems as best 1 could, he would not be true to himself, he says .
 I agreed to take on these responsibilities. Caring deeply about supporting Ukraine, recognizing that it stands for all of us in building a democracy and pushing back Russian aggression .
 Secretary of State Tillerson agreed that Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine would be restored .
 I did this on a voluntary basis, with no salary paid by the United States taxpayer, he says . "I believed it was important to serve our country in this way," he says.
 We coordinated closely with our European allies and Canada to maintain a united front against Russian aggression and for Ukraine's democracy, reform, sovereignty, and territorial integrity .
In May of this year, I became concerned that a negative narrative about Ukraine was fueled by assertions made by Ukraine's departing prosecutor general was reaching the President of the U.S. President .
Ukrainian President Zelensky asked me to connect him to Rudy Giuliani's personal lawyer, Rudy Giuliani . Giuliani's lawyer is Rudy Giuliani. Giuliani is a former mayor of New York City, New York .
 Third, at no time was aware of or took part in an effort to urge Ukraine to investigate former Vice President Biden .
 Vice President Biden was never a 10 1] 12 16 IF 18 19 19 20 21 22 22 23 24 25 topic of discussion .
 Vice President Biden has been accused of corruption in Ukraine . Biden has urged Ukrainians to focus on their own efforts to fight corruption domestically, he says .
 Ukraine's actions by Ukraine were never taken, says U.S. ambassador to Ukraine . "No such actions were ever taken," he says . "I gave them the advice I gave them," he adds .
 President Trump and President Zelensky had a phone call on July 25th, 2019 . Trump received only superficial readouts about that conversation afterwards .
 Vice President Biden's name was mentioned or a request was made to investigate him . The transcript of this call was released on September 25th, 2019 .
 Fourth, while executing his duties, he kept colleagues at the State Department and National Security Council informed and briefed Congress about his actions .
 This included in-person meetings with senior U.S. officials at State, Defense, and NSC, as well as staff briefings on 16 17 18 19 20 21 ee. 23 24 on Capitol Hill and public testimony in the Senate on June 18th, 2015 .
 I have an extensive record of public commentary about our Ukraine policy . I have a extensive record. I have been in Ukraine for more than a decade .
 As a matter of practice, I did not edit or clear on these messages . I told reporting officers just to report as they normally would .
 U.S. security assistance to Ukraine includes lethal defensive weapons, including lethal weapons . Fifth, and finally, I strongly supported the provision of United States security assistance, he says .
 The provision of such assistance was uniformly supported at State, Defense, the National Security Council, the House, the Senate, and the expert community in Washington .
I did not discuss the hold with my Ukrainian counterparts until the matter became public in late August . As I was confident the position would not stand, I did not discussed the position with my Ukraine counterparts .
 The last conversation I had with him would have had to have been Tuesday of this week, which today is the 3rd .
 I became aware of the President's interest in -well, let me take that back . Let me take it back. I become aware of his interest in –well, lets me take back .
 I don't recall ever hearing ever hearing that the President was interested in investigating Burisma . The President was not interested in the investigation, he says .
 The four of us had been part of the Presidential delegation . They had requested the meeting in order to brief the President after their participation at the inauguration .
 The U.S. wants to engage with the President of Ukraine in order to demonstrate full United States support for him .
 President Zelensky will face a lot of challenges, says CNN's John Sutter . He says he will need support from Ukraine's oligarchs and corruption .
 President Trump demonstrated that he had a very deeply rooted negative view of Ukraine based on past corruption .
 "It was important that we wanted to brief him, because we were saying, it's different, this guy is difterent," he said .
 Yuriy Lutsenko, L-u-t-s-e-n-k-o. Q Lutenko. 10 1] 12 19 20 21 21 2d 23 24 25 25 A. Lutsko is a Russian-born Russian.
Q. Q Because I believe we'll probably be discussing multiple prosecutor generals today . Q Because we'll likely be discussing several prosecutor generals .
 Prosecutor General Lutsenko was acting in a self-serving manner, he says . He says he wanted to save his job because he was trying to make things up .
 U.S. might object or prevent him from being removed by the new President .
 Vice President Biden did indeed weigh in with the President of Ukraine to have 37 20 20 21 22 pe 24 20 Shokin fired . The motivations for that are entirely different from those contained in that allegation .
 It was a White House visit, so, yes, it would have been an Oval Office meeting .
 A deep-rooted, skeptical view of Ukraine, a negative view of Ukrainian 2019, you Know, going back. A So, as I understood it was, I understood that it was thisDeep-rooting, skeptical views of Ukraine . A so-called "
 President Trump and President Poroshenko have met for the first time . President Trump has also met with President Obama and President Obama .
 "Even though he agreed in the meeting that we had with him, I'll invite him, he didn't really want to do it," she says . She says. "My understanding at the time was that even though he agreeing in the Meeting that we have with him
 The Ukrainians wanted to convey that they really are different, says Giuliani . The Ukrainians asked to communicate with Giuliani .
 Q Why did you single out those two specific allegations? Q Why? A Right? A right .
 20 21 21 22 23 24 24 25, you know, that is what we were talking about. And that was, 20 21 22 22 23 23 24, that was 20 21 20 21 23 24 .
 Andrey says he advised him, "This is not a good idea," he says . "In that conversation with Andrey and a subsequent conversation I advised him," he adds .
 Prosecutor General Lutsenko was at this time still in office . There is 45 20 20 21 22 23 24 Zz no -no evidence was brought forward to support .
 Hunter Biden was a board member of Burisma, so it could be interpreted that way . It was known that he was a member of the Burisma .
 I do want to go through the text messages because I believe that they're a good anchor for some of the other topics that we've been discussing . I want to 18 19 19 20 Zl 22 ao 24 20 discuss that I do wants to 1819 20 ZL 22 a
First turn to page 36, and we're going te mark, as exhibit 2, 36, 37, 38, dfhd 39. Q. Q: I'd like to first turn to pages 36 and we'll be on page 36 .
 The NSC has not been able to get a date for a visit . The date for the visit is urgent, the NSC says .
 Two years ago, Secretary Ne 18 19 19 20 Al ew. 23 24 24 25 Mattis came for Independence Day .
 A Let's have an internal call Friday, three of us plus Secretary Perry . The call will take place at 3pm.
 A George Kent is the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State responsible for Ukraine, Georgia, and this part of the world . Kent is also the deputy assistant secretary of state for Georgia .
 He's formerly the Deputy Chief of Mission in Ukraine . He's now the Deputy Secretary of State of the Ukraine .
 Kurt had a good meeting with Zelensky, I Neal This is now July 3rd .
 A He took a strong interest in Ukraine at the EU at the time . He wanted to strengthen EU support for Ukraine .
 He was part of the Presidential delegation in May for the President's inauguration . He was also part of a delegation for the inauguration in May .
 Gordon Sondland called the National Security Council chief of staff once . He called the chief of Staff once, but he didn't .
Gordon and Bill did call him a few more times than I 13 did. And one that I did not use very much, but I ie think Gordon and Bill didn't call him.
 The meeting that later took place on July 10th -A That is correct. A And I believe the meeting in question with Bolton -waiting for the Bolton meeting I understand to be 16 17 17 18 20 21 ne 28 24 25 Q Is that the meeting that -
 Zo is the chief of staff of the Presidential administration . He's 63 20 21 20 21 22 a3 24 Zo . He is also the president's chief of Staff .
 RG, Rudy Giuliani, is a 20 21 22 ao 24 25 private citizen, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Giuliani is a private citizen .
 Bill Taylor briefs that to 20 21 oe, 23 24 25 Counselor Ulrich so that Ulrich can inform Secretary Pompeo . Tairr A Yes.
 A Because Alex Danylyuk led the meeting and was talking very bureaucratically. A BecauseAlex Danyylyuk was talking really bureaucratically, he said .
 Danylyuk and Bolton had been invited to the White House without scheduling the visit . We thought it would be a good idea for President Trump to call him again .
 The President was skeptical, had a deep-rooted view of the Ukraine, according to the President .
 Andriy said he did not think this was a good idea, and I shared his view. So I sent that back to him, conveyed the conversation with him - because he had spoken with Rudy prior to that, not me -conveyed the conversation .
 Q You testified from the beginning you didn't think it was a good idea to mention Burisma or 2016 . Q You had testified that it was not good idea for 2016 .
 The target is getting Ukraine to be seen as credible in changing the country . Zelensky is the real deal.
 Rudy Giuliani made a statement when he canceled his visit to Ukraine in May of 2019 that President Zelensky is surrounded by enemies of the 73 20 21 22 23 23 24 2a United States .
 There was a point where you tweaked -A Oh, yeah. Q I guess what I'm trying to get to, though, is that there was a points where you tweak .
 Q -the draft statement and you sent it back, even though you weren't really in favor of -A Well, I wanted to do that because I was trying to communicate clearly. Q-the draft statements and you send it back .
 Burisma is an important distinction that I think I made earlier, but I want to repeat it again. And there is a important distinction about Burisma, he says .
 Saying investigating Vice President Biden or his son, that is not fine, that's not fine .
 Q And you said earlier today that that was never part of any conversation -A Correct. Q and you said that was not part of the conversation - a Correct .
 The U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine also never advocated for the investigation of -A Yes. Q And are you confident that the United States Ambassador to Ukrainian also never ever advocated for an investigation?
 Q Do you have any awareness, given your deep understanding of the area, whether -A I don't, or not . Do you know what you know about the area? Ask me .
 The Ukrainian government has been fighting corruption for decades . It's not just about fighting corruption, it's about who is my enemies and who are my friends and friends .
 Q Was Shokin regarded as a prosecutor general who was protecting certain interests rather than prosecuting them . He was not involved in policy at this time, but his reputation was 15 ore of his reputation .
 He is very anxious to see whether he will be able to stay on. So very anxious about whether he would be allowed to go to 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 ae stay on .
 A Foreign Service veteran, you've seen these -A I've seen that happen. Q But in your career as a Foreign Service vet, you have seen these-A.
 Q And sometimes doesn't happen. 20 21 eae om 24 25 and the foreign assistance, the same with the issue of the aid, the foreign aid .
 Limes says assistance gets held up for a variety of reasons at various Limes . I agree with you in saying that assistance gets hold up for various reasons .
 OMB has put a hold on budgetary issues, but there's a hold placed . OMB's budget issues came from OMB, so I immediately thought about budgetary issues .
 I tried to avoid talking to Ukrainians about it for as long as I could until it came out in Politico a month later . I was confident we were going to get it fixed internally, he said .
 "I have to verbalize this. And, basically, you know, you're just -you're - you're -you've got to verbalized this," he said .
I told them that is absolutely not the case. And you assured them that - I told them - that isabsolutely not a case . And you assure them that.
 The Ukrainian government has been accused of failing to act in Ukraine in early 2017 . The country's political crisis has been blamed for a lack of progress in the country .
 I did not want to be joining the administration full time at that point . I also had some other personal reasons that I'd rather not dive into, but I didn't want to do so .
 As a result of this firestorm, you had to resign, you've been forced to resign . The firestorm was largely the result of the firestorm in the UK .
 Ukraine had developed a very strong Ukraine policy. There were 19 20 Z1 Ps 23 24 25, according to the Ukrainian government .
Q. Q So, I mean, is it fair to say you're a little bit of a victim here of this political -A I don't characterize myself as a victim. Q. Q: Is itfair to say it's fair to be a victim? Q.
 A Generally speaking, I take a view that we need to protect our foreign interlocutors . A generally speaking, he takes a view of how to protect the conversations of our foreign Interlocuts .
 The substance of U.S.-Ukraine relations is pretty strong right now, he says . But he says he doesn't see it changing .
 The argument against this assistance being provided, the lethal defensive assistance, was that it would be provocative and could escalate the fighting with Russia . The argument was that this assistance was provocative .
 The rationale for why we were not providing lethal defensive assistance to me doesn't hold 17 18 19 20 21 22 Za 24 25 Water . That is a much stronger rationale that we should be doing it, says Tillerson .
 Decisionmaking about this really - I started in July, and I think we had the decisionmaking beginning around September and then a little bit later in the autumn .
 If you're 87 20 21 21 ee 23 24 2 being fired on with mortar or artillery, you can calibrate where that's coming from better with a counter-battery radar . That enables you to then fire back more accurately with the radar .
 A Well, without commenting on the merits of it, it is 20 21 pe, 23 24 25 absolutely the right of the President to determine who his Ambassadors are in the world .
 The recall of the Ambassador has provoked some I'd even say emotion on the part of her allies . Q The recall has provoked a number of reactions to the recall .
 A I would agree that she feels that it was improper and that she should not have been removed early . There has been an emotional response to that, and there has been a reaction to that . She feels that she felt that she was wrong to be removed early,
 A Yes, that is an allegation, and it was an allegation that made its way into media in the U.S. A I know that that -well, let me say it this way. A yes, that's an allegation. A Yes. That is an allegations, that
 President Trump would understandably be concerned if that was true if it was true . You want to have trust and confidence in your Ambassadors.
 Some of her Republican colleagues are having with the emotion connected to her recall . She says anything that besmirches your character and integrity would be upset about .
Ambassador Yovanovitch or 16 6 18 19 19 20 a1 22 23 24 24 25 Ambassador Pyatt . Both Shokin and Lutsenko said there were certain entities or individuals that should not be prosecuted .
 U.S. policy to investigate corruption in Ukraine was a matter of United States policy, and then a push to remove him for those reasons .
 The allegations have been reported in the past, but it's not true, it's been reported .
 The interagency community in Washington vets it, gives you an 97 10 1] 12 13 14 Be 16 18 18 he 20 21 Pw aa 24 2 answer .
 It 1s difficult to put together information of the right quality for a committee like this in such a short period of time. Another is that it 1s hard to put Together information of a Committee like this .
 State Department official says he's not had a chance to review text messages . "There's probably more that the State Department has that I have not had to review," he says .
 The State Department's activities are trying to block your testimony, that's what it's doing .
 It was only the 27th -27th of September is when I resigned, and then -and that is a date when I spoke with Marik String .
 I may have called him over the weekend as 20 21 22 23 23 24 24 25 well, and then October list . I may be calling him as 2021 22 23 24 25 .
 He got some facts wrong, but I thought that trying to do damage limitation was wrong . I wouldn't have used 20 21 Pe, Za 24 25 the word ""damage limitation," but I under -I kind of get what he's talking about .
 I did not want to show up in Ukraine during an election campaign, 16 17 17 18 20 eal 22 22 23 23 24 Oe . I just avoid going during election seasons.
 Ukrainians viewed Char as someone who communicated with the President and wanted to tell their story to him . I don't know any of Char, I do know from the Ukrainians .
 I don't think Mr Giuliani ever -ever -ever suggested that he's in a position te do thats. I don’t think he’s in a positions te do that.
Congressman: Rudy Giuliani seeing these as synonymous. 15 16 16 17 18 12 12 12 20 el ae 23 24 on THE CHAIRMAN .
 You don't mention a particular company. Just as a matter of prudence, you don't 20 21 22 23 24 24 25 mention a specific company .
CNN's John Sutter says he didn't know that was the context at the time of the incident . Sutter: "They 20 21 ee. They 20 21e. That didn't express that to me, and of course, I didn't understand that"
 The President's request of a foreign power that is mil dependent on the U.S. for military support is going to carry enormous weight with that foreign leader .
 The CHAIRman says he wasn't Knowledgeable about the request at all at the time . But now, he says, he's now aware of it .
 The news about a hold on security assistance did not get into Ukrainian Government circles, as indicated to me by the current foreign minister, then diplomatic adviser .
Bill Taylor says there is a linkage between those two things .
 A Well, my -well, about the nightmare, again, I said there's no linkage here. A well, my-well, and a well-witnessed the nightmare .
Several members of the Senate to OMB pushing to get that lifted . I was confident that it would. We had a letter from several senators to O MB .
 The message to Ukrainians we send with the decision on security assistance is key. Let me read that again for meaning now that I understand the message to the Ukrainians, I understand . The message is key to the Ukraine's decision to provide security assistance.
 Q Bill Taylor said it's crazy to withhold security assistance for help with a political campaign . He said he thinks it's 'crazy' to withhold help for political campaign.
 It's true that Rudy Giuliani and Andriy Yermak set up a meeting between Giuliani and his assistant .
 I reached out to 16 Rudy to see whether he could get together so that I could ask ly him whether he wanted to be connected to Yermak . I asked him if he would like to get together with him .
 Giuliani. Let me introduce Mr Yermak, let me introduce him, you know, Mr Giuliani . And it was literally, you 20 21 pa.
 President Zelensky will investigate slash get to the bottom of what happened in 2016 .
 Please 20 pa 22 23 23 23 24 24 29 remind Mr Mayor Rudy Giuliani to share the Madrid dates .
 Giuliani and Yermak meet in Madrid . Giuliani says: "Q -in Madrid. Q - in Madrid"
 Mr Giuliani brought to his attention. Q and Q talked about some of the issues he brought to the attention of Mr Giuliani .
 businessmen don't want to invest in Ukraine, even to this day, because they just fear that it's a horrible environment to be working in . They don't wants to 20 21 pw 23 24 put -expose themselves to that risk .
Serge Leshchenko, L-e-s-h-c-C-H-E-n-k-o, Sergei, S-e -r-g-e.1. And it was introduced publicly by an investigative 20 21 22 2 24 Pe journalist
 He was believed incorrectly to be close to President Zelensky and even in Ukraine . But he was never really part of the president's inner circle . He was campaigning, or speaking publicly, on behalf of the President .
When he arose kind of meteorically, it did take everybody by surprise, he says . He says he arose as an outside figure and popular candidate .
 A lot has been made of the discussion of Biden on the call. Q You Know, a lot has also been made.
 The passage we're reading this morning is on the same page, page four . It begins with a transitional phrase .
 Biden doesn't show up a ton in this Interview transcript . A Uh-huh. 20 a1 22 23 24 24 25 Q I mean, Biden doesn’t show a ton .
Bill Taylor was, you know, mentioned he 1 might resign. Q We were discussing on text message chain, I think it was exhibit 5, and Bill Taylor was .
 Nobody in any of the policy agencies would sit still for 23 suspending this. And he should know that pe ( pe) nobody in any policy agency would sitstill for 23 suspension .
 The special representative is the special representative of the U.S. House of Representatives . He says there's a lot of public role with that, and so you communicate with a lot.
 I've had meetings with U.S. citizens who have had problems in Ukraine and that wanted to tell me about them, you Know . You Know, you know, all kinds of things.
 The Russians 25 were not going to move out of eastern Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . It was 24 clear to me after the spring of 2018 that the Russians 25 weren't going to leave, he says .
 In the last round, you were asked to read a portion of the conversation between the President of the U.S. and that of Ukraine on page four .
 President of Ukraine is new, and, quite honestly, new to politics and new to elected office, as I understand, would it be appropriate . He talks very specifically about the 1] 12 13 14 20 zl 22 23 24 24 25 Attorney General .
 Attorney General says it's appropriate to say -have the conversation, based on our shared interest . "Under the agreement we have, this is my Attorney General"
 The White House visit is the first time the president has been to visit the White House . The visit is part of a White House tour .
Ukrainian special representative to Ukraine is a U.S. citizen . He says his view is that we do not want foreign countries interfering in American elections .
 "You've come 4 across in an unbelievably transparent and authentic way, and 5 I just want to thank you for that," says CNN's John Sutter . "Your testimony here today has given me such great encouragement," he says .
 The U.S. President Barack Obama has been in charge of the White House since 2009 . Obama's administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency in the past . The White House has been accused of being too secretive about its foreign policy .
 Lutsenko was not aware of that and didn't engage in that engagement. As I told you earlier, I had my own views about Lutenko and what the value would be .
 There are a few sensitive exchanges that I think would be detrimental if made public, but those are not classified information . As I said, there are a couple of sensitive exchanges.
 It is not unusual for countries to have an investigation, says Perry . It would be unusual to discuss specific investigations, he said .
 The use of the Office of the President may have been used to advance personal political interests of Mr Donald Trump rather than the national interest, says President Obama .
 I just want to level set here because I think, like you, I've seen how diplomacy works, and having seen that in action, it's possible to also identify when it deviates 9 significantly. I just wants to levelSet here, I think. I want to
 He or she will look into the situation, 18 19 19 20 21 ya Bo 24 pa specifically to the company that you mentioned in this issue . He or her will look at the situation .
 Morrison was 20 21 21 22 23 23 24 24. Za going to get dates for a visit, because we had been trying and trying and not getting anywhere. So I was very pleased that Morrison was 19 .
We inform about date of visit and our expectations and our guarantees for future visit . We inform about dates and expectations for future visits .
 The bottom quarter of the page is August 10th, 2019, at 4:56m., from Mr Yermak. Q And if you could jump down to kind of the bottom quarter, you could also jump down.
 Rudy or Gordon. That is clearly what he heard from either Rudy or from Gordon, that those were important additions . That is -I'd have to check the timeline here, that is what he hears from both Rudy and Gordon .
Rudy discussed, Rudy 2 Giuliani and Gordon Giuliani, what it is they are looking for. Because I have to check the ] timeline, because if you remember, Rudy discussed.
 A We discussed the Ukrainians' intention to make that 20 21 22 22 23 24 24 25 statement . A we discussed the Ukrainian's intention to made that 2021 22 23 23 24 25 statements .
 Andriy asked whether any request had ever been made by the U.S. to investigate election interference in 2016 . He said we will work on official request, and when I say we say we will, he said .
 A He said that if they did not mention Burisma and 2016 elections that he did not feel such a statement would have any credibility . He said there's still no commitment to finding out what happened in the past .
 Ukraine's government has been in power for more than a decade . Ukraine's current government has not been in charge of Ukraine since 2004 .
 Q Skipping down to August 19th -A. And when I say that's the clear message so far, I 22 23 23 24 Za just Literally mean that .
 There was not an official Department of Justice request from President Trump to President Zelensky .
 The Ukrainian government has asked for an official request from the Ukrainian government . There has been no official request about that .
 Rudy Giuliani is personally involved in crafting and ensuring that this public statement by the Ukrainians has the right words in them that refer back to what the President said, which includes Biden . The record doesn't really 20 21 22 23 23 24 23 support, which is that Burisma
 President Zelensky was, in your 10 1, a 24 25 mind, the best hope in 20 years to root out corruption in Ukraine . I want to take a step back, because I think 25 you testified earlier that President Zelenky was. I want
 The vast majority of diplomats in the Embassy were there soaking up the environment . But they were certainly of that point 20 21 21 22 23 23 24 phe.
We can look into whether the U.S. was trying to influence the United States in an inappropriate way, we can look at that .
 Rudy -not Rudy -Gordon Sondland, myself, Rick Perry, Bill Taylor, BillTaylor. A as I undérstood it at the timé, we were all convinced that this is someone we very much need to support in Ukraine .
 Rudy Giuliani was not convinced of that and was no 20 4 | 22 23 23 23 24 25 doubt . Giuliani continued to convey a negative assessment to the President through his own contacts with the President .
 Rudy would be conveying a more positive message to the President, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm trying to figure out what would be convincing to you, Rudy"
Q: I understand what you were trying to do and I understand you're trying to protect yourself . Q: "I understand what I'm trying toDo and I know what you are trying to try to do" Q: 'I understand you's trying to protection yourself
 A Well, that's where I'm trying to differentiate and 20 21 oe 23 24 24 25 saying, no, don’t get out there. A well, that’s where I’m trying to distinguish and 2021 oe23 24 25 .
 That's the time, so I think a S-minute bathroom break, if that works for you. That's what I think is the time.
 The Bidens have not been asked to investigate the Bidens . I think it is to find out what facts there are, and if they're asking them to investigate .
After that conversation, he never brought up Biden or Bidens with me again . After that conversation he never talked to him again . He never talked again .
 I drew from the beginning a very clear distinction. So I know that as we look in hindsight, we can see what he's saying and thinking, but I draw from the start of the day .
 His father is a prominent U.S. official, but does he get the 20 Al 22 a 24 25 Opportunity to draw this type of -A Right? "A Right"
 Famous names 12 i 14 20 21 pe 23 24 24 25 get paid just for their name .
 A text message on September 22nd, 2019 is from Mr Giuliani to you . It's a text message that says Zo 24 22 attention just to the bottom of the page .
 Rudy Giuliani went very public on television, talking about connecting him with Andriy Yermak . He was asserting that he was doing these conversations and having these meetings at the request of the State Department and reporting back, he says .
 He tried to call twice on the 20th of September, probably from the green room . He called twice on September 20th .
 State Department counselor Ulrich Brechbuhl spoke to CNN's John Sutter on Monday . He said he spoke to him the next day .
Rudy's text messages are a long stream of text messages from Rudy . He sent a number of texts Sunday morning .
 He's forwarding old messages that I had sent to him to demonstrate to him that he has these text messages, which he's got them on television . And then he's forwarding them to demonstrate he has them on TV .
 Yermak has talked about this to 10 1] 12 16 17 17 18 20 21 22 23 24 press, so it's now public information . Yermk has talked to 101] 12 17 18 18 20 20 21 21 22 22 23 23 24 Press .
 He said he had spoken with Rudy himself, gotten a call or called him . Then he said that he'd spoken with himself, then he said he'd called Rudy himself .
 There was no briefing that day, or if it was, this was not included in the briefing . It was 20 21 21 22 23 23 24 2 not .
 Lutsenko was going to go to Ukraine to pursue allegations that he had made . He was intending to pursue these allegations, and he was to go investigate these things .
 Both -Parnas basically was very knowledgeable about people in Ukraine and events, he says . Both - Parnas were very knowledgeable. And, to his surprise, they agreed with that .
 The Tifst entry for May 26, 2019, is on page 26 . On page 26, I'd like to direct your attention to the TIFst entry .
 I had the meeting in the Oval Office with the 19 20 20 altd. 23 24 23 President .
 I had been fighting for this every day and we had, I think, a very strong policy, but he was just worried it was going to get undermined at some point . He was worried it would get undermined by some point, he said .
 Z3 A did strike me as problematic, and therefore, I acted immediately to argue that this has to be reversed and 25 we have to keep the assistance going . I 24 acted immediately.
 OMB announced in interagency meeting that there was a hold -Q Okay. It was OMB that announced in the inter agency meeting that it was holding a hold .
 He did decide to take the job, after meeting with Secretary Pompeo and Ulrich Brechbuhl and Bill and myself .
Bill Taylor's text message exchange is 5/26719 at 11°23 . “Let's see how 1t looks on Tuesday,’ he says .
 Q You were discussing whether Bill Taylor -A Yes, Q -should take the job. Q You are discussing whether he should take a job .
 It's a much broader range of things that you can do from there, rather than being 20 zl 22 ad 24 Pes on the ground in Ukraine . It's not just a 20-zl 22 Ad 24 Pes, but it's a lot of things you can
 John Bolton had a phone call briefing with John Bolton before his trip to Ukraine . He was going to be visiting there .
 Kolomoisky had a bank called Privat Bank . The bank made a number of bad loans, $5 billion worth, to -it disappeared and -basically to him and his other leaders of the bank .
 IMF provides budgetary support to Ukraine . IMF provides budget support for Ukraine . The IMF provides funding for Ukraine.
 Zelensky visited some of his businesses and gave media 13 Tnhterviews . He played a very Visible public role .
 Ukrainians are trying to communicate a message back to Bolton to convey that they are actually a different crowd, not from 2016, not corrupt, so that positive message gets back to the President .
 In terms of advice, I suggested that he called Secretary of Defense Esper, that he's a brand-new defense minister . He's a new defense minister, he said .
President Obama could meet with members of Congress when Congress is in session, he says . He also suggested that he plan an early visit to Washington.
 Senator Shaheen, Senator Durbin, Senator Blumenthal, Senator Portman, and Senator Johnson. It was addressed to the Director of OMB, Mick Mulvaney, and copied to Secretary Pompeo and Secretary Esper .
 Ukrainians were still 20 21 22 23 23 24 Za pushing for a White House meeting . Q You were still still, and the Ukrainians were 20 21 21 22 24 24 Za were still 19 .
 The President was not going to be convinced that it meant 10 1] 12 20 21 22 23 23 24 anything, says Rudy .
 Ukrainians told them they shouldn't do it, and in fact told them just drop it, wait till you have your own prosecutor general in place . I agreed with the Ukrainians they shouldn’t do it.
 There's been no talk of the issue with anybody anymore, but I'm not actively discussing that with anybody now .
 A around -once the government -so the parliament had to be seated, which took place on September 1st .
 I was not as negative about getting a White House visit scheduled as Prystaiko believed I should have been. So I wasn't as negative. I didn't think it was a good idea to visit the White House. I'm not as bad about getting the visit scheduled.
 President Zelensky thought I maybe sugarcoated it when I should have been more negative in my way of presenting it with President Zelenky . And he thought I might sugarcoate it when he should have be more negative.
 Q -""and whether he will really pursue reforms he 20 21 21 22 23 23 24 24 29 says . Q - ""and whether to really pursue Reforms he 2021 22 23 24 29 say .
Vice President Pence met with Vice 14 President Pence in Warsaw on September 14 .
From July 18th up until September 1st, you became aware of an effort by Rudy 20 21 al 23 24 23 Giuliani, at a minimum, to influence Ukrainian to open two particular investigations .
 T& Tnere. It's a little different than saying Burisma and 2016 and 2016, but the call record T&Tnere is a call record .
 President Zelensky is trying to convince President Trump he is serious about fighting corruption . He's going to prevent things from happening in the future .
 Ukraine has had enormous issues of pressing Ukraine to fight corruption under previous governments . Ukraine has set up a special prosecutor's office for corruption cases, special investigatory office of corruption .
 There was no official readout from the White House of LHS €all .
 Andriy Yermak read out the text message from the White House . He said, "Heard from White House. Q"
 This is looking backward at whether there was any election interference . So this is looking forward to whether there were any election interfered .
 The connection between Andriy Yermak and Rudy Giuliani is the 22nd of July . The connection is a connection, says Giuliani .
 Do you know whether Rudy Giuliani had any role in Rudy Giuliani? I don't know whether he did. Do you Know whether Giuliani had a role in or not? I do not .
 A That*s COrrecr, Q. Q. So you don't really have firsthand knowledge as to what messages were relayed to the Ukrainians .
 I see a few things that infer corruption, but I do not see the word “corruption’s“corruption. I see some things that inference corruption,’ but I don’t see it.
 A -corruption in Russia, in the same conversation, like they're all terrible, is all terrible. A - corruption in Russia is a terrible thing, like it's all terrible .
 "We're talking about corruption, and I think we're talking really, you know, business climate there," he says . But we're also talking about business climate, he says. A But we are talking about Corruption, he adds .
 I had pushed back on that and separated it, and said, one thing about corruption in Ukraine, and that . I felt I had already put up that marker, and so every time that came up after that, I felt he had already done that .
 U.S. officials and 3 Ukrainians have been in talks over the past few months . "I would like to go through and talk about some 2 of the other conversations," says L Q .
 The White House had put the inauguration for President Zelensky on Vice President Pence's calendar . At some point, President Trump instructed Pence not to attend .
 A That refers -I don't use that phrase either because I think of three other people as the three amigos . I don't say that phrase. A That referring is a phrase that refers to three people .
Gordon Sondland usually uses that, and he was referring to himself and to Rick Perry and to me . But that refers to himself, he was referred to himself.
 A Senator Ron Johnson was there as well and our Charge d'affaires at the time Joe Pennington .
 "I appreciate your willingness to come in on your 20 21 22 23 23 24 24 25 own and testify before the committee here. But from what I understand, you're answering the questions, sticking to the facts," he says .
 Q Appreciate you sticking to the facts that you have firsthand knowledge about . Q Appreciation: You sticking to your knowledge of the facts .
 Vice President Pence didn't lead the delegation, according to reports .
 The President says some very bad people. I'm not certain the word "corruption" appears .
President Obama has been with the President and has had Uh-huh about Ukraine . President Obama has also been with President Obama .
 The President's OPT 1ce of Ukraine, yes, yes. Exhibit 12 was the statement from the President'sOP 1ce .
 You had a readout from your Ukrainian folks - that you have a rather sophisticated relationship with - a Q Yes .
 President Zelensky was elected in May of 2019, and we had meeting in September of 2019 . President Zelenky waselected in May 2019 .
 Ambassador to Ukraine was forced to address officials in Ukrainian Government in normal course of business . In the last series there was a lot of time spent.
 It was implied that surely they knew because of Mr Giuliani's statements, things in the press, that there could only be one thing, right. And it was implied they knew .
 Ukraine officials from Ukraine had in you personally. Now, previously in another round, you had talked to me about the trust that they had in him .
 A ~~ ~~ {t's @ terrible place, sll corrupt, terraole people, just dumping on Ukraine. A~~  ~~ ’s  ‘’t’m a terrible place’. A 
 Each of us took turns from this delegation giving our point of view . The delegation was that this 15 a new crowd, it's a new President, he is committed to doing the right things .
 He knows all of these things, and they've got some bad people around him . He's got a lot of bad people in his life, but he's not always happy with them .
 The President was sitting at his desk, the delegation facing him, and I could not see what was happening behind. A Yeah, the President sat at his Desk, and he could not hear what was going behind .
 Ukrainians visit to Washington, D.C., who they met with, the sequence of meetings that you participated in, just give us the lay of the land .
 Poroshenko has his own party, Tymoshenko has her own party and Slava Vakarchuk has a new party . The Voice is a representative of the United Opposition Block, which tends to be more Russian leaning .
 On the 26th I had -I guess that's when I had the breakfast with the humanitarian organizations .
 The principle topic of the meeting with Zelensky was what was going on in Stanitsa Luhanska . The Ukrainians now saw the next steps of how to improve the ceasefire .
 The Secretary for Lita Gault A would meet with the Secretary periodically to update him on what he was doing and things with Ukraine .
 The Secretary of State was up to speed on Ukraine, she says .
 President Zelensky called the Vice President to say security assistance is moving . He said security assistance was moving, and we are moving ahead with a White House visit .
 The Ukrainians want to see the transcript of the call first . The Ukrainian government wants to see it first .
 If it's going to be released, at least do the courtesy of sharing it and talking about it first so it can be seen to be something that they agreed or Father Thal 7USt Letting 1t go .
 Secretary Pompeo spoke with 19 20 20 21 21 22 23 23 24 ae President Zelensky and informed him that we felt we had no choice but to release the transcript .
 The whistleblower report wasn't released yet - but from the knowledge of the whistleblower report, we've got to release this phone call transcript . It was just the public buildup of, you know, expectation from the whistleblowers report or from the know of the report .
 A Well, I'm not -having read the transcript, it's a lot of information that I wasn't aware of, he says . A well, he adds, "I'm not-having read it"
 They felt that they were being a little bit - that their interests were being disregarded or subordinated to U.S. domestic political activity .
 Andriy Yermak was raising a concern about the release of the transcript . The transcript was released on Tuesday .
 The night before the meeting, Andriy had a conversation about the substance and followup of the meeting . The conversation was about what some of the substance could be, how do we build on this, he says .
 A No, because by that point it had been lifted, and so it was all moving, he says . "There was a satisfaction that that's behind us," he adds .
 The letter from the Senators, the one that I shared with the defense minister in a text message, had an impact on the White House, he says .
 A No, I don't know why it was put in place and I don’t know why. It's not clear why it’s been lifted, but I’m not sure .
 The President's general attitude was Lifted overall, he says . "Everybody who knows Ukraine and knows the policy thinks this is a good idea," he adds .
 A To my Knowledge -well, I shouldn't answer it that way, because I'm now out of the information loop, so I don't know whether one has been scheduled .
 Danylyuk is the head of the National Security Defense Council, and Yermak is going to Ukraine . The two men are both heading for Ukraine .
 I know they got in contact or both of them said they wanted to meet, but then I don't know what the followup was . I'm not sure if they want to meet or if they did, but they said they did .
 Ambassador Volker: First 6 months of President Zelensky's Presidency were very important . He says first 6 months were important .
 defectors from Kolomoisky's party are 19 20 Zl 22 23 23 24 25 . They are either bought off by corruption or supporting Kolomisky or unwilling to stick with the legislation .
 He's got a limited window in which to seize the reins of power, get real legislation passed, and push through a fundamental reform of all the different systems in the country and to fight corruption .
 A It is seen by others in Ukraine as validating and will convince them to stick with him if he has U.S. support . It is also seen by some in Ukraine.
 A It enhances his stature, that he is seen at the highest level, he is accepted, he says . A It adds to his stature. A It is a sign that he has been accepted by others .
 A I was referring to that and anything else that might have involved corrupt activity from the company . The company has been accused of corrupt activity .
 Vice President Biden was acting completely on his recommendation to get rid of Prosecutor General Shokin . Biden testified earlier that there's no doubt in his mind that he was acting entirely on the up and up .
 He was executing U.S. policy at the time and what was widely understood internationally to be the right policy, Pent. He was executed United States policy.
 There is actually no evidence that Vice President Biden's conduct was improper, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine should apply its own laws, no political interference in investigation, says Corrects A What Rudy . He says he doesn't actually care whether the Ukrainian Government investigates a Ukrainian company for corruption .
 There was never an investigation of that. To your knowledge, 20 ZI 22 oo 24 25 there was never a investigation .
 A little sentence means something other than the context of the 8 hours that we've had . They're going to 10 1] 12 14 15 16 17 17 18 19 20 21 ze ed 24 take, you know .
Despite everything that has led to this testimony today, as impossible as it may be to do, we've had a 20 21 21 22 23 23 24 25 lifting of this hold on security assistance .
 The Biden phone call was a reference to President Trump's call with Zelensky, CNN's John Sutter says .
President Barack Obama's administration has been criticized for not taking credit for his administration . President Barack Obama has been in office for 16 years . President Obama's White House has been under fire for his handling of the White House .
 It's just trying to give them as 10 1] 12 ios, 20 21 ows, 23 23 much background as possible . So just try to give it 10 1.12 ios .
 The problem, as I said, was that he was amplifying a negative narrative about Ukraine that was impeding our ability to advance the bilateral relationship the way we wanted . The problem was he was Amplifying 20 21 De 23 23 24 24 25 a negative story about Ukraine .
 A Well, referring to the President of Ukraine to work together with the Attorney General and to look into this, you can see, as it has now happened, this becomes explosive in our domestic politics .
 Some of this information is very sensitive from a diplomatic standpoint, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think you can also understand that some of this info is verysensitive"
 The State Department has concerns about the privileges and the classification level of these materials . It has stated that it would need to conduct a legal and classification review prior to the release of any of the materials publicly .
 Ambassador Volker has an opportunity to review the transcript before its release . I understand that the deposition rules of the committee require ambassador Volker to have an opportunity.