 Amnesty International report condemned Ukrainian combatants for torture, electric shock treatment, and mock executions . The report was released on 20 May 2015 .
Ukrainian authorities say abuse goes far beyond the battlefield . But as anyone who lives in Ukraine will tell you, the abuse is far beyond battlefield .
 No-one doubts that prisoners on both sides of the conflict have been subject to appalling treatment . But in reality this is just one facet of a much wider problems, says CNN .
 The tumult of the past 18 months has caused people to take leave of their senses and abandon the veneer of civilisation .
 This article will, we hope, provide a snapshot of what has been going on, and demonstrate that all corners of society have been caught up in the carnage of conflict . We hope this article will show that all parts of society are caught up.
 Most of the population of Donbass left their homes a long time ago and moved to other cities of Ukraine and Russia in search of a better, more peaceful life .
 The temporarily occupied territories of Eastern Ukraine are still home to thousands of people . But, nevertheless, they are home to hundreds of people.
 These people are forced to live in half-destroyed houses with shells inside . Many of them are living in houses with the shells inside, many of them living with them .
 These people are often hiding, or even living in the cellars, trying to protect themselves and their families . These people often hide in cellars or even in the cells .
 The locals have a very weak supply of food, having been cut off from the outside world . The locals are suffering from a lack of food.
 Most of the products that are delivered to the occupied territories are whipped away by the rebels for their own needs . The ordinary population gets very little.
 The factories and plants are closed, the mines also do not work because of the high risks of traumata, and the confiscation by the rebels of the materials produced .
 Thousands of people couldn't even imagine that the streets of their own cities would ever be filled by tanks and armed forces .
 The militants often specifically place their firing positions within or near the residential buildings . They hope Ukrainian military will not shoot at the area .
 The first refugees appeared when Russia annexed the Crimea from Ukraine . The Crimea was annexed by Russia from Ukraine.
Local population understood that in such geopolitical conditions it would be too difficult to achieve their goal of a normal life .
 Many Ukrainians offered their own homes for temporary or permanent residence of refugees . At the same time, many Ukrainians offered themselves homes for refugees .
 There are about one million displaced people in Ukraine . Not all of them have found a permanent home. Now in Ukraine there are about 1 million people .
 Some got lucky and settled in houses like the one Bronislawa offers, but the rest were less fortunate . The rest of the world was less fortunate.
 People are forced to look for a new job in a completely new city, to place their children in schools and kindergartens . At the same time they find places to live and eat .
 The refugees received some money from the local authorities, regardless of which region they moved to . The money is usually not enough to live normally .
 People simply survive as best they can, hoping for the state, or the volunteers, or their relatives to help .
 In fact about 10,000 of the approximately 300,000 Crimean Tatars moved to the mainland . About 10,00 of the roughly 300,00 Crimean Tatar population moved to mainland .
 The pressure on Crimean Tatars is unabating, says human rights activists . The pressure is systemic in character, they say .
 It's important to mention that not only activists face pressure, but also ordinary people who take part in political life . It's also important to include ordinary people.
 The Russian government is actively fighting against the leaders of the Mejlis a representative body of the Tatar community in Ukraine .
 Since the beginning of the antiterrorist operation in eastern Ukraine, the authorities began to actively resort to voluntary groups who wanted to fight against the rebels .
 New human resources are required to maintain the quantitative and qualitative composition of the defence . However, the operation has been delayed, lots of people have been killed .
 As a result, 100,000 people aged 25 to 60-years-old must be mobilised during 2015 . The mobilisation will take place in 2015 .
 Most of the male population of Ukraine, which still does not take part in hostilities, are in constant fear of being mobilised . Because of this, most of the men in Ukraine are in fear of mobilising .
 Ukrainians know that most of the army demand is provided by volunteers . The state actually turns a blind eye to the problems of yesterday's soldiers and their families .
 As a result, many men try to "shirk" from the mobilization call, using both legal and illegal methods .
 The question remains open for lots of Ukrainians, yet the answer for the authorities is, sadly, a clear one .
 It reflects not only the state tax shortfall, but also a violation of several human rights . The state's tax shortfall is also a breach of human rights, according to the report .
 The shadow economy is allowing thousands of employers to hire employees illegally . There is no official documentation or human resources procedures for hiring employees .
 For the ordinary citizen it can have its advantages, such as higher levels of salary or a free schedule .
 There can also be significant shortcomings for those on ""black"" wages. Yet there can also been significant shortcomings.
Employees who are ill or have to take maternity leave are routinely denied the pay they deserve . Employees who are sick or have taken maternity leave can be denied pay.
 Morever, some employees are denied their salaries for months, even when they have clocked-in every day .
 The employee has no legal recourse, as they chose the work by themselves . The employee is not entitled to legal recourse .
 Staff can be asked to work any hours the manager demands, lumped with aeons of overtime for no additional pay . Staff can work any time the manager wants, but can't be asked for extra pay .
 Almost half the population are now toiling in this squalid fashion, jeopardising their health and safety for the chance to earn a living .
 The behaviour of police has long tormented the ordinary people . But those who are supposed to uphold the law continue to behave with impunity .
 The scale of the problem was clearly seen during the Euromaidan protest in November 2013, at the very start of the crisis . The problem was seen in the wake of the protest.
 The protests against Yanukovych resulted in ritual beatings, with police cornering the young protesters and battering them with truncheons .
 The protesters tried to run away, but that only increased the anger of the police . The protesters were trying to run.
 People began to resist, to rebel, but only received further blows with batons, water cannons, and even sniper shots to the head . People started to resist. They began to fight back, but received more blows .
 The new government, which came to power a few months later, promised to punish the guilty ones . It immediately dismissed the chief policeman of the country from his post .
 No policemen have yet been punished, but already a year has passed, and none have been punished .
 Ukrainians tend to think that these guys are simply made the scapegoats . Only two ordinary police officers, who were recorded by camera, were punished .
 If we do not punish those who committed atrocities in the Maidan, these atrocities will continue to exist throughout the territory of Ukraine, as they are now .
After I almost got a fractured skull in the city centre, such actions are not surprising for me . After I nearly got a fracture, I was not surprised by the actions .
 The cases are still ""on investigation"" as the months tick by . I support the peaceful resolution of all conflicts, so I think that the perpetrators should be severely punished by an imprisonment . But the cases are yet to be investigated .
 Police violence is set to rumble on and inflict further torment on Ukraine's long-suffering population . Like all of Ukraine's myriad of rights abuses, police violence will continue to inflict more torment on the population .