 This week Ukraine marks 25 years of independence following the dissolution of the Soviet Union . CNN was only too willing to lend an audacious rewriting of history to sanitize current conflict in Ukraine .
 Viewers told that the separatists launched their attacks against Ukrainian Armed Forces two years ago in August 2014 . Viewers were told that they launched the attacks against the Ukrainian armed forces two years earlier .
 CNN reporter also informed viewers that the Russian army was amassing troops on its side of the border with Ukraine .
 This absurd reduction of history provides a much-needed makeover for the illegal Kiev regime that seized power in February 2014 . The regime seized power from the government in February 2013 .
 It also sanitizes the involvement of Washington and the EU in fomenting the coup against Ukraine’s then elected government .
 The U.S. media distortion serves to embolden the Kiev regime to continue its criminal aggression against the people of eastern Ukraine . The Kiev regime also reportedly conduct acts of terrorism against Crimea .
In other words, this is a case study in how ostensibly independent Western media dutifully perform a propaganda function and are complicit in war crimes .
 The gross caricature of Russia as a villain with regard to Ukraine also augments the warmongering narrative of Moscow allegedly posing a threat to European security .
 Vice President Joe Biden traveled through the NATO-member Baltic states this week . Biden promised them that American forces would leap to their defense if they were attacked by Russia .
 Biden's inflammatory, defamatory rhetoric is fuel for the anti-Russian Baltic regimes to escalate their unhinged accusations of hostility from Russia .
Major Western news channels such as CNN engage in outrageous falsification of past and present events . This wholly deranged dynamic is largely permitted because major news channels like CNN are allowed to do this .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has vowed that the Kiev regime would one day retake Crimea . Ukrainian President Poroshenko is marking 25 years of independence .
 Ukraine declared independence a quarter of a century ago, along with several other former Soviet Republics . The Western public has not forgiven Ukraine for declaring independence .
 U.S. planners like Zbigniew Brzezinski saw Ukraine as a strategic spearhead to destabilize Russia .
 It was immediately hostile and expansionist with regard to Ukraine’s historic ties with Russia . It was also hostile and Expansionist with regards to Ukraine's historic ties to Russia .
 The U.S. State Department funneled $5 billion into Ukraine for the purpose of undermining fledgling governments there . CNN did not mention either that the State Dept. funneled the money into Ukraine .
 State Department official Victoria Nuland bragged about the State Department's clandestine subversion . The official boasted of the state Department's secret operation .
 The culmination of Washington’s ‘pro-democracy’ operations was the violent overthrow of elected President Victor Yanukovych in February 2014, involving a mass sniper-shooting of police and protesters . Western media never checked facts or followed up on later disclosure of a false flag atrocity
 The U.S. State Department, CIA and EU governments pulled off the coup with the instrumental deployment of fascist Ukrainian paramilitaries .
 Crimea voted overwhelmingly to join with their historic Russian motherland rather than being subjected to the caprice of Nazi-adulating fascists . The Crimea vote was their moral and legal prerogative .
 Crimea did so promptly in a referendum within weeks of the illegal seizure of power in Kiev . But Western governments and media invert reality by accusing Russia of 'seizing' Crimea .
 A similar revolt occurred in eastern Ukraine among the mainly ethnic Russian population there . A similar uprising occurred in east Ukraine in the past .
 West-Ukrainian cabal extol their ancestors’ collaboration in Nazi extermination of millions of compatriots during the Second World War . They were simply unwilling to be ruled over by an illegally constituted west-Ukraineian cabal who extol them .
 CNN's grotesque reduction of history this week is told that separatists from east Ukraine launched a war against Kiev-controlled forces .
 CIA director John Brennan visited the new Kiev regime weeks before it launched the so-called 'Anti-Terror Operation' in eastern Ukraine in August 2014 .
 Two years later, the Western-backed Kiev ATO proceeds unabated, albeit on a lower-intensity scale . Two years after the ATO was established, it has resumed its operations .
 Some 10,000 people have been killed and up to one million refugees displaced, many of them fleeing across the border into Russia . Many of the refugees are from Russia .
 Kiev forces have not withdrawn heavy weaponry from the contact lines with separatist-declared Donetsk and Lugansk Peoples’ Republics . The Minsk ceasefire was proclaimed in February 2015 .
Towns and villages within these areas continue to be shelled by the UAF and its associated neo-Nazi militias .
 Kiev regime claims that the separatists are in breach of ceasefire .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe sits ineffectually on its hands and mealy-mouths claim that both sides are violating the ceasefire .
 civilian homes are being bombarded by Kiev’s forces in acts of criminal aggression . The fact is that civilian houses are being bombed by Kiev.
 If separatists fire back at the UAF it is with the reasonable aim to push back what are offensive forces targeting civilians .
 Kiev regime has not moved one iota towards affording the people of Donbass any autonomy . The Kiev regime is obligated to do under the terms of Minsk .
 This is the same regime that is covertly engaging in 'special operations' to sabotage civilian infrastructure in eastern Ukraine . The regime reportedly did again earlier this month on the Crimean Peninsula on the Crimea Peninsula .
 Russia’s President Putin is reportedly prepared to meet with German and French leaders, Angela Merkel and Francois Hollande, on the sidelines of the G20 summit .
 Putin has indicated that Kiev’s Poroshenko is no longer welcome to the discussions owing to his regime's evident disinterest in finding a political solution to end the conflict in Ukraine .
 Merkel and Hollande need to come to an unequivocal and realistic determination about the source of instability in Ukraine . The regime that they indulged to install in the first place.
 The EU's ludicrous sanctions against Russia over trumped-up claims only compounds the problem and panders to the Kiev regime’s reckless belligerence .
 The Europeans need to form an independent and accurate assessment on Ukraine that repudiates the historically falsified nonsense peddled by Washington .
 The lionizing of the Kiev regime as exemplified by CNN this week is not just a travesty of history that offends common intelligence, says CNN .
 Kiev regime to escalate its rogue conduct. It is an incendiary incentive to the Kiev regime. The Kiev regime has been accused of a series of abuses .
 Washington is pushing for an all-out war with Russia. And it also plays into the wider nefarious narrative Washington has been pushing for it .