 Three years ago, ‘little green men’ appeared in Crimea, a prelude to Russia's illegal annexation of Crimea on 18 March 2014, and its so-called hybrid war in the Donbas .
 ISIL/Daesh, refugee crises, the disunity of Europe, and the changing of the guard in the U.S.
 During the same period, scepticism has deepened about the ability of Ukraine to reform itself . The Ukraine government has been criticised for its lack of transparency .
 Ukrainian and Western interests are in place to secure an ultimate outcome to the conflict . Ukraine and the U.S. have been involved in the conflict for more than three years .
 Such an outcome will elude us if we diminish the issues at stake, says the U.S. If we diminish Ukraine's issues, we will fail to grasp the constraints on Russian policy and action, he says .
 When Russia intervened by force in Ukraine, it repudiated the principles and accords that ended the Cold War .
 Russia extolled the Yalta system and spheres of influence in Europe . The Helsinki-based system recognised the equality, independence and territorial integrity of all member states .
 President Vladimir Putin also called for the restoration of 'historic Russia' and its borders .
 Accommodation to Moscow's agenda would not only be seen as betrayal in Ukraine .
 Ukraine's Revolution of Dignity of 2013-14 has not led to systemic modernisation or in-depth reform of the Ukrainian state . But the war has rallied the country.
 The majority of Ukrainians have not treated the war as a referendum on their political leadership, but as an attack on their homeland . The majority have not considered the war a referendum.
 Were Ukraine the 'basket case' widely portrayed, it would have collapsed in spring 2014, it could have collapsed .
 Russia’s ‘Novorossya’ project is now obsolete by July . By July, a mainly volunteer force regained control of 23 out of 36 districts seized by Russian-backed insurgents .
 Putin has done more than any leader, Russian or Ukrainian, to strengthen Ukrainian national identity . Putin has also done more to strengthen Ukraine's national identity.
 Two major Russian offensives have not broken the spirit of the country or its fighting forces . Russia is notably more capable today than in 2014, according to the Russian military .
 Some 1. million refugees are being absorbed and integrated, largely by local and civic organisations . Some 1 million refugees have been absorbed andintegated by local organisations .
Western cities of Vinnytsia and Uzhhorod are breaking down regional barriers and knitting the country together . Their resettlement in places as far away from Donetsk as the western cities of Vinnytia and Uzhhorods is breaking down barriers .
 Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics comprise only four percent of Ukraine's territory . They are in a ruinous state and are in the so-called Donetsk region .
 'federalisation' means absolute autonomy as well as a veto over Ukraine's foreign policy . As employed by Russia and the “leaders’ of the separatist republics, “Federalisation’ meansabsolute autonomy .
 No existing federation observes such principles, least of all Russian Federation . Even public talk about such matters is punishable by a five-year prison term .
 The republics lose their utility to Russia. If that aim is not achievable, they will lose their power to Russia .
 Russia is also somewhat constrained militarily. Contrary to conventional wisdom, Russia is not as much as it is thought .
 Russia's battle groups intervened in the Donbas with devastating effect . On two occasions, Russia's fight groups intervened.
 As Ukraine's military capability improves, Russia's options narrow. But as Ukraine's capabilities improve, Russia has limited options .
 Its battle groups are not occupation forces, despite its maintenance of regular forces in the Donbas . The Donbas still direct most military actions of the militants .
 Russia abandoned its chosen path of plausible deniability of its military presence in the Donbas . The risks and burdens of seizing and holding large parts of the east would be enormous .
 Russia is already burdened by the costs of Crimea’s annexation, its military involvement in Syria and its ambitious, long-term programme of defence modernisation .
 The establishment of a land bridge to Crimea is highly problematic . Even the establishment of the land bridge in Crimea is problematic .
 Ukraine’s gains are far from firm and they can be reversed, either by military action or from within .
 It is widely recognised that profound internal transformation is prerequisite to Ukraine becoming ‘a full member of the European family of civilised nations’1.1.
 Ukraine is fighting a war with an aggressive nuclear power, and it is doing so with constrained and mismanaged resources . Ukraine is trying to protect its nuclear power from a nuclear war .
 Ukraine’s vibrant civil society will likely not be prepared to continue to risk livelihood and life while tolerating the profligacy of those who block progress and subordinate the national interest to their own .
 What it has is a hyper-bureaucratised labyrinth that allows real power to be exercised in the shadows. What it is is ahyper-b Bureaucratising labyrinth that lets real power be exercised.
 President Poroshenko has upheld the fundamentals of political democracy in Ukraine . But he has not promoted a deep reform of the system of power or taken meaningful measures against oligarchic interests .
 In this free but opaque environment, Russia continues to work intensively to destabilise the country via hybrid methods . In thisFree but opaque world, Russia is working intensively.
 The way to counter the first anxiety is to transform today’s fragile balance of forces into an effective deterrent .
 Command-and-control is hyper-centralised, forces are stovepiped and cohesion inadequate . Command- and-control was hyper- centralised, and forces were stovepipes .
 The former has proved its worth against Russian commanded proxy forces . The ex-Russian army has proved it's worth against the Russian forces .
 Ukraine requires armed forces capable of waging high-intensity, combined arms warfare on a highly fluid battlefield . But Ukraine needs armed forces to be able to wage high- intensity, combined weapons warfare .
 The defence system has suffered years of financial and organisational neglect . They are unlikely to emerge without systemic transformation of a defence system that has been neglected .
 This enterprise requires demonstrative political will, tenacity, capable leadership and the promotion of talent . This enterprise needs demonstrativePolitical will, 10acity, and tenacity .
 The second anxiety will not be addressed until the West adopts a more robust approach to the two Minsk accords . The West is expected to adopt more robust approaches to the accords.
 Both were the products of Russian military coercion rather than equable agreement . Both were products of Russia's military coercion instead of equable agreements .
 The Implementation Package contains provisions that are abstruse, ambiguous and weighted towards Russian and separatist interests .
 Ukraine has been given a modicum of stability and a baseline of unity in the West . This would be insufficient reason to renounce the accords, which have afforded Ukraine amodicum of instability .
 Minsk's commitment to Minsk implementation should not be put in question. So, the commitment to the Minsk agreement is not in question . Minsk has been criticized for its lack of transparency in recent years .
 There is no reason to allow Russia to impose its own interpretation of what the accords grant to the republics .
 Minsk-II calls for a process of accord <soglasovanie> on local elections and ‘special status’ It does not require Kyiv to accept the republics’ diktat .
 Ukraine does not violate them by standing firm on these points or any demand beyond the Minsk provisions . Ukraine is not violating the terms of the agreement with theinsk agreement .
 Crimea should not be excluded from the broader discussion on conflict settlement. Crimea should also be included in the wider discussion on the conflict settlement . Crimea should be included from the larger discussion on Crimea .
Until Russia begins talks with Ukraine to settle the moral and legal status of the peninsula based on a mutual accord, sanctions must stay.
 Russia should not be granted legitimacy in Ukraine or elsewhere, while it remains in blatant breach of international law . Russia is not granted legitimacy by Ukraine or other countries, it is not a country that should be given legitimacy .
 This point of principle applies not just to Ukraine, but to the broader and long-term stability of Europe and other regions .
 Two misperceptions have dogged the Russia-Ukraine conflict from the start . The Russian-Ukrainian conflict has been raging since the start of the year .
 Russia’s military instrument is dangerous and credible, but its utility is finite and, with the right steps on the part of Ukraine and the West, it may diminish . With the right Steps on the parts of Ukraine, it could diminish .
 Moscow still appears to believe that with enough military and political pressure, Ukraine will fall apart . Moscow still seems to believe with enough political pressure.
 James Sherr is an Associate Fellow of the Russia and Eurasia Programme at Chatham House . He is an associate Fellow of The Russia and Europe Programme at the London centre .