 explosion has hit the United States Embassy in Ukraine’s capital Kiev . Ukrainian police have classified the incident as a terrorist attack .
 Crime scene investigators inspect the scene of explosion in the grounds of the United States Embassy in Kiev, Ukraine .
 Ukraine is presently fighting an armed pro-Russian insurgency in the Donbass region in the eastern part of the country . Ukraine is currently fighting an anti-Russian insurgents in the region .
 In the winter of 2013-2014, the Euromaidan Revolution in Kiev ousted the country’s pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych . Ukraine promised to bring Ukraine closer to the West, including through NATO membership .
 Russia occupied Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula in February-March 2014 . In response, Russia occupied and then annexed Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula .
 A pro-Russian insurgency began in the Donbass region in Eastern Ukraine and has been raging ever since . Shortly after Russia’s seizure of Crimea, a pro-Russia insurgency began .
 The war in Ukraine has claimed more than 10,000 lives, and displaced millions of people . The war has also claimed millions of lives .
 The US, the EU, and other Western nations have imposed sanctions on Russia over both the annexation of Crimea and the insurgency in Ukraine’s Donbass . The West deems to be instigated and supported by Moscow .
 Ukraine’s leadership led by President Petro Poroshenko has adopted a course of integration with the West . But it continues to face serious challenges on the road to reform .
 Ukraine has recently achieved visa-free travel for its citizens to the European Union and Schengen Area countries . The EU – Ukraine Free Trade and Association agreement has finally fully entered into force .
 An explosion occurred inside the enclosed territory of the U.S. Embassy in Kiev .
 The report about the explosion was received by the Kiev police at 0:05 am on Thursday, June 8 . The explosion was reported to the police by the police .
 Ukrainian investigators found that an unknown perpetrator threw an “unidentified’ explosive device on the territory of the diplomatic missions . The unknown perpetrator was found to have thrown the explosive device .
 Nobody was hurt in the ensuing explosion inside the U.S. Embassy in Kiev’s Shevchenkovsky District .
 Criminal proceedings have been initiated under Art. of the Criminal Code of Ukraine, the Ukrainian police said .
 No information has been released about the perpetrator and their motivation to target the U.S. diplomatic mission .
 So far, no individual or terrorist group has taken the responsibility of the attack .