 Another report has come out about corruption in Vladimir Putin's inner circle . The report has been published in Russia .
 The corruption of this regime has been well documented -in Russia and in the West and in ways big and small -for years . The corruption is well documented in Russia.
Allegations that would bring down any Western government don't seem to resonate with the Russian public . But allegations don't ever seem to resonate with the public .
 Corruption is part of the fabric of Russian politics and most people just accept it, says Russian politician .
 The Kremlin has successfully dismissed these reports as foreign attacks on Russia . The Kremlin says these reports are not foreign attacks .
 There is a belief among Russians, encouraged by the regime's spin masters, that every government is corrupt and theirs is no different .
With the economy deteriorating, you have to wonder when people will begin to get angry at the kleptocracy that governs them .
 The Russian Embassy in London has expressed "surprise" over Philip Hammond's remarks this week that Russia is a threat to the world .
 Moscow promises an "asymmetric response" to NATO's military buildup in Eastern Europe . Moscow has promised an ""asymmetrical response"
 Russia's Supreme Court is holding a hearing on a challenge to a European Court ruling . The Supreme Court will hear the challenge on Friday .
 The Security Council is considering a proposal to make the Federal Migration Service and the Federal Antinarcotics Service part of the Interior Ministry . The Council is also considering making the federal Migration Service, the federal AntinARCotics Service, part of a government agency .
 Leonid Gozman said Russia was responsible for a war in eastern Ukraine that has killed thousands of people . Gozman is a citizen of the Russian Federation, he said .
 Gozman also called on Vladimir Putin to release Ukrainian military pilot Nadia Savchenko . Gozman said that all Russians do not support the "barbarism and cruelty" that Moscow has unleashed on their country .
 Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov was probably talking about when he said Western media is preparing an "information attack" on Vladimir Putin and his cronies .
 Grigory Baevsky is a 47-year-old business associate of Putin's judo partner Arkady Rotenberg . He is a former member of the Russian-backed judo team .
 Vladimir Putin's absence from this week's nuclear summit in Washington is raising eyebrows . Putin is expected to attend the nuclear summit .
 John Herbst, former U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, has a piece in The National Interest titled How Russia Undermines Nuclear Security . Herbst is a former United States ambassador.
New charges have been filed against the director of the Library of Ukrainian Literature in Moscow . They could land her a five-year prison sentence .
 She is now being charged with misappropriating 1. million rubles of state funds . But those charges have been dropped and she is now facing charges of misappropriation of funds .
 The charges were first reported by LifeNews, which is widely reputed to have ties to the security services .
 The funny thing about April Fools' jokes in the Russian media is that it's difficult to tell if they are true or not .
 Moscow is exploring the legal possibilities of reclaiming Alaska from the United States .
 The White House announced that it will provide Ukraine with $335 million more in "security assistance" after a meeting on March 31 between Vice President Joe Biden and Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko .
 Ukraine has faced an acute economic crisis since Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 . The aid is badly needed as Ukraine has been hit by a separatist revolt in Ukraine's east .
 Washington supports Ukraine's pro-Western government . It has been concerned about corruption in Kyiv .
 Ukraine's parliament sacked the country's chief prosecutor, who allegedly was stalling high-profile corruption investigations . Those concerns were addressed in part earlier this week .
 Biden told Poroshenko that more aid will come if he keeps up efforts to install a new reform-minded government .
 The United States and NATO are switching their defense policy from assurance to deterrence in Eastern Europe . The U.S. European Command Gen. Gen. David Frum says the change is in effect .
 Philip Breedlove spoke in the Latvian capital Riga Thursday, Defense News reports .
 Pentagon to deploy 4,200-strong armored brigade in Eastern Europe in 2017 in response to Russia's foreign policy in region .
 The new U.S. deployment avoids the issue because it is not technically permanently stationed in Eastern Europe . But the new deployment avoids that because it's not technically stationed in Europe .
From April 4 to April 9, the command of the 2nd Army Corps of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation is planning provocative attacks on the Ukrainian army leading positions and civilians in the settlements close to the demarcation zone .
 The provocations will be led by Commander of the 2nd Army Corps Armed Forces, Major-General Yevgeny Nikiforov .
 The occupation forces are planning to conduct simulation of military drills of the 2nd separate motorized rifle brigade . They will participate in the drills with the participation of the commander and mediators .
 Prime Minister of Ukraine Arseniy Yatseniuk declared UAH 1.966 million of gross income for 2015 . In 2014 his total revenues amounted to 1.147 million, while in 2014 he made 1.7 million .
 The total income of premier's spouse Terezia Yatseniuk for 2015 amounted to UAH 1.134 million . UAH 802,400 of business income and UAH 331,600 in interest on bank deposits .
 The declaration also indicated military bonds in the amount of UAH 100,200, which the prime minister acquired in 2014 . The declaration was made in 2014.
 The premier owns a 2010 model of Mercedes S, his wife a Range Rover of a 2012 model . He also owns a 2012 Range Rover .
 The Yatseniuk family did not acquire any new property or cars in 2015 . As follows from the declarations, the Yatsenuk family didn't buy any new properties or cars .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko met with U.S. President Barack Obama on the sidelines of the Nuclear Security Summit in Washington, D.C. Poroshenko gave special attention to need to establish Ukraine's reform-oriented coalition and government .
 The two presidents discussed the situation in Donbas and coordinated their efforts to secure the full implementation of the Minsk agreements, the press service said .
 Poroshenko and Obama spoke about ways to further promote the strategic partnership between Ukraine and the U.S. The pair also discussed ways to promote the partnership .
 Frunze Plant first entered the Austrian market after shipping a batch of punched screens for Austria's Fa Biokorn .
 The press service said that Frunze Plant is the world's only producer of these punched screens .
 Fa Biokorn bought a test batch and the contract could be signed after the tests . The contract is expected to be signed by the next month .
 Frunze Plant, founded in 1885, produces screens for agriculture machinery, flooring grills, netting and fencing systems for the construction industry .
 UKRAINE’s efforts to reach an association agreement with the European Union have led to revolution, poisoned relations with Russia and caused war with Russian separatists .
 Ukrainian and EU leaders at last signed the agreement in March 2014, just after the Maidan revolution . After years of negotiations, the agreement was signed in Kiev .
 The Netherlands is the lone holdout, and most polls show that on April 6th ‘no’ will probably win . The EU’s other 27 states have already done so, with the Netherlands only holding out .
 The Dutch government will have to respond to the outcome of the referendum . The referendum is not binding, but the Dutch government has to respond .
 Rejection would hobble European diplomacy and suggest that the EU is too fractured to maintain a common foreign policy in the face of Russian interference in Ukraine .
 Ukrainians want to be part of Europe, but many Europeans want no part of them . It would send a signal to Ukrainians that however much they want a part of the continent .
 Eurosceptic social-media group GeenPeil selected the issue as a test of the referendum law . referendum law came into force on July 1st .
 It quickly gathered 470,000 online signatures, far more than the 300,000 needed to force a vote . The vote was held by a group of more than 500,000 people .
 Since the referendum was announced, it has transformed into an active campaign group . It has used volunteers to ensure that turnout reaches the 30% needed for the result to be valid .
Opponents of Ukraine agreement regard it as forcing them into an alliance with a corrupt country requiring billions of euros in aid . Opponents of the Ukraine agreement say it is forcing them to join the Ukraine alliance .
 Many Dutch regard it as a step towards EU membership and fear losing jobs to low-wage Ukrainians . It is largely a trade deal and does not allow Ukrainians to work in the EU .
 The Netherlands has suffered more than anywhere else in the EU from the Russian-backed war of secession in Donbas . The opposition is all the more remarkable, given that the Netherlands has been involved in the conflict .
 A furious Dutch public firmly supported EU sanctions against Russia in response to Russia's actions . The Dutch public strongly supported the EU sanctions .
 The referendum campaign has become a forum for those who mistrust the official Dutch government inquiry into MH17 . But the campaign has also become a forums for conspiracy theories .
 Others say the association agreement itself caused the Ukrainian conflict, and hold the EU to blame . Others say it caused the Ukraine conflict and blame the EU for it .
 Ukraine remains divided between pro-Russian and pro-European regions, according to Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin . Putin says the West's promises of EU membership led to violence in Ukraine .
 Russia ejected Ukraine from its customs union, annexed Crimea and supported separatists in Donbas . In fact it was Russia that ejected Ukraine and annexed Crimea .
 Europe has been as important a market as Russia for Ukraine for decades . With exports to Russia now collapsing, the turn towards Europe was inevitable .
 focus groups convened by supporters of the trade agreement demonstrate that such factual arguments cannot win the referendum . But even though the “no” camp’s claims can be refuted, focus groups convened by supporters show that such facts cannot win.
Markin wrote that Vecherny Chelyabinsk was “the only news outlet brave enough’ to publish his text .
 The text is back up at Vecherny Chelyabinsk and the Investigative Committee republished the article a second time . The article was republished by the investigative Committee .
 The president's press secretary warns the public that some event in the public space is being prepared in the next few days .
 Mutko's announcement comes as a result of a lawsuit against him . Mutko has been accused of sexual assault in the U.S. for years .
 His statements are just evidence that his PR team is trying to get the situation under control . For now, his statements are only evidence that he's trying to control the situation .
 Gleb Pavlovsky was one of the first political analysts to use this technique . He was still working for Boris Yeltsin's team when he was still on the team .
 He was thought to have authored newspaper articles under pseudonyms that announced information attacks before they hit and political changes yet to be unveiled . He was believed to have written the articles before they were published .
 The Federal Road Transport Agency says smooth riding surfaces enable drives to break the speed limit more often . It may be leading to an increase in road traffic collisions .
 Drivers often exceed the speed limit and venture into the oncoming lane . On a good road, drivers often exceed speed limit .
 These infractions are among the most frequent causes for road accidents, the study concludes . The study concludes.
In 2015, the number of highway collisions overall decreased by 11 percent and road fatalities dropped by 15 percent . In 2015, road fatalities were down 15 percent, transport agency says .
 Ukrainians trusted Petro Poroshenko with their future giving him 54% of the national vote . Yanukovych's ouster was followed by Yanukovych’s ouster .
 Two years after the revolution it appears much of the initial faith and enthusiasm has led to a degree of unexpected disenchantment .
 Juncker underscored to Dutch voters that this year’s free-trade agreement between Ukraine and the EU would not represent a first step toward joining the politico-economic union of 28 member states .
 The European Commissioner’s sentiments likely dashed the hopes for many Maidan protesters who braved the cold winter in Kyiv two winters ago .
 Yanukovych's increasingly authoritarian rule of law, abuse of power and his deliberate methods of centralizing political corruption. One of the main reasons protesters endured the harsh wintry climate was their indomitable commitment to stand up to Yanukovych .
 Petro Poroshenko received 54% of the national vote in the presidential elections . Ukrainians who had been gearing for revolutionary change remained enthusiastic .
 Two years later, it appears much of the initial faith and enthusiasm for a peaceful revolution has led to a degree of unexpected disenchantment . The fruits of democracy have led to an unexpected disenchantment .
 A stalemate with the citizens’ standard of living has been exhibited largely by a stalemate. This level of disappointment has been shown largely by the citizens' standard of life .
 Ukraine is far from achieving necessary reforms for a true democracy. It remains the same as during the Yanukovych reign, and Ukraine is still far from reaching a real democracy .
 The Chocolate King has not kept his promise to relinquish his previous business ventures . President Poroshenko is sometimes cynically known as for his oligarchic past .
 The chasm has only widened between the wealthy and the average Ukrainian . It has also widened between wealthy and average Ukrainian.
 Oligarchs like Rinat Akhmetov and Igor Kolomoisky remain as powerful as they have been in the past . The economic system also has proven to be corrupt and inefficient .
 The IMF remains beholden to the International Monetary Fund for loans, especially in the last nine months . The IMF is still beholding to the IMF.
 peace has not come to the volatile East region where pro-Russian separatists continue to quarrel with Kyiv's forces .
 In February 2015, leaders of Ukraine, Russia, France, and Germany signed on to a package of diplomatic measures in hopes of alleviating the ongoing war in the Donbas region . The summit was held in February 2015.
 Russia needs to abide by the Minsk agreements and immediately implement a ceasefire, Poroshenko said last August .
 The meetings were among other things devoted to the fact that Russia respected its own commitments, says Poroshenko .
 War and Russian aggression against Ukraine are not the reasons for avoiding reforms. War and Russia aggression against the Ukraine not the reason to avoid reforms .
 President says he firmly stands on the position of an effective continuation of reforms .
 The ruling coalition formed after the parliamentary elections last October broke down following a series of misunderstandings on all sides .
 Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk has lost the support of his coalition . This dissension led to Poroshenko asking for the resignation of the Prime Minister .
 The Ukrainian parliament voted the cabinet’s work as unsatisfactory but rejected a call for a vote of no confidence . Later, that same day, the Ukrainian parliament votes the cabinet's work as unatisfactory .
 Ukraine's three major parliamentary parties agreed to form a new coalition and nominate parliamentary speaker Volodymyr Hroysman to be the country's new prime minister . It was announced on Tuesday that Ukraine’s three major parties agreed on Tuesday .
 Some Maidan supporters like V Liagushko, an Ukrainian &#233;migr&#233, do have some degree of sympathy for Poroshenko .
 Ukraine's newly minted fears remain that withdrawn Russian forces in Syria could be redirected to the East to fight Kyiv’s army .
 Putin’s guarantee was fulfilled in March 2014 as Russia annexed the Crimean Peninsula . Russia annexed Crimea in 2014 .
 Bulgaria, a former communist country like Ukraine, had a better chance to join NATO and the EU . Putin grew stronger with his territorial ambitions, and his overall mission to restore the Russian empire .
 Putin has only felt emboldened in the past few years as he continues to exert the Kremlin presence on former countries of the Soviet Union . Putin has been exerting his influence on ex-Soviet countries for years .
 disillusionment persists in Ukraine, as the chasm between its society and government appears to be growing .
 Jared Feldschreiber chronicles press freedom cases, ambassadors and dissidents . He chronicles the cases of journalists and ambassadors .
 A published poet, he also writes cinema and theater analyses . He is a published poet and works on films and film projects .
 Anguelina Piskova is a working journalist with Bulgarian National Radio since 2000 . She serves as news anchor and editor, largely dealing with foreign affairs .
Ukrainian ornaments have always had two functions – ensure protection and information . Ukrainian ornament has two functions to ensure protection, information .
 Amulets and ritual jewelry – rings, bracelets and crosses – were worn close to the skin .
 Six strands of coral beads could cost as much as a pair of oxen. Ornaments worn over clothing testified to the owner’s wealth .
 We look more closely at the design of these ornaments to understand why and when they were worn by our grandmothers and ancestors .
 The traditional beaded designs were shaped like geometric diamonds with simple or complicated contours, triangles branching out at the corners, zigzags and curved lines – symbols of infinity . The traditional designs wereshaped like geometric diamond-shaped geometric diamonds .
 Zhardy – metal necklaces consisting of two or three strands strung on a red or metal base of crosses . Z hardy – Metal necklace consists of two to three strands. Z Hardy - metal neckLaces.
 Two discs connected the two ends behind the neck – cheprahamy, which are larger than the crosses on the necklace .
 The cheprahamy are covered with solar symbols – a wheel with four, six or eight spokes . A rosetta or concentric circles are also known as a rosett or concentrics .
 Craftsmen used smalt – an opaque alloy of different coloured glass – to create dark blue, turquoise, white, green, brown, black and red . Craftsman used the alloy to create the glass.
 Round beads were encrusted with gold and decorated with bright-coloured inks . The beads were decorated with colourful inks.
 Dukach – pectoral shaped like a medal-like coin with a metal bow decorated with stones .
 The face of the most ancient dukach shows the “portrait’ of a person who hired Ukrainian Cossack warriors . The reverse side shows the battle scene in which the person took part .
 One of the oldest Ukrainian symbols is the head wreath woven from grasses and flowers and decorated with bright ribbons .
 The vinok was always decorated with different coloured ribbons, which were cut lower than a girl's braids in order to hide them .
 The central ribbon was usually light brown, symbolizing the land and soil, then came yellow ribbons, symbolized the sun, followed by light green and dark green – beauty and youth, light blue and dark blue – sky and water .
 Non-embroidered ribbons were not added to the vinok as they commemorated the dead .
 Girls used red ribbons to intertwine poppies into their wreaths – symbols of grief and magic . Girls used the ribbons as symbols of magic and grief .
 People bestowed lavish gifts, bread and money on young girls wearing decorative head wreaths . They wished them happiness and prosperity .
 The girls, in turn, expressed their gratitude by giving them a ribbon from their wreath . The girls said they were grateful for the gift .