 Vice President Joe Biden is spending his last few days in office by taking Air Force Two over to Switzerland and Ukraine . The White House says he will spend his final few days on the air force .
 Biden will be out of the country in Kyiv, Ukraine and Davos, Switzerland from Sunday to Wednesday .
 Vice President Joe Biden will fly to Kyiv on Sunday on a farewell visit by one of Ukraine's strongest political supporters . Ukraine looks forward with apprehension to the new administration of Donald Trump .
 Biden has been the front man for U.S. policy towards Ukraine since street protests in 2013-2014 forced a Russian-backed leader to flee . Pro-Western opposition took over, promising sweeping reforms whose delivery has been patchy .
 The U.S. has invested heavily in the reform process, providing over $3 billion in economic assistance . The United States has spent over $2 billion on the reform.
 Russia has imposed sanctions against Russia for annexing Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula and backing separatists in a conflict in the east of the country .
 Biden has been closely involved, visiting Ukraine four times since the change in power . He has maintained regular telephone contact with Poroshenko and the prime minister .
 Officials in Ukraine have expressed concern that U.S. support could wane following the inauguration of Trump . Trump has voiced admiration for Russian President Vladimir Putin and a desire to improve ties with Moscow .
 Biden has chastised officials for lacklustre reform efforts . He warned that endemic corruption risks undermining international will to maintain sanctions on Russia .
 The U.S. vice-president was on his sixth visit to Ukraine since the Euromaidan protests .
 Vice-President Joe Biden has told reporters in Kiev that the “international community’s must resist Russian aggression. Biden issued a plea to the incoming U.S. administration to help Ukraine tackle the threat it faces from its neighbour .
 Biden has visited Kiev six times since the Euromaidan protests in 2013 and 2014 . He said sanctions against Russia for seizing Crimea must stay in place until Moscow follows the terms of the Minsk accords peace deal .
 The conflict in the eastern Donbas region has claimed 10,000 lives . There are daily reports of shelling and mortar fire on both sides .
 Ukrainian oligarch Viktor Pinchuk calls on Kiev to accept the annexation of Crimea as part of a series of “painful compromises’ for peace with Russia .
 He also said Kiev should also abandon any chance of joining the European Union or Nato if it wants to see peace in Donbas .