 The first several months of a new administration are inevitably seen as an opening for those who hope to influence the White House over the next four years .
 The Senate Ukraine Caucus is a bipartisan group of senior lawmakers who have lobbied intensively for a closer U.S.-Ukraine relationship . The new president will order policy reviews, modifications in existing programs, or even a clean break from the past .
 Russia’s stealth invasion, occupation, and annexation of the Crimean Peninsula was for all intents and purposes a land-grab . U.S. and U.N. denounced Russia's annexation as a violation of state sovereignty and self-determination .
 This isn't the first time a stronger power will attempt to change the borders of a weaker neighbor, nor will it be the last . But let's not kid ourselves; this isn’t the first. But let’s not kid us; this is the
 The Russians saw an opportunity to immediately exploit the confusion of Ukraine’s post-Viktor Yanukovych period . The Russian government saw a chance to immediately exploited the confusion .
 The Minsk accords were designed to de-escalate the violence in Eastern Ukraine . A transfer of border control from separatist forces back to Ukrainian government has been stalled to the point of irrelevance .
 Ukrainian army would likely have been able to defeat separatist units in the east . It is incontrovertible that were it not for Russia’s military support and intervention in the summer of 2014, the Ukrainian army could have defeated the separatist units .
 Ukraine is far more important for Moscow's geopolitical position than Washington's, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: We should acknowledge Russia's violations of international law and the U.N. Charter .
 Vladimir Putin made the fateful decision to plunge Russian forces into Ukraine in 2014 . It wasn't because he was itching for a war of preemption, it wasn’t because he wanted a war .
 Russia deployed Russian forces across the Ukrainian border despite the whirlwind of international condemnation and the Western financial sanctions that were likely to accompany such a decision . Moscow's regional position was just too important for Moscow’s regional position.
 The U.S. military assistance to the Ukrainian security forces would be ill-advised . It merely explains why the Russian government acted the way it did, and why further U. S. military aid to Ukraine would be bad, it says .
 Kiev may delude itself into thinking that Washington will come to its immediate military aid in order to stabilize the battlefield .
 The United States Congress has authorized $750 million to improve the defensive capabilities of the Ukrainian military and security forces .
 Congress has followed up $650 million earmarked for Ukrainians over the next two years . The next administration would probably use that money as a message to the Russians that further territorial encroachment would produce more casualties .
 The next administration needs to ask itself, whether more money thrown at the Ukraine problem will be more or less likely to cause further violence in the country .
 Russia has demonstrated consistently that it will not permit a pro-Western democratic government from emerging along its western border . Moscow will do its best to preserve a Pro-Russian bent in Ukraine’s eastern provinces .
 Hundreds of millions of dollars in appropriations haven't forced Russia to change that calculation so far . It's not likely that hundreds of millions more will be any more successful .
Every time Washington has escalated its rhetoric or authorized money for Ukraine’s military, the Russians have responded in equal terms .
 The political crisis in Ukraine is far from resolved, in large measure, because of Russia’s own actions on the ground and its nonexistent implementation of the Minsk peace agreement . Russia's own actions in Ukraine are far from resolving, in big measure .
 The situation in the east, while not fully peaceful by any means, is far less violent than it was at the war’s peak in 2015 . But the situation is not fully violent by any Means .
Not weighing in can be just as smart for the U.S. national interest as getting involved, says John Sutter . Sutter: Not weighing in has been the forte of Washington’s foreign policy establishment since the end of the Cold War .
 He and Vladimir Putin are a mutual admiration society, if not exactly friends . He and Putin are not exactly best friends .
 Ukrainians should decide whether more weaponry would serve their purposes or not, I think . I think it should be up to the Ukrainians to decide if they want to use more weaponry .
 The Ukrainians’ will to defend their country is stronger than the Russians’ would to impose itself. It’s incontrovertible that the Ukrainians' will be stronger than Russians' will to impose themselves, says the Russian government .
 The EU and the U.S. exploited a debate concerning the purchase of oil. I am unclear why there is so much coaching on behalf of the Europeans and the US .
 The Ukraine's desire to entice the Ukraine further west in philosophy and practice the method made no sense. While one can understand the desire for the Ukraine to be further west, the method makes no sense .
 The role of the U.S. and the EU in the crisis from the start point makes the attempt messy if not out right inappropriate .
 One of the failings we must acknowledge is that democracy is a slow and frustrating process . Democracy is slow, frustrating process, says David Cameron .
 It on many occasions doesn't yield the most efficient or effective policies. It doesn’t yield the best or most effective policies, according to experts .
 Democracy may if fact be the worst form of governance for some societies. Democracy may not be the best form of leadership for some society .
Whatever the case violent revolution based on disgruntled members of an opposing side every ten years is bound to be destructive . But whatever the case is, it will be destructive, says author .
 Ukrainians in northern part of the country are doing based on a state that legitimized it system via revolution . Further I am unclear how one can make arguments against what the Ukrainians are doing .
 Europe as with many parts of the world are comprised on countries with populations whose identity are deeply divided . Europe is comprised on nations with populations that are deeply divide .
 I am not sure it’s unreasonable to comprehend a response in response to violence that appears to have targeted a particular ethnic minority . I'm not sure if it's unreasonable to respond to violence in response.
 I am at a loss why our foreign “experts’ did not foresee and anticipate the result of the revolution they encourage and should have discouraged. I am a loss. I'm at a Loss why our Foreign “expert’s” didn’t
 It's not as if these types of regional loyalties are new to the Europeans. It is not as as if they are new.
Russian kill Russian, because Russian kill Russian. I think just a good idea to arm themselves to Ukraine, if you want post-Soviet space .
 Basically Ukraine is no longer needed Russia, Russia now has its Crimea . Russia has its own Crimea .
 Ukrainians and Russian for the Russian people, it is one people, and Russian human hurt and pain when near them die other Russian people . The country came to power pro-Western oligarchs and U.S. citizens are sitting in government .
 Ukraine is fighting so many Russian volunteers, so in addition to humanitarian convoys, Russians collect money and goods to residents of Donbass . Russia is fighting Ukraine, so so many volunteers are helping Ukraine .
 You should continue to arm the Ukraine, if you think that “show must go on, and that Russian were still the aggressors and occupiers. You should also continue to arms the Ukraine. If you think "show must be on" you should continue the Ukraine war .
 Ukraine is a big country and has very significant arms industry . Ukraine has a very significant domestic arms industry. Ukraine is also a very big country .
 Given the demographics, the commitment must be open ended, else the regime falls of its own internal contradiction. Given the demographic demographics, it must be opened up, says the writer .
 This is how Iraq went from being supposed to pay for its own overthrow, to trillions of dollars past and yet to come to try to maintain a fig leaf of control . The Iraq government has been trying to maintain its own control of the country .
 There are putative euphemistic “American interests’ at stake it s true, but these are by no means able to be conflated with the interests of hundreds of millions of Americans .
 The elite decision to rely on both world financial hegemony and militarism doesn't result in a better standard of living, says John Sutter . Sutter says other more productive activity is eviscerating employment .
 Such a misallocation on vast scale also leads to a general climate of arms race, says Eisenhower . Eisenhower criticized, and leading to armed conflict and all the ills that ensue from war .
 Eastern Ukrainians would rather look to the West for inspiration and economic development than Russia . Eastern Ukrainians controlling most of the country would prefer the West to Russia .
 The U.S. wouldn't support them, except if it meant an American presence in the conflict, he says .
I would think the world is better off if Russia stays within its borders. I would think it would be better off to stay in Russia .
 The biggest source of instability, war, civil war, etc in the world is borders that don’t match the demographic lay of the land .
 Borders that slice through people who want to live together, and loop together people who’d prefer to live apart .
 Crimea and Eastern Ukraine should probably have been left in Russian hands at the breakup of the USSR if not sooner .
 Russia's border violations, sham election, formenting of civil war, etc. That does not justify Russia’s border violations and sham election. That doesn’t justify Russian border violations .
 The years of sanctions Russia has suffered already, plus the permanent loss of the rest of Ukraine into an anti-Russian orbit, are probably punishment enough . The years have already suffered already.
 The facts generally point to an uncertain future for Russians and a demographic and economic death spiral for Ukrainians . I'd love to see a more populous, fertile, confident, functional, prosperous Russia and Ukraine .
 Any claim that Ukraine can defend itself for long against a determined Russia is absurd . Any claim of Ukraine's ability to defend itself against Russia for long is absurd.
 Russia will not lightly allow any part of Ukraine to join NATO, nor should they if they are prudent and not naive . Russia will be careful if they're not naive.
 Ukrainian goverment that came in power after illegal coup. First, one need to admit that it is not Russian invasion as often claimed by Ukrainian government .
There are already powerful business interests who make good money on war and do not want war to end . Providing weapons and money to current government will just extend civil war .
Current goverment found uses for war to distract population from economic trouble, see current increase in fighting just after nationalization of biggest Ukrainian bank . Also found uses to distract people from economic problems, found by experts .
 In Ukraine, not only 1/3 of the population of Russia, and about the same number of tanks and weapons that remain from the Soviet Union . In Russia, about 1-3 of Russia's population is in Ukraine .
 Crimea residents voted in a referendum to vote for Crimea's future in the Crimea . Crimea's residents voted to vote in the referendum . The Crimea is the only part of the Crimea in Crimea .
 Ukraine has stopped access to river water to the Crimea . Ukraine undertook to resell the same Russian electricity, but in Crimea .
Ukraine gave up its nuclear MIRV’d ICBMs in exchange for what they thought was our guarantee of their territorial integrity . Welll, the Ukraine gave up their nuclear M IRBMs .
 Ukrainians may prefer a bit less Russia in their salad . The Holodomor is known for its unpleasantness .
 Equip them with an un-announced logic lock that allows them to target only Russian military assets or their state security services, or North Korea .
 The only local thing we’d do in Ukraine is harden the sites to prevent Russian special ops from taking the silos .
 A live video feed and popcorn feed is available on the internet . Other than that, install a live feed and stock up on popcorn .
 DePetris is a nice piece and well written, from an American point of view, but with a few mistakes . The piece is written from a well-written American point-of- view .
According to the Ukrainian constitution, the Crimean people have the right to issue a referendum about the status of the Crimean Peninsula, and they did .6% voted for reuniting with Russia . The point is that America and the rest of the world don't recognize the Crimian referendum .
Military intervention isn’t the only possible interaction, Norm says . Military intervention is probably the least constructive and most costly, he says . Norm says.
 The west, Lutsk, Livi, Ivano, look toward Polish and European role models . The west looks toward Poland and Europe's role models.
 Programs such as the European Marshall Plan or the current Peace Corps can help blend the competing cultures into a harmonious creative community of prosperous societies .
You speak to a western Ukrainian in Russian and they answer in Ukrainian . You speak to them in Ukrainian and they say they are Ukrainian .
 Western Ukrainians, given the tools, will innovate on their own . More often the easterners wait for orders from above, which might involve more corruption .