 The passing week, like a catapult, has thrown all Ukrainians into the election campaign .
 Dmytro Hnap turned into the ultimate villain of the upcoming elections . In two days from a democratic hero, he turned into a political villain .
Deputies voted for enshrining in the Constitution the course towards EU and NATO membership . But the same processes forced the deputies to vote for the enshrining of the Constitution .
 Whether positive energy prevailed or everything was as it usually is – read in the traditional digest of Opinion . Read in thetraditional digest of opinion.
 The show within the show exhibition was held in Mystetskyi Arsenal in April 2014 . For the visual accompaniment of the text, the show was chosen .
 The country then survived the Revolution of Dignity, the annexation of Crimea and the beginning of the war . The revolution was the start of the Crimea war .
 The artists’ vision then wasn’t ‘blurred’ and the ideas were not biased . The artists' vision then was not “blurred, and the idea was not biased.
 Verkhovna Rada has enshrined Ukraine’s course towards EU and NATO membership .
 The Law №9037 “On Amendments to the Constitution on the strategic direction of the state on the acquisition of the full-fledged Membership of Ukraine in EU and NATO’s NATO” was adopted .
 The Black Sea Fleet will have to automatically leave the peninsula after the return of Crimea to Ukraine . In addition, the Black Sea fleet will also have to leave after Crimea returns .
 Ukraine's non-aligned status of Ukraine should be excluded from the basic law . Also, the provisions of the non- aligned status of the Ukraine should also be excluded .
 How will it work in the event of joining NATO and planning for the deployment of their bases in Ukraine is unknown .
 President Petro Poroshenko explained why this happened while making a speech in the Parliament .
 The Verkhovna Rada today will demonstrate the unity that has been demonstrated for the last 4 years, Poroshenko said .
 The election slogan of Ihor Hryniv “Poroshenko or Putin” worked again . However, in the end, the election slogan worked again. In the end.
 None of the pro-European political forces in the pre-election period wanted to become ‘Kremlin’s agent’ The presidential law was supported even by those who did not really want to play for Poroshenko .
 There is a small number of records in the Constitution if the military budget is not transparent if weapons are not renewed if there is no missile or aircraft on the armament .
 Viktor Yanukovych was sentenced in absentia to 13 years of imprisonment for the high treason . He made a press conference in Moscow .
 Yanukovych said about European politicians who signed a “peace treaty’s with him during EuroMaidan .
 The president did not respond to any of his letters to "betrayers" After that, according to the “legitimate president, the above mentioned “betrayer’s” did not response to any letters .
 Viktor Yanukovych, who was sentenced in absentia, also assures that he still lives in Rostov, as well as thousands of people from Donetsk . He was sentenced to a prison sentence for his role in Ukraine .
 The escapee president was given the state protection in Russia by the orders of Vladimir Putin .
 Donetsk's "familiar faces from Donetsk" did not mess up Mr Viktor's face. So that “familiar face from Donetsk’s” didn't mess up his face .
 Putin's friend Viktor Medvedchuk is finally suspected of treason and violation of the territorial integrity of Ukraine . Putin’s friend ViktorMedvedchuk was also suspected of violation of Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 Medvedchuk was made a member of the Minsk Group, according to the Presidential Administration .
 Dmytro Hnap's political career almost ended after he got 2. million hryvnias from the Internet to pay his fee for the presidential campaign .
 His ex-colleagues from the Slidstvo.Info accused him of misuse of funds received by the team of journalists as an international prize .
 The CEC has submitted documents to the CEC for the first time . Anna Babinets, the head of the project, said it became clear only now after submission .
 The journalist denies the connection of her statement with the election campaign . She says she reported just after she found it out .
Info Dmytro Gnap, on behalf of the team, stated that the money will be spent on the army . Then the ex-leader of Slidstvo said the money was to be used for the army.
 colleagues from other media asked me about the fate of that money . Recently, colleagues from others media asked him about it .
 It appeared that the prize was transferred to Dmytro’s bank account, Babinets wrote .
 Hnap states that since 2015 that money has been kept on his bank deposit . 3,917 euros were spent due to a lack of funding for the project . Another 9,087 soon will be transferred to the bank account of Slidstvo .
 He promised to show the receipt, and the editorial board promised to send the money to the army . He said the money would be sent to the military .