 A prolonged crisis in Ukraine began in November 2013 when then-president Viktor Yanukovych suspended preparations for the implementation of an association agreement with the European Union .
 The decision sparked mass protests from the proponents of the agreement . The decision sparks mass protests.
 The protests, in turn, precipitated a revolution that led to Yanukovych's ousting . The protests in turn led to the ousting of Yanukovych .
After the ousting, unrest enveloped in the largely Russophone eastern and southern regions of Ukraine, from where Yanukovych had drawn most of his support .
 Russia invaded said regions and annexed the then-autonomous Ukrainian region of Crimea . Subsequently, the ensuing political crisis developed after Russia invaded the region and annexed Crimea .
 Russia's invasion emboldened the Russophone Ukrainians already in upheaval . The unrest in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts devolved into a subnational war against the post-revolutionary Ukrainian government .
 The Russophone Ukrainian opposition turned into a pro-Russian insurgency . It was often supported and assisted by the Russian military and its special forces . Then, as that conflict progressed, it turned into an insurgency .
 Ukraine became gripped by unrest when President Viktor Yanukovych refused to sign an association agreement with the European Union on 21 November 2013 . President Yanukovych's refusal to sign the agreement led to unrest in Ukraine .
 An organised political movement known as 'Euromaidan' demanded closer ties with the European Union . The movement also demanded the ousting of Yanukovych .
 The movement was ultimately successful, culminating in the February 2014 revolution, which removed Yanukovych and his government . This movement was eventually successful, ending in the 2014 revolution .
 During 24 January 2014, various western Ukrainian cities such as Ivano-Frankivsk and Chernivtsi had protesters seize regional government buildings in protest of president Viktor Yanukovych .
 In Ivano-Frankivsk, nearly 1,500 protesters occupied the regional government building and barricaded themselves inside the building .
C Chernivtsi saw crowds of protesters storm the governors office . Police officers protected the building while protesters stormed the building .
 Uzhgorod also had regional offices blockaded, and in western city of Lviv barricades were being erected .
 The entrance to the local administration building in the western city of Lviv was said to be guarded by "young masked men" The men wielded wooden clubs .
 The local governor at the time Oleh Salo was ousted three weeks prior to the blockade of the administration building . The building was sealed off by a "high barricade of rubber tires"
 Oleh Salo says he was not in his office when protesters stormed the building . He addressed during the interview in a borrowed room at the local cultural department .
 He also received a panicked phone call on his personal phone from a local staff member in the administration building at the time, who screamed "Please save us"
Pro-Russian and anti-revolution activists began in the largely Russophone region of Crimea on 23 February 2014 .
Demonstrations in eastern and southern Ukraine followed by demonstrations in cities across the country . These were followed by protests in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kharkiv, and Odessa .
 Pro-Russian armed men gradually began to take over the peninsula, provoking protests . Starting on 26 February 2014, pro-Russian men gradually took over the region .
 Russian soldiers without insignias. However, they later admitted that these were in fact Russian soldiers . They later admitted on-the-ground reports of a Russian incursion into Ukraine .
 By 27 February, the Crimean parliament building had been seized by Russia .
 Russian flags were raised over buildings in Ukraine . Self-declared pro-Russian government said it would hold a referendum on independence from Ukraine .
 Russia annexed Crimea on 18 March 2014 after an internationally unrecognised referendum . It was held on 16 March 2014 .
Pro-Russian and anti-government groups took place in Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts of Ukraine in March 2014 . In the aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian revolution and the Euromaidan movement, they called the "Donbass"
Pro-Russian protests across southern and eastern Ukraine escalated into an armed conflict between separatist forces of the self-declared Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics .
 Prior to a change of the top leadership in August 2014, the separatists were largely led by Russian citizens .
 Russian paramilitaries are reported to make up from 5% to 20% of the combatants . Russian paramillaries make up to 5% of combatants, according to reports .
 Russian artillery, personnel, and what Russia called a "humanitarian convoy" crossed the border into Ukrainian territory without the permission of the Ukrainian government .
 crossings occurred both in areas under the control of pro-Russian forces and areas that were not under their control, reports say .
 Ukrainian positions from the Russian side of the border were reported to have been shelling . These events followed the reported shelling of Ukrainian positions over the course of the month .
 Western and Ukrainian officials described these events as a "stealth invasion" of Ukraine by Russia . Western and Ukraine officials described the events as "a stealth invasion"
 DPR and LPR insurgents regained much of the territory they had lost during the previous government military on the offensive . As a result, DPR andLPR insurgents lost much of their territory .
 On September 5, 2014, Russia and Ukraine signed a deal to establish a ceasefire, called the Minsk Protocol . The deal was signed in September 2014 .
During the ceasefire, warlords took control of swathes of land on the insurgent side, leading to further destabilisation .
 Heavy fighting resumed across the conflict zone, including at Donetsk International Airport and Debaltseve .
 A new ceasefire agreement, called Minsk II, was signed on 12 February 2015 . The agreement was signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Multiple elections were held across Ukraine . Ukraine has been beset by a prolonged crisis .
 The first election held since the ousting of President Yanukovych was the 25 May presidential election . Petro Poroshenko was elected as president of Ukraine .
 In the Donbass region, only 20% of polling stations were open due to threats of violence by pro-Russian separatists .
 The first post-revolutionary parliamentary elections in Ukraine were held on 26 October 2014 .
 Once again, separatists stymied voting in the areas they controlled. Once again.
 They held their own elections, internationally unrecognised and in violation of the Minsk Protocol peace process, on 2 November 2014 . It was the first time they had been in power for more than a year .
 The economy of Ukraine contracted by 8% during the year 2014 as a result of the crisis, according to the World Bank .
 Economic sanctions imposed on Russia by western nations contributed to the collapse in value of the Russian rouble, and the resulting Russian financial crisis .
 Donbass region had been the chief source of coal for power stations across the country . The war in Donbass caused a coal shortage in Ukraine .
 Zaporizhia Nuclear Power Station was forced to close down one of its reactors after an accident .
 The combination of these two problems led to rolling blackouts across Ukraine during December 2014 .
 A new pipeline in Turkey was proposed to carry natural gas to Europe while bypassing Ukraine as a traditional transit hub for Russian gas . The pipeline will have an annual capacity around 63 billion cubic metres .
 Progress on implementing reforms in post-revolutionary Ukraine has been said to be slow .
 According to a BBC report in February 2016, Ukraine remained gripped by corruption . Little progress had been made in improving the economy .
 The report also said that there was talk of a "Third Maidan" to force the government to take action to remedy the crisis .
 An IMF four-year loan program worth about $17. billion was agreed in eight tranches over 2015 and 2016 . The program is subject to conditions regarding economic reforms .
 Only two tranches worth $6. billion were paid in 2015, due to lack of progress on reforms .
 A third tranche of $1. billion may be paid in June 2016 subject to the bringing into law of 19 further reforms .
 In May 2016 the IMF mission chief for Ukraine stated that the reduction of corruption was a key test for continued international support .
 Masked men with guns seized government buildings in the capital of Ukraine's Crimea region on Thursday . They barricaded themselves inside and raised the Russian flag after mysterious overnight raids that appeared to be the work of militant Russian nationalists .
 Crimea's new pro-Moscow premier, Sergei Aksenov, moved the date of the peninsula's status referendum to March 30 . The peninsula's referendum will be held on March 30.
 Crimean parliament has called for a referendum on May 25 . The date also set for the urgent presidential election in Ukraine .