 This collection of information includes suggestions for reducing the burden . Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of info .
 No person shall be subject to any penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number . Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person will face any penalty .
Joint Forces Staff College Joint Forces Joint Forces StaffCollege Joint Advanced Warfighting School 7800 Hampton Blvd Norfolk, VA .
 ABSTRACT Center of Gravity constructs either fall short of providing a useful method for discerning a hybrid threat's COG .
 This critical deficiency in threat analysis may result in the implementation of improper strategies and operational designs to defeat these threats . This is due to the dilemmas created by hybrid adversaries.
 This thesis defines a COG as the actor's “main effort’s “ main effort” to achieve its objectives . It proposes an analytical method for hybrid threat COG analysis .
 This methodology is applied to the 2006 Lebanon War and 2014 Russian invasion of Ukraine . This methodology has also been applied to Lebanon War. This methodology was applied to Russia's invasion of the Ukraine .
 Hybrid War, Hybrid Threat, Hybrid threat, Hybrid Adversary, Joint Doctrine, Center of Gravity, Hezbollah, Israel, Russia, Ukraine, 2006 Lebanon War, Future War and Future Conflict .
 A paper submitted to the Faculty of the Joint Advanced Warfighting School was submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements of a Master of Science Degree in Joint Campaign Planning and Strategy .
 Thesis Advisor: The U.S. will face increasingly hybrid adversaries that choose asymmetric ways to challenge American dominance .
 The Center of Gravity constructs currently in practice either fall short of providing a useful method for discerning a hybrid threat or omit the concept entirely . In practice, the Center of gravity constructs currently fall short.
 This creates a dilemma as denial, deception, and integration efforts make a hybrid adversary’s Center of Gravity elusive and difficult to identify in a timely manner .
This increases the probability of observing, orienting, deciding, and acting too slowly to effectively counter the threat or misidentifying the Center of Gravity . This increases the likelihood of observing and orienting to effectively combat the threat and act too slowly .
 Center of Gravity proposes an analytical method for hybrid threat analysis . It takes into account the ambiguity inherent in these kinds of adversaries . This thesis defines a Center ofravity as the actor’s “main effort” to achieve its objectives .
This work is intended to assist operational level planners in accurately identifying a hybrid threat’s operational Center of Gravity in a timely manner . This work is aimed at identifying the hybrid threat.
 It hypothesizes that identifying the hybrid threat’s operational level Center of Gravity is the ‘modality of principal use’ It says it enables planners to design operations to quickly and effectively defeat hybrid threats .
 The new methodology is then applied to recent examples of hybrid war as demonstrated by Hezbollah in 2006 and Russia in 2014 . This new methodology has been applied to other hybrid war examples .
 The thesis is dedicated to all the intelligence personnel and operational planners who continually struggle behind the scenes to make order out of chaos . Col Eric Walters, USMC for his mentorship, tutelage, and instruction on threat analysis .
You set the standard for the intellectual rigor necessary to succeed in today’s complex environments . You set the standards for the academic rigor needed to succeed.
I also thank my wife for her continued love and support as we walk this road together . I also thank her for her support and love as we walked the road together.
Alexander was marching through Anatolia on his famous campaign to conquer Persia . Alexander was marching in Anatolia to conquer the country of Persia .
 Alexander was presented with an opportunistic challenge as it was the home of the fabled knot of King Midas . Alexander was present with an opportunity to challenge the king.
 This knot was so renowned for its complexity and intricacy that an oracle stated that the one who could solve its riddle would be king of all Asia .
 Alexander accepted the challenge of solving the riddle of the Gordian Knot . With the future of his expedition on the line, Alexander accepts the challenge .
 Complexity, deception, misdirection, and ambiguity are characteristics of warfare dating back to ancient times . Hybrid warfare is an emerging method of conflict described as hybrid warfare .
 The elegant simplicity inherent in conventional, interstate warfare is foreign to hybrid war and the United States . The U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff will be the de facto global guarantor of stability .
 This quote is originally found in Churchill’s book The World Crisis written in 1923 . The quote is from the same book as the World Crisis.
 This thesis defines a hybrid threat as any adversary that creates a dilemma across the political, military, economic, and economic, information, and infrastructure spectrum . The thesis includes a tailored mix of traditional warfare and weapons, irregular warfare, and catastrophic terrorist actions .
 The resulting threat is akin to the ancient Gordian Knot in the dilemmas it creates due to its complexity and ambiguity . The resulting threats are similar to that of the ancient Knot .
 As such, identifying a single unit, force, person, or ideology as the Center of Gravity is potentially dangerous and misleading .
 identifying a hybrid threat’s Critical Vulnerabilities is extremely difficult . There is no single source of strength to defeat and no silver bullet powerful enough to neutralize the Critical Capabilities inherent within a hybrid adversary .
 The real danger in applying traditional Center of Gravity analysis to hybrid threats is that it misleads senior leaders into believing that operations against hybrid adversaries will be shorter, less costly, and less risky than is probably the case .
 The Center of Gravity constructs currently in doctrine and practice either fall short of providing a useful method for discerning a hybrid threat .
 Hybrid adversaries create dilemmas for commanders as denial, deception, and integration efforts make rapidly identifying a hybrid adversary’s Center of Gravity elusive and difficult .
 This thesis proposes an analytical method for hybrid threat Center of Gravity analysis . It takes into account the amorphous and agile nature of hybrid threat adversaries .
 This work is intended to assist operational level planners in identifying a hybrid threat’s operational Center of Gravity in a timely manner .
 In a hybrid war scenario, identifying the hybrid threat’s operational level Center of Gravity as the ‘modality of principal use’ enables planners and commanders to develop operational approaches and designs to quickly and effectively defeat these threats before they escalate to the point where later adaptation is un
 Before proposing a new method of Center of Gravity analysis, problems in current approaches must be understood and accepted .
 The Center of Gravity analysis is on the topic of "The Gray Zone" The analysis will focus on the analysis of a hybrid threat adversary .
 This thesis then discusses current thinking regarding hybrid threat adversaries and the uniqueness of hybrid warfare actions they conduct . This thesis also discusses the unique nature of hybrid Warfare actions they Conduct .
 Center of Gravity analysis recommends an updated method for understanding hybrid threat actors . Third, this thesis recommends a new method for Center of gravity analysis .
 Recent conflicts demonstrate divergent applications of the hybrid war methodology, says author .
 Hezbollah and Russia are both considered examples of hybrid warfare with clear effects on potential future conflicts . The modalities and tactics employed by Hezbollah and Russian differ dramatically, yet they are both seen as examples of hybrids .
 This thesis concludes with recommendations for Joint Doctrine as twenty-first century adversaries continue to seek asymmetric advantages against U.S. conventional superiority .
 Nathan Freier calls asymmetrical conflicts the “hybrid norm’ of the future 6 . Freier: Military professionals should not allow themselves to become myopic in their vision of future threats .
 Center of Gravity analysis is still an unknown art form practiced only by those schooled in advanced military planning or intelligence analysis .
 Mary Kaldor notes that “the logic of absolute war suggests that war should be concentrated in a single blow’-otherwise known as the decisive battle .
 Clausewitz theorized that defeating the enemy’s Center of Gravity in a decisive battle provided the best avenue for victory in war .
 The same analysis is conducted on friendly forces to identify the “friendly sources of strength and potential vulnerabilities’s potential vulnerabilities . The analysis is carried out by friendly forces .
 Theoretically, if accomplished timely and accurately, Center of Gravity analysis enables planners to identify an adversary’s greatest strengths along with potential areas of vulnerability that are attacked .
 There are numerous papers, articles, and books written about this topic . There are many books, papers, and articles about the topic .
 The Center of Gravity is a non-conventional threat that could be a hybrid threat . The concept proves challenging for those who attempt to conduct Center of gravity analysis .
 The Navy has no direct linkage to the Center of Gravity concept and only slowly adopted it as doctrine . The Navy only adopted the concept as doctrine.
 The Center of Gravity's roots produced different definitions and concepts in each service . Not surprisingly, these historical roots produced a different Center of gravity definitions .
 The four scholars who stand out as the most useful and comprehensive in their understanding of this concept are Dr. John Sutter and Dr. David Frum .
Strange developed his now famous CG-CC-CR-CV construct that forms the basis of joint doctrine, to assist planners in 9 Mark Cancian, “Centers of Gravity are a Myth,’s Proceedings .
 Eikmeier argued that the Center of Gravity concept is useless if it cannot be readily understood and applied in a real-word planning situation . He was an instructor with the Army’s School of Advanced Military Studies .
 Vego argues that “the concept of center of gravity is perhaps the most critical element of operational and strategic warfare. Vego: “The concept of centre of gravity was perhaps the greatest element of operations and strategic war .
 Building on the Clausewitzian Foundations So That We Can All Speak the Same Language, 43 .
 Military Review 80, no. , 23. 8 accomplish a given military objective’s.
 Echevarria approaches the Center of Gravity argument from a more mechanical perspective . EcheVarria: "I'm not sure what I think about Gravity"
 He identifies the Center of Gravity as the force, or focal point, that holds the various entities together . He says the center of Gravity is the force that holds all the entities together.
 The Center of Gravity concept was originally aimed at achieving the total collapse of the adversary’s forces . He argues that the concept is only applicable for absolute war .
 This distinctively Clausewitzean point-of-view holds true to the essence of On War, where each side seeks an advantage against the other in decisive battle .
 Echevarria's perspective is not helpful when approaching gray zone or limited war scenarios . There may never be a decisive battle and destruction of an adversary’s force is not the primary goal .
 Echeverria does not advocate the partitioning of Centers of Gravity at the strategic, operational, or tactical levels . Echevria is based in the Netherlands .
 He argues these are modem artificial constructs and not how Clausewitz viewed warfare . He argues that these are not Clausewitz's view of warfare .
 Echevarria concludes that the Center of Gravity concept is not applicable to the array of limited wars . The concept of attacking the center of Gravity often comes in conflict with limited political objectives .
 Echeverria’s conclusions serve as the null-hypothesis to this thesis, he says .
 Echeverria does note that the current conflict with Islamic terrorism, when viewed as a “war to the death,’ qualifies as Total War .
 There is currently no adequate model or methodology to determine a hybrid threat’s Center of Gravity . There is no adequate models or methodology.
 The Strange and Eikmeier methods fail to account for the multi-modalities and ambiguity presented by hybrid threat adversaries . The Strange, Eik Meier methods fail.
 Joint Publication 2-01.3, Intelligence Preparation of the Operating Environment, does not mention hybrid threats or discuss the use of denial, deception, or blending of conventional and irregular modalities .
 The Center of Gravity may not be the traditional source of greatest strength, power, or resistance described by the traditional Clausewitzean models .
 In practice, a single moral or physical source of strength may not exist due to the blending of capabilities and resources required in constructing a hybrid force .
Eikmeier postulates two key hypotheses that could radically change how Center of Gravity analysis is understood and practiced . Eikmeier: Two key hypotheses could radically changes the way the analysis is done .
 Clausewitz used mechanical metaphors to communicate with Prussian officers who did not understand social science, but did know engineering . First, he argues that Clausewitz uses mechanical metaphors.
 If true, this would seek to negate the current “mechanical’s approaches to Center of Gravity studies . It would be a more operationallyfriendly approach .
 He assesses that the “hub of all power’s description of the Center of Gravity is not Clausewitzean . Instead it is the product of Howard and Paret's transliteration .
 Clausewitz uses the Gennan word “schwerpunkt’ , which literally means the weight of focus or point of effort .
 Clausewitz was most concerned with the decisive battle and defeating the enemy’s main effort was the surest way to win the contest of wills . This makes sense as Clausewitz.
 The main factors in selecting a Schwerpunkt include the situation, terrain and commander's intent . The main factor is the situation.
 In German theory and practice, commanders should "build up" a point of main decision within their areas of responsibility .
 The same term is often used for variety of military and nonmilitary situations to describe where the main focus of effort is or will be . The term is also used for various military andnonmilitary situations .
 This is a simpler concept to understand than the ‘hub of all power’ metaphor . This is the “hub ofall power” metaphor, says author .
 The real task is identifying the enemy’s operational “main effort,” not necessarily its greatest source of strength . Following this logic, the real task, is identifying its operational ‘main effort’
 The Center of Gravity is the "main effort" for the center of Gravity . It is not binding in all circumstances, according to the organization .
 The Center of Gravity can shift as the situation develops, thus forcing periodic re-assessment and, if necessary, problem reframing . This definition opens the aperture on Center of gravity analysis at the operational level, and is applicable to hybrid threat scenarios .
In the case of hybrid war, the Center of Gravity may not be the source of great power, strength, resistance, or the focal point . The use of a particular force may negate the identified political objectives, provoke the full application of United States military might, or cause unacceptable second and
 Clausewitz's concept is still applicable, but the doctrinal definitions and methods for Center of Gravity analysis are less useful for analyzing a hybrid threat .
 Similar to Center of Gravity analysis, there are divergent views and definitions . There are diverge views and Definitions .
 New War advocates argue that the nature of war has changed due to the post-Westphalian erosion of the nation-state which no longer holds the monopoly on violence .
 War is a violent struggle-a deadly contest of wills-for a political purpose and hybrid war . War represents an evolution in the conduct of warfare, says the author .
Proceeding 133, no. 14 warfare, catastrophic terrorism, irregular warfare, and disruptive use of technology . United States Naval Institute.
 HEAT are entities that bridge strategy to tactics in an asymmetric way with the capabilities to threaten U.S. core interests . These hybrid threats, or HEAT, are a hybrid threat that can threaten American core interests.
 Frank Hoffman builds upon Freier’s concept and includes “criminality” within the Disruptive modality . Criminal activities are closely intertwined in many of the current gray zone or limited war conflicts .
 The concept of multiple, unified and integrated modalities void of 11 Frank G Hoffman, “Hybrid vs. hybrid’s” is a new concept . It is this concept of ‘Hybrid’ and ‘multi-modal’
 This thesis defines a hybrid threat as any adversary that creates a dilemma across the PMESII spectrum . The thesis includes a tailored mix of traditional warfare and weapons, weapons, irregular warfare, and catastrophic terrorist actions .
 Freier’s four modalities framework-with the inclusion of criminality within the Disruptive challenge-is used as the construct with which to assess a threat as hybrid at the operational level . Freier's fourmodalities framework is used as a construct with
 The hybrid threat definition captures the means and ways required at the operational level to accomplish the desired ends for the majority of conflicts U.S. forces will confront in the twenty-first century .
 The U.S. Marine Corps General James Mattis said he expects future enemies to look at the four approaches . The four approaches include traditional, Irregular, Catastrophic, and Disruptive .
We do not face a range of four separate challengers as much as the combination of novel approaches and means of war . We do not need to face four different challengers.
 The fighting forces of each state or alliance of states have a certain unity, says Center of Gravity Analysis .
 Alexander used creativity and cunning to defeat the puzzle in such a manner that the people believed the omen had come true .
 His success at this task foreshadowed his destiny as the ruler of all Asia . His success foreshadowing his destiny was his success as the leader of Asia .
 hybrid threats cannot be solved with conventional thinking as they do not fit neatly into traditional models . In much of the same way, hybrid threats can't be solved.
 Traditional and doctrinal methods do not adequately provide a process to identify the operational level Center of Gravity of a hybrid threat .
 Those acquainted with the Strange and Eikmeier method will note many similarities . The method is similar to that used by the two men .
 The first, and most important, step is to identify the modalities employed by the adversary . Step 1: Identify Observed Modalities .
 Every observed enemy action is categorized into one of the four hybrid modalities detailed in Chapter 3 and Appendix C-Traditional, Catastrophic Terrorism, Irregular, or Disruptive Technology .
 This step requires extensive and persistent intelligence collection efforts to accomplish accurately and timely . This step is the first step in a long-term intelligence collection effort to be successful .
 Some tactical actions or military forces could be used in multiple modalities . There may be some overlap as some tactical actions and military forces may be used.
 Operational planners must pay particular attention to their Commander’s Indications and Warning decks and Priority Intelligence Requirements as they drive intelligence collection efforts .
 If information gaps are identified, they must be filled in a timely manner to ensure that threat modalities are observed and identified .
 An assessment must be made as to the threat’s desired ends, military objectives, and limitations . The modalities of the threat are discovered and identified .
18 bears great importance on the correct identification of the Center of Gravity . This assessment must be made in a timely manner to inform decision-makers .
 Planners must determine the political end state, the military objectives at the operational level of war . Any limitations likely imposed on the forces conducting the actions are likely to be imposed .
This assessment is a critical step as the adversary’s desired ends and objectives relate directly to the ways and means required to accomplish those objectives . This assessment is an assessment of the adversary's desired ends, objectives relate to the way and means needed .
 Identify the Critical Capabilities Ways Planners must identify the “ways or actions required in achieving the desired ends’s desired ends .
CCs are usually noted as an “ability to perform a certain activity critical to the success of the operation . CCs are often noted as having an ‘ability to’ perform a specific activitycritical to the successful operation .
 If multiple CCs are required to accomplish the desired ends then these should be prioritized in order of necessity . If multipleCCs are needed to accomplish a desired end then they should be priorities .
 If possible, capabilities should be narrowed down to the fewest number of “critical’s capabilities . If possible.
 The Modality of Principal Use is determined as to which modality (Irregular, Traditional, Catastrophic, or Disruptive/Criminal) is the enemy’s main effort .
 The modality that possesses the required CCs to accomplish the desired objectives within the identified limitations is now identified as the enemy’s Center of Gravity .
 The modality identified as the Center of Gravity should be the form of warfare that the adversary employs as the main effort to accomplish the operational objectives within the identified or assessed operational limitations .
 The key difference is the distinction given to the modality in use as it may not contain the greatest source of power, strength, or resistance .
 The greater powers are used for purely deceptive purposes . The modality of principal use-the main effort may contain lesser powers .
 RussiaUkraine case study detailed in Chapter 6. This nuance is challenging when analyzing hybrid threats as what is highlighted as its strength may only be for show . The main effort remains hidden until revealed or uncovered.
For a hybrid force, the modality of principal use provides a type of cohesion for the employed forces to bind . For a hybrid Force, themodality of Principal use provides the type of cohesive for theemployed forces tobind .
 This cohesion of forces, under a principal modality, allows the main effort to deliver the most effective blows and is consistent with a Clausewitzean view of Gravity .
This is understandable as doctrine and experience dictate the identification of a unit, person, ideology, or some other physical or moral entity as the Center of Gravity . This is understandable, but it's not as clear as doctrine or experience .
 hybrid threats are fundamentally different than their traditional or irregular cousins . But hybrid threats require new lexicons, doctrines, and intellectual models to counter effectively .
 hybrid war requires fundamentally different approaches and executions. While there may be superficial similarities with traditional or irregular warfare.
 Center of Gravity analysis is an entirely new doctrine in threat analysis focused on the most likely threats to American power in the future .
 hybrid warfare makes the delineation between the modality of principal use and the supporting modalities difficult to make . The highly integrated nature of hybrid warfare.
 This fusion of modes provides the hybrid actor with the capability to shift main efforts should the situation dictate, depending on its own capabilities, the type of adversary, the political objectives and self-imposed limitations .
 The hybrid threat could potentially shift main efforts as part of the plan or in response to friendly actions . Similar to a conventional force shifting main efforts, the hybrid threat may be a threat to the ground .
 Changing the main effort at the operational level is no easy task, but it may provide an opportunity to seize the initiative from the hybrid foe .
Political objectives or limitations may reduce the flexibility of the hybrid force to shift the main effort and dictate which modality must be prioritized to accomplish the objectives .
 As Strange notes, these are actual things-nouns-required for the CCs to be fully operative . The CCs are required to be completely operative .
 This should be a list of the other noted modalities, resources, units, or other means required to execute the CCs . Such as trained guerrilla forces or a flexible command and control network .
 Any interdiction, destruction, or neutralization should have a direct or indirect effect on the Center of Gravity's ability to accomplish the desired ends. As these are critical, any interdictions, destruction or neutralizing should have an effect .
There may be few actual CVs, and there may be a hybrid threat’s CV . The CV is ambiguous and enigmatic due to its ambiguous nature .
 The 2006 Israel-Hezbollah conflict in Lebanon and the 2014 Russian invasion of Ukraine provide two recent examples of hybrid warfare that allow for Center of Gravity analysis . The 2006 Israeli-He Hezbollah conflict and 2014 Ukrainian invasion provide two examples of Hybrid warfare .
Two case studies highlight the deceptive and unrestricted nature of modern hybrid war with their effects on adversaries who were unable to identify their opponent’s Center of Gravity .
 The events described in these case studies confused many military planners at the time . Hezbollah and Russia were not easily discernable, nor were their Centers of Gravity identified in a timely manner .
 The main efforts employed by Hezbollah and Russian forces were not readily apparent, according to the study . Israel and Ukraine were the exact opposite of the modalities expected by the two countries . The study was published in the U.S.
 The misidentification of the Centers of Gravity facing them resulted in the loss of critical time and the initiative to counter the threat’s course of action . The Center of Gravity has been working to combat the threat of Gravity .
 Center of Gravity will review the specifics of each case from the operational level of war . The new model will be applied to these cases .
 As stated previously, this thesis focusses at the level of war most occupied by planners at the operational level .
Tactical minutia and strategic policy decisions are not discussed unless there is a direct effect on the operation at hand . Therefore, tacticalminutia is not discussed.
 These cases are reviewed with an eye to the “modalities’ employed. Also, these cases are review with an eyes on the "modalities" employed .
 Little attention is paid to the type of regular or irregular forces used unless it directly affects the outcome of the operations .
 The important notion here is for planners to have the ability to gain situational awareness rapidly and convey that understanding of the enemy’s ends, ways, and means to commanders .
 The Center of Gravity categorizes the threat in a manner that allows a commander to develop an appropriate operational design based upon the nature of the threat quickly as the situation develops, while minimizing the risk of misidentifying the center .
 The 2006 Lebanese War “Israel fought as a limping stepchild of Clausewitz’s son, Israel fought in the Lebanese War .
 Two soldiers, Udi Goldwasser and Eldad Regev, were taken from the ambush site into Lebanon . Two soldiers were killed in the ambush .
 A Retrospective Analysis of the Summer 2006 War Between Israel and Hizballah, Naval War College, 1.1.2 .
 Israeli decision makers took for granted that applying pressure on the government in Beirut would force its officials into coercing Hezbollah to meet Israel’s strategic demands . This despite it also having not done so during conflict 10 years before .
 Hezbollah acted with near autonomy in southern Lebanon and Israeli targeting of Lebanese government buildings and infrastructure only increased ill-will towards Israel . In truth, Hezbollah acted on its own behalf of Lebanon .
 The Israeli leadership was so sure in its belief that airpower alone would punish Hezbollah that it delayed its reserve mobilization for two weeks after the initial kidnapping .
 The IDF was not prepared to match Hezbollah’s well-trained and disciplined fighting force . This expectation proved unfounded and resulted in significant ground combat operations .
 Ralph Peters detailed that “Hezbollah fielded an impressively innovative military force incisively tailored to meet a specific foe on particular terrain’
 This resulted in a ground force that lacked the capabilities to conduct high-intensity combined arms operations, especially in the size and scope seen in the 2006 conflict . This led to the failure of the ground force in the conflict .
 Hezbollah developed a “cellular anti-tank defense’s in depth that frustrated Israeli forces . The Israeli government was frustrated by Hezbollah's tactics of irregular warfare .
 Hezbollah ground forces occupied prepared defensive positions in Lebanon’s difficult, hilly terrain and urban areas .
 First, late-generation fire-and-forget missiles were faster, more accurate and easier to wield . First, early-generation weapons were faster and more accurate, easier to use .
 Hezbollah's tactical defense was also a strategic defense, and the terrorist army had years to prepare fixed bunkers and connecting passages . Third, Hezbollah's strategic defense was a strategicdefense, and it was a tactical defense .
 The bunkers were designed by Iranian engineers . Hezbollah also embeds its defenses amid civilian populations .
 Israeli leaders did not understand the nature of the conflict they entered or the enemy they faced . Israel's intelligence failure or lack of operational vision may have led to a catastrophic intelligence failure .
 Hezbollah ground tactics changed from irregular in principle to an irregular-traditional hybrid . They did not fully grasp that the extensive fortifications constructed in southern Lebanon indicated a fundamental shift in Hezbollah ground tactic .
 Israeli forces abruptly received a conventional conflict against a well-trained, disciplined, and determined enemy that defended ground .
 Israeli leadership either did not conduct Center of Gravity analysis or misidcntified Hezbollah’s operational center of Gravity . The IDF was not manned, trained, or prepared to win, according to the report .
 Israeli political and military leadership were so blinded by promises of airpower through effects-based operations to achieve their objectives that they neglected to study other options .
 All participants agreed to abide by UN Security Council resolution 1701 on August 14, 2006 . In the end, the Second Lebanon War concluded when all participants agreed on a resolution .
 Ralph Peters, "Lessons from Lebanon the New Model Terrorist Army," is seen as a defeat for 13 .
 Hezbollah appears to be the first Arab force able to claim victory against the Israeli armed forces . A Retrospective Analysis of the Summer 2006 War Between Israel and Hizballah.
 This created a hybrid threat capable of standing its ground against Israeli forces . This created the hybrid threat, which could be a threat to Israel .
 Hezbollah integrated full-time guerrilla fighters with local militia forces and used extensive camouflage and deception to mask their defensive fortifications and make Israel believe it was facing an irregular force .
 Israeli leaders prosecuted the war 15 Ralph Peters, "Lessons from Lebanon the New Model Terrorist Army,” 38. He contends that it is unclear from the way Israeli leaders prosecute the war .
 Center of Gravity analysis is salient due to Israel’s decision to rely on effects-based operations to strike Lebanese government targets in the early stages of the conflict with disastrous results .
 It appears that if Center of Gravity analysis was done incorrectly, the IDF chose incorrectly, resulting in a course of action that did not attack Hezbollah’s real center of Gravity effectively, thus prolonging the war and resulting in greater losses .
 The IDF’s mistake “reinforces the aforementioned criticality of carefully analyzing the nature of the conflict in which an armed force is involved, the IDF says . The IDF's mistake ‘reinforce the aforementionedcriticality of closely analyzing’
 Hezbollah employed Traditional, Irregular, and Catastrophic modalities. It was clear that Hezbollah employed traditional, Ir regular, and catastrophic modalities .
 Traditional defensive positions and uniformed fighters with modern weapons represent the Traditional modality of the fight .
 The Irregular modality of guerrilla fighters and uniformed militia employs hit and run tactics . Their guerrilla fighters are known as the Irregular militia .
 Hezbollah initiated this conflict by the ambush and kidnaping of IDF soldiers . Hezbollah's political and military objectives were to defend its positions in southern Lebanon, says Peter Bergen .
 Hezbollah was limited in its ability to conduct conventional offensive operations . Hezbollah developed a purpose-built defensive capability to accomplish its objectives through the use of prepared ground defensive operations .
 Hezbollah's CC in its embarrassment campaign against Israel was the ability to interdict and bog down Israeli ground forces in such a manner that caused unacceptable level of casualties . Hezbollah’s CC was the. ability to Interdict and Bog down Israel ground forces.
 Israeli effectsbased bombing campaign against Lebanese targets was ineffective in applying pressure on Hezbollah leadership . This explains why the Israeli effects based bombing campaign was completely ineffective . The campaign was aimed at pressuring Hezbollah leadership.
 Hezbollah demonstrated capabilities in three modalities, including interdicting and bogging down Israeli ground forces . The Traditional was the only modality with the inherent ability to fulfill the critical capability of Interdicting .
 Hezbollah’s operational level Center of Gravity was the main effort, as main effort. Therefore, the Traditional modality (prepared defensive positions and uniformed fighters with modem weapons) was Hezbollah's main effort .
 The Irregular and Catastrophic modalities were supporting efforts and identified as critical requirements . They included prepared defensive positions, modem weapon systems and trained fighters required for the employment of the Traditional modality .
 Few critical vulnerabilities emerge, due to the elusive and purpose-built nature of the force . Out of these 30 CRs, few critical vulnerabilities emerged, according to experts .
 Potential CVs include Hezbollah’s command and control network, isolated outposts, and seams in its defensive positions .
 The neutralization of these vulnerabilities would have indirectly weakened Hezbollah’s Center of Gravity . It would have reduced its ability to delay IDF units and cause unacceptable casualties during the ground combat phase .
 These CVs are not silver bullet solutions to Hezbollah’s hybrid defense. But these CVs aren’t silver bullet solution to Hezbollah's hybrid defense .
 The CVs' defensive positions have been reduced to a systematic reduction of their defensive positions . CVs have been used in a number of incidents in recent years . The CV's defensive positions are now being reduced to less defensive positions.
In reality, there was no single CV that would have toppled the Center of Gravity and caused Hezbollah to release its hostages . In reality, it would have been a single CV.
 Hezbollah understood Israeli arrogance and correctly concluded that the IDF viewed the 2006 Hezbollah military force the same as they did in 2000 . Hezbollah understood Israel's arrogance, says the IDF .
 Hezbollah counted on Israeli leaders dismissing its ground forces as a mere irregular threat . The operational environment and nature of the conflict fundamentally changed, Hezbollah says .
 Hezbollah represented a non-state actor with a traditional military force capable of defending territory and inflicting great damage on the attacking IDF units . Hezbollah represented the non- state actor with traditional military forces capable of protecting territory .
 Israeli leadership would have abandoned their effects-based operations and used diplomatic channels to obtain the release of their kidnapped soldiers or anticipated a conventional ground operation against prepared defensive positions in rugged terrain .
 These “green men’s” had no identifying marks or uniforms yet operated with amazing efficiency and tactical proficiency .
 No shots were fired, but Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine had begun . No shots are fired .
 Russia enacted a plan designed to regain its lost influence and control over a previous part of the Soviet Union . Following the December 2013 ousting of pro-Russian President Yanukovych, Russia enacted the plan .
 Phase one involved operations in the ethnically-Russian Crimean peninsula, while phase two redirected operations to the ethnical-Ukrainian Donbas region .
 Russian forces used similar, yet slightly different, hybrid designs in these two phases against their Ukrainian foes . Russian forces use similar, but slightly different designs in both phases .
 Before reviewing the modalities used in their Ukrainian operations, it is important to understand two points concerning the doctrine and tactics used by Russian forces .
 First, use of denial, deception, and disinformation is integral to Russian doctrine . First, the use of Denial, deception and disinformation, in conjunction with complex operational maneuvers, is part of Russian doctrine.
 Gerasimov discussed the future of war and necessary measures in what is known informally as the ‘Gerasimov Doctrine’ of non-linear warfare .
 The authors assert that information warfare, along with Special Operations Forces, and a coordinated escalation will play a key role in future conflict .
 The Russian seizure of the Crimean peninsula was skillfully and rapidly executed . The seizure of Crimea was skillful and rapidly execute .
 The U.S. pressured the Ukrainian government to not react to Russian actions out of fear of escalating the crisis into a conventional military conflict . Phillip Karber states that the United States even pressured the Ukraine government not to react to Russia's actions .
Russian information operations significantly contributed to the Irregular and Disruptive modalities . Russian information operations contributed to Russia's information operations .
 They primarily targeted the ethnic Russians living in Crimea who were generally in favor of annexation . They mainly targeted those who lived in Crimea .
Ukrainian government has little response from the Ukrainian government. These operations resulted in strong public support among the ethnic Russians living in Crimea .
 Perry states that the groundwork for Russian operations in Crimea and eastern Ukraine was set well in advance due to the impressive efforts placed in their information operations . Perry: The groundwork for Russia's operations was set in advance .
 In eastern Ukraine, Russia encountered a different operating environment as the majority of the population is ethnic Ukrainian, not Russian .
 The Russian language is Russian . They did not want to be part of Russia or independent from Ukraine .
 Russian leaders could not count on the support of the local population, according to Russian media . This is another example where the Center of Gravity is not ‘the people’ as is often claimed . This means that Russian leaders cannot count on support of local population .
 7. 35 “will of the people’s’ is often the goal of both sides in these operations . A Center of Gravity Russia employed many of the irregular tactics that it used in Crimea .
Russian military presence represents the Traditional modality of Russia's military presence . It was intended to keep Russian forces ready if called upon to conduct conventional operations, intimidate Ukrainian forces .
 Ukrainian leaders misidentified the Russian operational Center of Gravity as its conventional military forces . Ukrainian leaders hesitated in countering the Russian unconventional forces operating within their borders .
 The means employed by Russia in its Donbas operation include SOF and information operations similar to the Crimean phase . Also included the forming, equipping, and employment of pro-Russian separatist units and cross-border artillery fires .
 Russia's irregular tactics eventually culminated in a direct invasion by pro-Russian forces using unmarked Russian armored vehicles, heavy equipment, and weapon systems .
 Separatist forces with Russian commanders carried out this conventional-styled military operation . Russian leaders continue to deny this accusation even though Russian material assistance to separatists is well documented .
Official Russian government denials inject just enough uncertainty to inhibit any substantial Western response . Official Russian governmentdenials inject only enough uncertainty for Western response.
 It also demonstrates how the Irregular and Traditional modalities can blur into a confusing hybrid war . It also shows how theIrregular and traditional modalities are different .
 Alba Popescu argues that economic dependency, endemic corruption, and fear of economic repercussions caused the failure of the EU and NATO countries to act decisively in response to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine .
 The Snake “infections’ targeted Ukrainian government computers with a powerful exploitation tool used to access secret information . The Snake’s "infections" targeted government computers in Ukraine .
 Karber describes Political Subversion as the insertion of agents and classic “agi-prop’s’ information operations .
 He describes Proxy Sanctuary as seizing local governmental centers, police stations, airports and military depots . He also describes arming and training insurgents, creating checkpoints and destroying transportation infrastructure .
 Intervention is described as deploying of Russian forces to the border with sudden large-scale exercises involving ground, naval, air, and airborne troops .
 Coercive Deterrence is composed of secret strategic force alerts and snap checks forward deployment of tactical nuclear delivery systems . Air patrolling of neighboring areas to inhibit their involvement is also included .
 Russia employed a lethal mixture of Traditional, Irregular, and Disruptive challenges against Ukraine, all under Russia’s nuclear umbrella .
Review of Russia’s opaque invasion of Ukraine shows need to identify hybrid threat. Since this conflict is ongoing there will undoubtedly be additional actions by both sides .
Russia’s sophisticated information operations and effective employment of SOF were ultimately the most important factors in its non-linear warfare campaign, Perry says .
 Its use of covert SOF, separatist forces, unmarked Russian equipment, and heavy information operations represent the Irregular modality .
Russian conventional forces arrayed along the border, as well as the cross-border artillery fires, qualify as the Traditional modality . Russian conventional forces and artillery fires qualify as traditional .
 Russia employed the Disruptive/Criminal modality through the use of Cyber operations, information operations, and criminal activity in Ukraine and other EU countries .
 Russian strategic communications ensured that Ukraine was aware of Russia’s nuclear capabilities .
 Russia’s nuclear intimidation of its neighbor implied the presence of the Catastrophic modality . It is unlikely Russia would employ those weapons even though it is unlikely it would employ them .
 It is unlikely that Russia would have overtly used its conventional forces to accomplish these objectives due to the severe political repercussions and additional economic sanctions imposed by the EU and U.S. This political reality likely resulted in the operational limitations to use only non-attributable Russian personnel and equipment that
 The CCs required to accomplish these objectives include the abilities to seize key government and military facilities covertly, create and support a pro-Russian militia, stoke Russian nationalism, and conduct brutal irregular warfare operations .
 The operational limitations discussed above negate the Traditional modality as the Center of Gravity, even though it contained Russia’s greatest sources of strength . The Operational limitations discussed below negate the traditional modality .
Covert Russian forces and pro-Russian separatists constituted the Center of Gravity for Russia as they were the main effort employed to accomplish the political and military objectives . Covert Russian Forces and Pro-Russian separatist forces constituted the center for Russia .
 Ukrainian leaders realized this too late and were unable to respond in a rapid and effective manner, resulting in the loss of Crimea and eastern portions of Ukraine . Ukraine's leaders realized that it was too late to respond to the crisis .
 Ukrainian leadership recognized Russia’s real Center of Gravity earlier they could have immediately counterattacked the ‘little green men’ in Crimea and reinforced government bases and buildings in eastern Ukraine .
 modem warfare is increasingly characterized by the erosion of the state’s sovereignty and monopoly of violence . The vacuum created by the fall of the Soviet Union and the realities of a globally-interconnected society.
 The wars of the twenty-first century are best described as a transnational asymmetric mixture of globalization and radicalized tribalism . The wars are located in geographic areas of instability characterized by weak or failed states where poverty is endemic .
 commanders must quickly recognize the hidden truth behind today’s complex, non-linear, and opaque problems . Alexander the Great demonstrated coup d’oeil in finding a creative and unorthodox solution to the Gordian Knot .
 Center of Gravity analysis in the thesis is an ideal type . Examples can be used to support the theory, but in principle, unprovable .
 The real goal of this methodology is to provide a useful tool for operational planners that can be adapted quickly to today's challenges .
Both Hoffman and Ionta argue for renewed study specifically in correctly identifying a hybrid adversary’s Center of Gravity . The assessment greatly affects the entire operational art employed to counter the threat .
 First, a full revision of the definition of the Center of Gravity is required to unify the numerous versions currently in use . A full revision is needed for the center of Gravity .
 Joint doctrine should define the Center of Gravity as an actor's “main effort’s ‘main effort to achieve its objectives at a given level of war’
Adopting this definition simplifies the process of Center of Gravity analysis . Adopting it is applicable to operational-level hybrid threat scenarios, and acknowledges that the Center can shift as the situation develops .
Center of Gravity analysis is continually assessed and reframed throughout the operation . This ensures that Center of Gravity is constantly assessed and the problem reframing throughout the operations .
 The Center of Gravity uses multiple definitions or uses mechanical metaphors . It also reduces the confusion and friction often associated with determining the Center of gravity .
Joint doctrine should be adopted as Joint doctrine and included in future revisions of the applicable Joint Publications . Second, the specific approach for hybrid threat Center of Gravity analysis should be used .
 The Center of Gravity provides planners with a holistic approach to hybrid threat analysis where none currently exists . Identifying the Modality of Principal Use as the Center of gravity provides planner with the holistic approach.
 It is useful in establishing requirements for intelligence collection operations and information needed for inclusion into JIPOE to support planning . It is also useful in setting requirements for Intelligence collection operations .
 The definition of hybrid war used in this thesis provides a foundation and should be incorporated into both Joint and Service doctrines . The definition is used in the thesis provides the foundation for hybrid war .
 enlisted and officer Professional Military Education programs must infuse their curriculums with a real understanding of this concept and the operational implications of its employment on the future of warfare . The military education programs must also be taught about the concept .
 Warfare, the actual conduct of war, is constantly changing based upon any number of factors . Warfare is constantly changed based upon the number of Factors .
 Innovations in technology or the use of violence by non-state actors does not change the fundamental nature of war, says the author .
 War continues to be a violent struggle-a deadly contest of wills-for a political purpose .
 Modern warfare is increasingly characterized as persistent, undeclared, guerrilla-style conflicts between societies . It appears that modern warfare is becoming more aggressive than by short, declared, decisive actions .
This is important as challengers to U.S. policy actively avoid actions likely to result in overwhelming conventional military response . This is important for the United States to avoid military action .
 It is critical that policy-makers and senior military leaders grasp the implications of committing forces into gray zone conflicts . Traditional and hybrid warfare have fundamentally different characteristics and require different approaches .
 Clausewitz is prophetic and timeless in admonishing the ‘statesman and commander’ to determine the “kind of war’ waged and not the real one .
 Strange illuminated a topic that was previously shrouded in darkness . Strange and Eikmeier Center of Gravity Models is based in New York City .
 The Strange method provides a well-defined, well-articulated theoretical framework supported with many illustrations . The Strange Method is described by many illustrations.
 The relationships between the Center of Gravity, the critical capabilities, and the critical requirements, are key to a systems theory of analysis and target development . It explicitly shows the relationship between the center of Gravity and the Center.
 His method provides a set of consistent definitions for planners to use and easily communicates the analysis to uninformed decision-makers .
 Strange claims that this method is useful in analyzing any kind of conflict and at the tactical, operational, and strategic levels of war . The method is also useful in analysis of any type of conflict .
 The w'ay is the Center of gravity. The means with the inherent capability to perform the w'ays is the Centre of gravity . The Center of Gravity is the center of gravity in the world .
Determine Center of Gravity by selecting from the list the means with thecapability to perform the way .
 Strange and Eikmeier disagree with respect to the nature of strategic and moral Centers of Gravity . However, they disagree with the nature and moral of the centers .
 Strange argues that a strong leader, a ruling elite, or a strong-willed populace can be a strategic moral Center of Gravity .
 He states that self-sustaining peace can only be achieved by undermining these strategic moral Centers of Gravity .
 Eikemeier argues that at the national level, the Center of Gravity is either the military/security force or economic/industrial capacity of that nation . Eikemeyer, on the other hand, dismisses the notion of strategic moral Centers of Gravity .
 Eikmeier contends that in a limited war the strategic Center of Gravity is the military/security force . In total war it is the nation’s economic/industrial capacity .
 The purpose of this thesis is to understand the operational level Center of Gravity for a hybrid threat . While both arguments are interesting and educational, the purpose of the thesis is not to be confused .
 This thesis does not address the various discussions about strategic Centers of Gravity . This thesis is not about strategic centers of Gravity, it says .
Nathan Freier’s Hybrid threat Quad Chart and Description of Modalities develop below quad chart to identify and categorize the forms of organized violence employed by hybrid threats .
 In reality, a hybrid adversary blends these modalities into a single, hybrid, force .
 Freier describes each of the modalities that construct a hybrid threat within his quad chart to provide a clear understanding of what actions are contained in each . Freier says each threat is a 'hysterical threat'
 They include use of all forms of weapons of mass destruction to include nuclear by terrorists or rogue state actors . They include the use of nuclear weapons by terrorists.
 These challenges also include the use of non-CBRN weapons for the purpose of causing catastrophic destruction, as demonstrated by use of commercial airplanes on Sept 11, 2001 .
 Catastrophic Terrorism does not include every attack or action by a terrorist or insurgent group .
 The idea behind this category is to identify if an organization or rogue state has the capability to ‘paralyze power’ through a single or simultaneous or cumulative actions . The idea is to determine if an organizations or rogue states have the capability of “paralyzing power�
 Irregular challenges can also include ‘alternative forms of war’ including “trade war, financial war, ecological war” as well as high-tech terrorism .
 They are described as capabilities designed to ‘capsize power’ and are largely seen as emerging technological capabilities that could negate American military superiority . They are called “capable’s’ capabilities, which could negate military superiority.
 cyber-operations designed to penetrate and disable military or civilian operating systems . Not explicitly identified, but use of highly sophisticated cyberoperations fits nicely within this category .
 Hybrid threats are integrated, amorphous, and difficult to analyze . By their very nature, hybrid threats are not easy to analyze. By their nature, they are integrated and are difficult to analyse .
 As such identifying a single unit or force as the Center of Gravity is potentially dangerous and misleading . As such, it is potentiallydangerous and misleading.
 identifying critical vulnerabilities is extremely difficult, as there is no single source of strength to defeat . No silver bullet powerful enough to neutralize the critical capabilities inherent within a hybrid adversary .
There is real danger in applying traditional Center of Gravity analysis to hybrid threats, says the author .
 Differences between Compound and Hybrid threats. Compound threats, like their hybrid cousins, employ two modalities . Usually traditional and irregular forces.
 These forces may coordinate at the highest levels, but rarely, if ever, coordinate action at the tactical or operational levels . The U.S. military says it will not be able to coordinate at any level .
 CW modalities work in concert with each other, but do not directly coordinate efforts . Generally speaking the CW modality works in concert, but not directly coordinating efforts .
 Under the CW construct, the irregular force is usually the supporting effort while the regular force is the main effort . The forces rarely, if ever, combine .
 Lawrence’s role as advisor to the Arab Revolt against the Ottomans in conjunction with the British Expeditionary Forces in WW I, the Chinese Communist and Nationalist collaboration against Japanese occupation during WWII, and the American experience against the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong during the Vietnam War
 The level of integration seen in hybrid threats is not seen with compound ones . There may be some efforts at deception to mask the regular force .
Regular force used for decisive victory and the irregular force serving as a vital supporting effort . This results in the regular force used to obtain the decisive victory .
 Center of Gravity analysis method identified in this thesis would work well for compound threats as well as hybrid threats . However, the alternative method would work better for hybrid threats.
 Graphical Depiction of the Hybrid threat Center of Gravity Method . The graphic below displays the holistic process for determining a hybrid threat's operational level .
 The graphic below shows Hezbollah’s operational level Center of Gravity analysis as explained in Chapter 5 . The graphic shows Hezbollah's operational level center of Gravity Analysis .
 The graphic below shows Russia’s operational level Center of Gravity analysis as explained in Chapter 6 . The graphic also displays Russia's operational level center of Gravity Analysis .
 The Islamic State’s strategic and operational Centers of Gravity are at the center of the debate . Islamic State officials are divided over the Islamic State's strategy .
 identification of the Center of Gravity is critical to the operational approach designed to counter the threat. As noted in this thesis, identification is critical.
 The Center of Gravity is the clearest path to defeat against a hybrid foe, according to previous studies . It's not the first time the center of Gravity has been found to be a hybrid opponent .
 Islamic State’s Center of Gravity is a quick assessment of the Islamic State. So, it is worth adding a quick Assessment of the center of Gravity .
 The first order of business is to determine if the Islamic State is a hybrid actor and what is its operational Center of Gravity . If so, what is the operational center of Gravity?
 First, Islamic State displays the Traditional modality through its fielded military and militia forces .
 These forces execute traditional military operations with modern weapon systems against traditional armies and local militias . These forces operate with modern weapons systems.
Islamic State fighters typically wear uniforms, deploy in units, and employ rudimentary arms offensive operations . Islamic State fighters use rudimentary combined arms operations .
 They also defend the ground they have taken with prepared defensive positions . They have also taken a prepared defensive position .
 The Islamic State displays the Irregular modality through its use of shadow governments, highly visible terrorist operations, killings of Sunni and Shia “apostates,” and internet-based recruiting .
 This modality solidifies its rule in captured areas, frightens potential adversaries, attracts foreign recruits, and increases its stature on the world stage . This modality solidifies the rule in capture areas, and scares potential adversaries .
 The Islamic State displays the Disruptive/Criminal modality through its vast network of illicit oil trafficking and sales, illegal bulk cash transfers through charities and individuals .
 Fourth, the Islamic State appears to have acquired or produced chemical weapons and may have the intent to use these weapons . The Islamic State is believed to be using these weapons.
 If true, this displays a Catastrophic Terrorism modality that could be used against vulnerable, high-profile targets . Iftrue, this shows a catastrophic terrorism modality .
 The Islamic State’s extensive information operations contribute to all four modalities in much the same manner that 10 supports multiple lines of effort in joint doctrine . The Islamic state's extensive information operation contributes to all three modalities .
 The Islamic State qualifies as a hybrid threat as it displays and integrates all four modalities into a single elusive entity . The Islamic state has been dubbed a 'hysterical threat'
 There is considerable overlap between the Traditional and Irregular modalities as well as the Irregular and Criminal modalities . There is much overlap between these modalities.
 The Islamic State acts very much like a nation-state even though it is technically a non-state rogue actor .
 Strategically the Islamic State desires the recreation of the historical Islamic Caliphate . The Islamic State wants to recreate the historic Islamic State .
 Operationally, the Islamic State’s objectives are to seize the territory required to build the Caliphate, establish the economic infrastructure and terrorize all those who oppose them .
 They appear to have no political or operational limitations that inhibit their ability to seek their objectives through the use of unrestricted warfare . They appear not to have any political, operational limitations .
 The Islamic State's Critical Capabilities is the ability to keep the U.S. from directly confronting its forces on the ground in Iraq and Syria .
 The Islamic State’s ideological call for a decisive battle to take place in western Syria against Western forces is one of the methods used to keep the United States at bay .
 U.S. strategic guidance appears to be effective in deterring the United States from committing general purpose forces to this conflict . This apocalyptic vision of a grand battle between Islam and the West, coupled with the political limitation of not directly supporting the Assad regime, seems to beeffective in deter
 The Islamic State leaders know that the U.S. has no appetite for another protracted ground campaign in the Middle East .
There are four Critical Capabilities required to accomplish the Islamic State’s operational objectives . Operationally, there are four critical Capabilities needed for the group to achieve its objectives .
 The Islamic State must have the ability to defeat regional challengers and seize terrain, says Frist . Frist, the Islamic State, must also be able to seize terrain and seize the terrain, he says .
 Determining the Islamic State’s Center of Gravity through the traditional methods is extremely difficult and potentially irrelevant . The Islamic State's Center of gravity is based on the use of Islamic State of Gravity .
 The Islamic State contains all four modalities within its hybrid nature . Traditional modality is the modality of principal use-the Center of Gravity .
 The Traditional modality is the Islamic State’s main effort to accomplish its operational objectives and create the Caliphate . The Islamic State is trying to create its own caliphate .
 Its real source of power lies in the forces arrayed on the battlefield engaged in the seizure or defense of terrain . The forces are in the midst of the conflict in Afghanistan .
 The other three modalities, along with all the resources and means contained in the Traditional modality, are identified as Critical Requirements . The other four modalities are identified by the same name .
 Two critical 11 Mark Cancian, “Centers of Gravity are a Myth,” Proceedings, 30. 59 requirements that must be addressed are the Islamic State’s senior leadership and its ideology .
 This is critical to weakening its fielded forces loyalty and ability to coordinate operations . This is crucial to weakening the force's ability tocoordinate operations .
 Additionally, these leaders have ordered and carried out barbarous terrorist actions . These leaders have also ordered and carry out terrorist actions.
 The Islamic State’s Salafist jihadist ideology is not the Center of Gravity, rather is a critical requirement necessary for the recruiting and sustainment of the group's stated purposes . The group's goals are to recruit and sustain the group, according to its stated purposes
 Efforts can be made to neutralize it with counter-messaging, but this generally proves ineffective . Efforts are made toneutralize it. But this generally proved ineffective .
 Defeat on the battlefield is often the best counter-narrative to the jihadist message . Defeat is often a good counter- narrative.
 The Islamic State’s Center of Gravity allows for an operational approach designed around defeating that modality as it will have the greatest impact on the Islamic State's ability to accomplish its goals . Assessing the Traditional modality of the State's Center of gravity allows for
 In layman’s terms, the Islamic State is acting more like a traditional conventional force . The Islamic State should be treated as such as such, says the author .
 Any operational approach that addresses the Islamic State as another non-state actor conducting irregular warfare or terrorism will fail to defeat the Islamic state as its very nature is more traditional than irregular .
 Understanding this reality provides insight into why current coalition efforts are failing to defeat the Islamic State . Understanding this gives insight into how coalition efforts to defeat Islamic State are failing .
 To defeat the Islamic State, coalition forces must engage in a conventional campaign to defeat or destroy its uniformed military and ununiformed militia forces .
 This coalition should be led and manned by those with the most to win or lose in the region . Turkey, Iraq, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Kuwait are among the countries in the coalition .
 Islamic State’s traditional forces are systematically destroyed and its leadership erased . The root causes of Sunni disenfranchisement and abuse by totalitarian regimes can be addressed, says the author .
 Building on the Clausewitzean Foundations So That We Can All Speak the Same Language .
 House Armed Sendees Subcommittee on Intelligence, Emerging Threats and Capabilities Hearing is held on Wednesday . The hearing is scheduled for a hearing on intelligence and emerging threats .
 He initially served as an Infantry Officer and later transitioned to a Marine Air Ground Task Force Intelligence Officer . He was an Intelligence Officer before becoming an Air Ground Force intelligence officer .
 LtCol Reilly commanded at the Platoon, Company, and Battalion levels . He recently served as the 3d Intelligence Battalion Commanding Officer .
 He served as an Infantry Battalion S-2, Division Intelligence Collection Manager, Marine Expeditionary Force Deputy AC/S G-2 . He also served as a Division IntelligenceCollection Manager and Marine Expeditionaries Brigade AC-S G2 .
 LtCol Reilly is a graduate of the Amphibious Warfare School, the USMC Command and Staff College and the Joint and Combined Warfighting School .