 He was talking about the U.S. neoconservative operative and the author of Universal Fascism . He has been flitting around the newly inaugurated Trump Administration .
 The nation of 42 million sits on the north shore of the Black Sea, southwest of Russia and east of the area of NATO’s East-Central European expansion .
 Three years ago, on February 22, 2014, the "Euromaidan" coup d’état was completed in Ukraine against the country’s elected President Victor Yanukovych . The prolonged, increasingly violent “EurOMaidan’an” coup
 Yanukovych fled the capital after the Maidan Self-Defense Forces threatened to storm his residence at dawn if he didn’t quit . He was unwilling to use military force to crush the thousands of demonstrators still in Kiev .
 Unable to regroup in the north-eastern city of Kharkov or his native Donetsk, he sought asylum in Russia .
 The coup of Nov.13-Feb.14 built on the precedent of Ukraine’s 2004 Orange Revolution . The coup was held on the “color revolution” model of Anglo-American financier George Soros and the American professional organizer Gene Sharp .
 The Orange revolutionaries were squabbling over power. Within months, the Ukrainian economy continued to dive under their deregulation and privatization policies .
 The new dimension in the Euromaidan, one that was pre-planned, was violent provocations and ultimately a violent overthrow of the government . The newdimension was a new dimension.
 Yanukovych’s November 2013 decision to delay signing an Association Agreement with the European Union was taken as the pretext for a full-scale coup . Yanukovych's decision to delayed signing an agreement with the EU, after he realized that it would damage Ukraine's economy, was taken by him as
 The Maidan organizers poured into central Kiev and announced they would not leave until the decision were rescinded and Yanukovych left office . Yanukovych left the office on Monday .
 paramilitary groups repeatedly escalated the violence and sabotaged every interim agreement to resolve the standoff . They marched under the red and black flag of the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists .
 The OUN had collaborated with the Nazis during World War II . It carried out the “ethnic cleansing’s mass murder of Poles and Jews on its own .
 These neo-Nazi groups called themselves Right Sector. Their formation and build-up during 1991-2013 stemmed from Bandera’s followers by MI6 and the Allen Dulles wing of the American CIA during the Cold War .
C coup-installed regime's immediate move to demote Russian. It was the coup- installed regime’s immediate move. Russian was spoken throughout much of Ukraine, from its status as a second official language .
 Crimea had seceded from Ukraine and voted to join the Russian Federation . By mid-March, Crimea had joined Russia's Federation .
 The autonomous Donetsk People's Republic and Lugansk People’s Republic were declared, rejecting the Kiev coup and laying claim to the major cities and much of the territory of those two districts . In the Donbass, the autonomous Donetsk people's republic and the autonomous Lugansk
 Kiev sent army units and Right Sector-based battalions into Donbass to try to quell the Donbass militias’ uprising . At least ten thousand people have died in the ensuing civil war .
 France, Germany, Russia and Ukraine reached the “Minsk II’s agreement between Kiev and the Donbass republics, for a ceasefire and prospective political settlement in that region .
 Heavy weaponry began to be pulled back from the ‘line of contact’ between their respective military forces .
 The ceasefire has been overseen and monitored by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . The East-West club dating back to the 1970s was an East- West club .
 With Right Sector and its offshoot battalions, it is never easy to say exactly who has provided the impetus for their actions .
 London and Washington quickly turns up who is cheering them. But a look around both London and D.C. quickly turned up who was cheering them .
 Prime Minister Volodymyr Hroysman visited NATO Headquarters in Brussels on 9 February . He met with NATO Deputy Secretary General Rose Gottemoeller, formerly an under secretary of state in the Obama Administration .
 James Sherr of Chatham House in the UK sounded an alarm against ‘preemptive compromise’ over Ukraine . Russian anti-Putin analyst Pavel Felgengauer wailed, “If Trump hands over Ukraine, he will make Russia great again’
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov devoted nearly half of his 12 February prime time interview on Russia's NTV channel to a careful, measured discussion of Ukraine .
 U.S. officials who will deal with Ukraine have not even been appointed yet, Lavrov said . Lavrov pointed out that the United States officials have not yet been appointed .
 The new Secretary of State Rex Tillerson will meet with new secretary of state Rex Tillerson when they meet . In the meantime, he said he would be discussing Ukraine, along with other major international issues .