 This report investigates the claims of Russian involvement in the attacks leading up to and during the assault on Novoazovs’k between 23 and 27 August 2014 . This report is based on a report into the attacks between 23-27 August 2014.
 The report analyzes open source evidence to determine the source of artillery fire on Ukrainian units . It also analyzes the origin of armored vehicles sighted inside Ukraine in the Novoazovs'k area .
 Two artillery attacks on 23 August 2014 came from Russian territory . Two T-72Bs and two 2s19 Msta-S sighted in Novoazovs’k after its capture .
 The report also provides analysis of other attacks in the Novoazovs’k area during July / August 2014 . Some evidence suggests attacks from Russian territory .
 Red solid lines indicate the trajectory of artillery fire that has been matched to a firing point found from satellite or social media evidence . The trajectory of the artillery fire is similar to that found on social media .
Orange lines indicate a trajectory estimated from photo or video at the attack site – the firing point is unknown . Orange lines indicate the trajectory of the attack.
 The green line indicates the movement of attacking forces after advancing across the border on 25 August 2014 .
 In mid-August 2014, Ukrainian armed forces had pushed back the Russian-armed separatist forces to areas close to the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk .
Until this time, the area of the Donetsk region close to Novoazovs’k and Mariupol had been spared the worst of the fighting .
 Ukrainian forces had sporadically come under artillery fire before 23 August 2014 . There were no clear signs of forces massing in the area at the time of the attack .
Large-scale artillery attacks on Ukrainian positions close to Novoazovs’k border crossing point . This changed on the morning of 23 August 2014, with large-scale and frequent artillery attacks .
 By the morning of 25 August 2014, it was clear that towns along the Azov coast were now targets of Russian-armed separatist forces .
Russia's artillery attacks and armored vehicles sighted in the area of Novoazovs’k in July 2014 came from Russia .
 Multiple Launch Rocket System fired from Russian territory struck a Ukrainian military base close to the town of Kholodne . More than 30 kilometers from the nearest position of Russian-armed separatist forces within Ukraine .
 Another artillery system within Russia struck the same position soon after . Soon after, another artillery system in Russia struck same position .
 MLRS fire from a firing position less than one kilometer from the Russian border . visible tracks leading back to a crossing point into Russian territory .
 satellite imagery supports media reports that Russian-armed separatist forces crossed into Ukraine through a crossing point north of Novoazovs’k BCP .
 The report also investigates the origin of T-72B armored main battle tanks and howitzers that were filmed or photographed close to Novoazovs’k after the town was taken .
Two specific T-72Bs and the 2s19 Msta-S were sighted earlier inside Russia . These vehicles were of Russian origin, according to Russian media reports .
Open source evidence shows that attacks on Ukrainian forces around Novoazovs’k came from Russia . Vehicles used in the conflict in the area were transported from Russia, it says .
 Report adds to growing body of evidence showing Russia was directly involved in the Ukrainian conflict of 2014-2015 . The report adds to the growing evidence of Russia's involvement in Ukraine .
 Self-propelled artillery shelling of Kholodne 23 August 2014 Russia Video of artillery firing site .
 Mortar shelling of Novoazovs’k border crossing point 25 July – 24 August 2014 Russia Potential firing site located on satellite images .
Within 1 kilometer of Russian border Firing site located, and vehicle tracks leading back to Russia .
 Russia's border from Russia between Markyne and Shcherbak, advanced on Novoazovs’k Witness reports . The border between Russia and the U.S. is between the two countries .
Border crossing point, route of vehicle convoy and subsequent battle identified on satellite images . Border crossing point is a key part of the battle between the two sides .
 MLRS attack on Sedovo – Novoazovs’k road 26 August 2014 morning Ukraine or Russia northeast of Novozovs'k .
 Bread factory northeast Novoazovs’k artillery strike 26 August 2014 morning . The attack occurred in Ukraine or Russia northeast of Novozovs'k .
 Northwest Novoazovs’k artillery strike 26 August 2014 afternoon in Ukraine . The attack site is southeast of Rozy Lyuksemburh Videos . The area is just southeast of the city of Novozovs'k .
 This report was written by Sean Case and Klement Anders, with significant contributions from Aric Toler.
 Pavel Aleshin and Dmitry Bochkov for assistance with translation to Russian .
 Censorship and repression of free speech are more active in Ukraine than ever before, says Ukraine's government . "Censorship" is more active than before, according to the Ukrainian government .
 I had actually never heaard of Bandera before last year, but I did know many Ukrainians volunteered to be SS guards in concentration camps .
 It makes no sense if your only chance of getting money is to do a bad thing MANY poor and badly instructed peoples will do it if it is the only way to survive . It's not a good thing if people are told to do the bad thing .
 Bandera and his O United Nations gang were involved in the genocide of Jews, Poles, and Russians . Then there was Bander a and his gang which was involved in killing Jews and Poles .
 Russia puts nonviolent solo protesters in jail for 3 years . We all know that Russia put nonviolent solo demonstrators in jail .
 People can't protest in Russia with more than one person without a license . People can’t protest in the Russian capital with a license.
 Russia puts bloggers against the invasion of Ukraine in jail for 5 years . Russia put bloggers against invasion of the country in jail in jail.
 Many pensioners commit suicide for lack of medical care. Mention the reasons for suicide, since many pensioners kill themselves .
 Your post just confirm to the average reader, that the Russian propaganda machine really exists .
 USSR built armour is not well-built tanks and cannot withstand TOW missiles . High chance of armour fail, so high chance of the armour fail .
 Ukraine cannot be trusted with any advanced weapons, which is why the USA has supplied Ukraine with only non functioning junk . Ukraine can't be trusted by the U.S.
 Europe would not allow US’ TOWs, Abrams and other scrap metal in Ukraine . Middle East seems far away, but not the eastern Europe .
 Obama would not risk to ruin relationships with EU on eve of elections, says EU leader . Obama would also not risk ruining relationships with the EU on the eve of election .
 Putin escalates on us constantly, while the West plays pick-up, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I meant more the current situation in Ukraine, and possible military escalation in Donbass and Crimea . I mean more than more, and possibly military escalation, in Ukraine .
 The west doesn't want to grant weapon, it is more than enough weapon already . That’s why the west doesn’t want to give weapon to the west, it's more thanEnough weapon already.
 The INF Treaty was signed in 1987 during US-USSR nuclear chase over Europe . The treaty was signed during the US-U.S. nuclear chase.
Both agreements can be logically understood only the context of that times and strategies . Both agreements can't be explained only by the context.
 NATO promised Gorbachev personally not to extend to the east . When USSR voluntary left Eastern Germany and Berlin wall was destroyed, NATO promised him not to leave the east.
 Gorbachev used to say that and then denied himself, so it is not very clear . Actually Gorb Mikhail used to saying that and later denied himself .
 U.S. withdraws with ABM Treaty and announces deployment of anti-missiles in Poland and other eastern European countries .
 Officially it was claimed to protect from Iran, but it was understood that Iran doesn't have such missiles . In the first turn it was implied to Russia .
 From strategic prospective that would ‘change the balance’ also who knows what those missiles would be actually capable of, anyway it was not considered as a friendly step .
 Russian officials several times stated that Russia MAY withdraw with INF Treaty . In the response Russian officials said Russia may withdraw with the Treaty .
 India, Pakistan, Korea, China, Israel are not limited by such treaty and actually have middle-range missiles . The nearby countries India,Pakistan, Korea and China are also not limited.
 Russia also claimed that U.S. is actually developing such missiles and particularly unmanned planes can be considered eligible .
 Russia is not going officially to leave the treaty. Nevertheless as far as I know Russia will not officially leave it .
 No foreign investors are going to invest any money in Ukraine either. And no foreign investors will invest in Ukraine .
 Russia just had a record month for foreigners buying Russian shares . Russia had the highest number of foreign investors in the country .
 Capital flight from Russia by the Russian elite remains high . It's just business, simply where they see best future for their money .
 The German Panther tanks were just as unreliable as they broke down due to inadaquate final drive gears .
 Speakers’ Corner is a forum that in real world might not even succeed in Speakers' Corner, let alone some serious place . No consequence at all, waste of time and precious energy, and as a bonus gives people a forum.
 Ukrainian fascists and government involved in the theft of Old Master paintings, says The Netherlands . The Netherlands says the Ukrainians hated the Soviets for what terrible things they did to them .
 Anyone joining the German army probably had good reason to do so, just as many other Eastern Europeans did .
Many Polish troops surrendered to the Nazis instead of the Soviets in 1939 . Many Polish troops surrender to the Germans instead of Soviets .
 One side was already well known for the brutality they could and did unleash . Of course, they were choosing between two evils, but one side was choosing between the two .
 Your daily meal reduced to tree bark, grass and stones, perhaps you too would have seen the Nazis as saviors . So, condemn the Ukrainians all you like Randy, but if you had seen your little sister or brother die of starvation, your parents reduced to cannibalism
Markist/Leninists feel things like the Gulag were justified . But in the mind's eye of Markist/ Leninists, this matters little at all .
 Ukrainians volunteered for the SS, including concentration camp duty, not the German Army . Ukrainians volunteered to the SS.
 They ethnically cleansed western Ukraine of most of its Jewish and Polish population, by murdering them . They also ethnically cleaned western Ukraine.
 The ethnical question was major for nasi Germans, that was the clear difference with soviets . Nasi Germans are the most ethnical Germans, according to a recent study .
 Ukrainians were those who conducted those policies in Ukraine . Soviet policy has never been against Ukrainians, in fact Ukrainians were the ones who conducted the policies .
 majority of Ukrainians fought against Hitler in soviet army, partisaned at occupied territories . We should not forget that majority of Ukrainian people shared and deserved that victory .
 Many ‘volunteers’ hated the Soviets for several reasons, including, but not limited to the Holodomor .
You are wrong in saying they only volunteered for the SS, since they were in German Army units as well . But they mainly fought in the Eastern Front and none were ever accused of a war crime .
 Hitler came to liberate from soviets as well as the interpretation of femine of 30th as golodomor .
 You are more than welcome to start a interesting topic and sustain a civil discourse and I’m sure it will attract the right people .
 sanctions on USSR now extend well into the future . Western nations here are all in formal agreement .
 Putin as having too extreme an attitude to the West, says Putin . With oil &@ its lowest price in decades, 38US$/barrel, can we sit back and watch as a Palace coup unseats Putin .
 BTW do you think the U.S. is responsible for what happened in Ukraine by supporting the coup against the legally-elected former president .
 Donetsk's elections were also surrounded by voter fraud and bribed voters . Over 300k voted who were not registered to vote in Ukraine .
 yanukotheif fled to avoid prosecution in Kyiv, he resigned his seat. Stranger in his opinion, he said.
Vova was not democratically elected any more then vova was elected in the last election cycle . But he was not elected in any more than one election cycle.
 The responsibility for his ouster was the crimes he committed, the USA did not force him to do that . The responsibility was the crime he committed .
Yanukovychleaks site is located in Ukraine . The site is also known as yanuk Yanukovychleaks . The Kremlin is known to have been behind some of the world's most famous buildings .
 Ukrainian war between Ukraine and Ukraine is not enough for a war of course . Ukraine has a historical separation of western and eastern Ukrainian regions .
 Yanukovich was eastern candidate, while all Ukrainian nationalists including Yushenko – from the west – were from the east . But Yanukovich is an eastern candidate .
 The revolution was made mostly by the west, the east felt their interests were not honored . The east felt the east was not honored.
 Joe Biden recently visited Ukraine and talked from parliament, rada, as a master . He accused current Ukrainian government in corruption and called not to loose the last chance to change .
 Ukraine might be reverting to its old oligarchical ways. I agree Biden may know more then I do and Ukraine may be reverbing to its former oligarchial ways .
 He has the USA treasury and other departments keeping a very close eye on Ukraine . He has been in charge of the U.S. Treasury since 2007 .
 organized crime is again getting a bigger foot in the door. Whether or not it is just a warning for them to keep combating corruption, I do not know .
 Many Ukrainians feel it is getting better, but the white collar crime is still prevalent . The lack of results of Maidan shootings and Odessa investigations is alarming .
 No matter how guilty everyone knows they are, the victim rights side of the equation is difficult . That is one difficult thing about democracy, it is difficult to say .
 He accepted the Kremlin loan and signed off on it regardless of everyone screaming no and voting it down . He accepts the loan and signs off.
 RF agent refused to recognize his signing, then stated himself that he never signed it . RF agent said he had many other witnesses there, but had many others .
 Poroshenko's election was the first presidential election inoshenko's history . Poroshenko has been in power for more than three years . He was elected to the presidency in 2012 .
Previous elections were which group could corrupt more of the election board . Previous elections were when group could corruption more of election board. Previous elections saw group which group was corrupt more.
 Maidan was an advance of democracy and an establishment of the will of a majority of citizens against the past corruption . Maidan is an advance to democracy and was an establishment of the will.
 I think Western criminal elements jumped on that bandwagon hoping to hide under the shroud of democracy and get their people into as many positions as possible . I think the Western criminal element jumped on the that bandwagon. I think it was a bid to hide in order to get people into
Smuggling between groups can be seen by the acceptance of smuggling between groups on the frontline .
 Eastern crime groups are wide scale taking advantage and stealing everything that is not tied down and running to Moscow . Eastern crime gangs are taking advantage of the Russian capital .
 The Ukrainian government says it is going to steal Eastern Ukraine and run away to Russia with it . It's the same way they did in Crimea, the government says .
 That was mostly a RF Kremlin action, not a true representation of the will of the people in the East . That was mainly a RF Moscow action, and not a real representation of a people's will .
 We saw both types of demonstrations in Donetsk and Luhansk, for and against unity . We also saw both kinds of demonstrations.
 FSB and GRU agents broke into police stations, freed jailed Russians, broke into banks and stole everything they could to escalate the crisis . Then booom, FSB, GRU Agents broke in to police stations and broke into military bases, stole everything from banks to military bases .
 A handful of Ukrainians were involved in an organized crime operation in Moscow . A few organized crime families were behind that action .
 The demonstrations for Unity should largely the will of Eastern Ukraine. The demonstrations should largely be held in Ukraine .
 To deny it, you just have not looked hard enough or turn off the channel when the facts stare at you . To deny the facts, you can't look hard enough and turn off your channel when they stare at us .
 You really have a lot of nerve if you supported the Crimean referendum and its results – all blatantly illegal, rife with fraud and against international norms – and you are pointing out they should have thrown him in jail, impeached him, then hung him . Or just waited 1.
 The changes that he implemented to the constitution of Ukraine made that removal of him from power more difficult and his prosecution as well. The changes he implemented made his prosecution more difficult .
 I wish they would have caught him as he ran away and gave up office, I really do . I wish I had caught him, I wish he would have given up office .
 I wish Ukrainian military and Interior Ministry would have stopped yanukothief and arrested him in his first year . I wish Ukraine military and the Interior Ministry itself would have arrested him .
 corruption has always been in eastern countries, Georgia, Ukraine, Russia, Georgia and Ukraine .
Hardly, will see how you would manage to help Ukraine, instead of pushing down Russia . Hardly, would see how we would help Ukraine instead of push down Russia.
 IMF has already changed their rules to allow Ukraine not to pay sovereign debt to Russia . The change is a good start, says the IMF .