 Elizabeth Pond, a respected American author, recently wrote a eulogy for Ukraine . She has reported on Eastern Europe for three decades .
 The seizure of Crimea, Russia's military rout of the Ukrainians in the east, and the humiliating ceasefire imposed on President Petro Poroshenko, she wrote . Ukraine was again "a borderland playground" for its mighty neighbor .
 Poroshenko gambled that the Ukrainian army could defeat the Russian-backed insurgents without provoking an outright Russian invasion, says Pond . Poroshenko says Pond, who says he gambled, gambled.
 Ukrainian military defeat in late August was followed by a September 5th ceasefire . Poroshenko conceded three years of special status to secessionist Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The Donbas region accounts for 20 percent of Ukraine's industry and 18 percent of its population . Those districts adjacent to Russia form the core of the Donbas area .
In mid-September, Poroshenko visited Washington, receiving a tumultuous reception from congress . In mid- September, he visited Washington.
 Obama administration rejected his appeal for precision weaponry that could defeat the rebels . But the Obama administration rejects his appeal.
 Russia's objective of subjugating and destabilizing Ukraine had succeeded . Russia had succeeded in its objective .
 The best that can be hoped for is public endorsement of Poroshenko and Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk's program of economic and political reform .
 The president's 'Petro Poroshenko Bloc' is expected to be the biggest winner with over 30% of the vote . The president is the president of Ukraine .
 Analysts say only 23 percent of Ukrainians in the Russian-speaking east are likely to vote . Only 23 percent in the east will vote.
This will be Ukraine's first election in which pro-western and pro-Russian parties are not pitted against each another . The election is being boycotted by separatists and the party of disgraced former president Viktor Yanukovych not participating .
 The goal is to build a properly functioning state, he says, something that has not occurred during 23 years of independence .
 This month they pushed through the outgoing parliament anti-corruption legislation . The legislation is required by the European Union as a condition for an economic association agreement .
 Yatseniuk hails the provision that government officials make public their assets and financial transactions . The provision is part of the government's policy to make public assets and transactions .
 Canadian economist Oleh Havrylyshyn says as of now not one of the recommendations has been implemented .
 When Poroshenko and Vladimir Putin met in Milan on October 17, progress was reportedly made on the acrimonious dispute over gas supplies and pricing .
 Opinions are mixed whether Russian gas shipments -suspended since June - will resume before winter .
 Ukraine faces severe energy shortages, says economist Havrylyshyn . He says it will only be resolved through the painful medicine of market based pricing .
 Ukraine does have a $17 billion bailout program with the International Monetary Fund . The IMF is conditioned on rigorous reforms . Ukraine does not have a bailout program.
 Ukraine's currency has lost value, down 18% against the dollar in the past three months .
Hudson Institute scholar David Satter says Maidan protests have inspired Russia's long-suffering citizens . Satter: Maidan protesters against dictatorship and corruption have inspired Russian citizens .
 Post-communist Russia and Ukraine, Satter continued, evolved in similarly corrupt ways with oligarchs controlling the economy .
 Putin was threatened by Ukrainians who want to connect with the European Union, says Satter . Satter: Ukrainians desire to connect to the EU, a western alternative to a hopeless status quo .
 Despite current nationalist fervor, Putin's Ukraine adventure, Satter says it hastens his eventual demise . Satter: Despite the current nationalists' enthusiasm, Putin is likely to die soon .
 Barry D Wood has written extensively about post-communist economic transformation . He has also written about the role of the Soviet Union .