 On September 8, 2015, former Ukrainian president Leonid Kuchma arrived in Minsk . The former president arrived in the city of Minsk in September .
 Ukraine's representative to the Trilateral Contact Group that seeks to end the conflict in Donbas . He travelled to Belarusian capital, as Ukraine's ambassador to the group .
 Kuchma called for the withdrawal of heavy artillery from Eastern Ukraine . He urged the UN to send a peacekeeping force to war-torn Donbas territories .
Kuchma's prominent stature as a diplomat has intrigued and confounded Ukraine experts . Kuchma has been in charge of Ukraine for more than ten years .
 His political rehabilitation also makes for a dramatic redemption story, says the film . The actor's political rehabilitation is a dramatic story .
 Kuchma was disgraced by allegations of corruption, authoritarianism and murder while in office . He had single-digit approval ratings in months leading up to the 2004 Orange Revolution .
 Kuchma's influence on Ukraine's foreign policy since the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea. Two factors explain the influence of the Russian government in Ukraine's policy .
 Kuchma has continued to be a prominent voice in Ukrainian politics after leaving office . First, she has been an outspoken voice in Ukraine's political scene .
 The failures of his successors, Yushchenko and Yanukovych, have caused the Ukrainian public and elites to view Kuchma's presidency more favorably than they did while he was in office .
 Kuchma is respected internationally as a competent defender of Ukrainian interests . He has a proven track record of making deals with the Kremlin .
 Kuchma's post-presidential life has undoubtedly been the most active and colorful of any former Ukrainian president .
 Kuchma had a hostile relationship with the new president . Due to his support for Yanukovych's failed 2004 election campaign and rumors of his involvement in the poisoning of Yushchenko, he had a hostility relationship with Yanukovych .
 In February 2005, Yushchenko announced a broad-based anti-corruption campaign targeting "privatization theft" in Ukraine . The campaign was launched in February 2005 .
 Kryvorizhstal was sold to Kuchma's son-in-law, Viktor Pinchuk, in June 2004 for $800 million . The bid was only half as high as that placed by his competitors . KryvorIZhstal is now a
 Yushchenko's decision to sack Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko briefly improved relations between the two men . The decision was made in September 2005 .
 Kuchma's solidarity with Yushchenko during the 2005 crisis was probably motivated by two factors . Kuchman's solidarity was likely motivated by the two factors, according to a report .
 Kuchma's attempts to ingratiate himself with Yushchenko were his first steps towards healing the wounds that tarnished his legacy as president .
 Kuchma wanted to frame the investigation of Viktor Pinchuk as purely a Tymoshenko revenge operation . Second, as the Financial Times reported at the time, wanted toframe the investigation as purely an revenge operation. The Financial Times said at the times, Kuch
 Tymoshenko would be able to discredit the corruption allegations swirling around his son-in-law . By helping to isolate theoshenko, he could discredit the allegations .
 Kuchma's improved relationship with Yushchenko was short-lived . He soon resumed his fierce public and private criticisms of the administration's policies .
 A February 3, 2010 confidential interview declassified by WikiLeaks reveals Kuchma's discontent with Yushchenko's style of governance . The interview was between then-US ambassador to Ukraine John F Tefft and Kuchman .
 Kuchma claimed that non-stop fighting between Yushchenko and Tymoshenko prevented Ukraine from developing an effective economic strategy .
 Yushchenko condemned anti-Soviet Ukrainian partisan Stepan Bandera as a "Hero of Ukraine" He also condemned the praise of anti-Ukrainian partisan Stepa as "a Hero of the Ukraine"
Kuchma's endorsement of Yanukovych during the 2010 election campaign did not surprise Western or Ukrainian observers . Kuchma was not surprised by the outcome of the election campaign .
In 2011, Kuchma was indicted by Ukrainian courts for his alleged involvement in the 2000 beheading of journalist and regime critic, Georgiy Gongadze . In 2011, he was finally indicted by Ukraine courts for the alleged involvement.
 Yanukovych's fall from power allowed Kuchma to return to the limelight . It was ironically, Yanukovych's fallen from power that allowed him to get back into the spotlight .
 Kuchma expressed his strong opposition to Russia's military intervention in Donbas . Ukraine's new president Petro Poroshenko selected him as the Ukrainian government's representative in the June 2014 peace talks .
 Euro-Maidan did not discredit Kuchma. Even though the Ukrainian people had overthrown Kuchman's hand-picked successor just months earlier, Euro- Maidan didn't discredit him .
 Oleh Rybachuk, Yushchenko's Chief of Staff, told me why Kuchma's reputation after the Orange Revolution was not as scathed as Yanukovych's was after Maidan .Rybachuk is former Deputy PM of Ukraine for European Integration .
Kuchma's non-violent handover of power after the Orange Revolution also improved his image relative to Yanukovych . Kuchma was also better than Yanukovych's predecessor .
 Ukraine's security forces had defected from the regime by late 2004 and Kuchma had no viable repression option . Yanukovych cracked down violently on the 2013-14 demonstrations .
 Kuchma's greatest strength as a negotiator comes from his uniquely extensive experience making deals with the Kremlin on matters that affected Ukraine's vital interests . He has also worked on deals that affect Ukraine's interests .
 Leonid Kravchuk and immediate successor Yushchenko were ethnic Russians in Eastern Ukraine . Kuchma's initial supporters were ethnic Russian in Ukraine .
 Kuchma's willingness to engage in clear-headed diplomacy with Russia explains why he was a more effective foreign policy president than Kravchuk, who conflicted openly with Russia and faced natural gas supply cuts from 1992-1994 .
 Kuchma effectively negotiated with Russia over the Kerch Strait, a controversial land bridge linking the Sea of Azov to the Black Sea . Rachkevych is the editor-at-large of Kyiv Post .
 Kuchma's rhetoric and political posturing provided a delicate balance between Ukrainian nationalism and pro-Russian sentiment .
 Kuchma famously entitled his 2003 book Ukraine is not Russia, to counter those who were skeptical of his commitment to Ukrainian sovereignty . Kuchmma famously called Ukraine not Russia .
 Kuchma infuriated Yushchenko by visiting Moscow as Yanukovych's 2004 election campaign unraveled in the wake of election fraud and mass protests . But only a year later, Kuchman infuriated him by visiting Russia .
 Kuchma's stance as a negotiator under Poroshenko is much more rhetorically confrontational towards Russia than his actions as president would have predicted .
 Kuchma chided the West for not taking more serious action against Russia after the Debaltseve ceasefire violations . He insisted Ukraine must recapture the Donbas territories annexed by Putin in 2014 .
Kuchma remains a valuable asset as Ukraine attempts to seek a viable middle ground with Russia . Despite this hawkish stance, Kuchma continues to be an important asset for Ukraine .
 Oleh Rybachuk compared Poroshenko's appointment of Kuchma to the United States' use of former presidents to negotiate during Mideast peace talks and crisis situations . Ryachuk compared the appointment of Poroshenko to the U.S. use of ex-presidents to
 Rybachuk believes that Kuchma is held in high esteem by both the Donetsk separatists and Russia . In spite of his dubious actions as president or maybe even because of them,Rybachuk says .
This is a quality unmatched by anyone currently serving in the Ukrainian government . This is aquality unmatched by any current government. This is the quality of any government member .
 The revival of Kuchma's political career was one of the most unexpected byproducts of the current Ukraine conflict . The revival was a nakedly exposed Ukraine's dearth of respected conflict negotiators .
 Kuchma's legacy as a diplomat could go long way towards covering over negative historical memories of his presidency . If he is able to advance Ukraine towards peace on acceptable terms, his legacy could go far further .