Until Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2014, relations between the two countries were testy, but manageable .
 attitudes toward Russia have hardened to a consider­able degree, writes Steven Pifer . Western institutions such as the European Union and NATO have grown, he says .
 The Ambassadors Review is the foreign affairs journal of the Council of American Ambassadors . This article was published in The Amb ambassadors Review, the foreign Affairs journal .
 Following the Soviet Union’s collapse, Ukraine and Russia maintained relations that at times were testy .
 The Kremlin used military force to seize Crimea and then supported armed separatism in the eastern Ukrainian region of Donbas . That changed in 2014, when the Kremlin usedMilitary force to seized Crimea and supported separatism .
 attitudes within Ukraine toward Russia have hardened to a consider­able degree . The appeal of Western institutions such as the European Union and NATO has grown .
 Ukraine and Russia found agreement on elimination of nuclear weapons . With U.S. help, Ukraine, Russia agreed to eliminate nuclear weapons.
 Kyiv and Moscow struck an arrangement on dividing the ships of the Black Sea Fleet . Ukraine agreed to allow Russia to use ports and other facilities in Crimea for its warships .
 The sides resolved their differences over debts and had occasional spats over energy . They usually found a solution .
 Crimea is the only part of Ukraine with a majority of ethnic Russians . As for Crimea, tensions periodically arose .
 Following the Maidan Revolution and then-President Viktor Yanukovych’s flight from Kyiv, Russian soldiers with identifying insignia stripped from their uniforms seized Crimea .
 Russia illegally annexed the peninsula within three weeks, following a wholly sham referendum .
 Russia had full support from Russia, including leadership, funding, heavy weapons, ammunition and, at times, regular units of the Russian army .
 The fighting in Donbas is more correctly de­scribed as a conflict between Ukraine and Russia .
 The initial provisions called for a ceasefire and withdrawal of heavy weapons from the line of contact . But those goals have never been achieved .
 Most observers lay the bulk of the blame on the Russians and separatist fighters . Most observers blame the separatists for the conflict .
 The Kremlin prefers to continue a simmering conflict in Donbas as a means to undermine and destabilize the government in Kyiv . It wants to hinder its effort to build a successful Ukrainian state and implement its association agreement with the European Union .
 Ukraine has found itself in conflict with Russia now for more than three years . Ukraine has been fighting Russia since 2008 .
 Some 10,000 people have died in eastern Ukraine, not counting an unknown number of Russian military personnel . The seizure of Crimea was relatively bloodless .
Ukrainian population is hardening attitudes toward Russia and Russians . The conflict has been blamed on the Ukraine-Russia conflict . Russia and Russia have been fighting in Ukraine for years .
 When Ukraine first regained its independence in the early 1990s, some nationalists held sharply anti-Russian views . But they constituted a small minority .
 Ukrainians generally hoped to get along with Russia . Many spoke Russian as their first language and had family and/or friends in Russia .
 57 percent of Ukrainians polled ex­pressed a very cold or cold attitude toward Russia . Only 17 percent expressed a very warm or warm attitude to Russia .
 The hardening of anti-Russian sentiment could make it more difficult for Kyiv to im­plement the political provisions of Minsk II if a ceasefire were to take hold .
 Poroshenko agreed in Minsk II to a constitutional amendment on decentralization of some political authorities . For exam­ple, Poroshenko agrees to an amendment on some political authority .
 Many Ukrainians now regard decentralization as an unwar­ranted concession to the Russians and separatists . Minsk II ended two and a half years after the conclusion of Minsk 2 .
 It is not clear that Poroshenko could secure a constitutional majority in the Rada to pass such an amendment . It is unclear whether Poroshenko can secure aconstitutional majority .
 The European Union, with its allure of economic prosperity and functioning democracy, has long at­tracted the interest of a sizeable portion of the Ukrainian population .
 Yanukovych's presidency lurched toward greater authoritarianism in 2010-2013 . That appeal grew as the Yanukovych presidency lurch toward more authoritarianism .
 Yanukovych's decision not to sign an association agreement with the European Union triggered first demonstrations in Kyiv in November 2013 . It was the Yanukovych decision to not sign a deal with the EU that triggered the first demonstrations .
 The Rada ap­pointed an acting president and an acting prime minister after the Maidan Revolution and Yanukovych’s departure .
 The EU's number-one foreign policy priority was to sign the EU association agreement, a priority that had wide public support . They immediately made clear that their number- one foreign policypriority was to signs the agreement .
 Poroshenko signed the association agreement on June 27, 2014, and it took full effect on September 1, 2017 . The association agreement was signed in June 2014 .
 53 percent of Ukrainians who were surveyed in April 2017 favored joining the EU as opposed to any other international economic union . EU leaders have refused to give Ukraine a membership perspective .
 Ukraine-EU trade agreement contains a deep and comprehensive free trade ar­rangement . Among other things, the agreement will bolster Ukraine- EU trade . The agreement also includes a long-term agreement on a number of issues .
 If Ukraine fully implements the associa­tion agreement, it will adopt many EU political and economic standards . Ukraine will be able to adopt many European economic and political standards .
Full implementation would bring Ukraine to a point where it should be considered. While the agree­ment offers Ukraine no membership perspective, full implementation would be a step toward full implementation .
 The Ukrainian leadership and public have warmly embraced the idea of drawing closer to the European Union . The Ukrainian leader and public are warmly embracing the idea .
 Kyiv government in Kyiv to moderate public expectations about future EU membership . That could prove a tough proposition, and it would be wise for the government tomoderate public expectations .
 Poroshenko in Spring 2014 indicated a readiness to set aside issues such as a mem­bership action plan with NATO . If that would help find a settlement with Moscow, Poroshenko said .
 In July of this year, Kyiv said that Kyiv would pursue a membership action plan . He expressed the hope that Ukraine could meet NATO’s mem­bership criteria by 2020 .
 46 percent of Ukrainians favor joining the alliance, as opposed to 27 percent who opposed joining . For example, the April 2017 survey showed that 46 per cent of Ukrainians support joining .
 43 percent opposed joining NATO while 34 percent favored doing so . This is a reverse of the results from a March 2014 survey, in which 43 percent oppose joining NATO .
 In the 1990s and 2000s, support for NATO membership rarely if ever broached 25 percent . In the 90s and 1990s, the support for the NATO membership was less than 25 percent.
 The upswing almost certainly represents a backlash against Russia’s aggression against Russia . Russia's aggression has been seen as the most aggressive in recent years .
 There is little support within NATO for putting Ukraine on a membership track, and membership is not in the cards in the near term .
 It would be wise for the government in Kyiv not to inflate public expectations. Here, too, it would also be wise to not inflate expectations .
 Ukraine can do much with the alliance in terms of practical cooperation, including steps that would bring the country closer to NATO standards and values . But Ukraine can also do much more with the NATO alliance, says the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine .
 Ukrainian government and many Ukrainians see the U.S. as Kyiv's primary security partner .
 Ukrainians recognize the weight carried by Washington in formulating a Western policy to support Ukraine . The U.S. government tends to take a more strategic view of Ukraine and its geopolitical situation than do most European countries .
 The November 2016 U.S. presidential election startled many in Kyiv . The election was held in November 2016 .
 The United States may drop sanctions on Russia and/or recognize Crimea's illegal annexation . They had followed Donald Trump’s candidacy, including his desire to improve relations with Putin .
 Ukraine has been reassured by actual U.S. policy, however, according to the United States policy . Ukraine's president is expected to be in the middle of the year .
 U.S. officials have stated that the United States would not accept Crimea’s annexation . Washington has maintained and even strengthened sanctions .
 Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Secretary of Defense James Mattis have each visited Kyiv . Trump hosted Poroshenko before his meeting with Putin .
 U.S. policy toward Ukraine should maintain a consistent line, according to the President .
 Ukrainian authori­ties will take comfort in that, while being wary of a wayward Trump tweet .
 A change in Russian policy that led to an acceptable settlement of the conflict in Donbas might ease some of the anti-Russian feeling . But the Kremlin does not seem interested in such a change at present .
 Crimea would remain a major obstacle on the path toward any kind of normalization between Kyiv and Moscow . Even then, Crimea would continue to be an obstacle to normalization .