 Each of the former republics occupies a specific place in its foreign and security policy . Each of them occupies a particular place in the foreign andSecurity policy .
Georgia and Ukraine are the two countries that have the same policy . Georgia and Ukraine have both been in the same country as Ukraine . Georgia is the country's most populous country .
 The President of Russia opened a new chapter in relations with the West through his speech at a conference in Munich in 2007 .
 He openly demanded equal treatment for Russia and the cessation of meddling with its internal affairs . He filled the western world with consternation by openly demanding equal treatment.
 The U.S. administration felt obliged to respond to an assertive Russian stance . It was decided to speed up the process of NATO’s enlargement by admitting Georgia and Ukraine .
 At the same time, Washington made its intention clear to include Georgia in the MAP as well .
 From Moscow's point of view, this was a drastic crossing of a certain boundary and a threat to its security interests . From Moscow’s point of views, this is a drastic Crossing of a Certain boundary .
 Georgia was conquered by Russia in 1801, but it was as early as 1812 that Piotr Bagration became a hero of the war with Napoleon . He was mortally wounded during the battle of Borodino in 1812 .
 At the top of the USSR there were many people of Georgian origin . Joseph Stalin and Sergo Ordzhonikidze were among those who led the USSR .
 Stalin was born in the Georgian city of Gori and his figure divides both the Georgian and Russian society even today .
 In 1956, after the 20th congress of the CPSU during which Nikita Khrushchev debunked the cult of Stalin, protests took place in Tbilisi .
 Vasil Mzhavanadze, a long-time secretary of the Georgian communist party in the period of 1953–1972, participated in a plot against Khrushchev . He advocated keeping Stalin’s museum in Gori .
 Stalin’s monument was not destroyed either after the debunking of his cult or the breakup of the USSR,1 and is still there today .
 Georgia was the center of destabilization and de-sovietization in the final years of the USSR . Georgia was a key part of the Soviet Union's demise .
 Georgian cinematography, painting, music, and theater were an important part of the Soviet culture .
 The film was directed in the Georgian language in 1984 before Gorbachev’s perestroika . It was the first film presenting the era of Stalinism .
 This is a story of the life and activity of a dictator who resembles Stalin and Beria at the same time . This is the story of a man who resembles the dictator who resembled Stalin at the time .
 In the final scene, the son of the dictator throws his corpse out of its grave . In the last scene, he throws his body out of the grave .
 The sensitivity of Putin and of the Russian political elites concerning this country can be easily understood . The sensitivity to Putin and his political elites is easily understood.
In order to reach the vast Russian territory and attack the center of power in Moscow, it was necessary to first enter the territory of Ukraine .
 It plays the role of a buffer state of vital, strategic importance. Thus, it plays a key role in the development of the country .
 No Russian leader can tolerate Ukraine’s political and military alliances with states considered by Russia to be enemies . Russia is considered to be the most powerful state in Ukraine .
 The Kremlin cannot also be indifferent to a situation in Ukraine where there is a center of power championing integration with a western alliance . The Kremlin is also trying to protect its own interests in Ukraine .
 Great countries always oversensitive to potential threats in the vicinity of their territory . Great countries are always overssensitive to potential threat threats in their territory.
 The U.S. would also not tolerate a situation if another superpower was close to its borders . The United States would not tolerate such a situation .
 China is trying to build a political or military alliance with Canada or Mexico . One can imagine the outrage and reaction of Washington if China attempted to build an alliance with the United States .
 Russian leaders informed the authorities of western states many times that the enlargement of NATO by the accession of Georgia and Ukraine was unacceptable to Russia .
 The aim of this article is to determine the place of Georgia and Ukraine in the policy of the Russian Federation . The aim is to find out the country's place in Russia's policy on Ukraine .
 Theoretical methods such as source and literature criticism, analysis, synthesis and inference have been used in order to answer these questions .
Disagreements between the Allies over Ukraine and Georgia Joining NATO in 2008 . Putin issued a warning that if Ukraine andGeorgia joined the Alliance, it would result in their division .
 Chancellor Angela Merkel and President Nicolas Sarkozy argued that the majority of Ukrainian society was against membership . In the case of Georgia, its leader Mikhail Saakashvili was not a real democrat .
 In November 2007, he closed the biggest opposition TV channel and broke up a rally of protesters who opposed his leadership . He closed the largest opposition TV station and closed his biggest opposition channel .
 Georgia has two unresolved border conflicts – in Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Georgia has been involved in a series of violent incidents between the two countries .
 The leaders of the Central and East European states declared openly that Sarkozy and Merkel were being bribed with Russian gas . The leaders were also accused of bribing them with gas .
 The strongest words were directed at the German minister of foreign affairs, Frank-Walter Steinmeier . Steinmeier is a former German foreign affairs minister .
 He was told that after what Germany did in the 20th century it did not have any moral right to stand in the way of the freedom of East European countries . He was also told that it was not a moral right for Germany to stand after what it did in
 The argument between Angela Merkel and Condoleezza Rice was a very interesting event, Mikhail Zygar reports .
 The two women were the only women present at the summit . They were standing aside and loudly arguing in Russian, which they both know perfectly well .
 Georgia and Ukraine will not be included in the MAP program, and at the same time they were promised full membership of NATO but without a clearly determined time perspective . It was decided thatGeorgia and Ukraine would not be part of the program .
 Georgia and Ukraine were not satisfactory either for Georgia or for Ukraine, or for Russia . However, the compromise was not satisfactory for both countries .
 Saakashvili and Putin, who came to Bucharest on the last day, were outraged . SaakASHvili was outraged .
 NATO's enlargement by admitting two states from the post-Soviet region had been clearly expressed . Resignation from the MAP had already been agreed, but even this was not acceptable to Russian president .
 A part of Eastern Europe is Eastern Europe, and a significant one is a gift from us . A significant part of its territory is Eastern European territory .
 Nobody, at that time, believed or anticipated an actual conflict between Russia and the Ukraine . At the time, there was no real conflict .
 Dmitry Medvedev was to be held the following month, on May 7 . The inauguration of the new president was scheduled to take place in May .
 The policies of the new president were largely a continuation of the policies of his predecessor . The War with Georgia was the first time the president was in office .
 His first diplomatic initiative was presenting the draft of a new treaty on European security at the end of 2009 . His first initiative was presented in 2009 .
 The new European security architecture would not be based on NATO but on the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations . However, the activity that preoccupied him the most during his presidency was the war with Georgia .
 The tension increased due to the concentration of the Georgian army close to the border with Abkhazia .
 Russia enlarged the military contingent of its so-called peacekeeping forces there . As a response, Russia began to hand Russian passports to citizens of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Moscow justified the move by the need for the rebuilding of Abkhazian infrastructure and providing humanitarian aid . Moscow justified move by need for rebuilding of infrastructure.
 In the beginning, Medvedev tried to open a new page in Russian-Georgian relations . In the start, Medvesev tried. to opening a new pages in Russia's relations .
During his first meeting with Saakashvili in Saint Petersburg in June 2008, he declared that he was ready to restore good, bilateral relations .
During the second meeting in July in Astana, the atmosphere of talks was not that friendly . The atmosphere of the two meetings was not as friendly.
 Russia had planned military operations against Georgia much earlier. That was a clear proof that Russia had been planning military operations much earlier .
 Many different authors have tried to reconstruct the course of events leading to the outbreak of this war . Many different author has tried to recreate the events that led to this war.
 Russia had been preparing for the war for some time past, analysts say . Their analyses indicate that Russia was preparing for a war for a time past .
 Russia had launched a massive cyber attack paralyzing the Georgian governmental portals . Prior to the military operations, Russia had attacked Georgian government portals .
 Russia was already experienced in a “denial-of-service’s attack when in the spring of 2007 it blocked banking and governmental servers in Estonia .
Large Russian military maneuvers known as “Caucasus 2008’s’ were carried out close to the Georgian border .
 The official aim of the exercise was to improve the skills of combating terrorism in a mountainous terrain . Such a scenario was a perfect fit for the operation of invading another country .
 Russian media carried out a disinformation campaign. Simultaneously, the Russian media also carried out the disinformation campaign .
 The number of engaged personnel and military equipment was much larger . In fact, the number of engagement personnel and equipment was larger .
 At the end of these military maneuvers, the forces did not return to where they had been previously stationed .
 80,000 soldiers and members of paramilitary formations would take part in war operations . 60,000 would be involved in operations. Not only did they remain in place but they were quickly strengthened .
 Four thousand citizens were evacuated from the capital of South Ossetia Tskhinvali to Russia . Four thousand people were evacuated.
 The evacuation was carried out in a planned and organized way, which proves that it was coordinated by the authorities . The evacuation is a coordinated way.
 At the same time, about five thousand journalists of the Russian media appeared in the city, as well as in the metropolitan TV station .
 Russian preparation for invasion of Georgia had begun over two years before, it seems . It seems that the Russian preparations for the invasion had begun two years earlier .
 The main geopolitical purpose was the elimination of all structures of Georgian statehood from South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
 separatist republics were to become independent, and then integrated into the Russian Federation . In this way, they were to be integrated into Russia .
 The planned military attack on Georgia was, on the one hand, to prevent the country from joining NATO . On the other hand, it was a clear message for Ukraine that membership in NATO could mean war with Russia .
 Such an action was intended to undermine the effectiveness of the North Atlantic Alliance’s defense umbrella, as it would not be able to mobilize its resources for a non-member state . Such a move would undermine the organization's effectiveness, says the U.S. Navy .
 The plan of the operation against Georgia also had long-term strategic goals . The plan was designed to keep Georgia out of the polls .
 For Russia it was a priority to increase control over the most important fuel pipelines . For Russia, it was an important priority for the country's oil industry .
 A pro-Russian government in Tbilisi would mean controlling the transport corridor of gas, oil, and other natural resources . Central Asia and Azerbaijan would be connected to the Black Sea and other reservoirs .
 In 1999, western concerns reached an agreement with the states of Central Asia concerning the construction of the oil pipeline Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan . In 2006, the pipeline began to be used in 2006 .
 Azerbaijan, as well as Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan, became independent of Russia-controlled pipelines . The pipeline allowed Azerbaijan to become independent of the Russia- controlled pipelines . It bypassed Russian territory .
 The Russian-Georgian alliance would enable the control of Azerbaijan from the west and north . It would make it difficult for the United States to station armed forces and intelligence assets on the territory of this country .
 Azerbaijan pursued a definitely pro-western policy until the annexation of the Crimea . It is worth mentioning that until the Crimea was annexed, Azerbaijan pursued pro-Western policy .
 On 8 August 2008, when world leaders were participating in the Olympic Games opening ceremony, Russian tanks crossed the Georgian border .
 The night before, fighting between the Georgian armed forces and the military formations of South Ossetia broke out .
 Troops on both sites used machine guns, grenade launchers, and mortars . Troops also used mortars and machine guns .
 Georgian artillery of the 4th infantry brigade began a twenty minutes artillery bombardment . The land forces took up arms and started capturing districts in Ossetia .
 The Georgian troops entered the capital of South Ossetia, Tskhinvali, in the early morning .
 The immediate Russian reaction was overwhelming, which might confirm the earlier hypothesis on the planned operation against Georgia, or on having intelligence concerning Saakashvili and the Georgian armed forces .
 Troops stationed near the border with South Ossetia were given orders to regroup in the direction of the Roki Tunnel,18 connecting North and South Ossetsia .
 The 58th Russian Army stationed in Vladikavkaz quickly gained advantage over the Georgian forces . The Russian Army is stationed in the city of Vladikvkaz .
 Lessons and Implications (Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, United States Army War College, 2011), 2.2.
 Lack of faith in its political effectiveness and pressure of Russia forced Baku to isolate itself from the world .
 The policy exercised by the authorities was more and more distant from the expectations and plans of the western states .
 Azerbaijan revised the balance of powers and the regional policy . In the context of the conflict in Ukraine.
 Azerbaijan is the key country of South Caucasus given its natural resources (oil and gas) as well as demographic potential . For the West and Russia, Azerbaijan is a key country.
 Azerbaijan supported Georgia during the gas conflicts with Russia in 2007 and 2008 . Azerbaijan also supported Georgia in 2008 and 2007 .
 See Aleksandra Jarosiewicz, “Azerbejd�żan – narastający problem dla Zachodu’s.”
 The 33rd Mountainous Battalion, trained to operate in the Caucasus region, took part in the operation as well .
 On the third day of the war, Russia opened a second front of operations – in Abkhazia .
 Russian forces prevented Georgian troops from achieving any of their goals . The Russian forces blocked the key Roki Tunnel .
 Georgian forces clash with the 135th and 693rd regiments of the 58th Army north of the city .
 Georgia threw its most valuable forces into the fight, the 2nd and the 4th brigades . Georgia's western part of the country was left defenseless by the fight .
 Russian forces did not encounter any resistance when entering Abkhazia . The situation was taken advantage of by the Russian forces which did not face resistance .
 In the city of Senaki they destroyed the infrastructure of the 2nd Brigade engaged at that time in South Ossetia . The 2nd brigade was engaged in the city.
 The defeat of Georgia was assured from the beginning of the conflict, mostly due to the fact that the Roki Tunnel had not been blocked .
 The operations of Russian forces were supported by a war in cyberspace . The operation was supported by the Russian military.
 Internet sites were attacked both in Georgia as well as in the western states . The sites include the official portal of the Georgian president, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Central Bank, the parliament, and the highest court .
 The ceasefire began on 8 August at 05:15, and ended on 11 August when the Russian forces announced a ceasefire . They began on the 8 August, and were repeated every 30 minutes .
 The Russian forces did not enter Tbilisi as a result of negotiations by France's President .
 Russia undertook disinformation activities attempting to impose its own version of events upon the world . Along with cyber-attacks, Russia undertook a number of disinformation activities .
Georgia's president was the aggressor, Georgia's president in particular, according to interpretation . Russia was the victim of the aggression, Georgia says . Georgia and Russia's president were the aggressors.
 Moscow forced to intervene in defense of Russians living in South Ossetia and Abkhazia in order to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe . Moscow was forced to protect Russian citizens living in the region .
 The West and the USA did not have 19 Cohen and Hamilton, The Russian Military and the Georgia War, 11 . Also, they insisted that the West and USA had not had 19 Cohen, Hamilton and Hamilton .
 A swift end to the conflict meant that Russia had attained its political goals by preventing the progress of NATO’s enlargement in the Caucasus .
 Russia's "niet" to Ukraine's European Aspirations has already been mentioned, from the point of view of Moscow’s security and politics . Ukraine is of even greater importance than Georgia, and in the context of its pro-European aspirations the crisis was unavoidable .
 The West with the USA in the leading role and Russia. It meant de facto a new form of confrontation between the superpowers,e. The United States and Russia are the leading powers in the world .
 During the night of 21/22 of February 2014, an agreement concerning a political solution to the crisis in Ukraine was reached .
 The document was signed by the president of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych as well as the leaders of the opposition . The document has been signed by Viktor Yanukovych and the opposition leaders .
 The foreign ministers of France, Germany, and Poland were the guarantors of the agreement . The foreign minister of Germany, Germany and Poland was the guarantor .
 A representative of the Russian Federation, who was present in Kyiv, also participated in the meeting .
 The compromise was not accepted by the protesters at the Maidan in Kyiv . The compromise is not accepted.
 Yanukovych escaped from Kyiv together with few of his co-workers, first to the Crimea, and then to Russia . Yanukovych was deprived of the support of his power base including the law enforcement departments .
 The crowd in Kyiv was supported by some oligarchs as well as nationalist groups . The crowd was supported.
 Ukraine's goals of foreign policy were clearly expressed, and included integration with the EU and Euro-Atlantic institutions . After Yanukovych's escape, the goals of Ukraine’s foreign policy was clearly expressed .
 The new Ukrainian identity that the protesters demanded was to be built on the rejection of the Soviet and imperial past of Russia as well as on the primacy of the Ukrainian language and culture . The protesters demanded that the new identity was built on a rejection of Russia's imperial past.
 The governments and public opinion in the West welcomed the Ukrainian revolution with satisfaction . It was seen as a victory for European values as well as proof of the attraction of western democracy and its market economy .
 The U.S. and EU representatives were at the Maidan . They were in attendance at the events .
 Wnioski dla Ukrainy i Polski is an Instrument of Influence of the Russian Federation on the Post-Soviet Area . It is also known as an instrument of influence.
 The Maidan was not only treated as a democratic expression of the protest of Ukrainians against a corrupt state, but also as a protest against the Moscow-oriented foreign policy .
 Yanukovych’s decision on November 2013 not to sign the already prepared agreement on the association of Ukraine with the European Union . The direct reason for the riots was Yanukovych's decision not to signs the agreement on Ukraine's association with EU .
 The president was afraid of the political and economic costs as well as the threat to his office in the context of presidential elections due to be held in 2015 . The president is afraid of political costs and the threat of his office .
 The decision by the head of the Ukrainian state was influenced by the Kremlin which had sent unambiguous signals of dissatisfaction to Kyiv .
 Russia argued that any association with the EU would bring serious harm to the economic cooperation between the two countries . Russia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus would significantly invigorate the Ukrainian economy .
 At the end of 2013 and the beginning of 2014, he suspended the process of association with the EU . He turned to Moscow with a request for financial support, which was granted immediately .
 In December 2013, Russia declared its readiness to provide financial support in the amount of 15 billion USD, out of which 3 billion would be transferred immediately . Russia declared in December 2013 that it was ready to provide the money .
 Ukrainian leader hoped that it would be possible to maneuver between Russia and the EU without having to make a final decision . The Ukrainian leader hopes that it will be possible.
 Ukraine was second in terms of the size of its territory and seventh in the number of citizens . Ukraine was a European country that was second on the list of countries in the world .
 The association agreement between the EU and the Ukraine did not mean much . The EU and Ukraine agreed to create a free-trade zone .
 The road from association to membership in the EU was still long, but it was impossible for Russia to ignore the symbolic step in terms of politics and geopolitics .
 The fact that Ukraine was leaving the historical Russian sphere of influence and its pro-western orientation meant a fundamental shift in the eastern part of Europe . The fact of Ukraine leaving the historic Russian sphere.
 Moscow’s hopes to create the Euro-Asian center of political and economic influence on the basis of the former USSR region were undermined .
 Russia assumed that the Ukrainian example of overthrowing the existing power would be an inspiration for anti-systemic movements in other countries .
 At the same time, it seemed that counter revolutions were gaining new energy and motivation .
 The essence of this project was putting Yanukovych, who was never fully trusted in Moscow, in a situation in which only one choice was possible – the alliance with Russia and the membership in the Euro-Asian Union .
 Yanukovych, who was always guided by private interests and not the good of the state, escaped from Ukraine .
 At the same time, representatives of the western states negotiating the association agreement were not able to restraint the Maidan’s emotions after its signing .
 In Moscow, the situation was perceived as the United States entering the political game . U.S. agents provoked clashes in Kyiv between protesters and law enforcement services .
 Russia says U.S. agents deprived the president of Ukraine of the support of the power ministries and pushed Europe away from having any influence on the course of events at Maidan .
 The Kremlin concluded that Ukraine had not only separated itself from Russia, but was also being transformed into an American stronghold .
 In this situation, a decision was taken to carry out the annexation of the Crimea . The Crimea was annexed by the Russian government .
 Russia also attempted to provoke riots in south-west Ukraine which were to be of an “anti-Maidan’s’ character . Russia also tried to provoke rioting in Ukraine to be an ‘anti-maidan' character .
 Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic did not recognize new administration in Kyiv . It was only in Donbas, in May 2014, that they managed to organize a referendum which resulted in the creation of the new administration .
 The Ukrainian authorities tried to counteract this by taking full control of the separatist republics . This became the cause of a conflict lasting until today and produced an area of destabilization .
 The regions which did not recognize the administration in Kyiv could not be fully pacified due to the economic, military, and diplomatic support provided by Russia .
 The Ukrainian administration, appointed after the ousting of Yanukovych, also took part in this course of events . At the same time, it should be remembered that the Ukrainian administration also took parts in the events .
 The Russian-speaking part of society was skeptical about the change of administration . They failed to convince and attract the Russian- speaking part of the society that was skeptical .
 Arrest warrants issued for the head of the Supreme Council of the Crimea, Vladimir Konstantinov, Sergey Aksyonov, 27 and Rear Admiral Denis Berezovsky . The Ukrainian naval forces commander had sworn allegiance to Russia .
 They did not take into consideration the ethnic diversity of Ukraine, and they perceived the situation only through the prism of the Maidan .
 They did not make any effort to visit the east and the south-east to talk, to ease the tense situation and to calm everything down .
 The use of extreme nationalistic rhetoric and fascist symbols should have been banned . The nationalistic Right Sector should also have been disarmed, says the author .
 The memories of World War II and the atrocities of soldiers as well as the security forces of Nazi Germany were still too vivid in the Ukrainian society . Russian-speaking people, especially for the Russian- speaking people, were too vivid .
 A great part of society did not support the change of power, but also had not acted aggressively against it . Consequently, they lost the confidence of a great parts of society .
 It might be assumed that the erroneous decisions of the new administration in Kyiv contributed largely to the result of the referendum in Crimea .
Western countries openly and firmly supported the Ukrainian administration which had gained legitimacy in the elections in May and October . In the meantime, western countries openly backed the Ukrainian government .
 In the West, there was no doubt that only Russia should be held responsible for the crisis in Ukraine .
 Malaysian Airlines passenger plane was shot down over Donbas by proRussian militants in June 2014 . This conviction was only made stronger by the shooting down of a Malaysian Airlines plane over Don Bas .
 The political condemnation of Russia’s activities was supported with economic and financial sanctions . The economic sanctions were supported by economic andFinancial sanctions, the strengthening the eastern NATO flank .
 The year 2014 was earth-shaking for Russian foreign and security policy . The Breakthrough in the Foreign and Security Policy of the Russian Federation was the year 2014 .
 The two geopolitical concepts that had existed during the period between 1989-2014,e.e. It turned out that an orientation towards Europe and, alternatively, towards Asia had turned out to be of limited use .
 The concept of a European orientation was formulated at the end of the Soviet era . The concept was formulated in the early 1980s .
 Despite attempts to put these assumptions into practice, they had never been realized . It presupposed economic, political, and social reforms transforming Russia into a state similar to western democracies .
 The fast pace in which the declared partnership transformed into a confrontation in 2014 proves, without any doubt, that it did not mean much and it was actually always in a state of constant crisis . It is worth noticing that the fast pace of the partnership in 2014 proved, without
 The development of an alternative concept, orientation towards Asia, did not prove to be successful . The development was not successful .
 In January 2015, the Eurasian Economic Union was officially established, but the actual scope of the integration was very different from the assumed intention .
 The idea of a large organization, fully integrated in terms of politics, economy, and law, has not been realized . The idea is not fully integrated, says the author .
 The EAEU is a shaky structure, within which only partial economic integration functions . It has been unable to become the world center of power under the leadership of Russia .
 According to the Kremlin, there were many causes for the crisis in Ukraine .
 One of them was the lack of political understanding between the collapsing USSR, and later Russia, and the West . One of the problems was a lack of understanding between Russia and West .
 No meeting between the East and the West similar to the Congress of Vienna or the Yalta Conference was convened in 1989-1991 .
 The Charter of Paris for a New Europe was signed in November 1990 . It was to set new rules for relations between the European states .
 Also at that time, the Treaty on 30 Dmitriy Trenin, Rossiya i mir v XXI veke [Russia and the World in the Twenty First Century] was signed .
 The Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe has been functioning since 1975 . It was transformed into the Organization for Security and co-operation.
 The crisis in Ukraine is in fact an expression of the collapse of the Soviet world. The crisis is an expression in fact of the Russian collapse, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Crimea referendum evoked a powerful reaction in the western world and in many other countries around the world . The outcome of the referendum in the Crimea evoked the world's powerful reaction .
 The Peninsula's annexation prompts the thesis that the process of the USSR’s dissolution has not yet been fully completed .
 Empires collapse, as history proves, in the course of long and agonizing processes. Empires collapse.
 Many administrative borders do not correspond with historical, ethnic, cultural, religious, and economic borders . Many administrative border areas do not match those of the past and present .
 The borders of countries created after the breakdown of the Soviet Union run against logic, contradicting the reality . Their shape was determined by earlier geopolitics .
 The post-Soviet area is a region which is very unstable, characterized by political improvisation . The region is also known as a very unstable region .
 It will continue to reveal tendencies to create new states and correct existing borders . It will also continue to show tendencies to change existing borders.
 The Crimea is a precedence and, unfortunately, it is impossible to exclude the likelihood that other states of the former Soviet Union, including Russia, will not want to make use of it .
 The scenario of events will largely depend on whether there exist effective instruments protecting against counter revolutions, as well as against the economic factor .
 It will be very interesting to see in which direction the situation in Ukraine will develop. It will also be veryinteresting to see how the situation will develop .
 Despite the support of the West, it can be supposed that it will pose a serious problem for the USA and Western Europe . The West's support for the West is supposed to be a problem for both the USA.
 Ukraine has potential to build nuclear weapons, and to do so in a short space of time . Unlike other Soviet satellite bloc states, Ukraine has the potential to develop nuclear weapons .
 The West is worried about Ukraine’s resentment over their forced renouncement of the possession of a nuclear arsenal .
 There are certain political and intellectual circles in Ukraine that believe the Crimean scenario would have never taken place if they had not renounced the possession of nuclear weapons .
 The international community does not take any radical steps aiming at overthrowing the authoritarian regime . North Korea's authoritarian regime is an oddity in the contemporary world .
 membership of the Alliance would make control of the alliance much easier . For it is not possible to leave it beyond international control, and membership would make it easier .
 The post-Soviet region will have to be seriously revised in the context of the Ukrainian situation . It means that the geopolitical order in the post- Soviet region will need to be revised .
 The West faces a new, surprising problem – how to react to the referendum and then the annexation of the Crimea .
Professional, analytical centers in the West, highly appreciated for their predictions, did not notice even the smallest signs of the later development of events until the last moment . It is all the more striking that professional, analytical center in West didn't notice any signs of later development.
 Crimea Volodymyr Konstantinov announced that the peninsula wished to join Russia . It was not even noticed that the chairman of the Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of the Crimea wanted to join the country .
 A lack of empathy, namely the lack of an ability to understand the views and the perception of interests of the Russian society in the Crimea . 2.3% of people in Crimea have not been able to understand their views, according to Russian media .
 It was assumed that the Crimea was still a part of Ukraine; 3.3. Intentional neglect of proof, namely ignoring, inter alia, the moods and statements of the members of the Crimean Duma .
 The mistake of analogy as well as the syndrome of considering the events, experiences, and data from the past as coinciding with the development of events taking place presently .
 The West counted on the fact that the Crimean scenario would develop in the same way as the situation in the case of Abkhazia and South Ossetia which definitely wanted to join the Russian Federation but were not given permission to do so .
 The diplomacy and the western intelligence services assumed that Russia, even if it occupied the Crimea, would not be incorporated into the Russian Federation .
 Moscow did not intend to play out such a scenario, it became obvious, very quickly, that Moscow didn't intend to do so . But it became clear that Moscow was not intending to play a scenario .
Both Georgia and Ukraine occupy an important place in the policy of the Russian Federation . Conclusions: Both Georgia and Ukrainian occupy a key place in Russia's policy of Russia .
 In the opinion of the Russians, their domination over Ukraine would make it possible to extend their influence basically to the whole of Europe . The Russian government would be able to influence the entire of Europe.
 The loss of this state could threaten Russia’s vital interests, including its security . The loss could threaten the country's vital interests.
 The historical experience and the sense of the cultural and civilizational community also play a significant role . The history of the community and its history also play significant role in the community .
 The economic partnership existing between the two countries is also relevant, taking on the form of a specific addiction in some branches of the economy .
 Georgia's geographical location on the Black Sea, between Eastern Europe and Western Asia, is of great importance for Russia . Georgia's location on Black Sea is a great importance to Russia .
 The eastern Black Sea coast is located on the territory of Abkhazia . It is important to use the coast for the operational capabilities of its armed forces .
 Georgia is an important player in energy diplomacy . Despite its lack of energy resources, Georgia makes it an important players in diplomacy .
 The Kremlin would like to subordinate both countries, which were once part of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . The Kremlin is trying to rebuild its superpower position .
 The proof of such action can be found in both the war with Georgia in 2008 and the annexation of Crimea in 2014 .
 Both cases prove that the Federation will not release these countries from its influence, even at the expense of engaging in armed conflict . Both cases show the Federation won't release these nations from their influence .
 Russia managed to attain these set objectives in 2008 . Today, it is even more difficult than it was in 2008 when Russia also managed to achieve these objectives .
 The world economic crisis has been tackled, but the various events and political factors having negative influences on the world economy are taken with greater caution and limited optimism .
 The sanctions imposed on Russia are criticized by economic and political circles, and there are more and more voices calling for their abandonment .
 Russian Federation aiming to avoid isolation by intensification of relations with BRICS states . Russian Federation also aiming at avoiding isolation by increasing relations with China .
 Moscow will never allow itself to lose its control and influence in the post-Soviet region. One thing is certain – Moscow will not allow itself.
 She holds a PhD degree in military sciences with a specialization in international security from the National Security Department of the National Defense Academy .
 She has published articles devoted to the security policy of the Russian Federation . She has written about the implications of contemporary international conflicts for the North Atlantic Alliance and European Union .
 Security and Defence Journal issued by the Social Sciences and Security Institute . The Journal was published by the social Sciences and Defence Institute .