 Vladimir Putin's policies have damaged his country’s standing and economy, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin has been criticized for his policies in recent months .
 Each year, two or three days of discussions involving foreign and Russian scholars and journalists would climax at Sochi on the Black Sea .
Russia's foreign policy is not to be viscerally hostile to Russia’s foreign policy . At least for a foreigner invited to join the club, it was not to have a hostile attitude to Russia .
 This year’s event was my second exposure. This idiot was asked to join four years ago, and this year's event was his second exposure . This idiot is not the first time he has been invited to join .
 We met from 22 to 24 October at a ski resort, surrounded by magnificent snow clad mountains, built for the 2014 Winter Olympics . We met at the resort, where the 2014 Olympics will take place .
 New Rules or No Rules? was held in the shadow of western sanctions against Russia for annexing Crimea, in Ukraine .
 The Big Boss chose to address the assembled idiots from the podium rather than wining and dining them . This time, the Big Boss opted to address them from theodium rather than the podium .
 He delivered a one-hour attack on the United States for wanting a world based on power rather than rules . He was more a polemic than a diatribe .
 Leading Putin officials such as Vyacheslav Volodin, Sergey Lavrov, Sergei Ivanov and Igor Shuvalov turned up to display their loyalty .
 Putin had offered U.S. a sincere partnership in the fight against Islamic terrorism . Russia had offered America a genuine partnership in fight against terrorism .
 Instead, America and its allies had been pushing the EU and Nato eastward into Russia’s historic space .
 Putin was occasionally spirited, but mostly listless and rambling . The three-hour question-and answer session followed his speech .
 Russia's embalmers may have been due to the famed skills of Russia’s embalmer .
 Ukraine was the hot topic of the hour, and one advantage of being at Sochi was to hear in detail Russia’s defence of its actions, which is hardly ever heard in the West .
 The coup brought extreme nationalists and “fascists’ to power in Kyiv on 22 February . As the Russians tell it, an illegal coup against the democratically elected government of President Viktor Yanukovych brought Yanukovych to power .
 Russian communities in Crimea and south-eastern Ukraine have organised in self-defence against persecution and even massacre . Their menacing anti-Russian stance forced the Russian communities to organise self-defense against persecution .
 Russian “volunteers’ from across the border came to the aid of their beleaguered brothers .
 Putin saw in the popular uprising against the corrupt, despotic and increasingly violent government of Yanukovych an excuse to seize Crimea and destabilise the Ukrainian state . His strategic aim was to prevent Ukraine freely choosing to pivot its economy and security system on the west .
 There was much legal chatter about frontiers, frontiers and guarantees . There was a lot of legal chatter.
 Crimea was not part of Ukraine when Ukraine became a member of the UN in 1945 . One expert claimed that Russia’s annexation of Crimea is not illegal under international law .
 Such legal subtleties attract lawyers, but are really beside the point . Such subtletie attract lawyers but are actually beside the points .
 Ukraine’s history as an independent state has yet to be written . They are the achievement of history, and Ukraine's history as a independent state is yet to been written .
 The contemporary liberal credo is that any state, however diverse, can be made or kept whole by a constitution that guarantees democracy, rule of law and minority rights .
 Ukraine's failure to achieve such a constitution must be due to Russia's manipulation of its neighbour’s politics in its own interests . Ukraine's failed to achieve a constitution is to blame for its failure to do so .
 Ukrainian state set up in 1991 was illegitimate to sizeable fractions of its own population . The Ukrainian state was illegitimate.
 In the economy, wealth is divided and redivided between alternating Russian and non-Russian oligarchic clans, to the accompaniment of stagnation and industrial decay .
 Russians have felt humiliated by the U.S. "victory" in the cold war and the destruction of the Soviet Union as a geopolitical balancer. It is obvious that Russians feel deeply humiliated by U. States .
 Putin began his presidency looking for a “strategic partnership’ with the U.S. against the common threat of Islamic extremism .
 Following the 9/11 attacks, he overruled his military to give unconditional support to U.S. intervention in Afghanistan . He also closed down Russian bases in Cuba and Vietnam .
 multipolarity evolved into resistance to U.S. superpower pretensions. It was only because the payoff from such gestures was so meagre that multipolarities evolved into Resistance .
 Russia was offered neither a fast track into the World Trade Organisation nor a meaningful security role in Nato or the Middle East . Russia was not offered a fast-track into the world Trade Organisation .
 America unilaterally abrogated the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, restarting an arms race it knew it could win . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1994 .
 The ‘reset’ of Barack Obama and Dmitry Medvedev – Russia’s president from 2008 to 2012 – got nowhere . The “reset” of Obama and Medvedvedev got nowhere.
 Russia is too weak to negotiate terms of a strategic partnership with America, says Sochi . It was plain from Sochi that the Russian leadership cannot grasp that Russia is not strong enough to negotiate .
 Russia’s authoritarian and corrupt political system, and disregard of human rights, has disqualified it as partner for most purposes . They fail to appreciate that the USA can choose what partners it wants .
 As a description of reality, multipolarity is thus a geopolitical fiction, says John Defterios .
 The world may not be exactly unipolar, but for most global purposes America remains the indispensable power . The world is not unipolar.
Russia has too few assets, hard or soft, to be a rival pole of attraction . Russia has too many assets,Hard or soft to be the rival pole.
 The biggest failure of the Putin years has been the failure to modernise and diversify the Russian economy . The Russian economy has been failing to diversify and modernise .
Post-Soviet leadership dismantled the old industrial system, without replacing it with a new one . The post-Soviet leader dismantled the former industrial system. The new industrial system was created by the Soviet Union .
 Russia remains dangerously dependent on the price of a single commodity – oil – and its economic dynamics are dominated by the struggle for oil rents . As a result, Russia remains dangerous to Russia's economy .
 multipolarity as a normative proposition has much to be said for it. Although it is a descriptive fiction, multipolarities as a normality as a Normality has a lot to say for it .
 No single power is wise or disinterested enough to claim a universal sovereignty . No one is wise enough to be able to claim universal sovereignty. No one can be wise ordisinterested enough.
 The American-led attempt to export democracy by force if necessary has created a shambles in much of the Middle East, with worse to come .
 A better appreciation of the ‘diversity of the modern world’ would have saved western policy from much error and humanity from much misery .
 Russia's attempt to ‘join the world’ has fallen back on an implicit Monroe Doctrine . In his own remarks at Sochi, I suggested that, with the faltering of Russia’s attempt to ' join the world, it had in fallen back to the
 Like U.S. President Monroe in 1823 it is telling the meddling foreigners to keep off its patch .
 Significantly it defines the frontiers of the old Soviet Union as the strategic frontiers. It defines the Russian Federation as the Russian Russian Federation .
 A world of Monroe doctrines, spheres of influence, is contrary to the contemporary western norms of international relations, says the U.S. State Department . The U.N. says it is a "world of Monroe doctrine"
 It may have more appeal for great powers which find themselves at odds with the 'universal empire' championed by the world’s superpower .
 The Ukraine crisis has divided the world into the western countries which imposed sanctions and the non-western world which was either indifferent to Russia’s behaviour or thought it justified .
 The assertion of hegemony in the former Soviet space may now be beyond the capacity of Russia . However, the assertion of dominance in the ex-Soviet space may still be beyond its capacity .
 Dominique de Villepin made the suggestion to set up a ‘contact group’ of the United States, Russia, Germany, France, and the UK to work to convert the Ukrainian ceasefire into a settlement .
 The separatists may be able to negotiate a middle ground of autonomy for the Ukrainian state . They may have a middle-ground of autonomy within the state .
 The latest round of parliamentary elections in the Ukraine has consolidated the division of Ukraine into two states, divided by the ceasefire line .
 On 26 October, parliamentary elections gave President Poroshenko a two thirds ‘super-majority’ to sign an agreement with the EU and reunite the country .
 separatist leaders have a mandate to break away from Donbass . In a ‘rogue’ election on 3 November organised by the separatists of Donbass, a much smaller electorate – about 5% of those eligible to vote nationally – gave separatist leaders a mandate .
 The new mandates weakens the incentives for the two sides to negotiate . Their reinforced mandates weaken the incentives.
 The West will not supply Kiev with the necessary offensive capacity and Russia will continue to supply the separatists with the needed defensive capacity . But the West won't supply Kiev.
 In all likelihood the conflict will be ‘frozen’ along the ceasefire line for the foreseeable future .
 Russia has been the chief object of Russia’s Ukrainian policy to prevent the pro-Western alignment . It will have exchanged an implicit regional hegemony, secured by its ability to manipulate Ukrainian politics .
For this meagre achievement it will have incurred huge costs in terms of sanctions and subsidies . And for this Iagre Achievement it will has incurred huge Costs .
 At what point will the owners of wealth decide that Putin is not Russia.
 Sochi left me with the overwhelming impression of people putting the best face possible on a bad story . Sochi has been a great place for people to put their face on a good story .
 Russia will stagger on in a mediocre kind of way, neither very successful nor quite failing, neither devil nor pure in heart . Russia will be resentful but not overly aggressive, until such time as it feels more at home in a world which it will have played little part in shaping .