 The end of 2017 saw some important and long-awaited changes in Ukraine, including the passage of legislation to reform the judiciary, the pension system, and the health care system . The IMF and World Bank greeted the changes positively by the IMF.
 Agreements with the U.S. to assist with Ukraine’s cybersecurity efforts and defensive needs were also welcome .
 Belarus was shaken by new tensions with neighboring countries, especially Belarus, over charges of spying, and Poland, as a result of how memory policies in the two countries are structured . At the same time, the country was shaking by the country's new tensions.
Turbulence on the domestic front also manifested in large rallies and protests of various origins . Turbulence in the past has also been seen in large protests and protests .
 Disagreements within the anticorruption agencies resulted in lack of progress on an independent anticorrupt court . International bodies see the court as critical .
 As the 2019 elections draw near, 2018 is unlikely to be less turbulent domestically . 2018 is likely to be more turbulent domestically.
 On September 29, the United States and Ukraine held the first Bilateral Cybersecurity Dialogue in Kyiv . The U.S. and Ukraine are the two countries holding the first such talks .
 The United States recognized cyberthreats as one of the most crucial challenges for Ukraine . The U.S. confirmed its desire to support the strengthening of Ukraine’s national cybersecurity .
 The U.S. embassy said that the country would provide $5 billion in assistance to Ukraine to strengthen cybersecurity . Later, the country said that it would provide the country's $5billion in assistance .
 The United States National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 went into force on December 12 . The act was signed by the U.S. House of Representatives on December 11 .
 The United States has approved $350 million in aid to Ukraine to enhance the country's security during the 2018 fiscal year . The U.S. has approved a total of $350million in aid.
 support is to include air defense and coastal defense radars, naval mine and countermine capabilities, according to the act . The act also includes littoral-zone and coastaldefense vessels .
 The act also stipulates the treatment of wounded Ukrainian soldiers in the U.S. and education and training of Ukrainian health care specialists .
 Turkey’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and a presidential delegation visited Kyiv on October 9 .
 The Ukrainian and Turkish presidents held a one-on-one meeting that lasted three hours instead of the planned forty-five minutes . The meeting was held in Ukraine and Turkey .
 President Erdoğan stated that Turkey did not recognize the legitimacy of Russia’s annexation of Ukrainian Crimea . Later, he said Turkey would continue to support Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 Crimean Tatar diaspora population living in Turkey is a huge part of Turkey's population .
 Chiygoz had been charged with organizing an illegal demonstration and sentenced to eight years of imprisonment . He was sentenced to 8 years in prison .
Umerov had been charged with fomenting separatism and sentenced to two years of imprisonment . Umerov was sentenced to 2 years in prison .
 Both trials had been condemned by international rights organizations and Western countries . Both trials were held in the UK and the United States .
 The prisoners were released on October 25 and flown to Ankara, where they met with Turkey’s president .
 Pavlo Sharoiko was arrested in Minsk, Ukraine, on November 17 . He was one of the National Public Broadcasting Company's journalists .
 Belarusian security services accused him of espionage and said he had confessed his involvement in intelligence activity . The Belarusian Security Services said he confessed to them .
 The KGB, the Belarussian state security agency, also stated that Sharoiko had established his own network of agents and was investigating the Russian military in Belarus .
 The Intelligence Department of Ukraine said Sharoiko had left the service in 2009 for health reasons . The department's spokesman had been the department’s spokesman .
 Belarus declared a Ukrainian diplomat in the Minsk embassy persona non grata for directing Sharoiko’s activity . On November 20, Belarus declared the Ukrainian diplomat.
 The Ukrainian Foreign Affairs Ministry declared one of the diplomats in the Belarusian embassy in Kyiv persona non grata . In response, the Ukrainian Foreign affairs Ministry declared the diplomat in the embassy persona nongrata .
 Ukrainian ambassador to Serbia said Russia was using Serbia to destabilize the Western Balkans and destroy united Europe . In late October the Ukrainian ambassador said in an interview with local media.
 Belgrade responds with statement that the Ukrainian embassy is seeking to degrade Russian-Serbian relations . Belgrade's statement prompted criticism from official Belgrade, which responded with a statement .
 Poland and Ukraine have enjoyed very warm relations over the past two decades . Poland was probably Ukraine’s most loyal advocate in the West .
 Historical memory is an extremely sensitive issue in Polish-Ukrainian relations . However, historical memory is a very sensitive issue .
 During independence, tensions have occasionally flared on this ground . During all the years of independence, tension has occasionally flared .
 In some cases, variant readings of history were promulgated by provocateurs . In other cases, the readings were published by provocatedurs .
Until recently all those incidents were handled at the top levels . But such engagement sometimes resulted in even closer and warmer relations between both states .
 In the fourth quarter of 2017, tensions had been simmering over the past two years . In the latest episode, the tensions reached a boiling point .
 Former Polish president Aleksander Kwaśniewski spoke at the 14th YES Conference in Kyiv . He noted a growing risk of worsening relations between the two countries .
 In 2016, the Kyiv city administration renamed a couple of streets after some leaders of the Ukrainian liberation movement caused concern in Poland .
 Some observers consider that renaming the streets had pushed Poland into its decision . Some other big cities in Ukraine had already been named after members of the liberation movement .
 Ukrainian parliament expresses concern over acts of vandalism at Ukrainian monuments in Poland . The Ukrainian parliament expressed concern over vandalism at monuments .
 The vandalism occurred two days before the seventieth anniversary of the Wolyn tragedy . Local officials and police did not try to stop the vandalism .
 In Ukraine, some monuments to Polish memory were supposedly illegally erected too . However, it had stood for more than twenty-three years .
Public consensus on leaving monuments alone had been observed before the period of high tension and acts of vandalism . So a sort of public consensus on leave those monuments alone.
 The government-run Ukrainian Institute of National Memory announced its decision to suspend Polish applications for building a new memorial .
Official recriminations flying on both sides and various diplomatic maneuvers launched to cool tensions . In any event, it contributed to aggravating the situation .
 Poland announced a ban on entry into the country of anyone who subscribed to an anti-Polish ideology . The ban is an indication of the pain caused by each country's historical memory policies .
 The Ukrainian MFA responded with a statement asserting that Ukraine did not hold an anti-Polish attitude . The statement was published in a statement by the Ukrainian M FA .
 The head of the Polish MFA said that Kyiv was misusing Warsaw .
 Polish president Andrzej Duda appealed to Ukrainian president to remove people who harbored anti-Polish attitudes from state decision-making system .
 Historical memory is an especially sensitive and delicate matter, and all steps taken in that arena must be carefully deliberated . Historical memory must be careful .
 Even seemingly insignificant issues can, singly or cumulatively, spark serious problems . Even seemingly trivial issues can spark serious issues .
 A step toward resolving the conflict was taken by Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko . A meeting of the Consultative Committee of the Presidents of Ukraine and Poland was accepted by the Polish side .
 President Duda visited Kharkiv on December 13 . President Poroshenko's obvious desire to move forward in solving the problems .
 President Poroshenko and his Polish colleague agreed to shorten the list of Ukrainians banned from entering Poland . The two countries would jointly look for historical truth on matters involving their countries in the past .
By the end of the year much of the tension between the two countries seemed to have dissipated . It looked as though the two presidents had managed to find a consensus .
 In the first quarter of 2018 new misunderstandings on the ground of historical memory sprang up . But in the first half of 2018, new misunderstandingings on ground of history sprang up.
 More general issues concerning the tensions caused by the two states’ historical memory policies are discussed in another article on Focus Ukraine .
 It is important to understand that not all Poles share a belief that conflicts have escalated between the two countries .
 Donald Tusk said Poland could not be safe so long as it was in conflict with Ukraine . Tusk was president of the European Commission, former Polish prime minister, former vice chair of Polish Senate .
 In the fourth quarter of 2017, the saga surrounding the new Law on Education continued unabated . The new law has sparked tensions with neighboring countries by disallowing the former practice of permitting instruction in minority languages .
 Council of Europe Secretary General Thorbjørn Jagland said ethnic minorities had to have full rights to and the possibility of studying in their native language . But should also be fluent in the official language .
 He underscored that determining minority language rights was a delicate matter . In general, he underscored the importance of language rights .
 President Poroshenko visited the session, outlined the reasons for the law, and answered questions . President poroshenko also spoke about the law .
 PACE expressed concern with articles related to education in minority languages . Ukraine asked Ukraine to implement further recommendations and conclusions of Venice Commission .
 Hungary was dissatisfied with the language principles of the law and started pressuring Kyiv . Hungary was unhappy with the law's language principles .
 The Hungarian government said it would block the EU's decision to establish closer relations with Ukraine .
 Hungarian MFA head says new law violated principles of the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement . He will initiate revising the agreement at meeting of EU foreign ministers in Luxemburg .
 He stressed that Ukraine remained a strategic partner for Hungary . However, he stressed that the country remained a Strategic Partner for Hungary.
 Ukrainian foreign affairs minister said Ukraine did not have any intention of forcing the assimilation of ethnic minorities . In response, Ukraine said it would not leave them bereft of their native languages .
 At the same time he stressed Kyiv's intention to support knowledge of the official language by all citizens .
 The rally’s organizers said they were demanding self-determination for the region and freedom for all ethnic minorities in the region .
 Hungary protested the Ukrainian law more strongly than other of Ukraine’s neighbors . Hungary has problems with its own law on education .
 The European Commission even decided to bring an action before the European Court of Justice against Hungary on the grounds that amendments to the law were restricting the rights of some universities .
 Ukraine and Hungary agreed to collaborate in implementing Ukraine’s law . In the end, on October 19, the two countries agreed to implement Ukraine's law .
 Poland announced it would oppose revising the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement . The idea had been floated because of Ukraine’s new Law on Education .
 Polish vice-prime minister said he had been able to find consensus with Ukraine on language issues of the education law . On October 23, he said he found consensus on the language issues.
 Polish and Ukrainian officials signed a declaration guaranteeing the right of minorities to study in their native language . The next day Polish andUkrainian officials signed the declaration .
 Bulgarian minority in Ukraine had supported the new law during a round-table discussion in the Bulgarian embassy on October 12 .
 Ukraine should continue ensuring a sufficient proportion of education in minority languages at the primary and secondary levels, in addition to teaching the state language . Ukraine should also continue to teach state language in the state .
 The relevant transitional provisions of the Law on Education should be amended to provide more time for gradual implementation of reforms . The law on education must be amended.
 Ukraine should enter into a new dialogue with representatives of national minorities and all interested parties concerning the language of education . Ukraine should also enter into the framework of the new Law on Education .
 Venice Commission's decision likely to bring an end to acrimonious discussions and ease tensions between Ukraine and Ukraine’s neighbors .
 On December 19, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on Crimea, with seventy countries voting for it . Twenty-six countries voted for it, twenty-six against, and seventy-six abstaining .
 The resolution recognized the existence of an international armed conflict between Russia and Ukraine . It urged Russia to restore human rights in Crimea in accordance with the order of the International Court of Justice .
 The summit defined twenty new tasks and aims for the six Eastern partners in the economic, governance, and civil society realms to be achieved by 2020 . The summit defines 20 new tasks for the Eastern partners .
 The summit acknowledged the European aspirations and European choice of those partners . Ukraine's, Georgia's and Moldova’s EU membership prospects were acknowledged .
 The summit’s final joint declaration also mentioned the prospects of the partners gaining access to the EU's energy and digital markets . The summit's final declaration also discussed the prospect of the European Union and the EU getting access to its energy markets .
 The declaration did not mention Russia’s aggressive actions in Ukraine or a UN peacekeeping mission in the Donbas . But those issues were brought up indirectly by the EU representatives during the summit .
 The last quarter of 2018 was marked by strong tensions between old and new law enforcement agencies and strong reactions from the West and international organizations .
 NABU has been trying to change its direction more dependent on certain officials, which has failed . This was followed by an attempt to turn NABu in a direction less dependent on some officials . This is followed by a attempt to change the direction of NAB
 All these events provoked sharp criticism from Western countries and international organizations, which had supported starting anticorruption reform and the establishment of new agencies in Ukraine .
Without going deeper into the reasons for those conflicts, it suffices to say that deliberately heavy-handed actions could cause serious losses for Ukraine .
 The agency formed in March 2015 to fight corruption continues to be beset with scandal . The agency was formed in February 2015.
 An employee of the NACP publicly accused the organization’s chief, Nataliia Korchak, of involvement in falsifying verifications of electronic declarations .
 The employee said that the process was supervised by someone in the presidential administration . The process was overseen by a presidential administration.
 The person she named was a prominent contender for a post with the recently established State Bureau of Investigation . She named the person she names was a top contender for the post .
 The NACP was not an elected body but a public commission heavily connected to the presidential administration . After that revelation, it became clear that the NACP is not anelected body . The commission was not a public body, but a commission heavily linked to the president .
 NABU started investigating the case, but this effort was stymied by the NACP . The NACP requested that the chief, Artem Sytnyk, provide some documents, a request he refused .
Nazar Kholodnytskyi described the situation as a case of getting even between the two agencies . The head of the Office of the Special Anti-Corruption Prosecutor said the situation was a case.
 The Prosecutor General’s Office of Ukraine said it was starting an investigation into the NABU's chief's alleged divulging of information . The NABu was investigating a case the N ABU was investigating .
 NABU has refused to accept investigations from the Prosecutor General’s Office . Lutsenko said that NABu had refused to accepted investigations .
 NABU’s chief said that they did not refuse such assignments but were shorthanded . In response, the chief said they were " shorthanded"
 NABU agents were often acting without the necessary legal permissions, says Chief Prosecutor Lutsenko . The hottest stage in the escalating conflict started in late November .
 A NABU special agent was detained by the Security Service of Ukraine on November 29 . He was detained for trying to bribe a clerk of the State Migration Services of Ukraine .
 The SBU also charged that NABU personnel had tried offering bribes earlier too . NABu personnel had also tried to offer bribes, the SBU said .
 NABU accuses the Prosecutor General’s Office and SBU of hampering its operation on disclosing corruption in the State Migration Service of Ukraine . The following day, NABu issued a statement accusing the prosecutor General's Office of hamper its operation .
 NABU does not have the right to conduct certain kinds of surveillance activities, such as phone-tapping, and uses the SBU's services .
NABU charged the SBU with recruiting the person suspected by NABU of trying to discredit NABu later . NAB U charged theSBU with recruiting a person suspected of being involved in the investigation . The SBU has been accused of recruiting the suspected person suspected
 The real scope of and reasons for the tensions between NABU and the Prosecutor General’s Office in that period are not clear . It is clear that in some cases the chiefs of all the agencies mentioned were speaking emotionally .
 The EU warned that public disclosure of a corruption investigation by the Prosecutor General’s Office weakened the capacity of Ukraine . NABU's efforts to battle corruption were hindered by the disclosure, the EU said .
 The United States Department of State condemned the conflict between NABU and the Prosecutor General’s Office . The conflict was regarded as an attempt to undermine the anticorruption institutions supported by the U.S.
 Chief Prosecutor Lutsenko said NABU’s chief, Artem Sytnyk, could not cope with his tasks . In turn, he said that he was unable to cope with tasks .
 Sytnyk recruited the West as an advocate and started a campaign against Lutsenko in the U.S. So Sytneyk recruited West as a advocate .
 The draft of a law would have allowed the firing of NABU's chief without an investigation . The head of Poroshenko's and Arseniy Yatseniuk's parties' parliamentary faction submitted the draft .
 Successful passage of the law could easily have made the new anticorruption agencies dependent on top officials . It would have undermined the efficacy of the anticorrupt reforms .
 The proposed law ignited a barrage of criticism from international organizations and Western countries .
 Christine Lagarde stressed that anticorruption reform was among the preconditions of collaboration with Ukraine . The IMF managing director stressed the need for reform in Ukraine .
 She appealed to lawmakers not to support the draft, to stop the attacks on NABU, and to support establishing an anticorruption court in Ukraine . She appealed for lawmakers to not to back the draft .
 Adopting the law could have threatened further financial assistance for Ukraine and possibly even cancellation of the visa-free regime .
 Mikheil Saakashvili returned to Ukraine after violating border-crossing procedures . Kyiv was rocked by protests led by some MPs, and civil activists .
 The main demands of the protesters were establishing an anticorruption court, abolishing immunity of the deputies, and adopting new legislation regarding elections .
 A tent camp was established for the duration of the protest, about a week . The camp was set up in a tent camp .
 There were occasional clashes between the protesters and police and National Guard soldiers .
 Saakashvili promised he could change the country in seventy days . But he was unable to do so because of the need to follow legal procedures .
December 3 saw another large rally calling for the impeachment of Poroshenko . December 3 saw a large rally call for Poroshenko to be impeached .
 The SBU conducted an operation jointly with the Prosecutor General’s Office to arrest Saakashvili at his apartment in downtown Kyiv .
 Saakashvili climbed out onto the roof of the building and threatened to jump off . He tried to avoid arrest but was arrested .
 Saakashvili was captured by officers. However, the drama did not help, and he was captured .
 He was charged with cooperating with the Ukrainian oligarch Vitalii Kurchenko . Kurchenko had fled to Russia, and received funds from Kurchenko and others to start a coup in Ukraine .
 Chief Prosecutor Lutsenko went to parliament to address members and inform them of the charges and some of the evidence .
 During the arrest, a wildcat rally of Saakashvili supporters took place outside the building .
 The law enforcement officers refrained from opening fire to prevent escalating the situation .
 Saakashvili denounced the charges as trumped up, then turned to demanding the resignation of Lutsenko and the head of the SBU . He demanded he be impeached .
After Saakashvili managed to escape from custody, protests at the parliament building became more organized . More people participated and a tent camp established .
 The next morning the police tried to take the camp by storm but failed . Some protesters were injured in the attempt. The next day the police attempted to take it by storm .
 Saakashvili himself was not in the camp, however, but ensconced in a hotel five minutes’ walk from the camp .
 Police seized Saakashvili in a friend's apartment and detained him in jail . Three days after the first attempt to arrest him the police seized him in the friend’s apartment .
 The court decided not to place Saakashvili under arrest for the period of the investigation . It meant he was subject neither to house arrest nor detention .
 The Ukrainian government approved new members of Naftogaz’s supervisory board on November 22, 2017 . Many members of the previous board had resigned earlier .
 The new board's composition is even more illustrious than the old board’s . The old board is more illustrious.
 Amos Hochstein from the U.S. and Clare Spottiswoode from the UK are among the members .
 The European Commission published a report on the EU-Ukraine Association Implementation with an assessment of Ukraine’s progress toward reforms . The report was published in November 2017 .
 The Commission believed that although Ukraine had demonstrated considerable progress in reforms, the pace of implementation had to be accelerated . The Commission believes that though Ukraine had shown considerable progress, the speed of implementation must be accelerated.
 The report stressed the need to continue battling corruption, including through the establishment of an independent anticorruption court .
 Truba and two deputies had been chosen by a special public commission after a long selection process lasting more than a year . Truba, two deputies and Truba were chosen by the special publicCommission .
 The SBI is part of reforming the entire system of law enforcement authorities . Establishing the SBI will be part of reform of the entire law enforcement system .
 The Prosecutor General’s Office in Ukraine was responsible for judicial supervision and investigation of crimes committed by persons serving in the legal system .
 The SBI is to turn the Prosecutor General’s Office into an agency responsible only for judicial supervision . The idea behind establishing the SBI will be to turn Prosecutor General's Office into a judicial agency .
 The main reason for such a division of authorities was the need for an independent agency to investigate crimes committed by persons capable of putting pressure on the investigator .
 In light of the professional ties existing between the Prosecutor General’s Office and other enforcement authorities, that risk was real, says the attorney general .
 Prosecutor General Lutsenko announced that the SBI will start its work toward the end of 2018 .
 President Poroshenko signed legislation introducing changes to the pension system in Ukraine . The changes include mandatory accumulation of pension assets .
 Pension reform was among the IMF’s requirements to continue its collaboration with Ukraine .
 Under the previous model, working citizens paid taxes into the State Pension Fund . The fund was responsible for paying pensioners .
 The fund was running a deficit, in part because 10 million employed individuals were supporting 12 million retirees . However, the fund was run a deficit because of 10 million employees .
 The reform roadmap gradually increases the qualifying period and stipulates the transition to a stock-based pension system . The reform will be implemented in the coming years .
 The new system was widely discussed between Kyiv, on one side, and the IMF . The IMF and World Bank on the other were also discussed .
 The World Bank praised the reform, saying it would ensure stability of the pension system . It would help the most vulnerable among Ukraine’s population .
 On December 28, President Poroshenko signed crucial legislation to reform the health care system .
 All medical services were supposed to have been available free of charge to citizens . The Soviet health care system was a remnant of the old Soviet health system .
 Polyclinics and hospitals did not have enough funds to provide free treatment . Patients had to spend their own money to pay for treatment .
 The reform stipulates a division into free and paid medical services . Funding granted by the state medicine service to hospitals and clinics .
 President Poroshenko also signed legislation to improve the availability and quality of medical care in rural areas .
 The legislation is intended to solve the problem of lack of doctors in rural areas . It's intended to connect rural facilities to special medical centers through modern communication systems .
 On November 22, President Obama signed legislation amending economic, civil, criminal, and administrative codes and other legislative acts .
 Some 4,383 amendments to existing legislation fall under the rubric of judiciary reform . In aggregate, those changes, comprising some 4, 383 amendments, fall under a rubric.
 On December 15, the new Supreme Court and the Supreme Specialized Court started working .
 The Supreme Specialized Court unites in its functions those of the previous supreme administrative and commercial courts . The Supreme Court is dedicated to civil and criminal cases .
 On October 3, parliament adopted amendments to the criminal code that had been proposed by MP Andriy Lozovyi . The changes were also adopted by the parliament .
 ‘Lozovyi’s Amendment’ also included some questionable ones . In addition to some positive changes, “Lozovia’'s Amendment” also includes some questionable changes .
 Legal experts and practicing lawyers claim that this provision has the potential to lead to a collapse of the investigating system . Legal experts say this provision could lead to the collapse of an investigation system .
Criminal forensic examinations can also be conducted by state agencies . Such criminal forensic examinations are also possible in the United States .
 The main idea was to improve the quality of the evaluations . But if only government agencies are able to conduct expert analyses, private agencies will go out of business .
 The amendment also limits the term for conducting pretrial investigations to six months . The amendment was roundly condemned by legal practitioners and law enforcement .
 On December 7, parliament agreed to decrease significantly the rent rates for oil and gas extraction . It also prohibited increasing those rates until 2023 .
This step is expected to drive domestic production and contribute to Ukraine’s energy self-sufficiency . This step is also expected to boost Ukraine's energy production .
 Ukraine's gas reserves are estimated to be the third largest among European countries’ reserves . More than a third of the gas consumed in Ukraine today is imported .
 An increase in domestic gas and oil production should decrease spending on imported fuels, which should have a positive effect on Ukraine's economy .
 On December 7, parliament canceled the VAT and excise duties for e-vehicles . The move was announced on December 7 .
 These vehicles will now be 17 percent cheaper, which means they will be more competitive with traditional vehicles . The new vehicles will be less expensive and more competitive than traditional vehicles.
 On December 7, the Verkhovna Rada narrowly approved extending the moratorium on agricultural land sales for one year more . The moratorium was approved on December 7 .
 In 2018, there will be no legal land market in Ukraine . This means that in 2018, no land market will be available in Ukraine. This means there will not be any land market.
 The IMF requested the launch of a land market as one of the conditions for further collaboration with Ukraine . The IMF asked for the launch. The land market was one of a number of conditions for collaboration .
 Currently large tracts of agricultural land are divided into smaller subplots and leased . This results in low economic productivity and disinterest on the part of foreign investors .
 Difficult discussions over the anticorruption court took place in Ukraine during the third quarter of 2017 .
 Some officials, including President Poroshenko, were opposed to the idea of establishing such a court .
 Poroshenko said he did not see much sense in establishing a separate anticorruption court . He would prefer special anticorrupt chambers within the existing courts, noting that a specific court could be created later if needed .
 At the same time, social activists pointed out the risk of those chambers not being independent within the existing court system .
 The Venice Commission rejected the idea of anticorruption chambers . Later, the Venice Commission strongly recommended establishing an independent anticorrupt court .
 The EU and the U.S. were waiting for Ukraine to adopt a law that would meet all requirements and expectations of the Venice Commission . The Venice Commission is waiting for the Ukraine law to be adopted .
 The absence of sufficient evidence and inability to prove corruption in the end can only result in a verdict of not guilty . A verdict is not guilty.
 This means that the whole judicial system’s approach to battling corruption still needs to be improved . This means the whole Judicial system's approach to fighting corruption still need to be better .
 The absence of an anticorruption court is not the only stumbling block in solving the problem in Ukraine . Ukraine's anti-corruption court has not yet been found in the country .
 Ukrainian parliament voted for a one-year extension of a law already in effect that introduced the special status of local governance within, the noncontrolled parts of Donbas and Luhansk regions .
 The U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker considered that to be taking tough steps for peace and ending the conflict in the Donbas . The United States Special Representative of Ukraine was considered to take tough steps.
 Ukraine guaranteed that participants in the conflict in the Donbas would not be criminally prosecuted . It established specific procedures for appointing judges and prosecutors in the noncontrolled regions .
 The one-year extension stipulated that the full implementation of the 2014 law would start after the complete exit of illegal military forces and troops from the region .
 In August, President Poroshenko announced the idea of starting a peacekeeping mission in the Donbas with the participation of UN and OSCE personnel . The mission is expected to start in August .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin agreed that a peacekeeping mission would contribute to good results . Later, on September 5, he agreed that the mission would be a good result .
 OSCE mission should be to protect OSCE personnel serving on the border between the controlled and noncontrolled parts of Ukraine . However, he stated that this had to be discussed with the separatists in Luhansk and Donetsk .
 Ukrainian foreign affairs minister Pavlo Klimkin said that Ukraine did not want Russians to participate in the peacekeeping mission in Ukraine . That same day, Ukraine's foreign affairs ministry said that the country didn't want Russia to participate .
 Russian foreign affairs minister Sergei Lavrov said on December 7 that Russia’s interests were not being observed by the peacekeeping mission in the Donbas .
 Klimkin retorted that an occupational administration had already been established in the region . He said that the region had already established a new occupational administration .
 Special Representative Volker said he did not imagine any way for Russia to participate in the mission . He said he didn't think Russia would participate in mission .
There were expectations that the issue could be resolved by the end of 2017 . There were expectations of a resolution by 2017 .
 At the end of 2018 conflict arose among the leaders of the Luhansk separatists . At the start of the 2018 conflict, the LuHansk separatists had been in power for years .
 The separatist leader Ihor Plotnyckyi and the head of the so-called ‘people’s police,’ Ihor Kornet, were at loggerheads . The separatist leaders were also at loggerhead .
 Plotnyckyi relieved Kornet of his duties because of suspected criminal activities . Plotnykyi relieved him of duties because he was suspected of criminal activities.
 Kornet demanded the arrest of other “officials’ close to Plotnyckyi whom he suspected of spying for Kyiv . He also demanded arrest of others close to him who he suspected were spying for him .
 Kornet and the militants surrounded and occupied some buildings while waiting for the arrival of support from Donetsk .
 Plotnyckyi initially tried to persuade citizens that the situation was under control and would be resolved soon . The situation is under control, according to the government .
 Plotnyckyi announced he was resigning for health reasons and left Luhansk for Russia . But the coup was successful, and on November 24, he announced he had left for Russia.
 New self-proclaimed leadership announced he was still responsible for the Minsk process . But Plotnyckyi was among those who had signed the agreements .
 The largest prisoner exchange since conflict broke out in the east of the country . December 23 saw the largest prisoner swap since conflict started in the East of the nation .
 separatist forces released seventy-four people who had been captured in the noncontrolled Donbas .