 The theme of Russian propaganda as an element of the Russian hybrid aggression against other countries has become particularly popular .
 Scientific and journalistic articles are written about Russian propaganda . Political and military leaders mention it in their speeches . International and national centers and institutes are set up to counteract it .
 In recent years, the Russian information influence on the population of other countries has become proportional or even larger than that carried out by the USSR during the Cold War . It is difficult to disagree with the fact that in recent years.
 At the same time, there is a lack of understanding of both the nature of this influence and its tools, says the author .
 Observers' attention is mostly focused on so-called "fake news" and on official rumors of Russian propaganda, such as RT and the Sputnik news agency .
 The proposed countermeasures are reduced to the rapid refutation of inaccurate information and limitations to broadcast official Russian mass media in one or another country .
 It ignores the fact that the most effective influence should be realized through channels that are not associated with Russia . The most effective channels should be found through channels not linked to Russia .
 This is especially true of the impact on the audience, which is negative about Russia . This is particularly true of how negative Russia is to the audience .
 Ukraine did not become an exception with the West and was deprived of the strategy of countering Russian information warfare . Ukraine, unfortunately, did not becoming an exception.
 The decision was obviously belated and inadequate, since it concerned only channels registered in Russia, not those controlled by Russia . Only those media that directly called for war with Ukraine.
 The Kremlin's ability to influence Ukrainians was not limited by these TV channels . However, the Kremlin’s influence was notlimited by these channels .
 Russia has built up its communication tools and influence long and vigorously for marginal pro-Russian audiences, but also for quite patriotic pro-Western citizens of Ukraine . Russia is giving it much more time and resources and resources .
 Most popular Ukrainian TV channel Inter was founded in 1996 by Russian state television . It covers 97 percent of the entire Ukrainian territory .
 Inter was sold to Dmitry Firtash, a pro-Kremlin oligarch, who had close ties to Vladimir Putin, Gazprom, and the leader of Russian organized crime, Seva Mogilevich . Later, Inter was sell to DmitryFirtash.
 Firtash is in Vienna, Vienna, where he expects to be extradited to the United States . The case has been launched against him . He is in the U.S. where he is accused of murder .
 UMH brings together more than 50 brands with leading positions on the radio, the Internet and the press . UMH is still controlled by the family of ex-President Yanukovych, who is in exile in Moscow .
 The leadership of the group is carried out by a close associate of Viktor Yanukovych, a former MP from his party, Elena Bondarenko .
 Bondarenko publicly denies Russian aggression against Ukraine . He calls the shooting of participants of the anti-Russian Revolution of Dignity not tight enough . He says Russian campaign to worsen Ukrainian-Polish relations is to worsen relations .
It is difficult to believe that there is any independence of this group. Taking into account the situation of Yanukovych, whose fate depends directly on the Kremlin, it is hard to believe.
 preparation for hybrid aggression required additional media capacity. Despite being constructed in advance channels of Russian communication and propaganda in the Ukraine, preparation for Hybrid aggression required extra media capacity .
 Multimedia Invest Group brings together 4 popular radio stations, 2 TV channels, an Internet portal, a magazine and a newspaper . The group was created in Ukraine.
 Media experts say that the group's protagonist is also part of Yanukovych's entourage . Media experts also say the group’s protagonist is part of the Yanukovych'sEntourage .
 The newspaper, Vesti, first came out in print in May 2014, in the midst of Russian aggression against Ukraine .
 The newspaper has been accused of having its messages coincide with the main narratives of Russian propaganda which is reduced to the inevitability of an anti-government revolution .
 Radio Vesti, despite being part of the same group began broadcasting in March 2014 and chose another position . The same group has been broadcasting for more than a year .
 The radio claimed to be impartial and underlined Ukrainian patriotism and anti-Russian propaganda .
 At the same time, the station repeatedly provided the opportunity to speak to representatives of pro-Russian terrorist organizations, Russian politicians, observers and it manipulated telephone polls .
 Social media and networks, at least in Ukraine, are also not deprived of influence from Russia . Despite the generally accepted view, social media and social media are not deprivation of influence .
 In 2015, Petro Poroshenko appealed to Mark Zuckerberg to create a separate Facebook office for the administration of the Ukrainian segment of the network . The office is administrated from Moscow, which leads to interference in the process of information exchange .
 Zuckerberg refused to assist Poroshenko, denying the existence of the Russian office .
 The first large private investor in Facebook with an investment of $200 million was the Kremlin oligarch, Alisher Usmanov, who currently controls the Mail.ru group, which includes Vkontakte .
With the growing number of media outlets, the importance of public opinion leaders who can interpret information from different sources is growing .
 Popular journalists, political scientists, television and radio hosts usually become leaders on the national level . Popular journalists and political scientists often become leaders of the country .
Evgeniy Kiselyov and Savik Shuster are the most influential leaders of public opinion in Ukraine . They were popular TV and radio hosts, including Evgeny Kiseleyov and Shuster . They are the two most influential figures in Ukraine.
Despite the generally acknowledged image of democratic journalists and fighters for liberal values, there are certain points in the biographies of these individuals which provide an entirely opposite view .
 Eugene Kiselyov began his professional career as a military interpreter for the Main Intelligence Directorate . He was a member of the first group of officers of the GRU who appeared in Afghanistan on the eve of the Soviet invasion .
 Kiselyov was a professor at the KGB High School and worked in the Soviet propaganda system . He was also a professor in the KGB.
 A Russian citizen, he decided to move to Ukraine in 2009, where he immediately began collaborating with the Inter channel, whose ties with the Kremlin are described above .
 Savik Shuster was the host of the most popular political talk show in Ukraine . He was also in Afghanistan, although, unlike Khiselyov, among the Mujahideen .
 Shuster emigrated to Canada with his family, despite having a medical education . He decided to become a journalist in 1979 .
 In 2005, he moved to Ukraine where he began his own television talk show . He moved to the country where he started his own TV talk show.
 Dmitry Kisyelov's TV show on Russian television was defined by The Economist as Orwell’s two minutes’ hate . He stretched to more than 30 minutes and focused on mobilizing Russian society to agitation and hatred .
 Kisyelov gained popularity in the West after his public statement that Russia can transform the United States into radioactive ash .
 Mariya Stolyarova, a creative producer of the latest news on Inter TV channel, was deported from Ukraine in February 2016 .
 She worked as a military correspondent for the Russian TV channel REN-TV, which is associated with Vladimir Putin .
 Stolyarova managed to cover the Ukrainian-Russian conflict in the Donbass . She did not conceal her sympathy for the Russian backed separatists .
 Stolyarova continued to coordinate activities of other Russian correspondents who worked in Ukraine . She participated in the parliamentary elections that took place in 2014 as a political and media consultant .
 She consulted politicians including those who declared pro-Ukrainian and pro-Western positions . She consulted a number of politicians including some who said they were pro-Ukraine .
 Igor Shuvalov was deported from Ukraine in 2017 . He was also a manager of Inter and also a citizen of Russia .
 Igor Shuvalov is one of the key political technologists working with the most odious pro-Russian politicians . He arrived in Ukraine in 1999 and since then worked with Viktor Medvedchuk, Viktor Yanukovych and Serhiy Lyovochkin .
 Russian citizens, Dmitry Solopov and Aleksey Vorobiev, became the directors of the aforementioned radio Vesti in 2014 . They arrived for this purpose in Ukraine in 2014.
 Both worked in Russia in the management of the radio station Echo of Moscow, which is part of the media holding company, Gazprom-Media .
 Solopov and Vorobiev are co-owners of the Hidalgo advertising agency . Their clients include Gazprom, among others .
 Igor Guzhva is a key person in the media holding Vesti, the News-One TV channel and the Internet magazine Strana.ua . He was born in Ukraine and still has Ukrainian citizenship .
 Since 2001, Guzhva has been working in Moscow in media and political consulting .
 One of his jobs was the position of editor-in-chief of the newspaper Daily Moscow News . He was a cover for the work of the Soviet Foreign Intelligence Service .
 Western powers are trying to promote the development of independent media in Ukraine . They are spending tens of millions of dollars annually on Ukraine's media .
 Russia successfully penetrates these new entities, neutralizing them or even uses them for its own goals . This is largely due to the fact that Russia successfully penetrate these new entity, neutralize them or use them for own goals.
 New military doctrine of Russia adopted in December 2014 . It is difficult to underestimate the role of media resources in the modern war .
 The West has not been able to develop an effective strategy to protect its own information space from Russian penetration . To date, unfortunately, the West has been unable to develop a strategy.
Without the return to the Cold War information policy, the Kremlin will only increase its own capabilities . It will inevitably be used for political sabotage, discrediting national governments and bringing the power of Russian influence to Western countries .