 The Obama regime's February 2014 coup in Ukraine replaced democratic governance with fascist tyranny in Europe’s heartland .
 A Russophobic puppet regime was installed to serve U.S. interests . The regime was created to serve United States interests .
 On November 25, three Ukrainian vessels entered Russian waters without requesting permission .
 Russia failed to respond to legitimate demands, forcing Russia to respond defensively against their hostile action . Russia has been accused of being aggressive in the past .
 Russia and Ukraine have freedom of navigation rights in the Kerch Strait . Under a bilateral 2003 treaty, the two countries have access to the narrow waterway .
 All foreign vessels wishing to enter territorial waters of another country. The same goes for all foreign vessels .
 Kiev acted extrajudicially, an indisputable fact, Russia wrongfully blamed for its action . Russia's actions were wrongly blamed for Kiev's actions .
 Did the US-installed Poroshenko regime act on its own or on orders from a higher power? Did the U.S. government act on itself or on order from higher power.
 Kiev flagrantly breached Minsk I and Minsk II agreements to resolve war in Donbass . Washington wants a perpetual state of war on Russia's border, not peace and stability .
 U.S. statement condemns Russia's actions against international shipping transiting the Black Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait to Ukrainian ports .
 No evidence suggests Russia obstructs or otherwise interferes with foreign vessels sailing through the Kerch Strait into or from the Sea of Azov . UNCLOS provisions and bilateral Russia/Ukraine navigation requirements are observed .
 Trump and Theresa May regimes' latest hostile action against the Kremlin. Accusing Russia of a Kerch Straight incident before it occurred suggests the provocation was perhaps made in the USA, maybe jointly orchestrated by the Trump and May regimes .
 Falsely accusing Russia of ‘aggressive activities in the Sea of Azov’ on November 16 raises obvious red flags . Falsely claiming Russia was involved in “aggressive activities’ in the sea ofAzov.
 The State Department affirmed continued Trump regime support for Ukraine militarily . The U.S. also affirmed continued support for the Ukraine .
 The illegitimate fascist regime is a dagger pointed at Russia’s heartland . The illegitimatefascist regime is an illegitimate regime.
 Ukraine and Syria are the world's leading hot spots for potential East/West confrontation if neocons in Washington go this far .
 NATO vowed Ukraine and Georgia would eventually be granted alliance membership . Over a decade ago, NATO vowed the two countries would be granted membership .
 Russia reserves right to protect its national security by whatever means it considers necessary . Russia reserves the right to defend its national Security by whatever way it considers needed .
 NATO membership for Ukraine and Georgia would pose unacceptable risks it would take steps to counter . NATO membership would pose an unacceptable risk to Georgia, Ukraine and Ukraine .
 The three vessels were detained on November 25 after they spent hours in Russian territorial waters . The vessels ignored requests of officials to stop .
 Two of the vessels, gunboats 'Berdyansk' and 'Nikopol' were mounted with “weapons and ammunition exceeding the standard loadout,’s deputy head of the Russian Coast Guard says .
 The ships were given instructions to “concentrate the efforts on a stealth passage’ of the strait that separates mainland Russia and Crimea, Shishov says .
 Flashpoint conditions in both countries risk greater conflicts than ongoing ones in the Middle East and Central Europe, including near Russia's border .
 Washington's imperial agenda bears full responsibility for wanting puppet fascist rule in Syria like its installed Kiev regime in Europe's heartland . Washington’s imperial agenda.
 In September, Poroshenko signed a decree the regime’s parliament approved on Thursday . Moscow notified about the move signifying nothing .
 Kiev is waging intermittent war along its border with Donbass freedom fighters . Complicit with the US, UK and other NATO countries, Kiev is militantly hostile toward Russia .
 The November 25 Kerch Strait provocation was likely prelude for similar stunts to follow . The November25 Kerch strait provocation was probably prelude to similar stunts .
Nothing will change as long as Ukraine’s US-installed war party runs things. Nothing will change in Ukraine.
 The terminated treaty affirmed a strategic partnership between both countries, sharing a common border, pledging to respect their territorial integrity .
 Until April 1, 2019, the treaty was automatically renewed every 10 years . The treaty was scheduled to end on April 1.
 Poroshenko’s announced termination came at the same time legislation was drafted to declare war on Russia with full US/UK support and encouragement .
 U.S. warplanes conducted a provocative Open Skies flight over Ukraine on the day Ukraine's parliament approved termination of the treaty . The flight came close to Russia's border, showing support for the illegitimate fascist regime Obama illegally installed .
 Ultranationalists under him, allied with Waffen SS and other Nazi forces, were responsible for slaughtering half a million Ukrainians, Poles and Russians, many of them Jews .
 Banderites were unapologetic about genocidal crimes committed during WW II . Their barbarity exceeded Nazi and Soviet atrocities, including use of excruciating methods to kill .
 He lied saying Ukrainian forces need to be ready to resist a nonexistent threat of “large-scale ground invasion’s” falsely claiming Moscow intends to seize Ukrainian territory .
 He urged NATO to send warships to the Black Sea to confront Russia provocatively . He urged US-led NATO to sent warships to combat Russia .
 He’s crazy enough to try anything, believing Washington will bail him out, he says . He's crazy enough, he's trying anything, he believes .
 His declaration of martial law in areas along Russia’s border risks confrontation by accident or design .
 Given Trump regime hardliners’ rage for endless wars and dominance, anything ahead is possible, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Russia ordered to return to Ukraine the seized vessels and detained Ukrainian crews involved in last month's naval provocation . Russia was also ordered to allow Ukrainian ships to freely navigate Kerch Strait and Sea of Azov .
 Lithuania and the UK also plan to step up their funding of the Ukrainian military . The financial decision was made in solidarity with Lithuania and UK .
 The State Department's announcement follows hints from Ukraine's National Security and Defense Council head Alexander Turchinov that the country might send more ships through the Kerch Strait soon .
 Russia seized three ships belonging to Ukraine's navy and their crews . HMS Echo was sent into the Black Sea earlier this month .
 Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson has visited the ship in the port of Odessa .
 He said the presence of the British ship shows support for Ukraine in the face of increased Russian aggression .
 It will be followed by other warships as part of a more constant British presence, he said . It will follow by other British warships as well as other warships .
 There are increasing tensions between Russia and Ukraine over access to the area off the coast of Crimea .
 Crimea used to be part of an independent Ukraine, but it was annexed by Russia in 2014 . Crimea was part of the independent Ukraine .