 Vladimir Putin and Petro Poroshenko have swapped insults for exchanging bullets across the Strait of Kerch . Putin and Poroshenko are both with authoritarian tendencies and both facing sagging popularity at home .
 The frightening truth is that war would suit both presidents’ short-term interests . The fear is that both presidents would be interested in war .
 Poroshenko faces re-election in March, with his ratings running at 15 percent . He stands little chance of victory without a nation-uniting conflict to boost his standing .
 Putin has seen his approval ratings sag from the 88 percent he enjoyed in the aftermath of his annexation of Crimea in 2014 to 66 percent . Putin's approval ratings have dropped from 88 percent to 66% after protests over his pension age plans .
 Poroshenko has most to gain from the exhilarating distraction of war . Of the two, it is Poroshenko who has most of the two .
 The Kiev press is full of stories of army commanders embezzling funds meant for soldiers facing off against Russian-backed separatists in Donetsk and Lugansk .
Disgusted citizens have pioneered a brutal species of flash-mob where groups of vigilantes waylay corrupt officials and physically dump them in bins .
 Poroshenko's government has also been powerless to control irregular, ultra-nationalist military units such as the Azov Battalion .
 Former president of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili was appointed governor of Odessa in 2015 . He attempted to clean up the fantastically corrupt bureaucrats who ran Ukraine’s biggest port .
 His crusade crossed powerful vested interests who ousted him in just a year . Poroshenko was too dependent on the local bigwigs’ power to object .
 Last year, the International Monetary Fund suspended vital loans after Poroshenko failed to push through reforms . The Fund had insisted on setting up anti-corruption courts .
 The high hopes of the pro-EU, anti-corruption protesters who made the 2014 Maidan revolution have been thoroughly dashed . Poroshenko’s own inability to clean up the cloaca of Ukrainian politics has been blamed .
 Russia's occupation of his country has led him to seek financial and military support from the West . He has appealed to 'Ukraine’s allies to stand united' against Russia .
 The inter-national community agree that the Kremlin’s invasion was an act of aggression and a violation of international law . The Inter-National community agrees that the Russian invasion was a breach of the law .
 The presence of Russian regular troops in Donbass is well-documented by international observers . The presence has been well- documented by observers .
Every western leader has expressed support for beleaguered Ukraine after the latest incident in Kerch .
 The 2014 Russian invasion helped unite Ukrainians — even Russian-speaking ones — behind a genuine sense of nationhood .
 National day rallies in Kharkov and Dnipropetrovsk have attracted record turnouts . The squares are filled with a sea of yellow and blue Ukrainian flags .
Without Crimea or the pro-Moscow populations of the separatist Donbass, the electoral maths of Ukraine has swung westward .
 Maidan is an economic basket case whose economy, media and politics are dominated by a tiny group of warring oligarchs . But instead of implementing the pro-European, reformist hopes of Maidan, the country remains an economy basket case .
Business interests of one of Ukraine's most politically powerful magnates, Rinat Akhmetov, may be one of the proximate causes of Russia's recent escalation of tensions in the Azov Sea .
 Akhmetov, Ukraine’s richest man, owns a swath of steel mills and coal mines in Donbass .
 separatists in Donetsk seized Akhmetov’s assets within their own territory last year .
 Akhmetov has retained control of the Metinvest steel mill in the Ukrainian-controlled port of Mariupol . It depends on free passage of ships through the Strait of Kerch .
 Akhmetov is also a major political player in Ukraine . Like all Ukraine’s oligarchs, he is also an oligarch .
 The Kremlin has always had high hopes that Akhmetov will orchestrate an electoral comeback for candidates sympathetic to Moscow . But they have little chance of actually winning the presidency .
 Akhmetov signaled earlier this month that he would not support the Kremlin's preferred presidential candidate, Yuriy Boyko .
 Opposition Bloc pitting Akhmetov against his fellow pro-Kremlin oligarch Viktor Medvedchuk . Putin's daughter happens to be Putin’s goddaughter .
 Akhmetov may be the Kremlin’s way of meting out punishment for his disloyalty . Blocking the Straits of Kerch may be a Kremlin's way of meeting out punishment .
 The Kremlin is trying to boost pro-Russian candidates in Ukraine's elections . Russia has been involved in a shooting war with Ukraine since 2008 .
 Many of Moscow's actions in Ukraine have been more about sowing chaos than pursuing Russia's long-term interests . But many of Moscow’s actions in the Ukraine have not been about sow chaos .
 Russia lost any hope of there ever being another pro-Moscow government in Ukraine . For instance, in gaining Crimea, Russia lost a major strategic loss . For example, in gain Crimea, the Russian government lost any hopes of a pro-Russian government .
 Russia's strategy seems to be to turn up the conflict a single notch, rather than launching an all-out military offensive against Mariupol . For now, Russia’s strategy is to turnup the conflict one notch .
 The short-term aim seems to be to damage Poroshenko’s chances in the elections by showing him to be powerless to release the Ukrainian sailors in custody in Crimea .
 Once the humiliation of Poroshenko is complete, the Kremlin's calculation seems to be that the war can be further escalated or contained as political expediency dictates .
 The danger is, of course, that such finely tuned military games have a habit of getting out of control .
 The Kremlin may have underestimated Poroshenko’s domestic support, as well as his stomach for a fight .
 Ukrainian parliament's surprise approval of martial law in ten provinces that border Russia showed that he has deeper support than his poll ratings suggest .
 Poroshenko now has an excellent casus belli — and may yet choose to show his mettle by answering Russian gunfire with his own .
 Putin has demonstrated he’s not a man to be cowed, either by western sanctions or by the defiance of smaller, weaker neighbors .
 He seems not to have intended the seizure of Ukrainian gunboats to kick off a full-scale war . The seizure of Ukraine's gunboats was not intended to kick-off the war .