 As war continues to victimize Ukraine, various observers and participants have proposed potential solutions to the conflict . They include greater regional autonomy to federalism to partial territorial breakup .
 The perceptions of Ukraine’s population will be central to the success of any political solution . Ukraine's population is one of the most prominent debates and decision-making .
 The self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People’s Republic declare that the latter regions should be part of Ukraine but only if they gain a special constitutional status that allows them to carry out their own foreign and economic policy .
 Reforms like this, involving far-reaching autonomy and regional vetoes over much central policymaking, are widely called “federalism’s in Ukraine and Russia .
 Russia and its allies also demand the legitimization of the DNR and LNR leadership through local elections to be held in October 2015 . Russia, its allies demand that the elections be held.
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko was elected in May 2014 on a platform of constitutional reforms that includes deep administrative and fiscal decentralization . He was elected on the platform of deep administrative, fiscal decentralisation .
 Russia and insurgents demand that Russia does not. This would not go so far as Russia and the insurgents demand . This, however, would not be the case .
 It stops short of introducing any special constitutional autonomous status for any of the regions . In particular, it stops short.
More limited constitutional reforms have won the endorsement of both the Council of Europe's Venice Commission and Ukraine’s Constitutional Committee . They are now up for parliamentary approval .
 Observers currently expect the reform to pass later this summer or during the fall . The reform is expected to pass in the summer or the fall.
 The survey was funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation, the Ukraine Studies Fund, and the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute .
 Of these, 1,406 were re-interviewed during June 24-July 13, 2014, and 1,373 were interviewed in a third survey wave during November 29-December 28, 2014 .
 Some respondents dropped out of the survey, especially in the Luhansk region . The survey included the Donbas fully in the first wave, though as rebel control advanced, some dropped out .
 The UCEPS found that there is broad popular support for policy autonomy in the regions . In the most general terms, the UCEP found that the majority of people support policy autonomy .
 In May 2014, 43 percent agreed that policy and administrative power should be equally divided between the central government and the regions . Another 25 percent favored giving the most power to the regions.
 The statements that “all decisions should be taken by the central government’ met with the agreement of only 5 and 8 percent, respectively . The statements were made by the government .
Figures were nearly the same in the November-December 2014 wave of the survey. These figures were nearly same in November- December 2014 wave.
Support for a balance between central and regional power increased to just over the 50 percent mark . 25 percent backed more regional power and only 11 percent backed a country dominated by the central government .
 One important example of decentralization Ukrainians appear to support language policy . One example of the sort of decentralisation Ukrainians support involves language policy.
 68 percent of respondents agreed that “each region of Ukraine should have the opportunity to make Russian the official language in its locality,’ while only 25 percent were opposed . In the May 2014 survey wave, 68 percent agreed ‘each region’ should have a
 Galicia is known as a center of ethnolinguistic Ukrainian nationalism . Even in the western territory of Galicia, a clear majority supported this .
 The ongoing conflict has appeared to take its toll on the tolerance of western Ukrainians for other regions’ language preferences . That said, the ongoing conflict is taking its toll.
 Support for linguistic autonomy also declined in other regions, but it still remained a majority nationwide by the end of 2014 .
 The Russian leadership has demanded a more comprehensive system of regional autonomy for Ukraine . It has called for Kyiv to adopt a “federal’ system of government.
 In Ukraine’s western regions, pro-federalism sentiment was at just 4 percent . In the Donbas it was at 62 percent. In Ukraine's western regions it was 4 percent.
 Ukraine's leadership agreed to a ceasefire that would grant the kind of special autonomous status to the breakaway regions . Russia's federalism proposal envisioned a federalism plan .
 The population of Ukraine generally supports greater regional autonomy and decentralization . The UCEPS findings indicate that with the partial exception of the Donbas, Ukrainians do not support more far-reaching reforms .
 Some policy observers, primarily based abroad, have argued that Ukraine should just forget about Crimea and perhaps even the Donbas .
 Advocates of partition suggest that this might not only make European integration more realistic but also excise some of the largest electorates that have challenged the most European-oriented parties and leaders .
 support for regional autonomy discussed above does not include backing a right to secession . For one thing, we find that the support for Regional autonomy doesn't include backing secession .
 An overwhelming majority backed it in the Donbas, but few supported it nationwide . Two-thirds of the country was opposed to it, with two-thirds being opposed .
 A large majority of Donbas residents are not willing to say that Ukraine would be better off without the Donbas . The Donbas are a city in Ukraine's eastern region .
 Donbas residents think the rest of Ukraine would be worse off if they were to secede . It may also mean that they just think that they would be even worse off.
 UCEPS: Most Donbas residents favor autonomy arrangement that would give them the right to secede . But it at least suggests that they would not actually want to exercise that option .
 8 percent averred in June-July 2014 that Ukraine would be better off without any of its territories, including Crimea .
 This indicates that Ukraine could more successfully reform and join Europe without Crimea and the Donbas was falling on deaf ears . This indicates the argument that Ukraine can more successfully Reform and join the EU without Crimea is falling on the deaf ears.
 Ukrainians appeared to become more resolute in championing territorial integrity over 2014 . One might wonder whether war fatigue changed these figures .
 In the November-December survey wave, only 7 percent agreed that Ukraine would be better off without some of its parts . The same as in the early stages of the war, according to the survey .
 feelings for territorial integrity were strongly felt. Perhaps most importantly, feelings for Territorial integrity were strong felt .
 Ukrainians appear unlikely to acquiesce to any solution to the current crisis that includes recognition of territorial losses . Overall, judging from public opinion research from May to December 2014, Ukrainians appear quite unlikely to accept any solution .
 Calls for federalism are also deeply unpopular nationwide and are unlikely to be accepted outside the Donbas . Calls forFederalism are deeply unpopular across the country and are also unpopular nationwide .
 Any move toward either of these solutions involves high levels of political risk for policymakers . So long as citizens have the right to freely vote in presidential and parliamentary elections.
 A federal solution might help bring the disaffected Donbas back into Ukraine’s active political fold . The result might also be to exacerbate societal divisions by antagonizing other parts of Ukraine, writes Peter Bergen .
 It seems unlikely that a Ukrainian leader with aspirations of staying in office for the longer run will seriously undertake such measures without securing concessions on other issues that are politically popular enough to offset the domestic political losses .
 There still exists broad national support for some decentralization and more limited forms of autonomy in realms such as language policy .
 Current constitutional reform efforts to redraw the administrative map and devolve certain executive functions are more in line with public opinion than calls for federalism or dismemberment . Current reform efforts have been successful in recent years .
 In November-December 2014, 50 percent of the population advocated a roughly equal balance between central and regional authority rather than favoring either regional or central power . A plurality of Ukrainian citizens believed that Poroshenko's party stood for precisely this.
 The fit of Poroshenko’s reforms with public opinion is far from perfect, however, and they look unlikely to satisfy the Donbas . The Donbas remains much more sympathetic to a farther-reaching federalism than the rest of the country .
 The UCEPS findings also suggest that so long as Russian and pro-Russian forces continue to occupy parts of Ukraine, there will be Ukrainians in the mood to fight for Ukraine’s territorial integrity .
 With Russia showing few signs of reversing course, the political situation in Ukraine and Russia appears likely to be hot for the future .
 In this text, reference to the Donbas includes both government-controlled and occupied localities . The text, which also includes government- controlled and occupiedLocalities, is written in the text .