 Comic actor Volodymyr Zelensky is leading in the polls ahead of Ukraine’s presidential election on March 31 . He has no political experience but has played Ukrainian president on television .
 Last weekend marked five years since Russia annexed Crimea, and fighting in eastern Ukraine continues to this day .
 Steven Pifer, a former U.S. ambassador to Ukraine, joins Deep Dish to explain the latest developments and what to expect next .
 This is Deep Dish on Global Affairs, going beyond the headlines on critical global issues . This is the latest in a series of deep Dish on global affairs .
Brian Hanson: Ukraine, five years after Russia's annexation of Crimea, on eve of presidential election . Hanson: "I'm Brian Hanson, and today we're talking about Ukraine" He says the election is an important election in Ukraine .
 Ukrainians will vote for the next president on March 31st . There's also a surprising leader in the poll who is a newcomer, Volodymyr Zelensky .
 He is a 41-year-old comedian with no political experience other than, and he's not making this up . He is playing Ukrainian president on popular Ukrainian TV show .
 This past weekend marked five years since Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula from Ukraine . Russian president Putin observed in Crimea this week .
 Neither Crimea nor the conflict in Donbass seems any closer to resolution. Neither Crimea or Donbass has killed thousands .
 Steven Pifer will help us understand what's going on in Ukraine today . Pifer has been working on the Ukraine crisis since the beginning of the year .
 He served more than 25 years with the State Department . He focused on U.S. relations with former Soviet Union and Europe .
 He was the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine between 1998 and 2000 . He also was the United States ambassador to the Ukraine between1998 and 2000.
 Zelensky is a comedian and comedian who is known for his comedy . He is best known for being a self-confessed comedian .
 Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin says more progress has not been made since 2014 and the Maidan Revolution . He says there is a significant degree of frustration on the part of a significant segment of the Ukrainian electorate .
 corruption was a big issue in 2014, as people may remember . Talk to us about corruption, because this was a huge issue.
 Ukraine has accomplished a lot in the last five years, particularly from 2014 to 2016 . But many Ukrainians still feel that the corruption picture hasn't changed .
Senior officials who own cars that are far beyond the reach of their incomes. You still have lots of reporting about senior officials who owned houses .
 Ukraine's oligarchs are people of great wealth who wield political influence . But also, it's the question of Ukraine's wealthy people who wield power .
 The government uses that to work with the government to keep potential competitors out of competition .
 Mr Zelensky now polls between 20% and 25% in most polls . He now polls up to 20% in the most polls.
 I think almost every poll now has him as the leading candidate for the March 31st election . I think he is the best candidate.
I understand that in Ukraine they have a two round process for the presidential election. I understand that they have two round processes for the election . In Ukraine, the election is being held in a two-round process .
 The mayoral election will take place in Chicago at the end of March . If no candidate receives an absolute majority, there is a run-off election at that time .
 Under Ukrainian law, in order to win the election outright, you have to get 50 percent of the vote plus one .
I think Mr Zelensky's going to make it and then either Petro Poroshenko, the president, gets in or Yulia Tymoshenko gets in . I think he will make it .
 Ukraine's election is less than two weeks from the runoff, and nobody can really predict who's going to be the president . If I could add, this is actually one really good thing about Ukrainian democracy, I say .
In 2013, Ukraine's president was expected to be the president in the 2018 election . In 2013 we all knew who was going to be in the election. In 2013, Russia was in the running for the president .
 This is a good thing that we don't know this, but it really does leave things open and it makes predictions very difficult. So, this is aGood thing that they don't known this, it's good thing to know this. It really does left things open
 You were talking about the protest or pushback against the incumbents, against the oligarchy . You were speaking about the protests and pushback.
 Mr Zelensky is running on the basis of being a new face, he says . For three years now he's portrayed a Mr Common Man as president of Ukraine on television .
 He hasn't outlined much in the way of policy, but he seems to be someone who has a lot of confidence but also may be inclined to go with his instincts . But, he hasn't really outlined much of his policy.
 It's not yet clear who he has in mind for his team were he to be elected, so there's a blank slate there . It's still unclear who he's in mind about his team .
 Yulia Tymoshenko has adopted a program that many folks have called populist . On the other hand, another candidate has adopted the program . The program has been dubbed populist .
 For example, she's called for lowering the price of energy that's provided to households and utilities .
 The International Monetary Fund is raising prices to cover the cost of producing electricity and heating . That's a tricky question, because raising those prices was a big demand of the IMF .
 She's trying to say look, we can walk back some of the reforms the last several years to make it easier for people . She's adopted an approach that's tried to say looks, but it's not easy for people to look .
 If she were to be president, she would be in a difficult situation vis-a-vis the International Monetary Fund . That would put her though, though, if she was to be President, immediately .
Candidates are trying to identify the best path to receiving a winning majority in the election . Some of these trends are seen as a way to identify best path for winning a majority .
Ukrainian politician is a long time figure in Ukrainian politics . She's a long-time figure in Ukraine .
 Her party was part of the pro-government coalition in 2014, but they've separated themselves over the last three years . Some of the reforms that the government has adopted were in compliance with agreements and commitments they made to the IMF .
 Miss Tymoshenko has been in Ukrainian politics now for some 20 years . Many of the voters may see her as part of the old guard .
 There is someone with her same name that has been put on the ballot as well in order to divide the vote even further . One of my favorite parts in preparing for this conversation was that there is someone in the ballot that has the same name.
 It's an effort to have people make mistakes and take votes away from her . It's a good way to get people to take votes from her.
 Ukrainian democracy, at this point, is not yet close to perfect. This is one of the things where Ukrainian democracy is still not yet perfect . This is a sign that Ukraine is in the process of becoming a democracy .
 Ukraine's orientation in the world was one of the big dividing issues back in 2014 . Ukraine's attitude to the world in 2014 was a big dividing issue in 2014.
 Ukraine was going to align more closely with the EU and Brussels. Fundamentally, to over simplify, is needed to be more closely linked to Russia and Putin .
 The Maidan Revolution back in 2014 was a protest when President Yanukovych decided he was not going to sign an association agreement with the European Union . People basically, what drew them out in the streets originally, was the protest .
 Russia has conducted a war against Ukraine and the eastern region of the Donbass . The feeling has only intensified in the last five years as the result of Russia's seizure of Crimea .
Last month, Ukraine's parliament adopted a constitutional amendment that makes membership in both the European Union and NATO strategic goals for Ukraine . In fact, last month, the amendment was passed by a huge majority .
 Vladimir Putin has conducted a conflict against Ukraine over the last five years, including 13,000 dead in the Donbass region . Putin says this has really been a direct result of the conflict that Vladimir Putin is conducting against Ukraine .
 Russia of course has, and under Putin's leadership, has been interfering with elections throughout the world . Russia has also interfered with elections in the past, according to the Russian president .
 There's concern in Ukraine for example about the ability to protect electronic voting systems from a cyber attack . There's also concern in the country's voting systems .
 No candidate running for President in Russia on March 31st wants to be seen as Moscow's favorite . But it's also a difficult question for Russia because, believe me, no candidate runs for President .
 Russians have made very clear they don't want Mr Poroshenko to be reelected . They've also been careful not to do anything that would look like endorsing someone because they know that would be a huge blow to that person's prospects .
 This is five years after Russian annexation of the peninsula . As I'd mentioned up top, this is 5 years after Russia annexed the peninsula.
 Deep Dish listener Yuriy Makar suggested a question for Deep Dish listeners . The question is a pretty sophisticated question, Makar says .
 It's hard to see how Ukraine musters the political, the economic, the military leverage to draw Crimea back. It's not clear how the political and economic leverage will be used .
 Crimea has had a booming economy and had a boom in foreign investment . But it's hard to see how Crimea does that . I think the one option would be if Ukraine really embraced the new economic reforms .
 The West must maintain the policy of nonrecognition of Crimea's illegal annexation, he says . It's important to maintain the sanctions, if for no other reason than to signal to Russia that these kinds of land grabs are not acceptable in 21st century Europe .
 Christina Irene Collins asked on our Facebook group something I think a lot of folks would probably admit to . Before I go there, another Deep Dish listener asked on Facebook: "What do you think?"
 She says, "I'm wondering whether there is still a way underway in eastern Ukraine" She says she's wondering if there is "still a way" underway in Ukraine .
 The Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe monitors report firing across the land of contact . It's not a frozen conflict because virtually every day it's monitored .
Ukraines report one or two soldiers killed and a number injured every week . And every week the Ukraines report a number of injured soldiers .
 The fighting is going on, albeit at a low intensity, and what you're seeing is an effort by the Kremlin to keep that conflict simmering . The Kremlin is trying to put pressure on Kiev to distract it, to destabilize it, and make it harder for the Ukrainian government to
 Putin first tried to deny even existed, including to his own people . This was of course a war that Putin first attempted to deny, including his people .
 Crimea and Donbass have a huge difference between Crimea and the simmering conflict in Donbass . Crimea has been in Crimea for more than a decade .
 Crimea was hugely popular with the Russian people, in part because Russia had a historical claim to Crimea . It was relatively bloodless, but it was relatively quick, it was also relatively quick .
 Russian government hides the fact that Russian soldiers are dying in Donbass . The Russian government does things like, it hides that, says CNN .
 The Russians are trying to keep their level of involvement as low as possible as possible . The Russian government is trying to make sure they don't get involved in any way .
 Most analysts say at least at the command levels, it's a Russian military operation . They say that there are volunteers in Ukraine, but they continually deny that there's any part of the Russian army there .
 I'm not sure that Donbass is going to be the issue that pushes things over the edge . I'm also not sure how much Donbass will be a factor in the next few years .
Over the course of the last year, an erosion in Putin's popularity reflects a number of factors, says Vladimir Putin .
 But I think it also reflects unhappiness that the economy is not doing better. But I also think it is also unhappiness with the economy .
 For the last several years you've seen stagnant growth at one to one-and-a-half percent . For the past several years, growth has been one to a half percent .
 The Donbass and then sanctions that are a result of Russian involvement in Donbass are a part of that . The sanctions are part of the Russian involvement.
 The fighting in Donbass itself is not going to push Putin over the edge. But it's a combination of factors, and I'm not sure that the fighting in the region is going to be a push for Putin .
 Russians are trying to find a way to get out of Donbass. You get the Russians to the point where they really are try to get a way out of the city .
 That's a perfect transition for where I wanted to go, which was to the question of sanctions . That's the perfect transition to where I want to go. That's what I wanted, and that's the answer to sanctions .
 The U.S. is imposing sanctions on Russia for the Crimea annexation and the recent Russian attack on Ukrainian ships . The United States is also imposing sanctions for the recent attack on Ukraine .
 The United States, the European Union and other countries, have applied a range of sanctions on Russia that are related to the seizure of Crimea . The heavier sanctions really are linked to Donbass, according to CNN.
 sanctions involve sanctions, visa sanctions and financial sanctions on Russian individuals . But they also involve sanctions on certain areas of the Russian economy . They involve sanctions and visa sanctions, but also involve financial sanctions .
 Most economists assess that the effect of the sanctions is probably between three-quarters and one percent of Russian gross domestic product .
 In an economy that's only growing about one-and-a-half percent a year, that's a fairly sizable impact . The economy is only growing one- and a half percent per year .
 sanctions have not yet pushed Russia to either end the war it's conducting in Donbass or to give back Crimea . Those sanctions are not yet pushing Russia to end its war in Don bass or to return Crimea .
 The sanctions probably have kept the Russians from doing other things. But I would argue that the sanctions may have kept them from doing more things .
 Russian and Russian proxy forces might move to seize the port city of Mariupol in eastern Ukraine . The port city is the logical export port for Donbass, Ukraine .
 Russian military action would have provoked much heavier sanctions . The Russians understood that that kind of operation would have required direct Russian military participation .
 For all the sanctions that have been imposed over five years, we're probably somewhere just around three or four . For all of the sanctions, we are probably somewhere between three and four .
 Ivo Daalder: Obama administration had not done in a way that the Obama administration hadn't done . Ivo: "This administration had done in the way it had done" Ivo's defense arms to Ukrainian troops, he says .
 The Obama administration has continued the sanctions against Ukraine . They have provided lethal military assistance in the form of Javelin anti-tank missiles to Ukraine .
 Obama administration has seen a toughening policy in the last two years of the Obama administration . The Obama administration's policy overall is really a continuation of the tougheening policy that you saw in last couple of years of Obama administration.
 It's very much what one might expect from a mainstream Republican approach . It's not what one may expect from the Republican party .
 It's supportive of Ukraine and it's very worried and skeptical about Russia . It's also very worried about Russia, but it's also skeptical about it .
 The only asterisk I would attach to that assessment is I'm not sure that the President believes in this whole approach .
 Congress has been trying to lock the president in on additional sanctions . It's not the first time Congress has tried to lock him in on more sanctions .
 I'm not sure, if left to his own devices, he would have pursued the policy that we've seen over the last two years . I'm also not sure if he'd been left to himself, but he's not sure .
 Some have been concerned with increasing discord between Europe and the U.S. and Trump administration's words and attitudes toward Europe . Some say cooperation could be more difficult on areas where there's potential shared interests .
There's been a tightening of sanctions in the Trump administration. As you point out, there's been an increase in sanctions .
 There seems to be pretty good coordination between Washington and Brussels on continuing the sanctions . There seem to be a lot of coordination between the two countries .
 Europe probably had 10 times as much trade with Russia as the U.S. did when we adopted sanctions, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 European sanctions are having a heavier impact on European companies than on American companies. So these sanctions are being more severe than on U.S. companies .
 Europe would have held steady on sanctions five years down the road in 2019, according to analysts . The second point I would make is that, had you asked analysts back in 2014 where Europe would be on sanctions, that is today in 2019 .
 The European Union has steered the European Union on this path of maintaining sanctions . Hungary and Italy want to move past sanctions and get back to something like business as usual with Russia .
 So far the Europeans have stayed committed on the sanctions question . But so far the European Union has stayed committed to the sanctions issue .
I'm not sure I feel comfortable about the answer because you are beginning to see more, as I said in places like Hungary, in Italy, I'd put Greece in that same category, saying these sanctions haven't worked. That's a really good question, and I'm notsure
I would disagree with that, but they say maybe it's time to get back to a different approach . I would disagree, but I would agree with that. But they say it's a time for a new approach .
 13,000 people have died in a war in Europe, and the price for it is not that high . You can conduct a war with now 13,00 dead, and you can conduct it in Europe .
 The Kremlin wants the Europeans to see that. That's not a calculation we want the Kremlin to make, and I hope that the Europeans will continue to see it, says Putin .
 sanctions are to put pressure on Russia in order to stop its actions in eastern Ukraine, in particular . Russia's actions in Ukraine have been criticized by some in the past .
 Ukraine also has parliamentary elections at the end of October . In Moscow they're going to see what happens in the presidential election .
 There may well be a hope in Moscow that as a result of these elections there's a political alignment and Kiev that somehow becomes more amenable to what the Russians would like to work out .
 Russia is preparing for a change in its policy course until the end of the year . But it's not likely to see real movement or a readiness in Russia to consider change in policy .
 The Kremlin may be reassessment in the Kremlin about whether this policy is working or not . If the Russians are still confronted with a Ukrainian government that is prepared to resist Russia, there is a reassessment .
 There have been some ideas out there that might offer a path to a peacekeeping force . The introduction of a U.N. peacekeepers could be among them .
 Steve asks him to do something that's incredibly hard, which is look into the future . Steve says he wants to do a thing that's very hard, and that's what he wants .
 Ukraine has the potential to change, but it requires that in the elections or at these elections there's a leadership that really is prepared to do the critical mass of reforms. I'm optimistic in that I think Ukraine has a potential to changed, but I think it requires a leadership leadership that
 That means coming to full terms with the corruption problem and reducing the outsized political influence of oligarchs . That means reducing the Outsized Political influence of the oligarchs, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine's economy is growing at maybe 2 1/2 to 3 percent a year now, but for a country in Ukraine's place should be growing at 5 to 6 percent per year, he says . Ukraine's economic growth should be at 5-6 percent, he adds. Ukraine's
 The Russians are going to have a difficult issue to deal with. Then there's the very difficult issue where are the Russians going to go .
 Russia seems to be determined that if it can't have Ukraine in its orbit, to hold the country back, to basically try to destabilize it and disrupt it . But Russia then seems tobe determined to hold Ukraine back, and to try to disrupt it.
 Crimea is going to be a burden to both the Ukraine-Russia relationship and the West-Russia relationships for years, if not decades, to come . At least, can you move to end the bloodshed and try to restore some measure of normalcy in the Donbass.
Deep Dish listeners share their thoughts on the Ukraine situation on Facebook .
 We've been together for more than a decade, and we've learned more about the dynamics in play there now . Thanks for helping bring us up to date and understand the dynamics of the world .
 The Council on Thursday, March 28th, will host a special event on Russia . The event will be held at the Council in Moscow, Russia .
 I'd also invite you to join our Facebook group, Deep Dish and Global Affairs . I'd like to see more people join us on Facebook .
 There you can ask our guests follow-up questions on anything you've heard today or submit questions for upcoming guests .
 The Chicago Council on Global Affairs says the opinions belong to the people who expressed them . It's not the Chicago Council of Global Affairs .
Deep Dish will return soon with another slice of Deep Dish . I'm Brian Hanson, and we'll be back soon with a new segment .