 Lukin says one should “forget the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics’s Republics. Lukin said one should "forget" the Donetsk region .
 "We're in no hurry," says Lukin . Lukin says the violence will continue, but he doesn't know how long it will .
 Former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko says the girl with the braid will eat him up .
 Putin didn’t seize the opportunity to invade Ukraine earlier in the conflict. First, they provide an answer to the question of why Putin didn't seize the chance to invade the country earlier .
 The Ukrainian government and army were completely disorganized after the Maidan revolution, and a quick strike could have won Putin Kiev .
 Putin may have placed his hopes on secessionist movements that formed the Donetsk and Luhansk People’s Republics as a way to get him what he wanted .
 Putin intervened to prevent a Ukrainian rollback in Ukraine . Putin intervened when those failed to win a decisive victory .
 In the last few days, he seems to have halted and partially reversed the Ukrainian advance . Second, Lukin’s talking points explain the mass destruction .
 As a result of separatist rule and ensuing war, several thousand civilians have been killed and wounded . Hundreds of thousands have fled their homes .
 Industrial production in Donetsk Province has fallen by 29 percent . In addition, industrial production in the region has also fallen by29 percent .
 Both provinces have experienced a 46 percent decline in light industry, a 41 percent drop in the chemical industry, and a 34 percent fall in machine building . Both provinces experienced a 13 percent loss in metallurgy, and 13 percent dropped in coal industry .
 Lukin says the goal was to ensure that the Donbas remains within Ukraine to thwart integration with NATO and to provide Russia with leverage over Kiev . Lukin: " maximal devastation would go a long way toward promoting Russia's political goals"
 A devastated region would be an economic drain on Kiev’s scarce resources . A source of never-ending political instability would be a source of political instability .
Russian offers of humanitarian aid would allow Kremlin to continue influencing politics in Ukraine . It would also invite continued Russian offers of aid, particularly for the region's reconstruction .
 The Russian regular forces could be impossible, and accommodating them would be counterproductive. Seen in this light, defeating the pro-Russian rebels and the Russianregular forces would be impossible .
 Kiev's best way out of Putin's trap may be to withdraw from the Donbas territories controlled by Russian troops and separatists . If that is the case, then Kiev’s best way to escape is to withdraw.
 The goal would be to turn them not into autonomous federal units within a weak Ukraine, as Putin desires, but into an independent entity, as he pointedly does not .
 Kiev could then request Western assistance for enhancing its military’s defensive capacities . Kiev could build fortifications along its new frontier with Russia and the rump Donbas .
 Russia and its proxies would then have to clean up the mess they made in the Donbas . Ukraine would then be free to pursue integration with the West and the world .
 Lukin was honest in his exchange with Gelman. Of course, all this assumes that Lukin really does know Putin’s mind .
 Putin called on Kiev to begin “substantive, content-filled negotiations about the political organization of society and the state in southeastern Ukraine’s Donbas . The goal of the recent Russian invasion of eastern Ukraine was to lure Kiev into agreeing to some form
 Kiev would still have to assess its chances of retaking those parts of the Donbas controlled by Russia . But even if Lukin’s account was inaccurate, Kiev would have to realistically assess its prospects .
 Ukraine's chances of success are small and declining, and that its territories would be impossible to manage . If it decides to abandon the Donbas and rebuild a Western country, it may permit Ukraine to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat .
Crimea and the Donbas could only hasten Putin's regime's decline. By the same token, saddling Putin with two economic sinkholes -Crimea.
 Ukrainians will be unwilling to accept such a solution, arguing that soldiers’ and civilians’ lives weren’t sacrificed for the satisfaction of Putin’s imperial designs . Calls to withdraw from the Donbas enclave controlled by Russia are tantamount to treason .
 Putin is banking on such morally uncompromising views to influence Ukrainian policy as well . Putin, no doubt, is banking on such uncompromising view to influence Ukraine policy .
 Ukrainians may be wise to refuse to play the game on his terms and focus only on what is best for them and their country .
 Ukraine may decide to abandon ungovernable stretch that was always Ukraine's odd man out . Ukraine's commitment to real sovereignty would be a stunning example of Ukraine’s commitment to sovereignty .
 When Putin eventually exits the political stage and Russia tires of Putinism, the Donbas and perhaps even Crimea may come knocking on Ukraine’s door .
 Ukraine could readmit them on its own terms, not on the Kremlin's. If they do, Ukraine could do it on their own terms .