After the orange revolution, the Euromaidan protests and Russia’s annexation of Crimea, Ukraine is now caught up in a war that both Europe and the major world powers would rather ignore .
 From its Capital to the small towns devastated by bombing, Ukraine looks more and more like a country left on its own .
 Euromaidan protests were not enough to raise hope for a tighter closeness to Europe . Kiev tries to move on its road toward progress, but Eurom Maidan protests are not enough .
 UN estimates 80% of Ukrainians are now living with less than 5 dollars a day . The UN estimates that 80% are living with 5 dollars per day .
 The former soviet land of Russia had to rebuild its identity from 1991 to 1991 . It represents the central crossroad of the European continent, but also in that land .
 Kiev's main square in 2014 gave name to “Euromaidan, where more than 70 people died, leading to the removal of the former president Viktor Yanukovych . The umbilical cord that ties Kiev to Moscow has maintained.
 Russia refused to acknowledge the new interim government and directed its political influence on some historically disputed lands between the two countries . Russia refuses to accept the new government and directs its influence on disputed lands .
Crucial actions were undertaken by Moscow to facilitate its control over Crimea . Crucial action was undertaken to facilitate control of Crimea .
 referendum in the peninsula on self-determination, the shipping of military and economic aid to local civilians and troops, and supporting the separation of the Donbass from Ukraine .
 Ukraine, with its policy of shifting alliances, now governed by Petro Poroshenko, once again does not allow its citizens to understand which forces are really involved in the ongoing conflict, beside the obvious Russian interference .
 The Minsk Protocol was not enough to stop the war at the borders of Donbass and Luhansk, marking the start of the conflict . More than 9.300 deaths, countless casualties, a spread of violence, unpunished rapes.
 It became, in the technical definition, a low intensity conflict . The support of an extensive network of volunteers and veterans has become essential to take daily care of soldiers .
 Europe has no desire to start an open fight with Russia . It will be very difficult for the Ukrainian army to affirm itself to a point where Moscow stops invading their country .
 The Ukrainian problem is, at this time, unmanageable, and that it could possibly be controlled only in the future . Angela Merkel’s interest in Kiev's fate is now clear .
 One of many Ukrainian check-points in the Anti-Terrorist Operation Zone . Luhansk region, Ukraine, is one of many Ukraine's anti-terror zones .
 Petro Yablinchuk, 22, is a member of the 24-th armored cavalry brigade, Operational Command “West of the Land Forces of Ukraine’s Ukraine .
 A woman from the village Novotoshkovskoe in front of her destroyed home was killed in May 2017 .
 Novotoshkovskoe, Ukraine, was destroyed by powerful artillery Tire in winter 2015 . 84 children are studying there .
 A priest who provides services to military camps to the front. Kyiv, Ukraine, is a priest who has been working in Ukraine since 2007 .
 Dmytro Kotov, 41, was injured by a mine in 2014 . He was hospitalized in Kyiv Military Hospital in May 2017 .
 In Severodonetsk, Ukraine, it is not uncommon to Tind soviet missiles of the years before Ukrainian independence .
Tank batallion of the 24-th armored cavalry brigade, Operational Command “West of the Land Forces of Ukraine’s Land Forces. Ukraine .
Born in 1988, I'm an independent documentary photographer and video maker . Born in 1988.
Photography is a way to tell stories focusing on human rights issues, identity and health from around the world . I am interested in the use of photography as a way of telling stories of minority, conflicts and marginality .