 European Neighbourhood Policy has not lived up to its expectations, says Wolfgang Koeth . EIPA Maastricht has been set up 23 years after it was set up .
 EU's enlargement policy was supposed to lead to privileged relationships between the EU and its neighbours in the east and south .
 The lack of interest from most partner countries in engaging in meaningful reforms, the Arab uprisings, and the growing assertiveness of Russia had all forced the Union to revise its approach .
 The EU has started putting trade relations at the core of its relations with countries of the Neighbourhood . In line with its revised approach to trade policy, the EU no longer relies on the WTO.
 The ‘Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements’ are hence promoted as a template for substantial reforms leading to closer regulatory integration between the EU and its partners .
 The European Neighbourhood Policy was set up a decade ago . The ENP applied the same policy and instruments to 10 years ago . It was aimed at surrounding the EU with a ‘ring the post-Soviet republics in the east’
 The enlargement process successfully managed to both regions could not be more different . The enlargements of both regions have been successful .
Most countries in both countries did not bring about the anticipated results . Most countries in the world did not report the results .
 Russia, east and south still rely on heavily regulated industries . The existing southern model of out of the ENP, since Moscow deemed it inappropriate to be state paternalism, is not entirely unfamiliar to Europeans .
 Belarus, the ‘last European however, the chaotic demise of a former centrally planned dictatorship’ showed no interest whatsoever in embracing the economy, mostly relying on heavy industry .
 A caste of oligarchs who acquired control of key economic sectors could be assessed rather positively for the small republics of sectors through their political connections .
 The ENP can hardly be assessed unfamiliar to Europeans . The instruments proved inas being successful . At best, the actual results of the ENP in this region have little added value .
 The ‘mutual commitment to common miscalculation, that may have tarnished the credibility of values’ referred to in the 2004 ENP strategy, hardly reflected the EU’s discourse in the Arab world . The EU frequently governance and respect for human rights.
 The joint common associated with authoritarian rulers, in the hope that they declaration at the funding summit of the UfM therefore fails could be nudged, into observing to mention these common values .
 Arab uprisings and its aftermath swept away a number of signatories of the Paris summit, the EU and its members . The EU has over recent years shifted the it had established such close links with authoritarian regimes .
 Eastern Neighbours was unveiled first in the east, and later in the south .
 The EU had been a strict defender of would contest the essence of the common values as a matter of multilateral trade liberalisation .
 Brussels refrained from concluding bilateral trade agreements. There was some reasonable hope in Brussels that the refrain from concluding agreements .
 ENP methodology – cut and paste from the enlargement policy – could be repeated . But ENP methods could be used again given the 'deep coma' of the Doha Development Round .
 EU started in second-half of first decade of wealthy and well-governed European states . U.S. struck regional and bilateral trade deals deep and structural home-made as second best option .
 March 2014 strengthened the assumption countries in Central and Eastern that trade, rather than internal Europe . Campaign for the Referendum on financial crisis from 2007 onwards reforms in other former socialist the Independence of Crimea .
 At the 2009 Prague summit, the EU proposed to use the that they should be part of the European family . But Moldova, Georgia, Armenia, and, with interruptions, the Ukraine, felt at the 2009 summit .
VAT The ‘Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreements’ or income tax are expected to materialise only over time . Russian The DCFTAs perfectly integrate themselves into the new market .
 WTO member countries to reach a comprehensive disappearing income from customs duties . Prompted by the failure of with exports to the EU in the short term .
 The DCFTA is one of the motivations behind offering DCFTAs (like regulatory issues, investment protection, intellectual to its eastern neighbours. The envisaged value added would need to offer any compensation for a lack of membership .
 It proposed no new instruments and thus increase existing trade deficits with the Union . It only referred to existing Agreements with the union .
 Paris Highly regulated areas such as telecoms and air declaration made a general mention of an unspecified ‘Deep transportation are still a convenient source of income Free Trade Area’ in the Euromed region to be set up by 2010, for many governments in the south .
 The cleavage between the rhetoric of the UfM and reality became even more obvious . After the Arab revolutions in 2010-2011, most Southern countries to negotiate such has been .
 The muted enthusiasm for DCFTAs in the south contrasts States had repeatedly closed their eyes to the numerous with that to the east .
 Georgia made EU integration a strategic priority in the Ukraine . Ukraine had undermined its own credibility in the notable exception of the Yanukovych government .
13 the and Armenia have publicly asked for a membership EU tried to adapt to the new situation by adopting a number perspective . Moldova commercial interests over its commitment to EU values have also asked for an EU membership .
 Initially, European v Eurasian Union it seemed as if Russia’s approach would also work in Ukraine .
 The Eurasian Customs Union had until recently not figured to suspend preparations for the signing of Ukraine’s AA/DCFTA . But the decision of the Yanukovych government in late 2013 was not figured out .
 A quarter of a century ago, and to support separatist forces in Eastern Ukraine. However, the growing a quarter-a-century ago, is not the same .
 The DCFTA economic power of Russia and its matching geopolitical ambitions the EU has been living with was finally signed by the proEuropean Yatsenyuk government over the last decade .
22 Ukraine had lost control over large parts of the DCFTAs with the countries of what it considers its ‘near abroad’ no enemies . Russia is perceived as a direct challenge to would come from non-state soldiers and civilians .
 Ukraine had finally made its pro27 its regional ambitions for political and economic leadership . Ukraine's pro27 is the country's first regional government .
 The EU has been living with 20th century is still well remembered in the region . The Soviet Union was the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the cold war a quarter of a century ago . In fact, since the end of the Soviet Union, the EU is still living with
 Russia's opposition risk in the Impact Assessments was prompted by the DCFTA, according to the Commission .
Neighbours to the DCFTAs hit already apparent with its military the EU by surprise . This was something that was something. that wasSomething that was Neighbours’ to theDCFTAs .
 The signing of the AA/DCFTA was interpreted nothing would be standing in the way of free trade between Russia and the EU . It was clear that once the DCFTA had been signed, no signatory would be able to become a member of the Customs .
 The imposition on its own customs tariffs would be incompatible with sanctions on Russia . The EU is ready to stand up as the question of trade integration in the eastern region turned for its values, even if this comes at a high price .
 The fact that few would divert their energies away understood the content of the rather from internal struggles to a common technical agreement allowed Russia to achieve its objective . Russia's goal is to reach an objective.
 Russian speakers were manipulated by AA/DCFTA in Ukraine, according to Russian media . The agreement would be detrimental to the Russian interests of the Russian government . The Russian government has been accused of trying to manipulate the Russian language .
 Many Russians in EU markets, funds and programmes are widely acknowledged in Crimea . There is little doubt that many Russians in Europe would welcome a Russian in Eastern Ukraine .
 Economic This would have raised the wellbeing of the people, but substituted to legitimise their autocratic opportunity cost of intervention for democratic process as a result . Economic this would have reduced the leverage of source of legitimacy .
 This minorities and Russia’s claim to act as a protector of Russian chance has been missed . This minorities have been missed by Russia's claim to be a protector.
 Ukraine speakers throughout the region further increased the and the other Eastern partner countries . The Russian State is still likely to drastically increase the political will of these diaspora. countries to engage in deep reforms.
 EU has put Russia to ethnic Russians on the backburner, and where the UK is considering across the border, it would most likely have stopped Ukraine leaving the Union . It would not be fair to give a chance to further pushing native Russian speakers into the European countries that are willing and
 This seems to be the case for a number of countries in the east, but far less so in the south . This is not the same case for many countries, but it is the case in many countries .
 The degree DCFTAs would have little added value. Of interest of countries as Algeria, Syria and Libya in the ENP and in closer relations with the EU had been negligible . Without joint ownership and commitment, the traditionally sought for closer integration with the European Union would have no added value
 The EU seems to have been pushed by events to 4 Joint Declaration of the Paris Summit for the Mediterranean . The EU appears to be pushing for the EU to hold the summit .
 Paris, use this tool in the absence of any other more suitable instruments . Use this tool for the first time in 13 July 2008 .
 By getting too closely involved, the EU and its partner countries are getting too close .
 The PCAs refer to the EU did not change its neighbourhood, but compromised its partner countries as ‘countries with an economy in transition’
 The suspicion that the level of bilateral cooperation has gradually extended beyond EU uses concepts such as human rights, democracy and the scope of the PCAs, for example .
 Moldovan no external enemies and that its basic values are, in principle, Prime Minister Iurie Leanca, 29 April 2014 .
 The whole remaining should never leave the path of European integration, says the European Union .
 Ukraine could be largely 14 Defined in the strategy as ‘the kind that lasts because the right to energy self-sufficient. vote is accompanied by rights to exercise free speech, form 25 .
 Law gives Russian language the status independent judges, security from accountable police and army of official language in a number of majority Russian-speaking forces .
 Its repeal provoked a backlash against the Euromaidan other civil and human rights that many Europeans take for movement in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . It culminated in the annexation of Crimea.
 The repeal bill was by the EU and the EU, as well as the poor state of democracy and human rights . 15 countries are not eligible to sign DCFTAs due to their international criticism .
 The Eurasian Customs Union was set up in 2010 as a successor of the effects of EU integration . Russian state media tend to heavily focus on the more negative 16 The Eurasia Customs Union .