 The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 9:30m. in Room SH-216, Hart Senate Office Building . Senator John McCain (chairman) was presiding .
Sen. McCain, Inhofe, Sessions, Wicker, Ayotte, Fischer, Cotton, Cotton and Rounds. Senators McCain, Hirono, King, and Heinrich are all in the Senate .
 The Senate Armed Services Committee meets this morning to receive testimony on Russian Strategy and Military Operations . It's a pretty important time to have this discussion .
 General Jack Keane, of the Institute for the Study of War; General James Jones of the Atlantic Council . Ms. James Jones, of Atlantic Council, is also a general .
 Heather Conley, of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, and Dr. Dr. John Sutter of the University of New York University, are the authors of the book .
 Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea forced a recognition last year . U.S. leaders of both parties have sought to maintain the international order since the end of World War 11 .
 Russia continues to destabilize Ukraine and menace our NATO allies in Europe with aggressive military behavior . Today, Russia is destabilizing Ukraine and threatening NATO allies.
 The President's top advisors have warned that failure to offer greater support to Ukraine would invite the very aggression we seek to avoid .
 Mr Putin’s appetite is growing with the eating. As the old saying goes, Mr Putin's appetite is now growing .
 Russia has intervened militarily in Syria on behalf of the murderous regime of Bashar alAssad . Now, in a profound echo of the Cold War, Russia has stepped in to help Syria .
 Russia never intervened overtly militarily beyond its so-called near abroad . In all 2 of its Soviet and post-Soviet history, Russia never interfered overtly militally beyond its near abroad.
 Vladimir Putin is doing so, and it has become the latest disastrous turn in the Middle East as well as another humiliating setback for the U.S. Now Vladimir Putin has been doing so .
 A few weeks ago, the administration warned Russia not to send forces to Syria .
 The administration tried to block Russia’s access to airspace en route to Syria . The administration then tried to blocked Russia's access to the Syrian airspace .
 United States defense officials rushed into talks with Russia’s military to, quote, “deconflict” in Syria .
 President Obama acquiesced to his first formal meeting with Vladimir Putin in 2 years with Putin . Obama agreed to meet with Putin to isolate Russia, exactly as Putin desired .
 President Obama is fond of saying there is no military solution to this or any other crisis . President Obama has said he has no plans for a military solution .
This ignores the reality that there is a major military dimension to the problem . This ignores the fact that the military is a key part of the problem. This is a serious problem, says the author .
 Most civil wars actually end when one side wins and the other side loses . Most civil war actually do end when a side wins, the other loses .
 Putin is imposing Russian airpower in an anti-American coalition of Syrian, Iranian, Hezbollah ground forces . That is Putin's military solution, and he is now imposing it with Russian air power .
 Putin has already established an intelligence partnership with Baghdad . We should not be surprised if Putin expands his anti-American coalition’s operations into Iraq .
 Putin wants to restore Russia as a major power in the Middle East, as Putin wants . However this conflict ends, it must not involve Vladimir Putin shoring up his partners, crushing ours, as he wants .
 His intervention has raised the costs and risks of greater U.S. involvement in Syria, but it has not negated the steps we must take, he says . He says it has raised costs and risk of greater United States involvement .
 As everyone from David Petraeus to Hillary Clinton has advocated, we must rally an international coalition to establish enclaves in Syria . We must do what is necessary to defend them, says David Petraeus .
 If Assad continues to barrelbomb civilians, we should destroy his air force’s ability to operate, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia must impose greater costs on Russia’s interests, for example, by striking meanin^ul Syrian regime targets .
 We must look to impose costs on Russia more broadly, including the provision of arms to Ukraine, the increase of targeted sanctions, and steps to deepen Russia’s international isolation .
 We must also recognize the growing challenge that Russia poses in other areas and domains . Russia poses a growing challenge in other regions and domains, says CNN .
 According to public reports, Russian actors are behind a growing and increasing campaign of 3 cyberattacks against the United States . The recent attack on the Joint Staff at the Department of Defense is one of the latest .
 Along the eastern flank of NATO, Russia is moving back into old military bases . Russia is deploying growing numbers of its modernized military forces, especially anti-access and area-denial weapons .
 Russia is involved in a significant military buildup of its air, ground, and naval forces . Russia has conducted a series of massive military exercises in the Arctic region .
 Russia represents the greatest threat to the United States, the Joint Chiefs of Staff says . President Obama says Russia is the biggest threat the U.S. faces .
 Whether we agree with that assessment or not, it is a striking wake-up call about the threat Russia poses, says CNN .
 Russia poses in Europe and in the Middle East, in the Arctic, it is not that the U.S. has done nothing . The United States has not done nothing.
 The problem is, nothing we are doing appears to be deterring Russian aggression . The Russian government is not doing anything to deter Russia's aggression .
 None of us want a return to the Cold War, but we need to face the reality that we are dealing with a Russian ruler who wants exactly that .
 We must revisit the question what it’ll take to deter the conflict and aggression while confronting a revisionist Russia .
 We look forward to the thoughts and recommendations from our distinguished witnesses on these questions . We will ask the distinguished witnesses to answer these questions.
 Let me first welcome the witnesses, thank them not only for their testimony, but for their service to the Nation over so many years .
 This morning, our hearing focuses on developments in Russian strategy and military operations . This morning's hearing includes developments in Russia's military operations in the Middle East and Arctic .
 The U.S. and its allies are facing an increasingly aggressive and revanchist Russia and a Putin regime . Russia is willing to use all tools, including its military power, to achieve its goals .
 Putin's goals appear to be, first, regime survival in the face of Russia's economic, political, and social decline . Second, securing Russia’s periphery by pressuring its neighbors against integrating with the West . Third, exploiting opportunities to weaken Western unity by dividing member states within the
 Russia’s provocative and dangerous aggression often appears opportunistic and potentially harmful for its long-term interests . Yet, Russia's provocative aggression often seems opportunistic.
 Ukraine is struggling to defend its sovereignty against aggression from Russia and Russian-backed 4 separatists . Last month, I had the opportunity to visit the country's nascent democratic government .
 Russia has demonstrated its willingness to use military force to violate Ukraine’s territorial integrity and intimidate its neighbor . Russia has shown that it is willing to use force in Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 Putin sees a functioning democratic westward-oriented Ukraine as a threat to his regime’s survival domestically and to Russia's broader regional security strategy .
 Russia has shifted its tactics in Ukraine from territorial gains to hybrid warfare and proxy forces to an expansion of his activities aimed at destabilizing the Ukrainian government .
 Russian tactics are changing in response to Ukraine and Syria conflict, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Russia is trying to shift the focus away from Ukraine and toward Syria . Russia has been trying to hide casualties from the Russian people, he says .
 Russian military operations in the Donbas have been a proving ground for its hybrid warfare technologies . The Donbas are a proving grounds for hybrid warfare .
 The United States needs to be firm in its support of Ukraine, right now, or else the U.S. and NATO will have a bigger problem in the future .
 If Ukraine does not weather the current crisis, then Russia’s aggressive behavior will be repeated elsewhere, potentially threatening NATO members .
 The U.S. needs to act in concert with our allies to assist Ukraine. The United States needs to help Ukraine, the U.N. says .
International community must press Russia not to support illegitimate local elections called by separatists . The separatists violate the terms of the Minsk agreement in Ukrainian law .
 The outcome of the local elections of the Donbas threaten to further undermine the prospects for negotiations as part of the Minsk peace process .
 Elections in the conflict area have been postponed until February . I understand that just recently the elections in the Conflict area were postponed until January .
 The United States and its allies and partners must immediately agree on an approach that supports Ukrainian efforts to hold elections under Ukrainian law . The U.S. pressures Russia to uphold the terms of the Minsk agreements, and makes clear that any separatist victors in sham elections will not be accepted
 The United States and its partners should take other steps to counter Russian aggression in Ukraine, as well . The U.S. and its partner countries should also take steps.
 Ukraine’s need for defensive weapons, including counter-artillery radars and anti-tank weapons, remains critical . Ukraine's need for anti- tank weapons remains critical.
 Ukraine should transfer key defensive weapon systems, including antitank weapons and vehicles . Other action to help Ukraine include expanding the training in Ukraine of units of the Ministry of Defense .
 In Syria, Russia has hidden its true intentions, using the ruse of joining the fight against ISIL to provide a cover for Russia’s military intervention to prop up the Assad regime . In Ukraine, much as it did in Ukraine, Russia did in Syria,
Russian airstrikes have predominantly occurred in Homs and Hama, areas controlled by moderate Syrian forces challenging the Assad regime . Instead of focusing on targeting ISIL, Russian airstrikes have been focused on Hama .
 Russia is providing broader enabling support to the Assad regime’s forces against the moderate opposition . Russia is also providing broader supporting support for the opposition .
 Russian missile attacks and enabling support were apparently conducted in coordination with a new ground offensive by the Syrian army, Iran’s terrorist proxy, Hezbollah, and other Iranianaffiliated forces .
 Russia's open military intervention in a conflict well beyond its borders marks a significant departure from how Russia has operated in the past . President Putin may be attaching particular strategic importance to Russia’s access to bases in Syria .
 Russia has deployed its military forces to Syria . Russia's military forces have been deployed to Syria in Syria since November .
 Russia’s unilateral and belligerent efforts are not helpful to the efforts of the unified coalition of 60-plus countries fighting ISIL . Russia's actions create a dangerous risk of unintended consequences, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin has chosen not to join the international anti-ISIL coalition . Putin is seeking to end the brutality of the Assad regime and establish a better Syria, he says .
 Russians’ actions are likely to only prolong and further complicate this conflict . Russia’s actions may only prolong the conflict, according to Russian media .
 Russia appears to be seeking to keep Bashar Assad in office and maintain Syria as a client state . Russia is trying to keep Syria as client state.
 Iraqi Prime Minister Abadi has suggested that Iraq would welcome Russian airstrikes against ISIL in Iraq . Russia, Iran, and Iraq have concluded an intelligence-sharing agreement . Iraq's prime minister has said that Iraq will welcome the Russian airstrikes .
 The witnesses' perspective on these issues would be absolutely critical. Once again, the witnesses’ perspective would beabsolutely critical .
 Russia is expanding its military presence in the Arctic, including coastal defense in the north . Russia is staking a claim to be able to control movements to a northern passage . The Arctic is a key part of Russia's military presence .
 STATEMENT of General John M KEANE, USA, USA .
 Chairman McCain, Ranking Member Reed, distinguished members of the committee . Chairman McCain is the chairman of the Committee .
 I’m honored to be back testifying before this great committee who means so much to our national defense and security . I'm honored to have been back testifying. I'm back testifying to this great Committee who means much to national defense.
 General Jones has served with the Pentagon and has known for years . It's a privilege to be here with his panel colleagues, particularly General Jones .
Russia's airbase in Syria is isolated from the heartland of Russia in a war zone . It is quite unprecedented, particularly for a non-expeditionary military .
 The map shows the air-bridges routes over Iran and Iraq, and a sea-bridge route through the Black Sea . You can see, on the map, the map labeled “Russian Deployment to Syria,” the map .
 The airbase consists of combat aircraft, helicopters, drones, drones and logistics . The base also includes a battalion-plus of armor infantry, artillery, and air defense for protection .
 Approximately 2,000 to 3,000 personnel make up the base, which also houses a joint operations center consisting of Russian, Syrian, Iranian, and Hezbollah military personnel .
 Some realities in Syria are insightful, some are insightful. While one can only speculate about the reason for the military aggression, some realities are insightful .
 The regime control area is now only about 20 percent of Syria . As you can see, the regime control is only in orange .
 Opposition control area to the north and south, in yellow, as the regime is quite confined . Note the opposition control area in yellow .
 ISIS seized Palmyra City, the famed ancient city, and a nearby regime airbase . It opened up the east-west transportation corridor from Homs to the Iraq border .
 Syria is Russia’s foothold in the Middle East . The Tartus Naval Base is a strategic asset .
 Russia believed the Assad regime’s survival was in a more precarious position and needed to be propped up . It seems apparent that Russia believed it was more precarious than Russia believed .
 The focus of the airstrikes are against the opposition forces threatening the regime from the north in Idlib, Hama, and Homs Province .
 The moderate opposition forces, many trained by the CIA, are the main focus with ISIS strikes at Raqqa and near Palmyra . Jabhat al-Nusra, an al-Qaeda affiliate, is also a main focus .
 Russian cruise missiles were introduced yesterday, striking 11 targets in northern Syria, northwestern Syria, and northeastern Syria .
 One is to stop the advance of the opposition forces threatening the regime, says the opposition .
 The main effort is in the north in southern Idlib and northern Hama Provinces . Two, to begin to set conditions for a ground counteroffensive to retake lost territory .
 The Syrian army began limited ground operations yesterday in Idlib Province, obviously supported by Russian airpower . The Syrian Army began limited operations yesterday .
 A supporting effort may also be launched to retake Palmyra and the military airbase . If the regime can generate sufficient forces, a supporting effort could be launched .
 Russia's recent strategic alliance with Iran will impact every country in the region . It will further diminish U.S. influence and United States interests in the area .
 Russia has entered into arms deals with Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwaifi and Egypt . Russia has been leveraging this reality to their own advantage by entering into deals with other countries .
 Russia is in preliminary discussions to build nuclear powerplants in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, and Tunisia . Russia is also in preliminary talks with Saudi Arabia and Jordan, Jordan and Egypt .
 The relationship with Iran and its proxies matters to Russia because it provides them greater influence in the Middle East . Russia also acts as a strategic buffer against radical Islam, a threat which is of great concern to Russia .
 Russian strategy and military operations in Ukraine and Europe. Second-highest level of Russian military activity in Europe .
 Putin has put Russia on a path to be a world power with global influence, says CNN's John Sutter . Putin has been in power for more than a decade.
Most historical world powers have strong economies and strong militaries . Most historical world power has strong economies, strong military forces .
 Russia was never prosperous, but certainly had a very strong military . The former Soviet Union was never prosperity, but had a strong military.
 Putin was on the path to do just that again with his military when the economy tanked . Putin was also on the way to do that again when his military was in trouble .
 About a third of his military are good units with some select excellent capabilities . But about a third are very good units, with some excellent capabilities, he says .
 This is a land-centric force with good combat aircraft, bombers, and submarines, and a limited power-projection navy with only one aircraft carrier . This is the only aircraft carrier in the navy .
 Russia’s strategy in Europe is influenced by the Napoleonic and Nazi invasions and the strategic buffer that existed in Europe as part of the Warsaw Pact protecting the heartland of Russia for almost 50 years . Russia's strategy in the Europe, he says,
 Putin sees buffer countries as a security risk. These buffer countries are now part of NATO, which Putin sees as security risk .
 Yanukovych thought the Europeans and Americans would be stunned into compliance, thus recovering at home from the embarrassment of Yanukovych’s forced departure .
 Putin moved on eastern Ukraine, introducing hybrid warfare, special operations forces and intelligence security officers to help create public unrest, then arm and organize unrest into fighting units . When the host country army moves to put down, bring in Russian-disguised conventional military to defeat the army .
 Russia’s use of military force in Ukraine is very revealing, as it relies heavily on drones to detect Ukrainian military units .
 separatists have consolidated Luhansk and Donetsk Provinces, but denied the land bridge to Mariupol . As such, the separatists, supported by Russian military, have consolidated Luhans and Donetsk provinces .
 Putin wants the Kyiv to fail and be replaced by a more friendly Russian government . Putin wants to replace it with more friendly government .
 The two new ground force bases are under construction across from the Ukrainian border . The airbase Putin has muscled into Belarus which is also now under construction .
 United States strate^ should be to assure allies and friends, deter Russian aggression, defeat ISIS, and, long term, defeat radical Islam . U.S. should be a part of a global alliance, defeatradical Islam, and defeat ISIS .
 Putin is counting on the U.S. fear of escalation and fear of confrontation to stop any thought of retaliation .
 As to Syria options, recognize the anti-ISIS strategy in Iraq and Syria is failing, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We are certain to lose the war unless there is major and comprehensive change to build an effective and decisive ground force in Syria . We need to remove restrictions on the air campaign to dramatically increase airstrike effectiveness .
 We need to continue the U.S. policy to force Assad from power, but let's be realistic, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia, as Assad's protector, will now play the decisive role. Understand that Russia is now playing a decisive role in Syria .
 Putin has begun a proxy war with the United States. Russian combat aircraft struck continuously moderate rebel forces trained by the Central Intelligence Agency .
 The U.S. military should have been given the mission to retaliate, according to a report . The report was published in the United States on Monday .
 The United States and the coalition will conduct air operations anytime, anywhere in Syria . Russia should stay out of our way if they want to avoid confrontation, U.S. and coalition says .
 U.S. aircraft are rarely flying now against ISIS targets in Syria . They are focusing their efforts in Iraq .
 Russian aggression will not just advance in the Middle East, it will, with certainty, escalate in the Baltics and in eastern Europe . If we continue to wring our hands and continue to be dominated by fears and opposed to instilling fear, then Russia will escalate in
 Russia is not finished in Ukraine, as the new military bases across the border suggest . Ukraine and Europe’s options, recognize further that Russia isn’t finished.
NATO rotational troop deployments to the Baltics, Poland, Romania, and Hungary are helpful but a small deterrence to Russian aggression . The Atlantic Resolve is the name for the United States -NATOrotational troop deployment .
 Russian aggression has already begun in the Baltics . It's pounding the Russian-speaking minorities with continuous propaganda to create unrest and to foment a split with the nation's majority .
 Department of Defense must reevaluate its stationing plan for the combatant commands, in view of a revisionist and aggressive 9 Russia . Department of defense must re evaluate its plans for combatant command .
 The Pacific is the largest combatant command in the world, with over 400,000 troops . Europe is down to around 50,000, while Europe is considerably smaller and less than adequate, now down to about 50,00 .
 The assumptions that drove the downsizing of the U.S. military positions in Europe have obviously changed, he says . "We need a relook," he adds .
 Russia is clearly challenging U.S. influence and interests in the Middle East as the dominant outside regional country . Russia also seeking to challenge NATO in eastern Europe and possibly NATO’s very existence .
 Our allies in both regions must be convinced that the IJnited States stand behind them, says the U.S. ambassador .
 The U.S. should not close off communications with Russia and continue to pursue opportunities where there is mutual interest . Now is the time for a firm hand, but the United States should not shut off communications .
 General John M Keane, Chairman of the Committee, is honored to be back testif 3 dng today on Russia and the crisis in Syria and the Ukraine .
 General Jones served with in the Pentagon and has known for years . It's a privilege to be here with his panel colleagues, particularly General Jones .
 The Institute for the Study of War has provided maps for the study of war . Please refer to the maps provided by the Institute of the Study Of War .
 Russia began air strikes in Syria about a week ago after rapidly establishing a forward operating air base at Al Assad airfield in Latakia province .
Establishing an out of region air base in a war zone is quite unprecedented, particularly for a non expeditionary military . The base is isolated from the heartland of Russia.
 The air bridge routes over Iran and Iraq and the sea bridge route through the Black Sea take approximately 4 days to transit . To establish and sustain this airbase you can see on the map labeled ‘Russian Deployment to Syria'
 Approximately 2K to 3K personnel make up the base which also houses a joint operations center consisting of Russian, Syrian, Iranian and Hezbollah military personnel .
 The Army is beset with low morale, desertion and equipment problems with the Air Force losing about 1 to 2 aircraft per month due to combat or accident .
 The opposition force has gained steadily on the regime forces. During the last year the opposition forces have gained steadily .
 The regime control area in orange is now only about 20% of Syria .
 Opposition control area to the north and south of the orange as the regime is quite confined . Note the opposition control area.
 In the last several months there has been some erosion of this Alawite support. In the past several months, some Alawites have lost some of their support .
 To the east of Homs and Damascus in central Syria, ISIS seized Palmyra city and a nearby regime airbase . The east-west transportation corridor from Homs to the Iraq border opens up the east- west corridor .
 ISW suspect that the Iranians who are in Syria in far greater number than the Russians have very good situational awareness . The Iranians raised the alarm to the Russians during multiple visits to Moscow by Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps leaders .
 Russia has a 60 plus year relationship with Syria dating back to post WWII as the former Soviet Union . Russia has been in Syria for 60 plus years .
 Syria is Russia’s foothold in the Middle East . The Tartous Naval base is a strategic asset that is much valued .
 Russia believed the Assad regime survival was in a more precarious position and needed to be propped up . It seems apparent that Russia believed it was in an increasingly precarious position .
 The focus of the airstrikes are against the oppo10 sition forces threatening the regime from the north in Idlib, Hama and Homs province .
 The moderate opposition forces, many trained by the CIA and Jabhat al-Nusra, are the main focus with the ISIS targets at Raqqah and near Palmyra . ISIS is the major reason for the Russian presence in the region .
 Russian cruise missiles were introduced yesterday striking 11 targets in western and eastern Syria .
 Syrian Army limited ground shaping operations began in Idlib province yesterday . Russian air supported by Russian air .
 A supporting effort may be launched to retake Palmyra and the military airbase . If the regime can generate sufficient forces, it could be launched .
Recapturing the ancient city would be a PR victory for Syria and Russia . Recapturing ancient city could be aPR victory for both countries .
 The counter offensive would likely be jointly planned by Syria and Iranian generals . It would likely consist of the Army, the National Defense Force, and the Hezbollah and Iraqi Shia militia .
Russia and Syria air power will play a large role in supporting the ground offensive . Russia and Syria will play an important role in support of the Syrian offensive .
 Russia entering Syria civil war is their recent strategic alliance with Iran which will impact every country in the region and further diminish U.S. influence and United States interests in region . Russia entering the Syria civil War is more significant than Russia entering.
 M.E. is experiencing one of the most tumultuous periods in its history with the old order challenged by the Arab Spring, Islamic terrorists taking advantage of the political and social upheaval and Iran using proxies to gain influence in Lebanon, Syria, Iraq and Yemen .
 Russia observed, probably somewhat in disbelief, as the United States abandoned Mubarak in Egypt, abandoned Iraq and retreated from Yemen and Libya as part of an unstated policy to disengage from the M.E. to avoid a protracted war .
 Russia has entered into arms deals with Saudi Arabia, UAE, Kuwait and Egypt . For a year now, Russia has been leveraging this reality to their own advantage by entering into deals with other countries .
 A country the United States had a mil to mil relationship with for 35 years . The U.S. has a mil-to-mil relationship with a country the country had a 35-year relationship with .
 Russia's desire to have a relationship with Russia as leverage against their strategic enemy, Iran . Russia is buying U.S. and European weapons because of the changing geopolitical landscape and the harsh reality of the world .
 Iraq is also purchasing Russian weapons as the promised U.S. flow of weapons has been slow to nonexistent at times . Iraq has recently welcomed Russian generals and their staff to join their coordination center in Ilaghdad .
 Russia is in preliminary discussion to build nuclear power plants in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt and Tunisia . Russia is also in preliminary discussions to build plants in Jordan, Jordan and Egypt .
 The relationship with Iran and its proxies matters to Russia because it provides them greater influence in the M.E. Russia is also acting as a strategic buffer to their south against radical Islam .
 Vladimir Putin came to power after the economic, political and social chaos of the 1990’s following the collapse of the Soviet Union . He ended the decade with their own military in shambles and suffering the public humiliation of his Serbian ally, Milosevic .
 Putin's life as a KGB officer tightens internal security and control, crushes the Chechens, represses political opposition, takes control of the media, and puts Russia on a path to be a world power with global influence .
 Most historical world powers have strong economies and strong militaries . Former Soviet Union was never prosperous but certainly had a strong military .
 Putin was on the path to do just that again with his military when the economy tanked, leaving him with a military that is no match to the U.S. and NATO . Putin has about l/3rd good units with some select excellent capabilities .
 This is a land centric force with good combat aircraft, bombers, submarines, and a limited power projection Navy . The Navy has only one aircraft carrier, with only one carrier .
 Russia’s strategy in Europe is influenced by the Napoleonic and Nazi invasions and the strategic buffer that existed in eastern Europe as part of the Warsaw Pact, 11 protecting the heartland of Russia for almost 50 years .
 Putin thought the Europeans and Americans would be stunned into compliance, thus recovering at home from the embarrassment of Yanukovych’s departure .
 Putin moved on eastern Ukraine introducing hybrid warfare to create popular unrest, organize sympathizers into fighting units and bring in Russian disguised military .
 Russia’s use of military force in Ukraine is very revealing . Russia relies heavily on drones to detect Ukrainian military units with target information relayed to artillery batteries .
 Putin wants the Kiev government to fail and be replaced by a more friendly Russian government . Putin wants Kiev to fail. He wants a morefriendly Russian government to replace the government .
 Putin will continue the pressure, see the map labeled ‘Current/Proposed Russian Bases Near Ukraine’ with the two new permanent ground force bases that are under construction across the Ukrainian border in Russia and the air base Putin is building in Belarus .
 U.S. strategy should be to deter Russian aggression and defeat ISIS initially and, long term, as a part of a global alliance to defeat radical Islam .
 Putin believes that European and American leadership is weak and has consistently out-maneuvered and out bluffed the U.S. and its allies . Putin believes Europe and American leaders are weak and out of control .
 Recognize the anti ISIS strategy in Iraq and Syria is failing and we are certain to lose the war unless there is major and comprehensive change to build an effective and decisive ground force in Syria and Iraq .
 This was no accident, targets were provided by the Syrian re^me and they were accurate . This was not an accident, and they are accurate .
 The Russian aggression will not just advance in the M.E. but most likely it will escalate in the Baltics and eastern Europe . Believe U.S. aircraft are rarely fljdng now against ISIS targets in Syria .
 Russia is not finished in Ukraine as new military bases across the border suggest . Recognize further that Russia's military bases are not finished.
 There is still time in addition to the U.S. military, training Ukraine battalions, which is an effective program and providing non-lethal aid, to provide defensive weapons and capabilities .
 Russia is pounding the Russian speaking minorities in the Baltics with continuous propaganda to create unrest and to foment a split with the nation’s majority .
Larger force commitments permit larger unit rotational deployments and a permanent base structure in the Baltics and eastern Europe . Larger force deployments permit larger units and permanent base structures .
All deployed forces assigned to bases in central Europe no longer makes sense . All deployed forces no longer make sense, all deployed forces in Europe are no longer deployed .
 Russia is clearly challenging U.S. influence and interest in the M.E. as the dominant outside regional country . Russia is also seeking to challenge NATO in eastern Europe and possibly its very existence .
 The U.S. should not close off communications with Russia but continue to pursue opportunities when there is mutual self interest . At times this demands a firm hand the United States should not shut off communications .
 Russia was and is consumed with radical Islam and its threat which is the primary reason for the war in Afghanistan . Prior to 9/11 it fought two major battles with the Chechens .
 The U.S. and Russia could partner on this issue as both countries have the most experience . Both countries could help organize together a global alliance .
 Another area is partnering on nuclear power plant development and security in the M.E. to the economic benefit of the M.-E. while controlling uranium enrichment and plant security . Another area has also partnered on nuclear plant development.
 Russia and the U.S. are in a renewed strategic competitive relationship . Russia has opportunities for positive engagement for mutual benefit, says the author .
 Heather CONLEY is the VP of EUROPE, EURASIA, and the Director of the EUROPE Program . She is also the Vice President of the European Union .
 Chairman McCain, Senator Reed, members of the committee, thank you so much .
 Russia's growing military threat stretches from the Kola Peninsula in the Arctic to the Mediterranean coast of Syria .
 The Kremlin is reconstructing a 21st century version of the Iron Curtain . In his view, the Kremlin is rebuilding a 21th century version.
 The Yalta 2.0 is designed to achieve a new grand international bargain with the West . It assures a Russian sphere of influence in Europe and the Middle East . As General Keane mentioned, they're recreating a strategic buffer .
 This curtain, like its 20th century predecessor, seeks to block the perceived contagion of democracy and reform . Russia is returning to internationally recognized great-power status. This curtain is similar to the 20th Century predecessor .
 It is designed to ensure the continuous exercising of air, land, and sea capabilities at full combat readiness . It's designed to be able to maintain air, sea, and land capabilities .
 It rapidly mobilizes substantial Russian forces in a very short period of time . It is rapidly mobilizing substantial Russian Forces .
 It’s designed to deploy a variety of hybrid eco15 nomic and political tactics which are at its disposal .
 It employs an extremely effective counter-factual strategic communications campaign . It employs a very effective strategy, it says .
 This 21st century curtain also has a built-in Kremlin-controlled thermostat . Now, this 21th century curtain has abuilt-in Moscow-controlled temperature .
 President Putin can turn up the heat when and where he wants, as he's done in eastern Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: When it is needed, he can turn down the heat .
 He can shift to a different portion of this curtain, as he is doing in Syria . And then he can shift from this part of the curtain to the other part of it .
 The West will continue to react to the Kremlin’s actions rather than proactively shape and deter them . The Kremlin will not be deterring them.
 Russia’s military modernization in the Arctic is the perfect example of how this new curtain has been constructed . CSIS report: An ‘ice curtain’ has been built .
 Russia has held three major military exercises in the Arctic over the last 24 months . Russia has been involved in three major exercises over the past 24 months.
 The first exercise was part of a larger Zapad 2013 military exercise, which focused on Russia's western military district . It demonstrated a more streamlined command structure, more efficient tactical units, and the ability to deploy a large-scale complex military operation coordinated with other areas of
 Russia has a much larger spatial definition of its theater of operations, which extends from the Arctic to the Black Sea . This exercise fully demonstrated that Russia's theater of operation extends from Arctic to Black Sea.
 The second exercise, in September of 2014, was the largest postSoviet military exercises that we have seen . The second exercises, the second in September, were the largest in the post Soviet military exercises .
 It was held in the Russian far east, and it was preceded by a snap military exercise .
 Vostok 2014 involved over 100,000 servicemen and demonstrated a complex display of air, maritime, and land components . The show also featured a variety of air and maritime components .
 The exercise was partly conducted on new military bases in the Russian Arctic, New Siberian Islands, and Wrangel Island . Some believe it simulated an exercise to repel U.S. and NATO forces .
45,000 Russian forces, 15 submarines, and 41 warships at full combat readiness . The third and most culminating exercise in March of this year was a snap military exercise in the Arctic .
 Russia will have 14 operational airfields in the Russian Arctic by the end of this year, 50 airfields by 2020, and a 30-percent increase in Russian special forces deployed to the Arctic . The Arctic is becoming a major theater of operations for Russia.
 The Arctic region has now been included in Russia’s amended military doctrine, as of December of last year, and in its new maritime doctrine, which was just released in July .
 The Russian Northern Fleet United Strategic Command for the Arctic is under a new command . It is under the new command.
 Russia is increasingly able to project significant anti-access, anti-denial capabilities in the Arctic, the north Atlantic, and the north Pacific . Russia has shown the ability to rapidly deploy both conventional and unconventional forces .
 Russia has simulated massive retaliatory attacks in the Barents Sea . It has simulated 16 retaliatory strikes in the Arctic .
 Senator McCain has witnessed a surge in Russian submarine activity in the north Atlantic . McCain was recently in the region .
 The remaining geographic contours of this 21st century curtain. So, let me just very briefly describe the remaining geographiccontours of the 20th century .
 The curtain proceeds from the Arctic, south to the Finnish-Russian border .
 Russia has returned to an abandoned military base 50 kilometers from the Finnish border . The 1st Russian Infantry Brigade has arrived with 3,000 soldiers anticipated . The base has been abandoned for more than a decade .
 The curtain proceeds to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, home of the Russian Baltic Fleet . Vessels from the fleet have delivered fighter jets and missile launchers .
 Russia has recently installed new S-400 missile batteries and has increased its force presence . Russia has also increased the force presence of its force.
 The curtain then transitions from ice to steel on the PolishBelarusian border . President Putin has just ordered Russian officials to construct a new military base in Belarus .
 This is the first time a newly constructed military base will be outside of Russia since the collapse of the Soviet Union . The base is located outside of the Russian capital, Moscow .
 Russia has an estimated 29,000 soldiers in occupied Crimea . It plans to augment its Baltic Sea fleet with 30 additional vessels by 2020 .
 The curtain then continues, going, through eastern Ukraine and extremely capable forces on the Russian-Ukrainian border . General Keane explained that new installations could contain significant munitions ordnance facilities .
Transnistria and Moldova, where there are 1500 troops, are Russian troops stationed as peacekeepers . Ukraine, of course, is moving to Moldova and Ukraine, where 1500 troops are stationed .
 Russia has Russian military presence in South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Russia's invasion of Georgia in 2008 led to Russia's military presence.
 Russia is further augmenting its forces in Armenia, and then, as we know, from Syria to Syria . The curtain continues to be extended to Armenia, where Russia is also expanding its forces .
 The National Defense Authorization Act is a really great point of departure . The bill is a good sign of departure from the military .
 I commend the bipartisan resolve to seek to assess these challenges and identify critical gaps. And I commend a bipartisan resolve.
 For far too long, we've discounted Russia’s military capabilities and did not take their threats and pronouncements seriously .
 We cannot reset this challenge away, and we cannot get back to business as usual . We cannotreset this challenge. We can't reset this Challenge away, we cannot reset it away . We must return to business.
 The West has forgotten how to conduct effective deterrence in the Modern Age against a sophisticated adversary in the modern age .
 The strong bipartisan support for the European Reassurance Initiative was another important signal of U.S. resolve . The strong bipartisanship was another signal of United States resolve .
 The act strengthened U.S. and NATO's Article 5 credibility, but these actions were viewed as temporary measures to change President Putin's behavior in Ukraine . This act strengthened the United States and NATO’s credibility, according to CNN .
 This has not achieved its objectives, and now we need a more durable deterrence posture, says the U.S. State Department .
 U.S. and North Atlantic Treaty Organization forces must increase their presence on NATO’s northern and eastern flanks .
 The United States should seriously consider sending a third combat brigade to Europe to reinforce both flanks . The U.S. should also encourage our European allies to increase their force presence, as well .
 NATO must initiate the pre-positioning of military equipment in the region, not simply for exercise purposes only . NATO must address shortcomings in secure communications and infrastructure needs that were identified during Operation Atlantic Resolve this year .
 General Keane has called for a comprehensive review of U.S. force posture in Europe for the next 5 to 10 years . It is time to echo General Keane’s comments, he says, for a review of the United States force posture .
 The outcome of next year's NATO summit in Warsaw is absolutely critical. It is for this reason that the outcome of the next year’s NATO summit isabsolutely critical .
 NATO has failed to address its most significant security challenge since the end of the Cold War . If NATO simply decides to review the decisions it reached at its last summit, the alliance will have failed to tackle its most serious security challenge .
 The summit must launch a longterm strategic adaptation to what will be a long-term and highly destabilizing challenge . The summit will need to launch a strategic adaptation.
 U.S. and NATO must do more to deter future Russian military aggression, Chairman says . "We must also be fully cognizant of the devastating impact of Russian influence"
 Russia dominates the media, financial, and energy markets of some NATO allies . NATO collectively less able to respond to Russia's media and financial dominance .
 This requires as much policy attention by the U.S. and NATO as it does to militarily deter the Kremlin . This requires more policy attention from the United States and NATO .
Russia's growing military threat stretches from the Kola Peninsula in the Arctic to the Mediterranean coast of Syria .
 The transatlantic community believed that these twenty-five years were the new, post-modem norm . After experiencing a period of relative peace and security in Europe over the past 25 years, Europe has seen some of the most violent conflicts in the world .
 The post-Cold War period was an exceptional moment of security that has now passed . Unfortunately, I believe we will come to view this post- Cold War period as an exceptional time of security .
 Russia with increasing frequency uses military means to achieve its political objectives . We have returned to balance of power politics where Russia has returned to power politics . Russia has increased frequency of using military means.
 The transatlantic community's response to Russia’s invasion of its neighbors is to take the military option immediately off the table .
 The West seeks to establish a diplomatic course guaranteed to ensure the intractability of the very problem that Russia has created . The West then seeks to “reset’s troubled relationship and achieve agreements on broader strategic issues .
 The Kremlin is reconstructing a 2 1 Century version of the Iron Curtain . It is designed to achieve a new grand international bargain with the West Yalta 2. If you will that assures a Russian sphere of influence in Europe and the Middle East .
 This curtain, like its 20*’s century predecessor, seeks to block the perceived contagion of democracy and reform . Russia is returning to internationally recognized great power status .
This curtain denies military access to the West through the construction of new and a revitalization of former Russian military bases . This curtain denies the West. It ensures the continuous exercising of air, land and sea capabilities.
 President Putin can turn up the heat as he has done in eastern Ukraine . He can turn down the 20 Conley: Russia Testimony to the Senate Armed Services Committee October 8 .
 Russia’s military modernization in the Arctic is a perfect example of how this new curtain is being formed . CSIS report suggests an ice curtain has been formed .
 Russia has held three major military exercises in the Arctic over the past 24 months . Russia has been involved in three major drills in the region over the last year .
 The first instance was a simultaneous exercise around the Kola Peninsula . The larger, Zapad 2013 military exercise demonstrated a more streamlined command structure, more efficient tactical units and the ability to deploy a large scale, complex military operation .
 Russia has a larger spatial definition of its theatre of operations, it says . This exercise demonstrated that Russia's theatre of operation extends from Arctic to the Black Sea .
 The second exercise, in September 2014, was held in the Russian Far East . It was the largest post-Soviet military exercise in the country .
 Vostok-2014 involved over 100,000 servicemen and a complex display of air, maritime and land components . Preceded by a snap military exercise.
 Some analysts believe simulated Russian forces repelling a U.S. or NATO invasion . This exercise was partly conducted on a new military base in the Russian Arctic New Siberian Islands and Wrangel Island .
 This exercise focused on rapid mobilization, combined operations and demonstrated use of both conventional and unconventional forces . The exercise was conducted by the U.S. Army and the US Army .
 The third and culminating exercise occurred in March 2015 when President Putin announced a snap military exercise . The exercise consisted of 45,000 Russian forces, 15 submarines and 41 warships at full combat readiness .
 Russia will have a total of 14 operational airfields in the Russian Arctic by the end of this year, 50 airfields by 2020 and a 30 percent increase of Russian Special forces in the Arctic . The Arctic has emerged as a major theatre of operations for Russia .
 The Arctic region has now been included in Russia’s amended military and maritime doctrines . It will be coordinated by a new Russian Northern FleetUnited Strategic Command for the Arctic . The new command will be called Northern Fleet United Strategic Command.
 Russia is increasingly able to project significant anti-access/anti-denial capabilities in the Arctic, the North Atlantic and increasingly in the North Pacific . Russia has demonstrated the ability to rapidly deploy both conventional and nonconventional forces throughout the theatre .
 Russia has simulated massive retaliatory attacks in the Barents Sea . Russia's focus has been on enhancing its nuclear deterrent in the Arctic .
 Norwegian and British allies have also witnessed a surge in Russian submarine activity in the North Atlantic .
 From the Arctic, Russia’s military presence increases along the new ice curtain south to the Finnish border .
 Russia has returned to its abandoned military base 50 kilometers from the Finnish border . The first Russian infantry brigade has arrived with 3,000 soldiers anticipated at the base .
 The curtain proceeds to the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad, home of the Russian Baltic Fleet . Vessels from the fleet have delivered fighter jets and Iskander missile launchers .
 Russia has recently installed new S-400 missile batteries and increased its force presence . Russia has also increased the force presence of the missile batteries .
 Putin has ordered Russian officials to work with Belarusian counterparts to construct a military base in Belarus . The curtain transitions from ice to steel on the Belarussian-Polish border .
 Russia already has functional radars and a navy communications facility in Belarus . The base would be the first military base constructed since the end of the Soviet Union .
 The curtain has been fully constructed in Ukraine where in March, Russia had an estimated 29,000 soldiers in occupied Crimea . Russia has substantially increased its Black Sea Fleet, adding a new base in the city of Novorossiysk .
 Russia Testimony to Senate Armed Services Committee October 8, 2015 5. 5 command structure .
 Russia has also commenced construction of a new installation on the Russian-Ukrainian border near the town of Soloti . It is expected to contain munitions and ordnance depots, training facilities, as well as barracks capable of housing several thousand troops .
 The curtain then extends to the rest of the Caucasus through Armenia . Russia has reinforced its position with nearly 5,000 troops, S-300 missile batteries, tanks, and a fleet of fighter jets and attack helicopters .
 Russian military build-up in Syria and first use of cruise missiles in combat . First use of Russian cruise missile in combat.
 The National Defense Authorization Act is a very good point of departure, he says . The Committee's bipartisan resolve to seek to assess this challenge and identify capabilities gaps .
 For too long we discounted Russia’s military capabilities and did not take their pronouncements and threats seriously .
 We cannot “reset’ this challenge and we cannot get back to business as usual. We cannot 'reset' this challenge, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The West has forgotten how to conduct effective deterrence in the modem age against a sophisticated adversary . The West may not have been able to do so much in the past.
 U.S. redlines no longer have meaning following the use of chemical weapons by the Assad regime . The United States has been in talks with Iran over its nuclear program .
 The U.S. did not support Ukraine by providing it lethal military assistance to defend itself . The United States provided the Ukraine with written bilateral security guarantees .
 Putin's actions were viewed as temporary measures to change President Putin’s behavior in Ukraine . Yet these actions were seen as temporary Measures to change Putin's behavior .
 This temporary posture has not achieved its objectives and therefore a new and more durable deterrence posture is required . A new and a more durable posture is needed, says the author .
 The U.S., along with our NATO allies, will continue to gain credibility by stating clearly and without hyperbole what we intend to do and then do it immediately . The United States, along with its NATO allies.
 NATO talks tough about Russia’s actions in Northern Europe but halves its air policing presence in the Baltic region . When NATO talks hard about Russia's actions, we undermine our own credibility .
 NATO will deploy 5,000 soldiers in 48 hours, we do it . We do not explain why airlift is in short supply and why adequate forces cannot be generated .
 U.S. leadership in NATO and bilaterally must create a long-lenn and durable response to Russia’s new ice and steel curtain .
 The United States and NATO forces must increase their presence on NATO’s northern and eastern flanks . NATO forces, accompanied by significant air and maritime components, must increase.
 The United States should seriously consider sending a third combat brigade to Europe to reinforce both flanks . The U.S. should also engage European allies to increase their force presence as well .
 NATO must initiate the prepositioning of military equipment in the region . NATO must address shortcomings in secure communications and infrastructure needs .
 It is time for a comprehensive review of the U.S. force posture in Europe for the next five to ten years . It is the first time in five to 10 years to look at the situation in Europe .
 The outcome of next year’s NATO Warsaw Summit is so critical. It is for these reasons that the outcome of the next year's summit is so important .
 NATO has failed to address its most significant security challenge since the end of the Cold War . If NATO simply decides to review the decisions of its last summit, the Alliance will have failed to solve its biggest security challenge .
 Putin has turned down the temperature on the conflict in eastern Ukraine as he turns it up in Syria .
 Russia Testimony to Senate Armed Services Committee October 8, 20 1 5 7 and migrants fleeing to Europe continues to fuel divisions within NATO . The threat from the “south’s fully aided and abetted by Russia is greater than that from the East for which Russia is fully
 The U.S. and NATO must do more to deter future Russian military aggression, the U.N. says . We must also be fully cognizant of the devastating impact of Russian influence inside NATO countries .
 Russia dominates the media, financial and energy markets of some NATO partners . NATO collectively less able to respond to Russia's media and financial dominance .
 This requires as much attention by the U.S. and NATO as does militarily deterring the Kremlin . This requires a lot of attention from the United States and NATO .
 The Kremlin rejects the international rules and of the post-World War II order . Putin’s Soviet predecessors accepted the rules .
 The question is will the U.S. and its allies accept Putin’s new rules and new curtain so President Putin can achieve his grand bargain, or is the West willing to challenge and fully reject this construct .
 NATO was bom in 1949 as a response to the building of an Iron Curtain . It is up to this generation of leaders to decide how they will respond to a new curtain of ice and steel .
 STEPHEN Sestanovich, GEORGE F KENNAN, COUNCIL on FOREIGN RELATIONS, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY Ambassador SESTanovich . STEPHen SESTANOVICH, GEorge FKENNAN SENIOR FE
 Chairman McCain, Senator Reed, members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to join your discussion .
 Russia is an existential threat to the United States, he said . I disagree with the other thing he said, which was that Russia is a threat to U.S. I also disagree with him.
 No matter how alarmed we are by Russia’s current behavior, we use the term ‘existential threat’ only because of its large strategic nuclear arsenal .
 Russia’s relations with us are good or bad, or whether Russia's behavior is reckless or wise . And that's a potential threat, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia has acted recklessly of late, but that has not really increased the existential threat . General Dunford spoke of the threat of Russia in a speech in London .
 It feeds a public mood in Russia that honestly borders on national hysteria. It feeds the public mood that borders on National hysteria .
 Russian officials routinely say things about the U.S. that are bizarre and incomprehensible . These days, Russian officials regularly say things that are incomprehensible .
Many Russians see Russia as an existential threat, and that we have accepted that idea . Unfortunately, hearing that we see Russian as anexist threat is pretty extreme language, after all .
 Russia's foreign minister says the country's policies look strange to the outside world . He urges members of this committee to take a different approach to Russia .
 We need to appreciate that it is alarming, but that it doesn't come out of nowhere, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It's alarming that it's alarming. And we need to recognize that, he says .
 Russian actions in the Middle East and in Ukraine reflect the doubling and more of their defense budget in the past 10 years . In the past 5 years, Russia has increased its defense budget 50-percent in 10 years.
 This program of modernization is still unfolding, and the biggest procurement projects are ahead . The biggest procurement project is ahead, with the biggest projects being planned .
 Russia's capabilities have increased, so has its antiWestern rhetoric . Russia’s capabilities are increasing, so have its anti-Western rhetoric.
 The official military doctrine of Russia identifies both NATO and the United States as threats to Russia . The U.S. military doctrine identifies NATO and NATO as threat to Russia.
 Russian actions reflect the new nationalism of Russian public opinion, according to the Russian media .
 The seizure of Crimea and continuing attempts to fragment eastern Ukraine have given this nationalist mood an angrier, more embattled tone .
Russian decisionmakers feel they can count on public support for more assertive displays of national power . Russian decisionmakers want to show more assertiveness in the future .
We should assume that they are just as worried, and maybe more worried, about casualties in Syria than they have been in Ukraine. And I think we should assume they are as worried as they are in Ukraine .
 Russian actions are a response to the weakness of the Assad regime in Syria, says General Keane . Russia is Russia's oldest and now only real ally in the region, General Keane says .
 President Putin has made clear that he is prepared to make a significant military commitment to save embattled clients in Ukraine . Putin has also made clear, as he has in Ukraine.
 In Syria, several years of policy confusion by the U.S. and Europe have encouraged him .
 Had the U.S. imposed a no-fly zone in Syria 3 years ago, there would be no Russian intervention today .
 Secretary Carter may well be right that Russian policy is doomed to fail. Fourth, Carter may be right.
 Syria may do a great deal of damage, both in Syria and beyond . But, in the course of failing, it may do great damage, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It should be a goal of the U.S. and its allies to limit and eventually reverse Russia’s intervention . It should also be agoal of the United States and its ally to limit Russia's intervention .
 Continued confusion, merely calling on Russia to join the coalition against ISIS, will not achieve this end . Continued confusion is not the end, but it will not end.
 The Fifth Committee members should worry about where Russia's reckless behavior will lead next, they say .
We should not, by any means, conclude that we face an endless, never-cresting wave of Russian activism . We should not be surprised by the growing wave of activism in Russia, we say .
 Putin is doing now in Syria probably reduces the risks of near-term military provocations in Europe, especially against our NATO allies . To my mind, what Putin's doing now is likely to reduce the risks.
 If I were a Baltic Defense Minister, I’d actually be sleeping slightly better these days, he says .
 Most of us have been wrong in anticipating Russian actions in the past couple of years . But, we have to remember that most of us are wrong in anticipation of Russian actions .
 Just when we thought Putin had finally realized he had acted foolishly, he then acted even more foolishly .
 Today, the ingredients of some future confrontation may already be coming together . Today, some future confrontations could be in place .
 After what we’ve seen of Russian behavior, we can’t afford to be unprepared .
 Russian policy creates problems without making those problems worse than they have to be. Mr Chairman, members of the committee, let me close as I began.
 Many Russians understand that President Putin is damaging his own country's security as well as others .
 The U.S. will protect itself, its allies, and its interests. They should understand that the United States will protect its own interests, the president says .
 There can be a place for them in this effort if they want it. They should also understand that there can be an opportunity for them to do so .
Russian military units in Syria in the last few days have taken action in the past few days . Russian military units have been involved in the Syrian conflict .
 The Russian steps are not only unprecedented in the post-Cold War era, they have few antecedents in the Cold War itself .
 General Joe Dunford described Russian policy in his confirmation testimony . Members of this committee surely remember how he described Russia's policy .
 Russia's nuclear weapon is a potential threat, whether our relations with Russia are good or bad . Russian behavior is reckless or wise, whether Russia is reckless, or wise .
 All statements of fact and expressions of opinion contained herein are the sole responsibility of the author . The author is responsible for the majority of the statements .
Senior Russian officials often say things about the U.S. that are bizarre and incomprehensible .
 Many Russians see Russia as an “existential threat, after all,’s language is pretty extreme. Unfortunately, hearing that we see Russia is a pretty extreme language, afterall .
 Some believe that America's leaders are preparing for a future conflict .
 I urge the members of this Committee to take a different approach to Russia's policy . I urge members to challenge responsible Russians to see how strange their country's policy looks to the outside world .
We need to appreciate just how alarming it is, but we should not think it comes out of nowhere . We need to be aware of just how disturbing it is .
 Russian actions in the Middle East reflect the doubling of their defense budget in the past 10 years . First, Russian actions reflect the doubled of their Defense budget in 10 years.
 This program of modernization is still unfolding; the biggest procurement projects are ahead . The biggest procurement project is ahead of the next few years .
 The official military doctrine adopted late last year identifies both NATO and the U.S. as threats to Russia .
 Russian actions reflect the new nationalism of Russian public opinion. Second, Russia's actions reflect a new nationalism of the Russian public .
 Russian decision-makers surely feel they can count on popular support for more assertive displays of national power . But they cannot be any surer of this than we can, they say .
 Russian leaders worry about operations that might bring casualties down the road . There are in fact reasons to believe that Russian leaders are worried about casualties .
 Russia's actions are a response to the weakness of the Assad regime in Syria, President Obama has noted . Russia is Russia’s oldest real ally in the region .
 President Putin is prepared to make a significant military commitment to save embattled clients, no matter how shaky and illegitimate their position, he says .
 Putin acts this way in part because he thinks circumstances allow it. But Putin thinks circumstances allowed it to happen .
 Had the United States imposed a no-fly zone in Syria three years ago, there would be no Russian intervention today . The U.S. would have imposed the no- fly zone.
 Even in the course of failing it may do a great deal of damage, both in Syria and beyond . But even in thecourse of failing, it may be a good thing for Syria, and beyond.
 It should be a goal of the U.S. and its allies to limit Russia’s intervention. It should also be a target of the United States and its ally .
 Continued confusion, including calls for Russia to focus its actions on defeating ISIS, will not achieve this aim . Continued confusion will not be achieved this aim.
 Fifth, anyone responsible for the national security of the U.S. should worry about where Russia's reckless behavior will lead next .
 We should not by any means conclude that we face an endless, never-cresting wave of activism, we should not conclude . We face a never-Crestingwave of activism. We face an Endless, Never-cesting wave.
 Putin is doing now in Sjria. If anything, it probably reduces the risk of near-term military provocations in Europe, especially against NATO allies .
 Most of us have been wrong in anticipating Russian actions of the past couple of years . But we have to remember that most of us are wrong in anticipation of Russian actions .
 Just when we thought Putin had finally realized that he had acted foolishly, he acted even more foolishly. Just when he thought Putin was finally realizing that he was acting foolishly he acted worse than ever .
 Mr Chairman urged realism about the problems Russian policy creates without making those problems worse than they have to be .
 The hearing will be held in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday night . It will be the first time the two countries have met in a year since President Barack Obama's inauguration .
 Mr Putin is using force to advance his highly cynical campaign to prop up Bashar al-Assad . We are all witnessing the most recent and dangerous developments in Syria .
 This is the latest in a pattern of behavior emanating from Moscow that we had hoped ended with the Cold War . This action is merely the most recent in apattern of behavior from Moscow.
 The dissolution of the Warsaw Pact was an outcome that was neither cheered nor welcomed by the current Russian President .
 I've submitted a full written statement covering three areas that will hopefully be of help to the committee . I’ve submitted a complete statement covering the three areas . The committee will also be looking to help the committee.
 The third addresses some thoughts regarding what the U.S. and our allies could consider doing in response . And the third addresses what the United States and its allies might consider doing .
 Mr Chairman, in 2009, as National Security Advisor, attended a breakfast meeting between the then-Prime Minister Putin and our President .
 Russia’s lack of political and economic evolution during his tenure as President, all quite similar to Cold War behavior and priorities . These three views are reflected in Russia's revanchist foreign policy and adventures abroad .
 President Medvedev's tenure was the kind of partner with whom we could work to achieve common goals . We genuinely hoped he aimed to integrate Russia into the Euro-Atlantic ark .
 President Putin reversed much of the progress we made during the Medvedev presidency . Putin is now taking Russia down a very different path, says the Russian president .
 The Russian President has proven he remains a cynical Cold War hero . He needs an enemy to make himself look good and deeply nostalgic for Moscow .
 His strategic objective is to reassert Russian power and prestige on his terms without regard to international principles and norms . He is also trying to re-assert Russia's power without regard for international principles.
 He is willing to use force to achieve his objectives, including overturning internationally recognized boundaries and disregarding state sovereignty . The Crimea annexation of the Crimea in 2014 was an illegal annexation .
Despite an anemic economy debilitated by low oil prices, cronyism, and corruption, he is nonethe29 less consolidating his power effectively .
 He continues to subvert human rights, clamp down on media and free expression, fosters an environment of hostility for what is left of his political opposition . He takes intentionally stabilizing actions abroad, all the while operating a robust propaganda machine at home and abroad .
 He is employing a broad toolkit composed of major military, energy, and political elements . As outlined in his full statement, he wants to pursue his ambitions . He wants to use his toolkit as a toolkit.
 Putin is strengthening and modernizing the Russian military to reassert power on the world stage . A very high priority for Mr Putin, despite enormous domestic problems, is strengthening the military .
 U.S. military leaders fear Putin's new capabilities are being used to pursue an antiaccess area-denial strategy against NATO . Russia’s buildup in the Crimea, now in Syria, and the naval bombardment from the Caspian are among the concerns .
 There was growing concern within the alliance that President Putin is using a series of capability deployments in these sensitive areas to raise the risk of U.S. or coalition military action .
 Russia’s deployments are geared not towards fighting the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . But rather towards protecting the regime of Assad .
 Russian President's deployment of combat aircraft and air defenses are intended to deter the U.S. coalition from establishing a no-fly zone in northern Syria . I believe that the Russian President’s deployment is not needed to fight ISIS .
 Russian military exercises, some conducted on very short notice, also pose a significant cause for concern . The exercises were conducted on a short notice and as discussed by the other witnesses .
 Major military maneuvers in the Arctic, joined with China in naval drills near our Japanese allies, and held major exercises on NATO's eastern flank .
In March of 2015, Russia held an exercise intended to simulate the invasion of Denmark and the Baltic states .
 In some cases, the guise of training has been used to mask long-term Russian troop deployments . U.S. European Command has estimated there may be as many as 12,000 Russian troops .
 Russia’s use of so-called “volunteers,” or “little green men,’ is another element of the Kremlin's so- called ‘hybrid warfare’ tactic . Russia's use of ‘Volunteers’ or
 Moscow alerted by Moscow that such volunteers may find their way to Syria very soon .
 Russian naval forces are more aggressive and more capable than ever before . There have also been more aggressive naval forces in Russia, says the Kremlin .
 Russian military aircraft are violating NATO airspace with their transponders turned off, raising the risk of civilian aircraft accidents . Russian aircraft are also violating the sovereignty of our treaty allies .
 Russia violated the sovereign airspace of our Turkish allies this week . It's not the first time this week that Russia violated Turkish airspace .
 The members of this committee understand that Mr Putin’s incursion in the Crimea is, among other things, about exercising political power through the control of energy .
 Europe is now awakening to the threat and is investing in redundancies, gas storage hubs, and interconnectors that reduce Russia’s ability to hold countries hostage . Fortunately, Europe has now started investing in redundancy and gas storage.
 Putin is working hard to sow division within the western alliance and undercut the cohesion of the Euro-Atlantic ark of economic and security cooperation . Thirdly, President Putin is trying to sow divisions within the West .
Syrian President Assad has built links to European party leaders on the far right and far left . He has made a habit of sustaining old and corrupt alliances, such as with Syrian President Assad .
 President Assad noted the importance of the Russia, Iran, Iraq alliance that’s sustaining his regime .
 The U.S. is emerging one of the premier strategic challenges of the post-Cold War period . It is doing what we can do to counter President Putin’s retrograde ambitions in favor of the peaceful and progressive order of the transatlantic community .
 The U.S. should support the European Union’s development of an energy, telecommunications, and transportation corridor along a north-south axis from the Baltic to the Adriatic .
 "I ask permission to submit for the record a comprehensive plan for doing so. My full statement provides greater details on this major strategic initiative," says the author .
 There is much we can do, and must do, to support the development of this critical infrastructure to complete Europe and counter Mr Putin's use of energy as a weapon .
 Chairman would ask Chairman to make the report a part of the hearing record .
 sanctions may not have altered Putin’s strategic calculus in Ukraine, but they have raised a cost to his actions . Russia is now partially economically isolated .
 U.S. leadership will be crucial in fostering a common vision for the alliance in the face of new and more challenging operating environments . American leadership in this effort will be key in fostering the common vision.
 NATO should admit Montenegro at next year’s summit in Warsaw, assuming it has met all political and military commitments .
 Doing so would counter Russia's growing influence in the Balkans and send a powerful signal that the vision of a united Europe whole and free remains viable .
 A similar effort should be made by Washington to unlock the tragic political conflict within the alliance that has prevented Macedonia from taking its rightful place as a NATO member .
 We must enhance NATO force presence in an eastern Europe to include American forces . We must also enhance NATO forces in eastern Europe .
 Some allies now fear provoking Russia, which will require careful diplomacy . This will be controversial, because some allies now worry provoking Russia .
 Russia's aggressive exercises and troop positioning on NATO’s eastern flank, I believe we run a greater risk of conflict by not increasing NATO's presence in central and eastern Europe .
 NATO Chairman must become more proactive, more agile within the alliance to prevent future conflict . NATO, Mr Chairman, must be more proactive and more agile .
 President's $1 billion initiative to enhance the presence of U.S. rotational forces, air policing, and infrastructure in central eastern and southeast Europe . I applaud the efforts of the United States Congress to fund the President's initiative .
 U.S. political leaders should press allies to continue contributions to NATO’s readiness action plan. This appropriation should continue, given the ongoing Russian threat to our allies, says U.N. official .
 The next summit in Warsaw will be critical to the future of the alliance . It will be the first time the alliance has held a summit in Poland .
 NATO's current core task of collective defense, cooperative security, and crisis management is enhancing NATO’s cybersecurity capabilities and responsibilities . The Supreme Allied Commander will conduct rapid troop deployment in response to Russia's reliance on strategic surprise and hybrid warfare .
 I support the administration’s recent decisions on long-range counter-battery radars to Ukraine . I support President Obama's recent decisions.
 Russia's actions in Syria, Ukraine, and eastern Europe have had a negative effect on our bilateral relationship, says Reed .
 I believe these actions merit careful considerations of the tough response that all of us have outlined . I believe this is a good example of what we have outlined in the past .
 The United States and its allies should continue to make clear to Russia that Russia has its rightful place in a united Europe whole and free and at peace . Russia is willing to respect the sovereignty and the free will of its neighbors, demonstrate a commitment to democracy and human rights, and respect the
 Mr Chairman, thank you for allowing me the opportunity to testify before you today, and I look forward to answering any questions you may have .
 General James L Jones, USMC Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Reed, and Members of the Committee, thank you for convening this important hearing at this very challenging and consequential juncture .
 Mr Putin is using force to advance his highly cynical campaign to prop up Bashar al-Assad . We have all witnessed the most recent and dangerous developments in Syria .
 The dissolution of the Warsaw Pact was an outcome neither cheered nor accepted by the current Russian president . As he came to learn during his tenure as National Security Advisor, the dissolution was not cheered or accepted .
 I would like to share with the committee my thoughts on three dimensions of the situation before us . I would want to share my thoughts with a committee of the committee .
 U.S. and allies should consider steps they should consider in response to Putin's activities, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 In 2009, I attended a breakfast meeting between President Obama and President Putin . I also attended a meeting between Obama and Putin .
 Third, he clearly believes that NATO is a great evil and that his interests are best served by weakening the transatlantic alliance and destabilizing his western periphery .
 Russia's lack of political and economic evolution under President Putin's tenure as President is reflected in the country’s lack of economic and political evolution . Russia's revanchist foreign policy is reflected not only in Russia's foreign policy, but also in its lack of
 As national security advisor, Mr Medvedev worked hard with President Obama and Russian President at that time . He worked hard on advancing the United States-Russia relationship to a new paradigm .
 I genuinely believed that President Medvedev aimed to integrate Russia into the Euro-Atlantic arc . He was the kind of partner with whom we could achieve common goals, he says .
 We made important progress including the START II treaty, convincing Russia to withhold its delivery of S-300 surface to air missiles to Iran during a key period of time . We also achieved their cooperation on a range of non-traditional security challenges on regional matters such as Afghanistan and transnational crime
 President Putin reversed much of the modest progress we made during the Medvedev 33 presidency . Putin moved Russia down a very different path, away from Euro-Atlantic integration .
 President Putin has proven he remains a cynical cold warrior, deeply nostalgic for a Russian-centric sphere of influence . Putin has shown he is deeply nostalgic.
 Russia’s recent military involvement in Syria and increased cooperation with Iran, combined with greater political engagement across the Middle East, indicates Mr Putin is upping its effort to increase Russian influence .
 International principles and norms of behavior are not in his calculus, he says .
 He is willing to use force to achieve his objectives, including overturning internationally recognized boundaries and disregarding state sovereignty, he says . The Crimea annexation of Crimea in 2014 was seen as an example of his actions .
 Mr Putin is far more interested in modernizing his military than reforming Russia’s dysfunctional and corrupt political and economic systems .
 Low oil prices and western sanctions have negatively impacted the country’s already fetid business environment and placed great strain on the Russian economy .
 It is difficult to know if these numbers are credible given the lack of civil society, free media, political opposition and independent institutions in Russia .
 Russia is experiencing a significant economic downturn. It remains to be seen if his popularity can survive the downturn .
 The World Bank forecasts Russia’s economy will shrink by 3. percent in 2015 . Russia's economy is expected to grow by 3 percent in the next year .
 Russia's political system and human rights situation has also degraded during Mr Putin's return to the Kremlin . Russia’s political system has also been degraded during his return to Kremlin .
 The Russian state actively persecutes homosexuals, has clamped down on media and free expression . It has fostered an environment of hostility to what is left of the political opposition and free media .
 Russia's aggressiveness abroad is not only a means of diverting attention from his domestic shortcomings, it emanates naturally from President Putin's world view and his desire to project power and influence .
 Putin aims to restore Russia as a major player in the international system . Putin also aims to harness a resurgent nationalism for his adventures . Putin wants to sow division within the transatlantic alliance .
 Military Action Strengthening and modernizing the Russian military has been central to Mr Putin’s ambition of reasserting Russian power .
 President Putin has looked to protect the military from budget cuts due to low oil prices . There are signs the modernization process may be forced to move at a slower pace .
 U.S. military leaders fear new capabilities are being used to pursue an anti-access/area denial strategy against NATO . The new capabilities include in the Baltic Sea region from Kaliningrad, Crimea, and Syria .
 Putin is using a series of capability deployments in these sensitive areas to raise the risk of U.S. or coalition military action in these regions .
 Russia's deployments are geared not toward fighting ISIL, but toward protecting the regime of Bashar al-Assad . We see this in Syria, where Russia’s deployments are aimed at protecting the murderous regime of Assad .
 In addition to investments in Russian military equipment, large-scale Russian military exercises, some conducted on very short notice are a cause for concern .
 Russia has held major exercises in the Arctic, joined with China in naval drills near our Japanese allies . Tens of thousands of troops on NATO's eastern flank.
 In March 2015, Russia held an exercise intended to simulate the invasion of Denmark and the Baltic states .
 A snap exercise could be used as a pretext for Russian forces to suddenly conduct a small-scale incursion into NATO territory . There is real concern among allies in northeast Europe that a snap exercise would create a fait accompli .
 This would be a direct challenge to Article V of the Washington treaty, and potentially end the principle of collective defense . NATO's founding treaty is the very heart of NATO’s founding treaty .
 Given the growing anti-access capabilities described above, that cost could be high if we and our allies are unprepared for such an outcome .
 There have also seen the deployment of more aggressive and more capable Russian naval forces . There have been more aggressive naval forces.
 The Russians are constructing an “arc of steel from the Arctic to the Mediterranean, the Commander of United States Naval Forces Europe says .
 Mr Putin is focusing his naval capability on addressing the perceived advantages of NATO navies .
 Russian aircraft are violating NATO airspace with their transponders off, raising the risk of civilian aircraft accidents . Russian military aircraft are also violating the sovereignty of our treaty allies .
 Just this week we saw Russia violate the airspace of our Turkish allies . And of course, just this week, it did .
 Russia’s advanced cyber capabilities are also a source of grave concern for the U.S. and its allies .
 Russia employs its impressive cyber capabilities against Estonia, a treaty ally . We have seen Russia employ its impressive cybersecurity capabilities against Estonian .
 We must be alert to Moscow’s willingness to use this tool to achieve its political goals. We must also be aware of Moscow's desire to use it to achieve political goals . We need to be alert.
 Mr Putin’s strategy does not rely on military power alone, says Mr Putin .
 He seeks to maintain European dependence on Russian gas and continues to use that dependence as a weapon . He applies a ‘divide and conquer’ strategy to undermine Europe’s cohesion .
 Nord-Stream pipeline connects Russia directly to Europe while bypassing Ukraine . We see this in particular through the Nord-stream pipeline, which connects Russia to Europe .
 Russia's gas pricing tactics reward its friends and punishes its opponents . Also in Russia’s gas prices tactics which reward friends andpunishes opponents .
 The greater the gap between global supply and demand, the more destructive the ener^ weapon will become . The more destructive it will become, it will be more destructive .
 Putin's rubles are being spent on campaigns to stop natural gas development in central Europe . Russian troops occupy a sovereign country, including a major port, to stop Ukraine from receiving energy imports .
 Europe is awakening to the threat and is investing in redundancies, gas storage hubs, and interconnectors that reduce Russia’s ability to hold countries hostage . Fortunately, Europe is waking to the threats and is spending more on redundancies .
 Russia's foreign policy is to sow division within the western alliance . Political Action is to undercut the cohesion of the Euro-Atlantic arc of economic and security cooperation .
 Moscow actively courts EU countries that are economically weak or dependent on trade with Russia in hopes of fracturing unity . Moscow is trying to break up the EU's economic ties with Russia .
 Putin unsuccessfully wooed the newly elected Syriza government in Greece in the midst of ongoing discussions with the Eurozone over its economic rescue package . Putin is trying to convince Athens to vote against EU sanctions on Russia .
 Russia has built links to European party leaders on the far right and far left in order to foster close relationships at political and financial levels . Russia has also built links with the National Eront in France, and with the European Union .
 President Assad noted the importance of the Russia-Iran-Iraq alliance at sustaining his regime . President Assad said the alliance was key to sustaining his government .
 The Russian government deliberately lies about Russia’s activities in Ukraine, despite visual proof to the contrary . The government denies it has forces there, despite the evidence .
 It has also obfuscated the role of Russian-backed rebels in downing Malaysian airlines flight 17 . It has outrageously blocked a UN tribunal to get the facts .
 Russia thumbs its nose at the international community by blocking simple fact finding a stunning example of how out of touch its behavior is with international norms and standards of justice .
 Russian has lied about the fact that Russian air force is bombing U.S. opposition groups in Syria, despite evidence to the contrary .
 The U.S. should lead its allies in developing a three-pronged approach that includes economic, political, and security components . The United States should lead the allies, he says .
 The United States should support the EU’s development of energy, tele-communications, and transportation infrastructure along a North-South axis from the Baltic to the Adriatic Sea .
 This North-South corridor would constitute the most strategically viable alternative to Russia’s regional abuse of current energy supplies and supply routes . It would foster greater cohesion among Central and East European states, undermine Russia's monopoly on energy pricing, and severely inhibit its ability to use
 Polish colleague Pawel Olechnowicz, CEO of the Grupa Lotus, co-chaired an Atlantic Council report exploring this issue .
 It includes a set of recommendation receiving strong support in Europe and the U.S. It also includes strong support from Europe and United States .
 There is much we can and must do to support the development of this critical infrastructure. There is a lot to do to help develop the critical infrastructure .
I would ask your permission to make the report a part of the hearing record . I would ask you to make it part of a hearing record. I would also ask for your permission.
 Energy security is instrumental for a transatlantic growth, prosperity, and security, says John Sutter . Security is essential for transatlantic prosperity, he says .
 Europe and the United States have the largest trading partnership in the world . Europe and U.S. have the world's biggest trading partnership .
 Strengthening it serves our mutual interests and reaffirms the centrality of the transatlantic alliance in the 21st century .
 TTIP affords the United States a unique opportunity to author the rulebook and roadmap for 21st century advanced economies . It would stand in stark contrast with Russia's reliance upon crony capitalism .
 The sanctions regime that was implemented in response to Russia's illegal actions in Ukraine may not have altered Putin's strategic calculus . But they have raised a cost to Putin's actions and left Russia economically isolated .
 Crimea-related sanctions should remain in place until Russian forces evacuate the Crimean peninsula and return it to Ukraine . Russia's full implementation of the Minsk II agreement shouldn't necessarily result in 'business as usual' either .
 A central tenet of a U.S. strategy for countering Russia should be to strengthen transatlantic solidarity and cooperation .
 A key source of Russia’s influence is its predation of fragile governments and the exercise of corrupt practices . Russia is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 The U.S. must continue to support ongoing political reforms in Europe, particularly in countries on the NATO/EU periphery . Moldova, Georgia, Ukraine, and the Balkan states are seeking closer association with Euro-Atlantic institutions .
 NATO must prevent Russia from shutting its long-standing ‘open door’ membership policy .
 The U.S. should rally allies around a permanent NATO force presence in Central and Eastern Europe, to include American forces .
 Some allies fear provocation of Russia, which will require careful U.S. diplomacy . This will be controversial because some allies fear provoke of Russia .
 A key element of Russia’s strategy is the use of strategic surprise and hybrid threats to take advantage of weak states . Russia's strategy is to use of strategic surprise and hysterical threats .
 Adding resilience as a core task would complement NATO’s current core tasks of collective defense, cooperative security, and crisis management . Adding resilience would complement the current core task of collectiveDefense, cooperative Security, and Crisis Management .
 An important component of building greater resilience should be enhancing NATO’s cybersecurity capabilities and responsibilities . NATO's cybersecurity capabilities should be enhanced, according to the U.S.
 Russia’s reliance on strategic surprise and hybrid warfare, illustrated by the seizure of Crimea, poses acute risks for NATO allies such as Baltic States .
 Russians fear snap exercise could result in encroachment on their territorial sovereignty . They fear a Russian snap exercise that could potentially lead to encroachment .
 NATO must employ his best military judgment and order rapid troop deployments in the interest of Alliance security . To counter this threat, NATO must empower the SACEUR to employ hisbest military judgment .
 The Atlantic Council has approved two items for the hearing record . The hearing record includes proposals by the Atlantic Council for steps the U.S. government should consider .
 Chairman Reed says he has been deeply disappointed by Russia's actions in Syria, Ukraine, and Eastern Europe . Reed says Russia has had a negative effect on the United States-Russian relationship .
 The United States and its allies should continue to make clear to Russia that they believe Russia has its rightful place in a united Europe, whole, free, and at peace . Russia is willing to respect the sovereignty and free will of its neighbors, demonstrate a commitment to democracy and human rights,
 The President said he wasn’t going to engage in a proxy war . The Russian general knocked on the door of our embassy to notify us that Russian airstrikes would begin in Syria .
 deconfliction is our top priority. And, in response, deconflict is our hot — top priority .
 The U.S. is rerouting its flights to avoid Russian warplanes, not the opposite .
 The introduction of cruise missiles is a testimony to the loss of precision-guided munitions and missile technology advantage that we've had for 25 years .
 China has caught up to the technolo^cal advantage that we’ve had. For some time now, the Chinese missile development strategy, the Iranian missile development Strategy, and what Russia is doing also with missiles and precision-guided munitions, have literally caught up.
 Russians have had this capability, and they’re obviously using it, he says . We are the country that used cruise missiles on our adversaries, and certainly Russians have.
 We have to understand that that technological advantage that we’ve had is gone. So, we have to understanding that, that that technology advantage is gone, we've had . We’re not going to be able to use that technology as a tool .
 Iran, China, and Russia are in competition with other countries, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia is the psychological bully that they are with a national chip on their shoulder since the collapse of the Soviet Union in ’91 . I believe they are absolutely convinced they can have their way with us. I'm absolutely convinced.
 This campaign was certainly calculated with that thought in mind. And this campaign that they’re doing in Syria was certainly Calculated .
It's unprecedented for them to move this distance, says David Cameron . "It’s unprecedented," he said in his opening line, in a military perspective .
 The United States will not impede any of their air operations and their support for ground operations, they say . But they established this base with confidence that they will be able to control the airspace that they want to use .
 China is building airbases in archipelagos in the South China Sea, as opposed to flying over those bases . Because they're international waters, we're avoiding them, we’re avoiding them .
 Russian control of the airspace and desire to fly wherever they want, when they want. We have an enemy, called the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, called ISIS .
 General Keane: Avoid that, or else face confrontation, and put our foot down. And what's your General Keane?
 There are prudent actions that you can take to discourage an ally, I think . But there are also prudent actions to take, I say, to discourage a friend .
 Russia's heen manifested as a result of the red line in Syria, the annexation of Crimea, the movement into Ukraine, and a sort of deniability that he gives his adversaries by the kinds of deceptive ways he uses military force . I believe his calculation is that we get paralyzed by
 Syria operation in any way, shape, or form will hold him back for exerting his national interests in the Baltics and eastern Europe, he says . He says he is 'absolutely convinced' that the Syrian operation will not be successful .
 He will use this as a platform and foundation for more aggression against that buffer in eastern Europe. And he will use it, he says, as aplatform for more aggressive aggression against the buffer in Europe .
 General Keane will do it because he knows he can and because he will get away with it, says Keane . General Keane is a former president of the United States .
 Putin has now clearly said that there will be no international regime change, based on his understanding of Libya operation in 2011 . U.N. Security Council basically, in his view, gave a green light to changing regime .
 Ambassador Sestanovich says he is a status quo power, and is most concerned about his own power . He says the power he is most worried about is his ownPower .
 He is sending a clear message to President Obama that he is not a regional power, he is a global power, and he has extensive reach . He is also sending a message to the president that he has an extensive reach, he says .
 Russia’s military modernization and its significant increases in its defense spending have paid off . We’re also seeing where Russia's military modernization has paid off, according to CNN .
 It can move quickly, and it does have sophisticated weaponry that it can use . It can also move quickly and can use sophisticated weaponry .
 Russian equipment is also a benefit of seeing the level of sophistication that it has and will be willing to sell . Russia is also interested in purchasing Russian equipment .
 Syrian policy has b^een a demonstration of lack of resolve and weakness, of which he has been able to exploit, he says . And our Syrian policy is b ^een a demonstrated of a lack of resolution and weakness .
 Polish and central European colleagues are advocating sending two Russian divisions to Syria . "Please, send two Russian division to Syria," one Polish official says .
 He can turn the temperature up when he needs, and temperature down . But he can move very quickly, and he can turn it up very quickly .
World War II rules were established at the end of the second World War . I think we have to return to our rules, which were established during the second war .
 "This is a kind of situation that we didn’t face in the Cold War," Keane says . Keane says, "I think General Keane is right about something very important, and that is, that is"
 In the Cold War, there was a kind of constraint on Russian activity, as you say . "There was a sort of constraint" on Soviet activity, according to the author .
 Since the Cold War, U.S. use of military power has been almost entirely free of a fear of Russian interference .
 I don't think the difference is so much a technological one as a political one. I don’t think the differences are so much of a technologicalone as apolitical one .
 Our preference would be for him to think he had to deconflict with us . Obviously, we would prefer him to be a man who had to break with us.
 That's not only something we haven’t experienced since the end of the Cold War, it really is a change, says CNN’s John Sutter . Sutter: It's a change even from the cold War itself .
 But I think we should not forget what some of our advantages are here . But, I think, we shouldn't forget what we have .
 I think our discussion has been very bilateral, as though it’s us against the Russians, forgetting Senator McCain . I think we have had a very bilateral discussion, as if it's us against Russia .
 Russia can check the Russians and limit this kind of independent action. We have, in Europe and in the Middle East, an array of states that want to work with us, we say .
 Syria has not done anything in the way of coalition management to create a block of states that would keep the Russians out of Syria . The U.S. has been passive in Syria for several years .
 I think we’ve heen off balance in Syria since Assad violated the red lines and used chemical and biological weapons on his own people . I think it’s not the first time Assad has used chemical weapons on himself .
 Many people advocated that a no-fly zone and a safety zone for refugees be created in Syria . I was one of them, and I was a member of the group .
 NATO meeting to shore up and demonstrate the alliance's resolve in the Middle Eastern problem . I think we should consider really elevating NATO in this, an emergency meeting of the North Atlantic Council .
 General Jones touched very, I think, insightfully on the whole issue of energy policy. General Jones, in your testimony, touched very. I think that, in his testimony, you touch very, insightful on the entire issue of Energy Policy .
 Russia is at $50 a barrel in oil. We have a very contentious and confrontational Russia right now . It's a very difficult time to see what's happening in Russia .
 "We should be thinking strategically, in terms of terms of what we should do," he says . "I don't think that we're going to settle here at this panel, but we should be think strategically," he adds .
 A lot of his ability to be confrontational will take away a lot of him, he says . "That’s what, basically, would take away," he adds .
 The U.S. still does not have a strategic energy policy, Reed says . There isn't one that I can find anywhere that's written, either classified or unclassified .
 This is a — an asset in our quiver that is incredible, in terms of future potential. This is an asset, says the author of the book .
 energy security is a vital part of our toolkit, he says . I don’t think we fully grasp how the energy situation has changed the power balance in the world .
 U.S. leadership, particularly with Europe, can continue to help our friends and allies wean themselves off their dependence on Russian energy, which is. I think there are ways in which, with United States leadership, wean ourselves off of Russian energy .
 Many of the proposals, in terms of countering the Assad regime, would require overt attacks .
 Most of what we’ve done, legally, has been under the AUME, which has been in effect for more than a decade . Most of the things we've done have been done legally, but most of them have been under it .
 But, that doesn't mean we shouldn't confront them and resolve them, he says . But, those — but, that’s — don't mean that we shouldn’t confront them.
 General Jones says policy issues can be done by decision . Jones: In many cases, the debates assume that these are policy issues alone . He says he thinks that, in many cases.
 Senator Reed: "I think we have to be very careful" Senator Reed says. "There are immediately, immediately, where, in fact, there are"
 Senator McCain has been extraordinarily eloquent about the issues involving legal authorities . How do they constrain us, how do they enable us, he says .
 I will ask for a quick response, and I'll ask the Ambassador and then I’ll ask him to respond . I will also ask for the Ambassador to respond, and then, anyone else wants to chime in, he says . I'll — finally,
 The decisive ability to change the facts on the ground in Syria is somehow ground forces, in my view . The decisive can be seen in Syria, in his view .
 I don't think airpower alone, by any side, is going to decisively sort of settle the issue . I don’t think air power alone, or any side. I’m not sure what will happen, but I think it will happen .
 Russian officials already mentioning volunteers suggests to me we should worry that that’s already entrain, and that their analysis is, they can’t succeed without it. Senator, to work through those in exactly the order you suggest, hoping not to get to number three .
 There could be some deployments, and maybe not too far down the road. If that's what it takes to succeed, I think there could be a few deployments .
 The IRGC is leading, in some cases, the local militia, but, in all cases, advising them . They know that the IRGC has been leading, but in some case, it's advising them.
 There are about 7,000 Hezbollah and about 3,000 Iraqi Shi’a militia that are being returned from Iraq .
 Russian doesn’t have a clue whether this ground force is going to be effective or not. Russian doesn't — Russia doesn't know if it will be effective .
 I think they’re going to wait to see if they have to inject something. And I think it’s going to be a long wait for them to do something .
I think they will be guarded about their introduction of significant combat forces . So, I think they'll be guarded. So, he says .
 I’d — first of all, I really appreciate the very blunt answers we’re getting here, says CNN’s John Sutter . Sutter: "I’m not sure what I'm doing, but I'm not sure if I'm going to
 General Dunford's comments are "courageous and talking about the seriousness that we’re facing right now," he says . "We had — not just general Dunford, but others — Clapper — coming in and making statements that I think are really pretty courageous"
 General Dunford had disagreed with the Ambassador in this respect, he says .
 General Dunford's statement is a statement of the existential seriousness of this. I’d like to have each one respond as to whether or not you agree with the statement .
 General Dunford’s statement was that Russia is the only power that can wipe the U.S. off the planet with its nuclear arsenal .
 The U.S. has seen a focus on strengthening and modernizing their nuclear strategic deterrent and their nuclear submarine forces over the last several years .
 The Kremlin is willing to use military means to accomplish its political objectives, he says . The Russian invasion of Georgia began in 2008, beginning in 2008 with the Russian invasion.
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is very concerned about Russian activities and aggression and their willingness to use their Senator Inhofe .
 The display of cruise missiles reinforces exactly what General Dunford was saying, he says .
 Captain Jeff Davis told reporters the United States has a good awareness about the skies over . The U.S. has begun routing its airstrikes so they’ll pass clear of the Russians .
 He said we have taken some actions to ensure the safe separation of aircraft . He said that we have been taking some actions.
 I look at that, that they are dictating what we’re doing with our aircraft in making those determinations while we're sitting back and doing what is the most effective way to respond to them . I looked at that. It's a good way to
 Syria has full visibility of the airspace and also these airfields in Syria .
 We can track an airplane taking off from any airfield in Syria, and follow that airplane . And we can actually track a plane taking off in Syria .
 The idea that, to avoid some kind of air conflict, that we would stop or curtail our operations against ISIS, makes no sense to me, he says .
For the first time in 96 years, there’s not one Communist in their Parliament. And the reason I’m asking that — I was over there when they had their parliamentary elections, and they’re not one .
 I would look for him to stop the lull and get back in. And I think that’s very significant, and I would be looking for him, she says .
 Putin's aggressive nature of Putin in Ukraine is causing a crisis in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "No, I’m talking about what’s happening right now"
 The government that was anti-Russian, to a sense, has turned its head away from the thought that it would be economically integrated into Europe or militarily integrated .
 Conley: "As all of you know, we just passed our defense authorization bill. Conley, that — and as all of us know, I just passed the bill" Conley says .
 Putin is dialing it down in Ukraine because he would like the European Union to lift sanctions, he says . The European Union must make a decision in the next couple of months .
 NDAA amendment speaks about looking at the Arctic and seeing the strategic picture of the Arctic . The amendment is aimed at assessing and assessing the capability gaps .
 I think it is time — we have studied this issue, and there are pile and piles of studies, but we now have to look at this region more strategically . I think the issue is time, and we have been studying this issue for years .
 There is a specific discussion about how to look at the Arctic, the NDAA says .
 There's also discussion about Poland and east, and looking at increasing our force posture . I think it’s also — in the NDAA, there's also talk about Poland, east .
 The committee is trying to get at this problem. These are exactly the strong signals that we need to send, I thank the committee for their thoughtfulness .
 I do — I share your concerns about the Arctic and what’s going on there strategically. I do, I do. I share my concerns about Arctic and the Arctic . I do .
 I'm going to defer to my colleague from Alaska, who I am quite confident will discuss that issue in some detail . I’m going to deferred to his colleague, who will — will — be quite confident. I'm quite confident that he will discuss the issue.
 Putin wants Assad out more than we want him out, says Putin . It seems to me, if you boil it down to its most essential element, Putin wants him out. It seems that he wants Assad in more than he wants.
 He’s willing to make a commitment that we haven’t been willing to made over the past 2 or 3 years . He's willing to making a commitment over 2 or3 years, he says .
 Our policy has been a — benign neglect is too strong a term, but it’s been a kind of — go slow, hope that momentum would eventually push him out .
 Putin decided he was going to reverse that. And apparently there was some progress being made .
 The Sudetenland of 1938 or Sarajevo of 1914 is a historical dilemma . I have this historical dilemma of whether this is the Sudetanland of 1937 or 1914 . It's not clear whether it's the same time as Saraje in 1914 .
 The Archduke is long forgotten, and, at some point, Assad will be, as well . The archduke will be remembered, and at some time, Assad may be .
 Perhaps that’s an opportunity for us to make common cause with them, just as we did on the chemical weapons issue .
 The area is separate from the issue of Assad, the author says . "This is a place where we do have a coincidence of interest," he says .
 Putin wants to correct what he sees as a — an injustice with regard to the — how the Cold War ended. The — I think, deep in the — as I mentioned in my remarks, Mr Putin’s thought process is, he said .
 But, I think that it does mean that he will push his borders away from Russia . But I think it does not mean that it means that he'll push his border away from the country .
 He's consumed by the idea that we are his natural enemies. And he's consumed, I honestly believe he’s consumed by this idea. He’'s consumed. And I honestly think he”s consumed.
 I define his leadership as a negative type of leadership, he says . I mean, he is the type. He is the kind of leader that people like him need an enemy to make themselves look good .
 He's been successful, but he's been moving faster than we can act, than we've acted, he says . So, he’s been successful. So, we’re not acting, but we're acting, he's moving faster, than they’ve
 General Breedlove has done some very innovative things, within certain constraints that he faces, in terms of the organization and how NATO makes decisions .
 The new England manager has been in charge since the summer of 2013 . He is expected to win the title for the first time in three years . He has already won the title in the past two years .
 Senator King will continue to exhibit this kind of behavior until he's confronted with a Senator King. But, he’s going to continue to do this, he says .
 I've always thought of Russian foreign policy as like a thief in a hotel that tries every door until he finds one that’s open . I’ve always been thought of Russia as a thief.
 As long as NATO exists and is vigorous and represents a line, that's the policy that I think you're recommending, he says .
 American leadership is absolutely es46 sential in creating the conditions that will show that all doors are securely locked and that he can’t Senator King . But, he has not seen that yet, so until we demonstrate that, he hasn't seen that.
 The first point was economic, but it was interesting, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I think it's awfully important"
 That was what ultimately brought about the decline of the Soviet Union, and that also is what can undermine this new expansion, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The decline of Soviet Union was what eventually brought about that decline .
 Senator King says every great power must have a sphere of influence . He says Putin is doing it by force .
 He would seek to undermine NATO credibility if he could run a train through NATO credibility, he said .
 The Warsaw Pact disintegrated, but NATO survived, according to the U.S.
 The only way you get to a new European security architecture is to undermine the credibility of the NATO alliance . "This is yours and I’ll let you keep that,” is the only way to get this grand bargain, he says .
 If he can provoke a government for taking actions that other NATO allies won’t support, he can divide the alliance, if he can put . If you provoke until there’s an action, then you blame the victim for doing that, he says .
 The great Russian civilization has to fight against the decadence of the West, he says . He believes that there's a civilizational challenge here .
 There is a slight ideological component to this, so it’s not about invading Poland. And so, there's not about invasion Poland, so there's no ideological component .
 It's so eroding America and NATO’s credibility that it just sort of dissolves on its own, it just dissolves. It’'s so  eroding U.S. and NATO's credibility.
 Russia can exert its own influence and its own power, and it’s demonstrating that it, in itself, is a superior model of development .
 I think they’re going to probe to see how they can best do that, politically and militarily . I think it will be a test for them, and they will be able to do that .
 Portugal, Spain, and Canadians are doubtful participants . They already know that Portugal and Spain are doubtful Participants .
 The Baltics are likely to use the Baltics, likely as the best vehicle because of the Russian minority population there . I think they’re going to — they will use theBaltics, they will be the best vehicles, I think .
 The question is there is there that gives them some leverage. And just the fact that that question gives them leverage is there .
 Russia's experience with radical Islam has led to Russia's refusal to cooperate with Russia . Russia's relationship with Russia has been strained since 9/11 .
 Putin was the first guy that called the President of the United States, you know, based on what happened here .
 We actually were involved in it years before that, but we never responded . We never responded to any calls about it .
 The U.S. and Russia could exercise some leadership together to put together that alliance, he says . "This is an area where I believe we need a global alliance to deal with it," he adds .
 Putin imagines that he can, with a combination of assets, be the dominant power in Europe, because, above all, Europe is divided, he says .
 He says we should not underestimate the lessons that he's learned over the past couple of years . But, he says, he doesn't think we should underestimate the lesson he has learned .
 He has been surprised by the way the U.S. and Europe have responded to the Ukraine crisis . He said he was surprised by how the United States and Europe reacted to the crisis .
 The President has been told what the President has told, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don’t know, myself, what we do know and what we have been told"
 National Command Authority's reaction appears to have been forewarning of this, says CNN's John Sutter . "We didn't have much forewarning," he says .
 He flew his fighters in underneath his large cargo aircraft so they wouldn’t be picked up on radar . It was obvious he was constructing something at the base .
 I think the first signs that I believe we knew something was changing at the airbase were physical signs of something changing . I think it was a sign that something was going to change at the base .
 I don't know that for a fact, because I’m not privileged to have those classified briefings anymore, he says . I don’t know that, for a matter, because he’s not privileged. I don's not privileged, he writes
 Putin's actions in Syria have been 'outrageous', says David Cameron . He says Putin is 'one thing you can say for him' for him .
 Putin will stand by his friends and his allies, he says, and he's willing to put muscle to that to accomplish that . I think this is one of Putin's major points that he's making strategically, is that he’s making that point .
 Putin 48 was somewhat in disbelief to watch America abandon Mubarak in Egypt, to watch U.S. retreat from Yemen, and America retreat from Libya . And I think — I suspect Putin48 was slightly in disbelief.
 Putin will be read by Putin as another sign of U.S. arbitrarily making decisions about conditions of a war zone . Putin: We no longer want to be in it, moving away from it despite those conditions .
 Our allies have all seen this track record of retreat and withdrawal, and obviously it has to give them concerns . Certainly, our allies have been concerned, but it's not the first time they've been in such a position .
 There is not a country in the Middle East who doesn't have doubts about America, says CNN's John Sutter .
 I haven’t talked to a Baltic leader, but I’m certain they have some issues with it. I haven't talked to them, but they’ve had some issues, he says .
 I also know, though, that they truly appreciate the forward positioning of troops and airpower in their country, because that is a positive sign . "I also know that they really appreciate theforward positioning of their country," she says . "That's a good sign.
 I don't think there's any doubt that, particularly in the Middle East, that our reliability factor has suffered a serious blow over the last few years . I don’t think there’s any doubt. I think that, in the areas that we deal with, particularly
 I thought that the announcement of a pivot towards Asia was a mistake to announce it that way . When you pivot toward something, you’re pivoting away from something, and the Arabs took it quite differently than what, perhaps, we intended. I’m
Congressman says he doesn't remember being a Member of Congress for the last 21 years . "I don’t remember being part of that decision"
 The Russians have been eating our lunch lately when it comes to the information war . It seems to me, as an advocate, as a strong advocate of Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.
Radio Free Europe, Voice of America are no longer the tools that were successful during the Cold War . Radio Free Europe is no longer able to penetrate an incredibly and sophisticated strategic communications campaign .
 Russian oligarchs and firms have basically purchased every media outlet in Bulgaria, says CNN's John Sutter . He was in Bulgaria 3 weeks ago, where Russian oligarch and firms bought all media outlets .
Narva, Estonia, is only listening to Russian media, and they're given a completely different universe .
 We have seen the efficiency of Russian trolls and tweeting incorrect information that’s happening in the U.S. that can, you know, cause concern .
 We are not able, at this moment, to counter this campaign, but we need to employ a much more effective strategy, says David Frum .
European public opinion is quite negative, as well as in Russia . But we must work much harder at focusing on European public opinion, which is very negative .
 This is the great challenge of our time, and we really don’t have an effective answer. But, this is a great challenge, and this is the greatest challenge of the time, says the author .
 The Pentagon confirmed yesterday that American pilots are now being told to alter their routes to get out of the way of Russian aircraft .
 In your long career, you said you can’t recall a time in which that’s happened .
 There probably is something along those lines, but I don’t — in modern warfare, since the United States has had global responsibility, I don't have a reference for it .
 I can't recall receiving or giving such an order, either. I certainly haven't served as long as you two have, but I can’t recall receiving and giving such a order .
 He recalls the experience of Afghanistan when they lost thousands of lives and it made the Soviet leadership very unpopular with the Russian people .
 The key part of Afghanistan was U.S. active intervention in providing billions of dollars worth of weapons and support to various Afghan fighting forces . The United States was active intervention.
 The opposition forces have been on the side of the opposition in Syria since the start of the Syrian conflict . The opposition has been "completely inadequate," says CNN's John Sutter .
President Obama's national security team was advocating a much more robust strategy, as far back as 2012 . Obama's team has had very competent people on President Obama’s team, says Obama .
 Central Intelligence Agency -trained force to provide them with some weapons capability .
 opposition forces have been able to put this regime still in jeopardy for the second time . Despite our faulty programs, the opposition forces, to include the al-Qaeda, have been unable to put the regime in jeopardy .
 Putin is going to be successful in supporting the Syrian government, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Putin is likely to push back on many of these gains in Syria .
 I don’t think we’re going to do anything more than what we are doing to help the opposition forces, he says . And I don't think we're going to be doing anything more. And I’s not going to go more.
 I don't believe the President’s going to take any action, you know, to protect them, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: He could, by establishing free zones for them, and certainly some other actions that he could take to protection them .
 ISIS has been fighting ISIS in Syria for more than a decade . The group is fighting in Syria and other parts of the country . ISIS has not been able to defeat the group in Syria .
 Ambassador Sestanovich: ‘We should all worry about where Russia’s reckless behavior will lead next.’
 General Keane said he would have a question for the panel about the future of the U.S. President .
 A 5-month-old is repeatedly surprised by the same action over and over again in close succession . It’s amusing when a 5-year-old has the same reaction to a baby who is surprised.
 I think we may discover, as some of the other panelists have said, that there’s another round of Russian policy in Ukraine . I think it may be a new round of Russia's policy in the Ukraine .
 I think right now they’re unsure of how to handle this crisis, but they have not written off their investment there . I thinkright now they're unsure of what to do with this crisis .
 If you ask about crises in the Middle East emanating from Syria, you know . You know .
 I’d look to other countries that have been very worried about what is going to happen and have not gotten a lot of help from us . I'd look to the spillover to other nations that are very worried.
 The fact that Turkish airspace was violated over the weekend is a warning by the Russians, but it’s not the only way in which this could spill over .
 Syria, unfortunately, has got a lot of neighbors in the Middle East, and Russian policy is going to prolong this civil war . Syria has got lots of neighbors, and Russia's policy will prolong the civil war.
 General Keane’s maps in front of you. I’d just put one little extra piece on the board for you to look at .
 Azerbaijan is the country off whose coast the Russians fired those cruise missiles . Azerbaijan is a country off the coast of Azerbaijan .
 It's been able to sustain its independence over a long period of time, but it's in play . It’s been ableto sustain itsindependence over a short period.
 Many panelists have said the Russians want to restore influence over other countries of the former Soviet Union . But, the Russians move on a lot of different fronts.
 General Keane: " aggression unanswered, you fear, leads to more aggression" General Keane said that aggression unanswered leads to "more aggression"
 Russia has not done anything to incite Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's actions have been "pretty astounding," he says . "What has happened without us, it's been pretty astounding," Sutter says .
 I think it’s possibly the beginning of the end of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . I think this could be the beginning to the end.
 In 2004 or 2005, we started withdrawing a lot of our forces from Europe . In 2004 and 2005, the U.S. military has withdrawn a few of its forces .
 Some of us had some serious discussions with the then Secretary of Defense about the tradeoff of doing that . Some of them had someserious discussions with him about that .
 Bulgaria and Romania helped build bases that would accommodate rotational forces . But because of the demands on our troop strengths in Iraq and Afghanistan, they were never really used .
 The old adage “a virtual presence is actual absence’ is absolutely correct, says John Sutter . Sutter says he would strongly suggest that .
 NATO needs to show itself as an alliance of 28 countries that adheres to what it says and what it's for . The alliance needs to bolster its presence, NATO says .
 It should become more proactive as a way of dissuading other engagements. And it should be more proactive to dissuade other engagements . It should also become more proactive as a way to dissuading engagement .
 The United States has been the dominant country in the Middle East that’s outside the region . U.S. has been in its own self-interests, obviously, in the region.
 We’ve been willing to take action to ensure stability and security. And we’re willing to do so, says the U.S.
 Russia, with this alliance with Iran, cannot be understated, in terms of its strategic significance . Russia's relationship with Iran has been described as "strategic significance"
Every country in the region will be impacted by it and will be making adjustments to the new geopolitical landscape that Iran and Russia are creating for us . Every country will be affected by it.
 Russia has to leverage their relationship with Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia has a strong relationship with the U.S.
 The Middle East is still a major player in the Middle East, according to CNN .
With this alliance, this will be an accelerant to actually reduce our influence more considerably. And with this alliance. This will be a accelerant, this would be an Accelerant to reduce the influence of this alliance more considerably .
 Russia supported the deal as much as the U.S. did. Well, obviously Russia support the deal .
 Iran’s behavior for the last 35 years should have been on the table as a condition for the deal, but it was removed .
 The other thing — I totally agree with General Jones — I think, strategically, it — is the NATO alliance's objective in Europe, he says .
 Russian aggression has led to a number of deaths in recent years in Russia . Russia has been accused of a series of violent acts of aggression against the country .
 The — strategically, he will break that alliance, and he’s not going to have to take much military action to do it, in his judgment . He will break the alliance, but he will not have to do so much, in my judgment .
 Jim, the president of the U.S. National Security Council, says he has to lead the country in the future . He says there are some careful points that we could exercise strategically, but we have to lead .
 The economic strategy is also very important, he says, and the political strategy is important .
 Mr Putin’s Russia as it is today, says Mr Putin. So, I think it's three things that have to come together to have a — an effective strategy to deal with the Russia .
 "What is his escalation response?" is the thing that paralyzed us from taking action, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "When you focus on that, in terms of “what is his escalate response?”
 I do believe there’s prudent things, you know, that can be done, I say . I mean, I think — I think, I do think there's a prudent thing to do, I mean . I think that's what I do, and I
 Chairman has talked about a no-fiy zone for a while here, ending the barrel bombs .
 Putin’s airpower there, and enforcing a no-fiy/no-bomb zone is more challenging now. Obviously, with Putin's air power there, there is more challenge now .
 In the south, it is also necessary to enforce a no-fiy zone . In the South, it also has to have someone on the ground to protect that zone from infiltration from the regime .
 In the south, we can put together a free zone, where moderates would be protected there . We would be able to bring refugees in as a sanctuary, and we would have to bring them in .
 The Free Syrian Army has an effective ground force in Syria, says the U.S. government .
 In the north, where we truly want to do it, and where the Turks have interest in it as well, it's much more challenging . The Turks have also been interested in it, as well .
 We don’t have the density of moderate forces there that we have in the south. We don't have the denser forces there in the South. We have moderate forces in the southern part of the country .
 General Keane is a former president of the United States . He says he's been in a safe zone, where things like General Keane don't get barrel-bombed from the sky .
In the north, it’s challenging, and I’m not confident that we would have the same results. In the north it's challenging, it's not confident, and we would be the same result.
 General Keane says he'll give you a firmer answer, than General Keane . Keane: "I’m giving you a — I’ll give you an answer, actually, than general Keane"
 The U.S. and its allies in the region are going to take serious military action, he says . "If you have — if you have" if you convey that the United States and its ally is going to be taken seriously, he adds .
 Putin will start saying, “You know, we need to talk about the future of the Syrian regime’s future, in a way that has not been true until now. That is, for the first time, Putin will begin saying, "You know"
 I think the Russians have not felt that they have to take seriously what we say about the future of Syria, because we’re not playing, I think . I think they don't feel that they must take seriously about Syria, as we're not playing .
 If you want to play in this game, you have to be prepared to put some assets on the table . The game is currently being played in the UK .
 The Russian military risks to them are greater than they calculate, he says . And I don’t think we can expect to affect the political equation until the Russians think that there’s a — that there is a — a — risk to them, says
 If the economy stays the way it is, certainly that’s going to have some impact on him .
 Putin's view is much larger than just a couple of years, in terms of what he portends, strategically, for himself . But, he still believes that Putin’s view is bigger than just two years, he says .
 If we establish free zones, you know, for moderate opposition forces, but also sanctuaries for refugees, that gets world-opinion support rather dramatically . If we established free zones for moderateOpposition forces, it will get world support.
 If Putin is going to attack that, then world opinion is definitely against him . If Putin's attack is on him, world opinion will definitely be against him, says some .
 You take this issue right off the table, in terms of why he’s in Syria, says CNN's John Defterios .
World opinion will have a significant impact on him, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "If you're doing that, and contributing to the migration that’s taken place by your aggressive military actions"
 Iraq's air force was completely grounded in 1991 . If I could, it’s — we have a model in 1991 in Iraq, where we not only partitioned the north and the south, but we cratered the runways .
We avoided a significant refugee problem. But, what we also did was, by creating those zones, particularly in the north, we avoided a major refugee problem .
 A mistake was made, back on the redline days, when we didn’t do that as a response to chemical weapons. And I think that a mistake was making, back in the days of the chemical weapons use, I think .
 I believe that Europe would not have been suffering the refugee problem that they have now, I think . I think that is a powerful argument to do that. I completely agree with General Keane that, if you tie it to the safety of — and security of innocent civilians, and you take
 It's harder in the north and that that's something we should look at in the south, he says . And I agree that it’s hard in the North and that’�s something we shouldn't look at .
 Putin’s behavior may have impact on Putin's behavior sooner than 2 years from now, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin doesn't fold his tent lightly, and he’s not going to admit quickly that this entire operation has been a fiasco for him . Putin doesn’t fold his Tent lightly.
 If there's pushback, he will not necessarily just continue plunging forward . But, if there’s push back, he won’t just continue to plunge forward .
 The domestic situation is continuing to deteriorate, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the domestic situation in the U.S. is improving .
 He’s having to tell the 55 oligarchs that they can’t quite get as much funding as they do . He's had to tell them they can't quite get much funding .
 Russia is encircled by enemies, he says . But, remember, he's created the national narrative that he’s created . He's created a national narrative of Russia's enemies .
 He controls the media space, and he’s created a warlike environment, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "He's created a Warlike environment"
 The economic situation in the U.S. is likely to continue to deteriorate, he says . "There’s probably a little more longevity here, even if the economic situation continues to fundamentally deteriorate"
 The mothers of Russian soldiers are now foreign agents because they were talking about the disappearance of their sons in Ukraine . So, if you do make the military cost higher, that he can’t cover up, he can't cover up .
 His control over his media space can go on for a long time. But, his control over media space is so, so, this can go for long time, he says .
 I think if he does run into strength, he responds to that strength and adjusts. And I think, if he runs intostrength, he will adjust, I think .
 This was during the Russia-Georgian conflict when we had to fly back — Georgian soldiers back to Georgia .
Conley and gentlemen, for being here today, and your service to our country . Conley and men, Conley, thank you for your service .
 General Jones and General Keane voiced concerns about the new intelligence-sharing agreement between Iraq, Russia, Iran, and Syria .
 Deputy Secretary of Defense Robert Work says the agreement caught the administration by surprise .
 The Iraqi government has entered into this information-sharing agreement, he says . He says he is troubled that the Iraqi government is entering into this agreement .
 intelligence professionals are at risk, he says, and our country is at a greater risk . "This puts our intelligence professionals at risk," he says .
 The U.S. should not have entered into the information-sharing agreement, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "We should or should have not entered into this information sharing agreement"
 Senator Ernst, thank you, and thank you for your military service .
 Maliki’s ineptness and nefarious character that he is, that excluded the Sunnis politically from participation, he says . And it has cost Maliki's ineptness, it has also cost him, he adds .
 The Ambassador interacts with Prime Minister Abadi for political reasons, as well as military reasons . Ryan Crocker and General Dave Petraeus did with Maliki before .
 The Sunnis will be the lynchpin for success of the indigenous force . It's not something to be taken lightly, because it is the political decision to include the Sunnis .
 You’re never going to be able to succeed until their participation is there, says the author . You're not going to succeed unless you're involved, says author .
 Let’s assume we clear Ramadi next week with predominant Shi’a militia forces and some degree of Iraqi army .
 Sunnis are armed and trained and have the resolve to stay there, just as it will be in Mosul . ISIS will be staying in Ramadi.
 The Sunnis' participation is totally dependent on a political inclusion of the Sunnis . That participation is completely dependent on the inclusion of a political party .
 The U.S. is not supporting Abadi in a way that he needs, and the Iranians are, the Russians will be, he says . He says he's making a shift, right before our eyes, without making any public pronouncements about his loss of confidence in the U
 Prime Minister Abadi visited the U.S. for his first visit with the President of the United States . He left with nothing more than what he already had .
 Four weeks later, he's in Moscow, and he's cutting an arms deal with Russia . He's in Russia for four weeks, and is in Moscow.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin wants U.S. equipment. He doesn't want to buy Russian stuff, he wants American equipment .
 He can’t even get the American equipment on time in the numbers he wants for the deals he already has with the U.S. He can't even get American equipment.
 That’s how frustrated they are with just supporting him on the decisions we’ve already made, much less additional support . That's how frustrated we're with just support for him, he says .
 The United States is coming to your aid, but that aid is so shallow, it's so shallow that you can understand what he's doing .
 If Iran's going to be the helper, he's probably going to take it, says CNN's John Sutter . Iran's president is expected to be in charge of Iran's nuclear program .
 We've got great witnesses, and have shared with us information about a very grave foreign policy time in our country . We’ve got great witness. We've also shared information about the very grave Foreign policy time.
 It’s unbelievable that we’re drifting without a kind of strategy to seriously deal with Russia or the whole Middle East .
 George Kennan was trying to develop a strategy that would be good even for a couple of years . I have the greatest respect for Kennan, but, actually, at the time, he was attempting a strategy .
 If we had a strategy that was good for a couple of years, we’d be way ahead of where we are now, says David Frum .
 Let's try to think about how to get our act together in a way that does us some good in the Senator Sessions .
 I — but, but, if I could answer your Senator Sessions, I would agree to agree on Ambassador Sestanovich . I will not be able to do so, but if I can answer Senator Sessions. I would like to talk to him, but he
 The Russians have always thought about us in relation to them, he says . "They are all by themselves," he adds .
 This, of course, feeds a lot of insecurity on their part, but it is a genuine advantage for us . This is not the first time we've seen this, but we've been able to use it to help others. This is a real advantage.
 A strategy that will be effective over the next couple of decades is how to leverage this advantage, he says . The place to start in thinking about a strategy is to use this advantage to build up over half a century .
 There are doubts about our strategic good sense and our staying power, generals say . It's not for reasons that the generals have mentioned, not easy to do at this point, they say .
 These are still assets that are latent and can be recovered if we are at all serious about it . But, these are still latent and could be recovered. But, they can still be recovered, says David Cameron .
 They were sincerely saying they were going to get to 2 percent . And, of course, they were sincerely telling them they were getting to 2 per cent .
 If we don't lead and don’t step up, they’ll just try to negotiate their way and not take any real serious action . But, their lack of will is so palpable, it seems to me that it seems that they're not going, says CNN's
 At the NATO summit in 2002, 19 countries that made up NATO agreed unanimously that 2 percent of their gross domestic product would be provided for national defense .
 Ongoing in NATO right now is a reaffirmation of the fact that we need that 2 percent . "Everybody needs to chip in that 2 per cent"
Conley's admonition that the next Warsaw summit, next year, is critical, in many respects, says Conley . NATO's commitments that NATO members make now, with 28, should be universally agreed to and should be supported .
 I do believe that our engagement in this 21st century is — got to be different than the 20th century engagement . But, I do think, our engagement has got to get different than 20th Century engagement .
 If you don’t tie in economic development, governance, and rule of law in a more comprehensive, whole-of-nations involvement, you’re going to create refugees all over the world, says CNN’s John Sutter .
 Nigeria collapses or another big country goes under in another 10 years, when Nigeria collapses . And if you like what's happening in the Middle East right now, we're going to love what's going to happen in Africa.
 Putin: "This is a very difficult, dangerous time, where weakness is not something that we should show" People like Putin will draw the long — wrong conclusions, he says .
 The panel has had a great experience, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "This really incredible experience here, but also great insights"
 Conley: "I want to thank you, particular, for your outstanding work on the Arctic" Conley's Arctic work is "outstanding work," says Conley .
 The Arctic is a requirement for no plan, actually, for the Arctic, according to the NDAA . The Arctic strategy is the current Arctic strategy, which you may have seen .
 The Department of Defense is trying to get serious on the issue, says the Pentagon . "What we’re trying to do is get serious," says Pentagon spokesman .
 The Russian military buildup includes four new brigade combat teams and 40 icebreakers . Some of those are nuclear powered .
Military exercises didn't get a lot of press in the U.S. But, in terms of the three military exercises, they didn’t get a much of press, he says .
 Do you view those as provocative, in terms of what the Russians were doing, Ms. Obeidallah says .
 The March 2015 exercise was a snap exercise at full combat readiness . I view the last one, the March 2015, because it was asnap exercise. I view it as a snap Exercise at fullcombat readiness .
 The OSCE needs to get the Russians back to the rules of transparency, 45-day notification over a certain level . This is where misunderstandings and accidents happen.
 Senator Sullivan says he was provocative and unprovoked . Senator Sullivan: "That, to me, was provocative"
 If you look in the right-hand corner of the map, there's two blue dots .
 They’re the only Arctic-trained American warriors that we have in the Active Duty forces . They are the onlyArctic- trained American warriors in the active duty forces .
 There are some people saying, “Hey, we’ve got to stand 60 up. We’re not even — you know, you know. We're not even. There is some people who say, ‘ Hey, we've got to standing up.
 General Jones said that they viewed our reductions in Europe as similar to those in the U.S. Senator.
Senator Sullivan: We do not have much of a U.S. security architecture in the Arctic . He says the Arctic is more important than missile defense at Fort Greely Senator Sullivan .
 The Arctic Council has told the Russians that they are our partners in the Arctic . "That would be true in the case of the Arctic Council," he says .
 Senator Sullivan says he has not fully addressed the dramatic shifts in the military component . Sullivan: "We have not properly addressed and understood the dramatic shift"
 There's a need to relook at what's happening, says CNN's John Sutter . But, he says, we need to take a look at the situation in the future .
 The Arctic is not just for the Arctic’s sake, but important changes are happening, he says .
 The Baltic Sea, North Sea, the Barents Sea, and the Arctic are all part of operations . The Arctic is a continuation of operations.
 Norwegian and British allies are very concerned about the maritime component . So, we have to look at it holistically, not only the land component, as you rightly note, but also I'm particularly concerned .
 The North Atlantic is becoming a much more active Senator Sullivan .
Bridgeport and Alaska have had the opportunity to train a lot in cold weather at Bridgeport .
 Since 1945, the U.S. has recognized that if you’re not present where you need to be present, you create a vacuum . The United States has recognized this since 1945 .
 vacuums are usually filled by people that don’t have the same interests .
 The term “virtual presence is actual absence,” but actual absence means you’re creating vacuums .
 The 61 U.S. needs to think about strategically what we’re going to do to avoid increasing the number of vacuums around the world . The 61 United States needs to be a globally significant power by the year 2050 .
 The toughness of the soldiers themselves to operate in minus-30, minus-40-degree temperatures is why we have forces there, he says . The acclimatization, the special equipment, everything that you need, is the reason .
 The airfield is an airfield where you can seize and then bring in a lot of other things to help them out . You can seize the airfield with them very quickly and then take in other things.
 Budget control authority and sequestration is driving the force structure of the Army down to World War II numbers . The Army is down to pre-World War II Numbers .
 Chief of Staff and his four-stars just the other day, dealing with this very subject . I was with the Chief of staff and his three-star staff on the same day .
 budget control authority is doing to him. He has no choice but to take brigades out of his force structure because of what he is doing .
 This was done in conjunction with the Pacific theater commander and where he also wanted his forces, not just the Army . This was a joint effort with the commander, who wanted his troops .
 Democratic President, Republican House of Representatives and Republican Senate. But, let me just say that we have a Democratic President and a Republican House .
 Both of these entities are underwriting sequestration and the decapping of military capabilities . The U.S. is at a greater security risk than it needs to, says John Sutter .
 I mean, we’ve got to stop this, and stop this freefall of military capability, I say . I mean. We’s got tostop this, we've got to stopped this, I mean . We have to end this free fall of military capabilities,
 I think we have to retain the current assets that we have in theater . We have to look at how we can best augment to be able to rapidly respond and deploy, if necessary . We will look at what we can do to improve our ability to respond and respond .
 General Keane, thank you for taking responsible action to eliminate sequester on both the defense and nondefense side . General Keane says sequester should be eliminated on both defense and non-defense sides .
 This committee, of all committees, fully understands the negative impact of sequestration on our military, he says . This committee of all Committees, he adds, " fully understands"
 General Keane's testimony raises the issue of whether or not we ought to be having a debate on a new Authorized Use of Military Force .
 Some of the suggestions probably would warrant that. And I think you acknowledged that some of the suggested suggestions might warrant that .
 Syria is having a difficult time in terms of its strategy in Syria, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Brzezinski said it is time for U.S. to persuade Moscow to act with us in stabilizing Syria and encouraging engagement by China . He said that so far, persuasion hasn't worked very well.
 Putin must have some concerns about potential for mission creep for them in Syria, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Putin is no fool, as one of you said, that he is as concerned as he is .
 I did not know what Zbig Brzezinski meant in that piece about bringing in China, so you’ll have to ask him .
 I think the answer to your question, more broadly, is an easy one . But, I think, more widely, is a more broadly answer to the question .
 The U.S. is not going to be able to have any meaningful cooperative or discussion with Russia about cooperation . The United States is willing to bring some assets to the discussion, and act on its own if it can’t cooperate .
 The administration has been very interested in cooperating, but it has pursued this discussion as though you could get 63 Russians to cooperate with you as a substitute for American action .
 The only way to really get a serious discussion with the Russians is to begin by thinking through what matters to us and what we are prepared to do, and then telling them .
 To just think of cooperation as a substitute for any independent action is a loser, it's a loser . But to just think that cooperation is a substitute is a loss, he says .
 I would just say, I think that moment of trying to think cooperatively expired a long time ago . I would say, "I would just says, I wouldjust say, that's what I would do, and that's how long it's been. I
 "We have no strategy at what we’re clear about and willing to enforce," says Ambassador Sestanovich .
 The strategic cooperation is whether we go along with Mr Putin or whether we don’t. So, the strategic cooperation was whether we went along with him or not .
 President Putin wants to sit down and talk about it. I would agree that you have to take some action that clearly shows that, says CNN's John Sutter . He says Putin needs to take action to talk about the situation .
 There's been too much talk and not enough action on our side, I think . But I think that, I believe, there’s been toomuch talk and no action on the side .
 Mr Brzezinski also talked about retaliation against the regime, as you recall in that article .
 Putin understanding our resolve and our commitment, judged by our actions and not by our rhetoric, will make a difference, says David Cameron .
Military escalation leaves us with the emptiness of the status quo, says John Sutter . Sutter: If military escalation is the only lever that we’re concerned about, is military escalation .
 I think we should approach him with everything that we have, in terms of putting pressure on him, but I do think we’re out of time, given the military aggression that he is using, and he’s been using for a number of years now, that we
 I would just add one — to the question about whether it’s only military action we’re talking about . I would also ask whether it's only the first military action.
 I think an effective strategy is going to have to be one that brings together other countries in the region . I think a successful strategy will need to be a strategy to bring together other nations .
 Those other countries are going to want to know what we are prepared to do, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 The first kind of cooperation that has to be established for us to have any credibility in conversation with the Russians is with our own friends . But, to begin with, to start with, is to have a credibility in talks with the Russian government .
 The Russian in64 cursion is doomed to fail, says Ambassador Sestanovich . He says he had a discussion with a diplomat who seemed to share the view .
 Some $200 billion in reserves that they have to spend. They try to use that as a rationale behind that, as to some $200billion in reserves .
 What they're doing right now, relatively speaking, seems to be low cost. What they’re doing is relatively low cost, according to experts .
 Russia's involvement in Syria is a material part of what Russia ultimately does in Syria, he says . We don't seem to be discussing other partners that are already active in Syria .
 President Putin faces an economic one or economic one, he says . The Assad regime will be short of the kind of intervention that Putin is surely hoping he doesn’t have to launch .
 It's possible that they will have some near-term advantages, he says . "It’s possible that it’'s possible. Yeah, I think that it's possible," he adds .
In the short term, you’re going to see some tactical successes, but there’ll be adjustments on the battlefield. I think it’s a little hard to predict, but I think, in the shortterm, you're going to seeing some tactical success,
 I'm unconvinced that the victory through airpower alone is going to achieve success in either Syria or Iraq . I’m unconvincing that the success through air power alone is likely to be achieved in Syria and Iraq .
 The Syrian people are determined and determined, says CNN's John Sutter . "You cannot underestimate the resolve of the Syrian people, in terms of what has happened to them"
 A military machine has all modern weapons, and they stood up against it with very little weaponry themselves .
 I mean, what has kept this in their fight is their absolute determination and will to change their country . I mean. What has kept them in their fighting is theirabsolute determination, I mean . They will change their nation so that their families and communities can have a better
 A diplomat says the White House's passive posture is not really what they wanted . The diplomat says they're acting on the recommendations of the Pentagon .
 The Pentagon does not make policy, says Jim and I am very familiar with this .
President Obama's decision to use military force to accomplish political objectives is different than the process that we’re used to experience, he says .
 The Department of Defense would put together a campaign that would have various options and risk associated with it .
 The Pentagon was told many things in terms of what the parameters for that operation would be, the Pentagon says .
 The rules of engagement are so restrictive that we cannot conduct effective air operations to the degree that we know we can and keep people safe . But, the rules ofengagement are so strict that we can't conduct effective operations .
 The military has a campaign plan and options associated with it, says David Cameron . He says it's not something we have not seen in our past .
 Former NATO chief says NATO is at risk of dismantling . He says it's startling to hear someone who was formerly in command of NATO say it's at risk .
 I think that that’s a message that should be loud — heard loud and clear . I believe that that's a message to be loud, heard loud, clear . The message should be louder and clear.
 The U.S. has a strategic energy policy that anyone could read, says Sen. John McCain .
 The Department of Energy was formed in the 1990s . It was the first time the department of energy was formed .
 The Department of Energy was really the Department of Nuclear Energy . Years and years ago, it was the department of Energy .
 I’m of the opinion that we have a great Secretary of Energy and a great Deputy. I'm of the Opinion of the Secretary of energy .
 The Middle East believes that energy for security deal over the last 40 years is no longer viable, because we have our own energy .
When you hear people talking about energy independence, I wince at that, because it does say, “We’ve got ours. And, in fact, when you see that, it does says, ‘We've got ours’
Energy good fortune can be used in the global playing field for developing countries, says Mr Putin . But, our energy good fortune should be used, he says, as a response to what Putin is doing .
 The plan will wean 14 nations off of Russian energy from dependence on Russian energy . The plan is a plan that we're going to enter into the record today .
 Putin's response is an elegant response, and an economic response, to Putin's actions . That’s a staggering — if this works, this is a staggering response, says Mr Putin . That's a staggering, if this work, it is an impressive response,
 Chairman McCain thanks Chairman McCain for his commitment and dedication to the country . McCain: "Let me thank you all for extraordinary insightful testimony and for your commitment"