 The first 'Putin war', of 2014, was accompanied by denials of Russian military involvement . There were 15,000 deaths in 2014, but there were more than 20,000 in 2014 .
 In November 2013, tens of thousands of protesters took to the streets in Kyiv, Ukraine’s thousand-year old capital city, to protest at the then President Viktor Yanukovych's sudden decision to abandon plans to sign a free trade agreement with the European Union .
 Dr Vlad Mykhnenko is Associate Professor of Sustainable Urban Development & Research Fellow, St. Sustainable Urban Development and Research Fellow . He is a former member of the St. European Urban Development Council .
 By mid-March 2014, Moscow forced through a de facto annexation of Ukraine’s southernmost region .
 Russian armed groups had seized parts of Ukraine’s easternmost provinces of Donetsk and Luhansk on the Russian border .
 The conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014 led to at least 15,000 people being killed, 30,000 wounded . The Kremlin has been protesting its innocence since the early occupation of Crimea .
 A sarcastic social media meme was generated, usually tagged to footage of blown-up Russian tanks and servicemen killed in action in Ukraine .
 President Putin maintained the actual Ukrainian army were fighting a civil war against 'former coal-miners and tractorists' from the Donbas . President Putin, meanwhile, maintained the real Ukrainian army was fighting acivil war against former coal miners .
 The claim that the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine in 2014 was triggered by domestic and economically-determined factors did not hold water then, any more than the current Russian claims are legitimate now . My research, published in 2020, reveals that economic and material circumstances in the region did not generate
 The role of the Kremlin’s military intervention was paramount for the commencement of hostilities . The role was paramount. The Kremlin's military intervention.
 Since the early occupation of the Crimea, the Kremlin has been protesting its innocence . The Crimea has been occupied since the early 1990s .
 President Putin went on television to deny Moscow’s military involvement in the war . He claimed the Ukrainian Donbas is a typical shrinking old industrial region .
 The Russo-Ukrainian war caused tremendous damage to the region in the period 2014-2018 . The total amount of permanent asset loss amounting to over US$84. billion in 2013 prices .
Before the current war, the human cost of 15,000 lives lost and many millions permanently scarred by the earlier hostilities has been significant . Before the current conflict, the cost of the current wars has been the most significant .
 The economic standing of Donbas as a whole has more than halved, even considering the remaining economic activity in non-government-controlled territories . During the first four years of conflict, the officially recorded aggregate regional GDP plunged by 61.1% in constant local prices and by US$
 In terms of industrial output, the weight of the occupied territories of Donetsk province shrank to just 20.5% of the aggregate provincial production in 2017 .
 The economic standing of Donbas as a whole has more than halved, even considering the remaining economic activity in non-government-controlled territories . ORDLO militants control 29.8% of aggregate provincial production in Luhansk province .
 ORDLO as a whole, let alone its two separate Donetsk and Luhansk sections, has an insufficient economic and demographic basis for anything resembling a financially and materially sustainable future as an independent statelet .
 The occupied Donbas is heavily dependent on Russia and formally governed by Moscow’s Inter-Ministerial Commission for the Affected Districts . The annual cost to Russia of sustaining ORDLO and maintaining and resupplying the armed formations operating there is in the
 Moscow's prolonged involvement in other frozen conflicts across the post-Soviet space does not bode well for a peaceful settlement in the Ukrainian Donbas .
 The evidence presented here points to the paramount role of exogenous political agency and of endogenous military geography in explaining the outbreak of the armed conflict in eastern Ukraine in April 2014 .
 He has written numerous articles on post-Soviet transformations and regional and urban economic development . He is currently serving on the editorial board of Eurasian Geography an Economics .
 We must break free of fossil fuel Stockholm Syndrome 20 Jun 2022 20 minutes of daily exercise can keep teens' doctors away . Oxford China expert Prof. Prof. Professor Prof. Professor Prof. Prestigious Tang won the prize for Oxford China's prestigious Tang prize .