 Empirical Assessments of Threats, Coercion and Gray Zones,” led by Amy Pate, led byAmy Pate .
 START uses state-of-the-art theories, methods and data from the social and behavioral sciences to improve understanding of the origins, dynamics and social and psychological impacts of terrorism . START is based on state‐of the‐art theories and methods used by START .
Start at infostart@start.umd.edu. For more information, contact START atinfostart.edu or visit www.start.com.com .
 More specifically, it studies the use of various instruments of power across a number of conflict dyads, present in the conflict .
 The case study’s findings can better inform practitioners and analysts about the presence, content, and effectiveness of utilizing different instruments of power in the Gray Zone .
 The analysis uncovers numerous Gray Zone interactions across several dyads . It also demonstrated the limits of the Gray Zone both as a set of empirical actions and as a conceptual approach .
 Study shows that Gray Zone activities exist to varying degrees in all dyads . Most pronounced in the Ukrainian versus Russian governments dyad .
 Case study argues Special Operation Forces should pay substantial attention to preexisting perceptions, media framings and worldviews in devising general Gray Zone policies and actions .
 The analysis shows that the classification of the conflict in the Donbas as a Gray Zone conflict is possible only if the emphasis is put on the interactions between the Russian and Ukrainian governments as the primary driver and cause of the violence .
 If the attention is shifted towards domestic, rather than geopolitical causes of the violence, the conflict is more properly classified as a Black Zone conflict .
 Special Operations Forces' policies and actions can have substantial impact on the specific policies, actions, adopted by Special Forces . These differences in classification can have significant impact on specific policies.
 The analysis also shows that in practice, Gray Zone dynamics are extremely complicated and involve numerous actors and activities, often operating separately .
 The report demonstrates the inherent difficulties and limitations of Gray Zone actions, especially under conditions of large scale conflict . The report is based on the analysis of the Russian government’s actions .
 The report also shows that Gray Zone activities that utilize some instruments of power can and do operate simultaneously with both Black and White Zone activities . The report shows that some activities that leverage other instruments can also be used in other activities .
 The Zones are not exclusive across the entire spectrum of instruments . This suggests that the Zones aren't exclusive to all instruments .
 Special Operation Forces offer a wide spectrum of potential actions to choose from . They are instrument-specific, thus offering Special Operation forces a wide range of possible actions .
 Many of the Gray Zone activities, utilized by non-state actors on both sides of the conflict, are driven by primarily financial considerations and have a substantial criminal component . The analysis shows that many of the activities, including that of non- state actors, are used by
Non-state actors should be aware of potential implications of Gray Zone activities for law and order . Practitioners, devising the application ofGray Zone tactics by non- state actors, should be prepared for potential implications .
 The National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism has been tasked with providing support to the Special Operations Command Gray Zone project . The project is undertaken as a Strategic Multilayer Assessment initiative .
 Ukraine and Ukraine are mostly controlled by the Russian government . They enjoy a certain degree of independence in their interactions with each other .
 The Russian/pro-Russian versus the Ukrainian camps holds a number of important background conditions constant . This variation in actor type and behavior across and within the Russian and Ukrainian camps is constant .
 The case study’s findings can better inform practitioners and analysts about the presence, content, and effectiveness of leveraging different instruments of power in the Gray Zone .
 An answer to this question will largely determine whether the conflict should be viewed as a Gray Zone conflict with some additional White and Black Zone components, or as a Black Zone conflict .
 The first section provides a general overview of the conflict, its timeline and a description of the main non-state actors . The second section provides an overview of what is happening in the conflict .
 The second section briefly outlines the case study’s methodology and the data used in preparation of this paper . The third section outlines the study's methodology .
 The following section analyzes the use of 1 Department of Defense Strategic Multi-Layer Assessment, “Gray Zone Effort Update,’s September 2016 .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 2 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . A Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence provides various instruments of power employed by the actors involved in the conflict .
 Special focus is given to the Gray Zone dynamics and interactions, their presence and importance .
 The center of the protests was the city’s Independence Square (Maidan Nezalezhnosti, or simply the Maidan), which was also the site of the Orange Revolution almost a decade prior .
 The protestors objected to Yanukovych’s increasingly authoritarian and extremely corrupt rule . They sought to return the state to the path of increasing integration with Europe and pro-Western values .
 The protests, which became increasingly violent, reached their peak in February 2014 . Some protestors, some armed, clashed with the police and Yanukovych's security services .
 The clashes triggered a chain of defections among Yanukovych loyalists and security officials, and his rule quickly disintegrated .
 Yanukovych fled the capital and was impeached by the Parliament as a transitional government took over . By late February, Yanukovych had fled.
 Russian special forces occupied a number of strategic facilities in the Crimea Peninsula . Ethnic Russians were the majority and the home base of the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 The transfer of Crimea from Russia to Ukraine in 1954 was considered by the majority of Russian citizens and elites to have been a historic mistake .
 Putin set out to have this mistake fixed in Kyiv, Putin says . The mistake was made against the background of turmoil in the country .
 In March 2014, Crimea became a part of Russia, following a Crimean referendum . The legality of the annexation is not recognized by Ukraine, the United States and most other countries .
 Protesters Blockade Government Sites,” BBC News,’s December 2, 2013, sec.
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 3 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . The Donbas is an area collectively known as theDonbas .
 The Donbas was predominantly Russian-speaking, and other than Crimea, the most politically pro-Russian region of Ukraine . The region was predominantly Russia-speaking and most politically-pro-Russian .
 A land of coal mines and heavy industry, it was also the home base of now deposed Yanukovych and his key allies .
 March 2014 witnessed violent street clashes between pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian crowds . In April, a wave of occupation of government buildings was spreading out across the area .
Pro-Russian activists were led by local pro- Russian activists as well as Russian citizens . Many of them had ties to Russia's security services .
 The Crimea scenario was not repeated in the Donbas . The Ukrainian government decided to respond to the events in East Ukraine with military force .
 In April 2014, the Ukrainian government launched the so-called Anti-Terrorist Operation, an armed attempt to crush the insurgency and return the area to Ukrainian state control .
 The Ukrainian army was unprepared for the task and suffered early setbacks . After more than two decades of corruption, decay, and neglect, the army was absolutely unprepared . The army was completely unprepared.
 During this period, a crucial role was assumed by Ukrainian volunteer formations (also known as volunteer battalions), which initially consisted of the most active Maidan protestors and was funded by Ukrainian civil society .
 Ukrainian army launched a new offensive to retake insurgent-controlled areas in summer 2014 . In summer 2014 the Ukrainian army reorganized and reorganized .
 The insurgents relied on military supplies from Russia as well as a constant stream of Russian volunteers . Many of them Russian army servicemen officially ‘on leave’ from their units, offered dogged resistance but were constantly losing territory .
 When the insurgents’ defeat seemed imminent, Russia directly intervened military in the fighting and halted the Ukrainian offensive .
 In September 2014, a ceasefire was announced following negotiations in Minsk, the capital of Belarus .
 The ceasefire collapsed in late October, and a new ceasefire agreement was reached in Minsk in February 2015 . The ceasefire was reached after a ceasefire agreement collapsed in October .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 4 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . A Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence formations withdrew from the strategic Debaltseve salient after being routed by the insurgents .
 No large-scale fighting has taken place in Donbas since the Minsk II ceasefire, since the ceasefire .
 According to the UN estimates, almost 10,000 lost their lives as a result of the war .
In practice, the estimated number of combat ready troops was about 6,000 . In practice, it was about 5,000, according to military officials .
 Russia-Backed Rebels Seize Debaltseve, Putin Visits an EU Ally,’ Transitions Online, no. 2 .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 5 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . A Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence Ukrainian population, civil society groups, and wealthy oligarchs .
A number of veterans of the Soviet war in Afghanistan in the 1980s also volunteered despite their age . A number of Soviet veterans also volunteered.
 The volunteer battalions were the backbone of the Ukrainian fighting forces during the early stages of the insurgency . The government invested considerable efforts into integrating the volunteer formations into the armed forces’ formal structures and chain of command .
 The Ministry of Defense also moved to establish territorially-based battalions . Almost a third of the battalions are volunteer formations .
 The MoD and the MoI forces currently include between 40 and 50 volunteer battalions . According to the assessment of scholar Rosaria Puglisi.
 The members of the battalions come from a diverse set of demographic, regional, ethnic, linguistic and religious backgrounds . The battalions are based in London and London .
 The vast majority are Ukrainian citizens, although citizens of other states occasionally volunteer to serve in these units . The vast most are Ukrainian Citizens .
 volunteer formations are now mainly employed in combat support and law and order roles in the Donbas . They occasionally take part in active combat .
 At the beginning of the uprising, the insurgency was a motley crew of local political activists . Some of them marginal figures with strong Russian nationalist, and at times fascist, leanings . Russian citizens with ties to the country’s security services .
 The financing of the early insurgency was sporadic and rudimentary, with a substantial portion of the funding coming from Yanukovych's son, Oleksandr .
 The uprising started as a wave of mass protests against the new government in Kyiv . The uprising began as the local law enforcement, either thoroughly coopted into Yanukovych’s patronage or bribed .
 In April 2014, the incipient insurgency moved from proclamations, occupation of buildings and protests to the establishment and consolidation of territorial control .
 Prior to Donbas, Girkin also fought as a volunteer in the early 1990s’ conflicts in Transnistria and Bosnia .
 Other volunteers, both fighters and political consultants with ties to the Russian government and nationalist oligarchs, followed suit .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 6 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism was never very large, 25 their arrival and determination to rebel against the Ukrainian government transformed the initial protests and anarchy into an armed uprising .
 An attempt to unite the two entities was made in May 2014, but abandoned after just one year . A Union of People’s Republic was made.
 The insurgent entities are politically, militarily and economically unsustainable on their own . They are dependent on Russian government’s military, financial and diplomatic support .
 The Russian government also has a high degree of control over the self-proclaimed Republics . The self- proclaimed Republics are the country's political and military leadership .
 The Russian government pays the pensions and public sector salaries in the insurgent-controlled areas . The government supplies the insurgency with weapons and materiel .
 Numerous Russian soldiers and officers, officially on leave from their units, fight in the insurgents' ranks .
 This case study is based on the analysis of open sources, in English, Russian and Ukrainian . It's based on analysis of academic research, policy memos and news articles .
 In preparing this case study I have also utilized my academic experience as a scholar of both political violence and of contemporary Ukraine . In preparing the case study he has also utilized his academic experience.
 Most of the academic research on the conflict are still works in progress, says the author . The research has yet to be subject to peer review and academic validation .
 Any attempt to analyze the dynamics of relations between various actors inevitably has to rely on partial data, at times of unverified quality .
To overcome this potential problem, I tried to triangulate every source and claim used for this report . To overcome this possible problem, he tried to Triangulate all the sources and claims used .
 The Russian government actively tries to conceal the very fact of its deep involvement in the conflict . The LNR and the DNR are extremely opaque and hostile to independent media, says the Russian government .
 The combination of factors, presented above, defines the choice of the research method . The choice of a research method is based on the research methods used by researchers .
 For an in-depth study of a single case, subject to competing historical and official narratives and constrained by limited data, qualitative analysis is the preferable tool of analysis . For a in- depth study of one case, Subject to competing Historical and Official narratives, it is a better tool of
 Such an approach allows for “thick description’s’ and process tracing whenever possible . Such a approach allows ‘thick descriptions’ to be used in tracing . The approach is an approach that allows for the process to take place whenever possible
 The Conflict in the Donbas is between Gray and Black 7 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . The conflict in the donbas is a conflict between the Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence .
 This section presents an overview of various Gray Zone activities and actions used in the conflict in the Donbas . This section includes a look at the conflict's activities and activities .
 The Gray Zone analyzes the instruments of power used in every dyadic configuration by various actors . It shows whether these qualify as belonging to the Gray Zone .
 This overview and analysis will allow practitioners and Special Operations Forces to better understand what types of Gray Zone activities are more likely to be used by which actors and to make informed predictions about which activities will be successful .
 Ukrainian government versus Russian government versus insurgents, Ukrainian government vs. Russian government . Ukrainian government is against insurgents, and Russian government against insurgents .
 The most important of these dyads are the Ukrainian government versus Russian government . Other dyads also have a substantial impact on the intensity and dynamics of the conflict .
 For each instrument of power, I center on the Gray Zone activities, but also discuss the White and Black Zone activities . If present, if present, I will discuss the activities, if there are any activities .
 Russian government says it plays no active role in the conflict in Eastern Ukraine . Ukrainian Government versus Russian Government is not an active role .
 The Russian government’s actions, including those in the Gray Zone, shape the dynamics and the course of the conflict . The Ukrainian government is unable to defeat the insurgency by using purely military means .
 This subsection analyzes the interactions between the Russian and Ukrainian governments across the instruments of power . It analyzes interactions between Russia and Ukraine across the instrument of power.
 The origins of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine are traceable to the Russian government’s goal of reorienting Ukraine's political ties from the EU and the U.S. towards Russia .
 The chain of events that immediately led to the fighting in Eastern Ukraine started with then-President Yanukovych’s decision to suspend the preparations for a trade deal with the EU in November 2013 .
 The subsequent mass protests in Kyiv led to the fall of the Yanukovych government, regime change in Ukraine, Russian annexation of Crimea, and rebellion.
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 8 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . A Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence solutions solutions .
 Russia mainly plays the role of the defender and the promoter of the DNR and LNR . The key goal of Russia’s action is to ensure its own geopolitical goals, rather than promote and protect the insurgents .
 Some activities can be classified as belonging to the Gray Zone . Most of these activities take place in the White Zone .
 Russian diplomacy was to ensure the infeasibility of any purely military solution . The goal was to force Ukrainian government to make diplomatic concessions that it would not have made otherwise .
 Russian government's diplomatic efforts to ensure a change to the very structure of the Ukrainian state in order to give the Russian government extensive influence . Russian government could veto powers over Ukraine's foreign and domestic policy .
Under the White Zone there is a layer of often-unnoticed Gray Zone activities, used by the Russian government .
 The Russian government has a very high degree of control over the insurgents’ policies and diplomatic positions . President Vladimir Putin’s administration is in control of the DNR and LNR political leadership .
 DNR and the LNR categorically refused to sign the Minsk II agreement . Vladislav Surkov, Putin's advisor in charge of Russia’s policies towards the Donbas, quickly ensured the insurgents’ compliance .
 In May 2014, the DNR conducted a referendum on “state independence,’s statehood . The Russian government viewed it as “expressions of popular will,” but stopped short of formal recognition of the statehood.
 The Russian government has de-facto recognized the insurgents’ independence . 34 potential formal recognition is much more powerful as a tool for exerting pressure on the Ukrainian government .
 Ukrainian and Russian governments extensively use information and propaganda against each other . Both the Ukrainian and the Russian governments use information. Both the Ukraine and Russia extensively use the information to propaganda .
 Both governments’ efforts are not limited to disseminating favorable information . Both governments are also invested in preventing and restricting information available to both sides’ domestic audiences .
 A key feature of the Russian government’s information campaign against the government of Ukraine is the constant attempt to deny legitimacy to the forces that came to power in Ukraine after the removal of Yanukovych .
 The mass protests that led to the change of the regime are portrayed as having been organized and led by fascists, neo-Nazis, anti-Semites and the U.S. government .
 The regime change itself is typically referred to as a coup, therefore lacking legal and political legitimacy . The regime's regime change is typically called a coup by the military .
 Russia’s state controlled media is mobilized to rally the population against Ukraine and in support of the insurgents . Russia's state media is mobilizing to rally against Ukraine .
 The Russian state is pursuing more clandestine efforts to control and direct this information campaign, both in Russia proper and in insurgent-controlled areas . These activities are taking place in the public domain, but also in insurgent areas .
 Putin's aide Vladislav Surkov hacked and leaked emails of Putin’s aide Vladimir Surkov . Surkov explicitly instruct the information ministries of the DNR and the LNR to label the Ukrainian government as fascists and puppet dictatorship of the United States .
A number of Russian singers and artist were also banned from the country . A number of singers and artists were also barred from Russia .
 Ukrainian government focus on the conflict as solely an outcome of Ukraine's fight against Russia’s foreign invasion, despite mounting evidence .
 Ukrainian TV has aired interrogations and confessions of Russian servicemen captured by the Ukrainian forces .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 10 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . The Russian government is forced to contest the interpretation of empirical facts, but also the facts themselves, thus damaging its credibility .
 Russian army officers were captured by the Ukrainian government in the Donbas . The Russian government adamantly refused to recognize them, despite their own claims .
 The Russian government declared information on the Russian army's peacetime casualties a state secret and criminalized any publication of such data .
 Information is an important instrument of power in the Russian-Ukrainian government dyad . It is unclear whether it has a direct impact on the conflict .
 Political scientists Arturas Rozenas and Leonid Peisakhin argue that exposure to Russian TV propaganda did not change Ukrainian citizens’ political views .
Pro-Russian Ukrainians are now more pro-Russian, while pro-Western Ukrainian citizens are even more anti-Russian . It made the already pro- Russian Ukrainians even more Pro-Russian.
 Putin’s switch to somewhat less inflammatory rhetoric towards Ukraine did not lead to any reduction in the levels of violence on the ground .
 Most direct military interactions between the Ukrainian and the Russian government take place in the Gray Zone . Military most direct military interaction between Ukrainian and Russian government takes place in Gray Zone.
 These interactions, while violent and often deadly, do not escalate to the Black Zone level of open warfare . These interactions are often violent, but don't escalate to a deadly level .
 The exceptions are the shelling of Ukrainian troops by Russian artillery units stationed on the Russian side of the border . The Russian military has been involved in the fighting in the summer 2014 .
 The Russian army denied and tried to conceal its involvement in the engagements . But even this fighting had elements of Gray Zone encounters .
 The conflict in Eastern Ukraine is often presented as the key example of ‘hybrid war’ that includes a heavy mix of Gray and Black Zone interaction . The conflict is often referred to as the “Gerasimov Doctrine,’s Chief of Staff Valerii Ger
 The empirical evidence presents a picture in which Gray Zone interactions are much less important and consequential than the conventional Black Zone warfare .
 The conflict intensified following the Ukrainian government’s armed response . It became a largely conventional war, including the limited use of Russian air power .
 At the peak of the Russian army's direct involvement in the conflict, about 10,000 Russian troops were taking part in the fighting . A total of 42,000 were rotating through the Russian-Ukrainian border area .
 Russian military involvement does assume several Gray Zone features . The exception of summer 2014 and January 2015 episodes of heavy fighting is the exception .
 The Russian government prefers to abstain from direct involvement in the fighting . Unless large numbers of Russian troops are absolutely necessary to save the DNR and the LNR from elimination or to destroy the crucial Ukrainian salient in Debaltseve, the Russian government wants to stay out
 The Russian government denies any active involvement in the conflict . Both fighters and equipment have to be transferred secretly .
 The military equipment is stripped of any identifying signs, 45 while fighters are either convinced or pressured by their commanders to go fight in the Donbas .
 Russian army active duty officer who went to fight in Ukraine says he got formal transfer to Novocherkask .
Change your uniform, remove any ‘incriminating’ insignia and take away your documents . They change your uniform and remove your insignia .
 This serves as a potential constraint to larger scale covert actions on Russia’s part . This is the first time Russia has been involved in such covert actions in Russia .
 The same officer contended that for Russian servicemen, fighting in Syria is preferable over going to Ukraine . The former does not require relinquishing one’s identity and potentially being buried in an unmarked grave .
 The economic aspects of the Ukrainian and Russian governments’ interactions center on three main areas . All of which are important for the analysis of Gray Zone activities .
 The first one is the use of energy by both the Russian and Ukrainian governments and the Russian state-controlled Gazprom company in the aftermath of the regime change .
 A spike in Russian gas prices is yet another economic tool to pressure and punish the Ukrainian government . The spike in gas prices has been blamed for a spike in prices .
 Ukrainian government decides to substantially raise price of Russian gas transits through its territory . Ukrainian government also raises price of gas Transits through the territory .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 12 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . Another Gray Zone area is the “trade war’s’ between Russia and Ukraine .
 Both countries ban numerous products produced by the other side from sale on domestic markets . Both countries also ban many products produced in the country from sale.
 As of November 2015, Russia is still Ukraine’s main trade partner . However, the impact of such actions remains unclear, and the impact remains unclear .
 The Russian government uses humanitarian assistance to project its influence and to demonstrate the Ukrainian government's malevolence and its own benign role .
 Some observers argued that the convoys were used to secretly transfer military equipment to the insurgents . While this activities is primarily economic in nature, it should be noted that the provision of humanitarian aid to the conflict zone also clearly had an informational/propaganda component .
 Both actors enjoy substantial financial resources, and the Russian government uses these resources against the government of Ukraine in the Donbas conflict . Russia does so indirectly in ways that are consistent with Gray Zone activities .
 The Russian government uses its financial resources to attract Russian army servicemen to serve in the insurgents’ ranks despite substantial risks .
 A Russian soldier admitted that he was offered about $115 a day to fight in Ukraine . The soldier was offered a substantial amount for a Russian low rank serviceman .
 A former DNR high-ranking official says Russia's financial help could not be sustained by insurgents .
 The Russian government leverages its financial capabilities to prolong the conflict in ways other than direct participation in the fighting . By financing the breakaway regions, the Russian government Leverages itsfinancial capabilities .
 Most experts agree that prior to the conflict, the Russian intelligence services had successfully penetrated the Ukraine Security Service to the point of making its activities an open book for Russian intelligence .
This type of intelligence gathering is a normal White Zone activity, which escalated with the beginning of the fighting . This type of gathering is usually a normal activity, but it escalated as fighting escalated .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 13 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . A Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence military activities .
 As a result, a number of Russian military intelligence officers were killed or captured in Ukraine .
 Both sides use legal tools to punish participants in the conflict from the other side . Legal both sides are using legal tools for punishment .
 Nadiya Savchenko, a Ukrainian officer, was captured by the insurgents . He was transferred to Russia and put on trial .
 She was accused of complicity in the killing of two Russian journalists in the Donbas . She was sentenced to 22 years for her role in the murder of two journalists .
 The Ukrainian side charged two Russian army servicemen, captured in Eastern Ukraine, with terrorism . The Russian army was captured in eastern Ukraine .
 A captured Ukrainian officer was transferred to Russia more appropriately belong to Gray Zone activities . The trials themselves occurred in the public domain .
Each instrument of power either has a substantial Gray Zone component or is used to support Gray Zone activities . Some interactions take place in the White Zone and large-scale military operations belong to the Black Zone .
 Ukrainian Government versus Insurgents. This section analyzes the interactions between the Ukrainian government and the insurgents in Eastern Ukraine .
 The DNR and the LNR are the two entities in aggregate . For the sake of the analysis, I will treat them in aggregate. There are some differences between the D NR and LNR, but there are also some differences .
 In this section I will also focus specifically on the Ukraine governmentinsurgents dynamics . I will try to separate these dynamics from the relations between the Russian and Ukrainian governments .
 Moscow has a high degree of control over insurgents and the insurgents’ dependence on Russia for finances, materiel and fighters . A number of unique dynamics can be observed in this dyad nonetheless .
 There are very limited diplomatic interactions between the Ukrainian government and the insurgents. Diplomatic interactions are limited.
Key roles in diplomatic interactions are performed by the Russian and Ukrainian governments, as well as the leaders of key Western states, such as France, Germany and the United States .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 14 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . Both sides actively use information and propaganda within the Gray Zone .
 The insurgents’ information services invest considerable efforts in presenting the Ukrainian government as illegitimate, and controlled by the U.S. Like the Russian government, the insurgents' information services invests considerable efforts to present the Ukrainian Government as illegitimate .
 insurgents also rely on time-honored messages and symbols . In so doing, they also use symbols and messages .
 Ukrainian nationalists have been traditionally viewed by many people in the Donbas region as fascists . The black, blue and red banner of the anti-Ukrainian government protests during the early days of the conflict can be traced back to the beginning of the donbas’ experiment with statehood
 The official name of the Ukrainian government’s fight against the insurgents is the Anti-Terrorist Operation .
 Both sides use the other’s transgressions, cruelties and attacks against civilians, deliberate or otherwise, to reinforce their message . Both sides are using the other's transgressions to reinforce the other side's message .
 A standard defense against accusations and unwelcome information is that these are just “provocations from the other side’s side. The defense is that they are just "provocations" from the Other side .
 Some of these blogs provide high quality information about events in insurgent-held territories and the insurgents’ attacks against Ukrainian troops .
 The insurgents depend on the Russian army’s support in materiel and manpower to sustain their fight against the Ukrainian government . The locals bear the brunt of the fighting in Eastern Ukraine .
Donbas-based pro-Russian activists, former officers of Yanukovych’s security services and Russian citizens, led mass protests and rallies against the Ukrainian government . Many with connections to the Russian intelligence, many with connections, took over government buildings .
 Ukraine's authority in Donbas region had virtually collapsed and the Ukrainian army was in disastrous shape . The Ukrainian government's ability to respond to these actions was also limited as the state’s authority in the region had almost collapsed .
 The Ukrainian government’s weakness was one of the key reasons for the escalation of events from the White to the Gray Zones . The Ukraine government's weakness was the key reason for the increase of events.
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 15 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . The interactions escalated from the Gray Zone activities to conventional warfare .
 The Russian army has to take special measures to conceal its involvement in the fighting . The Ukrainian army and insurgents can fight openly without the need to engage in such deceptions and denials .
 The conflict between the Ukrainian government and the insurgents is important for the analysis of Gray Zone dynamics . Despite its mostly conventional nature, the conflict is mostly conventional .
 The Ukrainian government accused the Russian security services of hacking . The exact identity of the hackers remains unknown .
 Both sides enjoy the support of active and dedicated groups of hackers . Pro-insurgent hackers include groups such as CyberBerkut, Cyber Riot Novorossiya, and Green Dragon .
 Some ex-officers of the Ukrainian security services lost their jobs in the wake of the regime change . On the pro-insurgent side, some hacker groups are believed to include former security services officers .
 Ukrainian government does not seem to be interested in cooperating with pro-Ukrainian hacker groups . At the same time, the Ukrainian government lacks independent capacity to engage in large-scale cyber operations .
 Economic factors did play a role in the outbreak and the development of the conflict, but these are predominantly preexisting conditions . Economic Economic factors played a role.
Economic factors are not deliberately used as instruments of power within this conflict dyad . Economic conditions help to explain the conflict, but economic conditions help explain the situation .
 Most susceptible localities were those where jobs had already started disappearing due to turmoil in Ukraine’s capital and the subsequent insurgency in the Donbas .
 This lead young and middle age males to join the insurgents’ ranks simply to make a living .
 In insurgentcontrolled areas, the new authorities experience uneasy relations with the coal miners . The insurgents “raid mines for explosives, kidnap their managers, and even try to force miners to fight for their cause’s cause,” 58 a clear escalation of the already tense labor relations
 At the beginning of the insurgency, none of the local pro-Russian groups had the financial resources to sustain a large-scale movement . The White to the Gray Zones does not require an extensive domestic financial base, according to the government .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 16 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . After the insurgency took off, insurgent authorities started using wide array of available activities to fund their effort .
 Some activities, such as taxation, require the creation of a quasi-state government apparatus and legal rules . Others, like extortion, trafficking, smuggling and plundering of humanitarian aid are purely illegal .
 Those activities supplant the role of the state, thereby delegitimizing it, are clearly Gray .
 The availability of financial opportunities also led to serious internal conflicts among the insurgents . The Insurgent versus Insurgents dyad is a key issue .
 The Ukrainian government uses various legal tools at its disposal against the insurgents .
 Ukrainian government designates the LNR and the DNR as terrorist organizations . Ex-rebels were put on trial in Ukraine and charged with joining a terrorist group .
 The Ukrainian government also uses the legal tools available to it as a state to punish former insurgents in areas beyond its control . Ukraine also seeks extradition of such individuals.
Ukrainian legal authorities also try to punish those who transfer property from insurgent areas . Ukrainian legal authorities are also trying to punish people who transferred property from insurgents .
 Luhanskteplovoz, one of the largest locomotive manufacturers in Eastern Europe, was ordered to stop production . Most of the enterprise’s operation was moved to Russia .
This is the case as they seek to supplant the government’s authority to administer the law . This is the latest in a series of attempts to replace the government's authority .
 Rebel activities using the legal instrument are also Gray, while the legal activities of the Ukrainian government are White .
 Other instruments of power used by the actors in this dyad belong mainly to the Black Zone .
 The two actors in this dyad have relations so close that at times distinguishing them is almost impossible .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 17 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . A Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence is involved in running the affairs of insurgent entities .
Key roles in Russian military and political leadership were held by Russian citizens . From the very establishment of the DNR and the LNR, key roles in their political and military leadership were also held by Russians .
 Russian government and insurgents never escalate to open conflict . At the same time, tensions occasionally do appear between the government and the insurgents .
 In the diplomatic arena, Russia is the key defender of the insurgents’ interests . At times the interests of the two actors diverge .
 The insurgents’ leaders initially refused to sign the Minsk II agreement, during negotiations in which Russia played a key role . Russia played key role in the negotiations .
 Only direct pressure from Surkov forced the insurgents to sign the document . The document was signed by Surkov .
 Some insurgents’ military leaders are viewed by the Russian government as too reckless and undisciplined . Some insurgent commanders, especially those from Russian nationalist groups, are too cautious and hesitant .
 The most striking case of such tensions was the removal of Girkin as the DNR’s Minister of Defense .
 Girkin was pushed aside after the Kremlin’s explicit threat that if he were to stay, the provision of weapons to the insurgents would be discontinued .
 Girkin has returned to Russia and became a fierce critic of Putin . Since then, he has been an outspoken critic of the Russian leader .
 The potential of escalation does exist, especially if the insurgents’ leadership becomes more secure and less dependent on Russia, says the Russian government .
 relations between Russia and insurgents do not exceed normal levels of White Zone competition . The fact that Russia maintains such close relations with the insurgents is aside, says Russia .
 Ukrainian Government versus Ukrainian Volunteers has been close cooperation between the Ukrainian government and the Ukrainian volunteer formations/battalions since the early stages of the conflict .
Almost all the battalions are now fully subordinated to the Ukrainian government under the auspices of the Ministries of Defense and 62 Iashin and Shorina, “Putin.’s”
 The Conflict in the Donbas is between Gray and Black 18 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . The two actors have been involved in the conflict for more than a decade .
 From the beginning of the war, there was an uneasy cooperation between the Ukrainian military and the volunteer battalions .
 The volunteer battalions were praised for almost single-handedly holding the line during the initial phases of violence . The Ukrainian army was too weak and disorganized to effectively fight the insurgents .
 The military leadership often sees the volunteer formations as disorganized, undisciplined and unreliable .
 Both sides traded accusations from the early stages of the war, but they almost never escalated above the White Zone of political and non-violent arguments . The two actors and information engagement directed towards other relevant parties .
After Debaltseve debacle the leadership of 17 volunteer battalions declared the creation of their own, 68 this did not lead to a split within the military .
 The armed clashes that did occur were often caused by economic and financial factors .
 Military The volunteer battalions were privately funded when established . Military The Volunteer battalions are privately funded .
 Some relied on donations from the civil society, while others were funded by various oligarchs . Some feared becoming the oligarch’s private mini-armies .
 Ihor Kolomoyskyi employed a group of armed men in combat fatigues . The billionaire politician reportedly funded a number of volunteer units .
 Militarized clashes have occurred between the two belligerents over economic and financial resources . The two sides have been involved in a dispute over financial and economic resources .
Members of the Right Sector, a nationalist ultra-right group fighting in the Donbas, battled with the local police and security guards of a local sports complex, presumably over contraband and trafficking of cigarettes .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 19 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . A Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Center of Excellence standoff between the Right Sector and the Ukrainian security services ensued .
 Four Right Sector members were charged with terrorism and put on trial . Subsequently, four Right Sector member were charged.
 At the same time, a small potential for escalation does exist, as shown by the example of the Right Sector, the only volunteer formation that was not fully and legally integrated into the government forces .
 Armed conflict involving the government and Right Sector rises to the level of Gray Zone activity . Armed conflict is sometimes over resources.
 It can be prevented only by complete subordination of the volunteer battalions, not only de jure, but also de facto, to the government’s command and control .
 The conflict is still ongoing with armed clashes taking place regularly despite the ceasefire agreement . The conflict continues to take place despite a ceasefire agreement.
 Gray Zone interactions are present in various dyads, most notably between the Ukrainian and Russian governments . This clearly pushes the conflict towards the Black Zone .
 Gray Zone elements are also present in other dyads, even if less extensively . The Gray Zone element is present in many dyads .
 At the end of the day, the overall classification of the conflict largely depends on whether we view the conflict as predominantly a Russian invasion that utilizes local forces .
 The exact nature of the conflict is still hotly debated among experts . But if one views the conflict as mainly one between the Russian and Ukrainian governments, then it is possible to classify it as belonging to the Gray Zone .
 The most important dyad is the Ukrainian government versus the Insurgents, then it can be viewed as Gray only during its initial phase, prior to Ukraine’s large scale offensive . If the conflict is more correctly classified as a civil war with elements of external involvement
After that, it is a chiefly a Black Zone conflict with some elements of the Gray Zone . After that, the Black Zone is a mainly a Black zone conflict with the Gray zone .
 The goal of this case study was to analyze the presence of Gray Zone dynamics and the utilization of various instruments of power in the armed conflict in the Donbas since its eruption in 2014 . Conclusions were the goal of the study .
 The Conflict in the Donbas between Gray and Black 20 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism uncovered numerous Gray Zone interactions across several dyads . The Gray Zone also demonstrated the limits of the Gray Zone both as a set of empirical actions and as the
 Gray Zone activities, exist to varying degrees in all dyads, but they are most pronounced in the Ukrainian government versus Russian government dyad .
 Russian actions in Ukraine are often seen as the main example of a new, hybrid type of conflict . This in itself is not surprising, as the Russian actions are seen as an example of the emergence of the Gray Zone .
 The Russian government is pursuing Gray Zone actions, pursued by the Russian government . But a deeper analysis shows the inherent constraints of Gray Zone action .
 Russian propaganda and attempts to delegitimize the Ukrainian government have failed to change Ukrainian citizens’ views and perception, says the author . The pro-Western Ukrainians are even more anti-Russian, he says .
 The Russian government's adamant denial of active involvement in the conflict contradicts an overwhelming body of evidence that clearly points to Russia’s crucial role . The government is adamant that it is not involved in any conflict .
 Russia's military personnel are disowning the country’s military personnel to the point of burying people in unmarked graves and denying military compensations and pensions to dead soldiers’ families . Such a denial harms both Russia”s international credibility and its soldiers” willingness to carry
 The Russian leadership clearly sees benefits in remaining in the Gray Zone . But that is not necessarily the case for those bearing the brunt of Gray Zone interactions .
 The overall classification of the conflict as Gray also heavily relies on viewing it predominantly through the lens of interactions between the Russian and Ukrainian governments . The Ukrainian government-insurgents dynamics are considered to be the most important part of the Ukraine conflict .
 If the conflict is viewed predominantly as an internal civil war in which local, intra-state causes and dynamics are paramount, the classification shifts from Gray to Black .
 During its initial stages, the conflict was indeed Gray. What is undisputable, though, is that during its first stages, it was Gray .
 Whether it remained as such or moved to the Black Zone depends mainly on one’s perspective and predisposition as arguments can be made for the primacy of either dyad .
 The conflict in Donbas shows that Grayness is often chiefly in the eye of the beholder .
 The Conflict in the Donbas is between Gray and Black 21 National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism . The conflict in the donbas was between the two groups .