 Many analysts announced the first foreign policy challenge faced Donald trump . The tests of North Korean ballistic missiles were probably expected .
 Pyongyang's threat to the White House is greatly overestimate, says U.S. State Department . Pyongyang has threatened to attack the White house at the same time and at same time, it says .
 North Korean dictator Kim Jong-UN may declare war on South Korea or Japan . There is no realistic scenario in which North Korean leader Kim Jong Jong-un could declare war .
Until he crossed that line, it will affect his behavior, not Washington. Meanwhile, until he crossed the line, his behavior will not change .
 USA Kim is the most narcissistic leader on the planet . The only challenge is that he is quite able to compete with trump for the title .
 First time for a presidential trump foreign policy crisis unfolding since the end of January on 7,000 kilometers West of Pyongyang . Meanwhile, in reality, it's the first time for the crisis to unfold since January .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has renewed his efforts to destabilize the situation in Ukraine and annexation of Ukrainian territory . Putin and his armed forces seriously has renewed its efforts.
 Putin's campaign for the U.S. presidential election has slowed down . But a few hours after a telephone conversation between Putin and trump it again gained momentum .
 Pro-Russian forces and regular troops of the Moscow fight with the Kiev government again shed blood . In the Donbass, the Ukrainian region controlled by Pro- Russian forces andregular troops of Moscow fight.
 13 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed by Russian troops and separatists in Avdeevka . No light has been seen at the peak of the winter cold for a week . The attacks have left the town of AvdEEvka with no light at the height of the cold .
 The purpose of the decision was to avoid "unintended consequences" in the business cooperation with Russia, a senior state Department official says .
 Putin's attempt to appease Putin has been well chosen, according to the Kremlin .
 The Ukrainians had a good enough reason to see what is happening in Ukraine . The new occupant of the White house will not mind if his Kremlin counterpart will capture another part of Ukrainian territory .
 At the same time in the same day, trump spoke with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko and promised him his participation in peace talks between Kiev and Moscow .
It's hard to imagine that trump will speak at such negotiations bona fide intermediary . Of course, it is hard to believe that trump would speak at this bona fide negotiator .
 Ukrainians skeptical is understandable. If to take into account the enthusiastic attitude of President Putin, Ukrainians skepticism is understandable .
 Many in the U.S. intelligence community believe that admiration for Russian leader does trump unreliable .
 The security services are not included in the materials provided to the President, part of the secret information related to Russia . He didn't tell it to Putin during the telephone conversation, according to rumors .
 The Russian government is trying to keep Russia in check . But attempts to keep trump in the dark will not help to keep the country in check.
 Ukrainians it is necessary that the U.S. President understood the real situation and the sooner, the better .
 The prospect of a full-fledged war in Eastern Ukraine, where in 2014 killed more than 10,000 people, looks scary real . In contrast to the formulation in the spirit of Kabuki, we now observe the demilitarized zone separating from each other the two Koreas .
 There are several causes of the political, military and economic nature of the country . There are many causes of political and military nature .
 The U.S. is in debt to Ukraine, according to a report by CNN.com . The report says the United States is in "debt" to Ukraine .
 Washington has to convince Kiev to give up its nuclear Arsenal in exchange for guarantees of protection from Russia . The collapse of the Soviet Union has been blamed for the collapse.
 President Obama betrayed Ukraine in 2014, allowing Russia to seize the Crimea . Obama has been accused of betraying Ukraine in the past .
 Washington is not willing to do the same thing that was done with the Crimea. Now, trump can restore the good name of America, and again to convince the former Soviet republics .
 Obama is unlikely to be able to fix Obama caused the harm and to return the Crimea to Ukraine .
 Russia's territorial expansion must stop now, says Putin . Obama can give Putin to understand that Russia’s territorial expansionmust stop now . Obama could impose even more severe sanctions on Russia .
 Pro-Russian militants laid down their arms and made peace with Kiev . It may require troops to Moscow returned the territory to Russia .
 The U.S. and NATO must supply Ukraine necessary for self-defense weapons, the U.N. says . If these demands are not heard, the United States and NATO should supply Ukraine.
 Trump granted Amnesty to Donbas separatists, and more equitably shared power with them . Trump should not only talk with Putin, but also to achieve from Poroshenko .