 The events of the past year in Ukraine have been unprecedented, and therefore not easily comprehensible as a single yet complex phenomenon . The events in Ukraine are unprecedented, according to the author .
Both participants and outside observers are trying to identify these events with some familiar scenarios . "recognizing the traits of yet another "color revolution" against a post-Soviet autocracy, or a national liberation movement or a bourgeois revolution"
We simply lack a ready analytical language and explanatory models to describe the birth of the new Ukraine as a unique and – yes – unprecedented phenomenon. We simply lack an analytical language.
 As a way of expanding the repertoire of available explanatory paradigms, I suggest a serious consideration of the concept of postcolonial revolution . I suggest that the concept should be considered .
1 “Postcolonial revolution’ is used quite indiscriminatingly in literary studies and social science literature as a synonym for the anticolonial revolutions of the second part of the twentieth century . This notion can be seen as too pretentious and vague,1
 Apollo Obonyo 22 Ab Imperio, 3/2014 of the “Ukrainian events’s own subjectivity, is a persistent manifestation of one's ownsubjectivity in pursuit of forging or upgrading Ukrainian collective subjectivity .
 The Ukrainian revolution is a postcolonial revolution because it is all about the people acquiring their own voice . In the process of this self-assertive act they forge a new Ukrainian nation as a community of negotiated solidary action .
 We will see then that not every type of revolution can equally meaningfully describe the realities of Ukraine and the ways they are perceived by participants and analysts .
First, it should be explained why ‘revolution’ – and not, say, civil war . First, it must be explainedWhy “Revolution’s” and not ‘civil war’
 People are free to use words indiscriminately, but to better grasp the meaning of the phenomenon, this word choice must be a conscious one .
 Ukraine has seen an escalation of intercommunal violence over the past year . citizens of the same country killing each other, often on political grounds .
 A typical civil war, twentieth-century style, implies the principled clash of opposing collective subjectivities, "two truths" that cannot find a compromise . The U.S. is determined to seize supreme authority in the nation .
 The “Maidanites’ are all about distinctive subjectivity, political ideals, and social program . The ‘maidanite’ is all about subjectivity and political ideals .
 Donetsk and Luhansk "republics" explicitly announced their ultimate goal to secede and join the Russian Federation . There is no such a program and no interest in Ukraine, as the leaders say .
 The U.S. Civil War that was Amoko was the first civil war in the 19th century . The United States Civil War was also the first American Civil War .
 The appeal of the classical formula is understandable, but in the modern world, ‘bourgeois-democratic revolution’ can be used only as a metaphor rather than an analytical category . The appeal is understandable.
 Maidan took place in a society with a capitalist market economy and an institutionalized political democracy . Maidan has a capitalist economy and a democratic political democracy.
 It overthrew no monarch but a legitimately elected president . It did not question the very values and principles of capitalist economy and parliamentarism .
 The only thing that Maidan shared with historical “bourgeois’ revolutions was a common reliance on the European tradition of political liberalism .
 John Locke claimed that a revolution was an obligation and a civic duty if a government abused the rights and interests of citizens .
 Maidan as a declaration of civic subjectivity toward and disobedience of a government that disregarded people’s rights and interests was very Lockean in spirit .
Social scientists from several Ukrainian cities met in Kharkiv to discuss the new post-Maidan social realities . Only few of them resorted to the language of colonial dependence – and only to explain the motivation of separatists, not revolutionaries .
 The main goal of the meeting was to elaborate an active research and civic solidary position of social scientists . The theme of expressing one’s personal subjectivity was central to most speakers .
 The very refusal to play the subaltern card as an ultimate justification for the Ukrainian revolution can be explained by their fundamental incompatibility . The Ukrainian revolution is the reason for their refusal to use the sub alternative card .
 Anticolonial revolution is a powerful act of transcending one's subalternity, but not one’s embedded dependence on the former colonial master .
 In the soft version of anticolonial resistance, former subalterns manage to coordinate collective action . They framed 5 Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak in the name of their traditional moral economy .
 Scattered Speculations on the Subaltern and the Popular // Postcolonial Studies.05.05 .
In neither case is there room to express one's own distinctive subjectivity as the main driving force of the uprising .
 The anticolonial paradigm just does not fit the imagined community of Ukrainians and the vision of Ukraine "from the Syan to the Don" that integrates the many regional a local knowledge in Ukraine .
 The model of national revolution or national liberation movement seems to better fit the realities of Maidan and the public discourses making sense of it . The model is better fit than the model of a national revolution.
 The abundance of interpretations of the phenomenon of ‘nation’ provide ample opportunities to cast Maidan in national terms . The abundance. of interpretations provides ample opportunities for Maidan to be cast.
 Ukrainian nationalists on Maidan and on the front of the RussoUkrainian war that followed . This seems all the more appropriate given the high visibility of Ukrainian nationalists .
 ‘national revolution’ implies rise of some preexisting nation to complete sovereignty . ‘National revolution” implies the rise of a pre-emptive nation .
 This (essentially Hegelian) historical scenario can be recognized in the story of the downfall of the Soviet system in 1989−1991 . It is quite typical for the twentieth century .
 The Moral Economy of the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia . The moral economy of the peasant is based in the South Asian region .
 Decoding Subaltern Politics: Ideology, Disguise, and Resistance in Agrarian Politics . Decodingsubaltern Politics.
 The rhetoric was employed by a rather marginal group of Maidan activists . This rhetoric does not correspond to the general social and political dynamics of the movement, says the author .
 The main pre-Maidan political force representing organicist nationalism has dramatically lost its popularity amid the unprecedented national mobilization . The all-Ukrainian movement “Freedom’s” has dramaticallylost its popularity .
 There was no real preexistent historical Ukrainian state to be restored within its original borders . No homogeneous nation in agreement about its composition, and no homogeneous state .
 Individual people with active civic positions stepped forward to protest the abuse of their rights by the tyrannical regime . In the course of their collective action, a new type of solidarity emerged .
 The Ukrainian nation became the product of the revolution, not its perpetrator, not the perpetrator . Ukraine's revolution was not the result of a revolution, but its perpetrator .
 The last and probably the least intellectually productive of the familiar revolutionary scenarios is the concept of color revolution . The concept of the color revolution is the last and perhaps the most intellectually productive.
 This is an insightful and thought-provoking approach, but it is more a metaphor than a self-sustainable explanatory model . It first requires an explanation of how we understand the persistence of ‘Sovietness’ almost a quarter century after the collapse of the Soviet regime and socioeconomic
 It is recognized that color revolutions were just a milestone somewhere in the middle of the long transition process from communism, and not “true’s revolutions .
 The First Postcolonial Revolution or not, the names of color revolutions are really meaningless . But we cannot say this about the Ukrainian revolution of 2014 that immediately proclaimed itself the Revolution of Dignity .
 Ukrainian revolution alone presents a decisive argument against comparing it to color revolutions . The study of languages of self-description by historical actors is central to the research paradigm developed by Ab Imperio .
 The Revolution of Dignity could have been produced only by self-conscious moral and political subjects . The revolution was not just to topple the government but to impose their subjectivity as a new system of coordinates .
 Communicating this content requires a lot of words and practical actions, it cannot be signified by any single color or plant .
 Neither were, for that matter, questions of language or historical memory . Neither were questions of history or memory .
 Hrytsak is a key to grasping the unprecedented uniqueness of what is happening in Ukraine . This distinction drawn by Hrytak is key to understanding the uniqueness of Ukraine, he says .
 A very general framework for binding common values structured an open field for negotiating a common subjectivity and acting in accordance with it . The open field is a very generalframework for negotiating common values .
 The image became viral in the Ukrainian section of the Internet in early September, 2014 .
 We know that this is a new phenomenon because it largely ignores or creatively recodes the readily available historical precedents and symbols . We know this is an old phenomenon because of its lack of historical precedent .
 The Ukrainian Insurgent Army and other forms of Ukrainian nationalist mobilization of the 1940s play a surprisingly marginal role in the country at war . The readily available political symbolism and historical mythology of the Ukrainianinsurgent army play a relatively marginal role .
 The 20th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS was part of the Estonian public sphere . Estonian statehood had enjoyed sovereign statehood during the interwar period .
 Ukrainian Jews immediately produced the mem ‘Yid-Banderite’ and developed it into a social identity . Many proudly accepted the social identity that many proudly accepted .
 Klezmer Band, in his usual Yidby yet another insanity, broadcasted Banderite t-shirt .
 Russian state TV insinuating that Ukrainian volunteers were promised a plot of land and two slaves for fighting in Donbas,10 followed by the whirlwind of hilarious “creative interpretations’ of this news in the Ukrainian section of the Internet .
 It is important to stress that this reaction to Russia’s attempts to seize the initiative may be spontaneous, but not unconscious . It is also important to Stress that this is not the first time Russia has tried to seize an initiative .
 New Ukrainians can call themselves Yid-Banderites, Dills, or Khokhly because they do not follow some preset names . 10 70 let nazad Sovetskie voiska osvobodili Ukrainu ot fashistov // 2014 .
 This is why they cannot be effectively “trolled by identity-centered Russian propaganda, and this is what sets them apart from most uncompromised anticolonial rebels . This is not only from subalterns but also from most unprovoked anticolonal rebels .
 They are creatively minding their business, inventing a new country for themselves . They frame the response to outside pressure in their own terms, they say .
 Nothing demonstrates the material power of subjectivity better than the scale and diversity of activities of Ukraine's volunteer movement in Ukraine .
State building after February 2014 has been stimulated, guided, and even staffed by grassroots citizens’ initiative. Arguably, the very process of state building has been stimulating.
 Former volunteers are serving as advisers to the president and defense minister . They are also staff for newly created departments in ministries. They are elected to the parliament .
 The key question is whether people are willing to step forward and help – and, more important, to define the venues and terms of help . There are numerous opportunities to help, and there are many opportunities for help .
 Three percent of the respondents were “professional volunteers’ – coordinators, who collected donations and personally delivered them to the war zone .
 The hypothesis of the mass-scale expression of an individual civic position can be verified, quantitatively assessed, and specified in aggregated social profiles . This is just an example of how the hypothesis of a civic position regarding a personally identified cause of communal importance can be assessed .
 hybridity has changed its modality from marginality and parochialism to a trendy and mainstream personal quality . Several contributors to the forum mention the significance of hybridity as a new phenomenon .
 The project “Information Resistance’s” 11 See World Giving Index full table // Charities Aid Foundation .
 This group reveals a distinctive social composition and a characteristic spectrum of political opinions . This group of people reveals a characteristic range of political views .
 V Maidane prinimal uchastie kazhdyi piatyi ukrainets – opros // Zerkalo Nedeli. 14.14.14 . See V Maidan prinimal   piatyi piatyyi ucrainets
 Tymchuk introduced his own format of news aggregation and presentation . He soon became a key newsmaker – not just a commentator .
 Bilinguals in more than one sense, they are confident in this intermediary position . They do not feel pressured to prove their Ukrainness by switching to the Ukrainian language in public .
 Dnipropetrovsk has become a champion of new Ukrainian patriotism and a major factor of public war mobilization efforts . The First Postcolonial Revolution appears in a new light .
 The decisive role in this transformation of the governor (oligarch and leader of the Dnipropetrovsk Jewish community, Igor Kolomoisky, has been broadly acknowledged .
 Donetsk elites are usually motivated by their personal convictions and values, particular business interests, and political rivalry with Donetsk elites .
 The social group that can be tentatively defined as “Soviet Jews’ was the most consistent representative of hybridity in the twentieth century .
 In the nationalist social imagination obsessed with defining fixed identities, they were perceived as marginal and parochial . Every hybridity was equated with backwardness.
 The closer a group approached some uncompromised “ideal type’s higher social status was. The closer the closer the group approached the higher its social status.
 Jewishness was maintained not only because of outside stigmatization, but also because people voluntarily and creatively chose this loosely and very selectively defined self-identification .
 In revolutionary Ukraine, the marginal type of Soviet Jews has become surprisingly relevant as an archetype of the new, “post-identity form of solidarity.’s new, post-identities, is a new form of support for the Ukrainian revolution .
 The project of hybrid Ukrainness does not necessarily threaten but may even greatly enhance the cultural component of it . It is important to stress that the project of hybrids is not necessarily threatening .
 A national canon, twentieth-century style, is always an arbitrary nomination of certain local characteristics to the role of the national standard .
 A regional dialect becomes the linguistic norm of ‘high’ language marginalizing other dialects . One type of local dress, repertoire of songs, or cuisine would rise to the status of national importance .
 Ethnic Ukrainians are so diverse that a single mandatory national canon has to be discriminatory toward some . Even “ethnic Ukrainians’s” themselves are so varied that a mandatory national Canon has to have to be discriminated toward some.
Lead world theorists are lagging far behind the revolutionary sociocultural transformations there . At the moment, a model of culture in a hybrid nation remains nonexistent . Ukraine is still elaborating this project.
Postcolonial theory is astonishingly underdeveloped when it comes to hybrid identities . Despite its obsession with social status and interaction, postcolonial theories are underdeveloped .
 There is a widespread misperception that the authoritative contribution by Homi Bhabha provides an exhaustive reflection on historical hybridity . But even this tradition has not been effectively engaged in empirical studies .
 The body of research on hybrid imperial social personae and “imperial biographies’ that is produced within new imperial history. The research demonstrates its mainstream role in prenational and anational societies .
 The unfolding story of the Ukrainian postcolonial revolution provides a unique opportunity for postcolonial scholars to upgrade their theoretical models . The Ukrainian revolution is arguably the first of this kind ever .
 Dynamic hybridity not only offers a practical political solution for a heterogeneous and multifaceted society such as 16 Homi K Bhabha .
 A Critical Reflection on Homi K Bhabha’s Post-Historical Thoughts // Ab Imperio.13.
 The First Postcolonial Revolution as Ukraine opens new horizons for European and North American societies . The original promise of multiculturalism and affirmative action did not live up to the original high expectations .
 Multiculturalism is framed by the essentialist, nation-centered discourse of fixed identities .
 The hybridity espoused by new Ukrainians demonstrates a truly postcolonial emancipation of one’s subjectivity unconstrained by alien hegemonic will as well as by the golden chains of communal traditions .
 Like a ‘bourgeois revolution’ or “national liberation movement,’ it is not a “thing’ – just our more or less accurate description of it, and only from one angle .
 Euromaidan appears to be ‘bourgeois democratic’ because, historically, self-conscious civic subjects belonged to the upper classes .
 Euromaidan is anti-Soviet because it is post-Soviet and refuses to borrow ideas and symbols from the past in order to outline the future – but not in any Cold War-period sense . It toppled Lenin statues throughout the country .
 To scholars themselves – and all other bystanders commenting on Ukraine – this is truly the last judgment . But to scholars themselves, and all others commenting on the Ukraine issue, this is the last judgement .
 Ukraine has opened up new historical horizons and is already living in the future, says author . If the model of “postcolonial revolution’s is correct, this means that Ukraine has open up new horizons, he says .
 Everybody has the right to disapprove of the Ukrainian revolution and wish bad for the country . One should just realize that by doing this in the name of reviving and freezing some mostly imagined past, s/he is getting locked in a different temporality with no future .
 Some rise up to the role of self-conscious subjects of common history . Others surrender their own subjectivity to become the slaves of predetermined identities and scenarios .
 Fedor Berezin is the author of two dozen novels in the genre of Russian military sci-fi . He is currently the deputy war minister of the “Donetsk Republic’s” ‘Donetsk republic’
 Bykov mentions a few other Ukrainian and Russian writers of conservative sci-fi and fantasy that wholeheartedly sided with counterrevolution . Lukianenko was prominent for his vicious anti-Ukrainism .
 Arsen Avakov used to be the main sponsor and organizer of the leading sci-fi writers in Russian language, the Star Bridge . The Star Bridge festival took place every year in Kharkiv, Ukraine, from 1999 to 2012 .
Avakov organized the event in reality, while conservative fantasts dreamed about the idealized past in the future . Avakov organized it in reality .
 Former festival participants rose up against the rigidly predetermined historical scenario . Avakov joined the government to build a new Ukraine .
 One year after the outbreak of Euromaidan, we see that the Ukrainian revolution has put to the test not just the political order in Europe, but the reputation of intellectuals who are professional in analyzing Ukraine or revolutionary politics .
 The main reason for frustration is the refusal of very intelligent people to put their minds to work rigorously . It seems that this frustration results not from political disagreements per se or conflicting scholarly interpretations .
 What really hurts is not an opposing opinion, but barely masked superficial indifference. What really hurt is not a opposing opinion but a superficial indifference .
 West European and Russian left-wing activists are united against Ukrainian antikleptocratic popular uprising with strong anticolonial component .
 Otherwise, they would have to reconsider their ideas 20 Vladimir Sorokin .
 The 2011 English edition translates the answer as ‘It’ll be all right,’ which is misleading . The 2011 edition translates as “It” which is ‘it’s all right.’
 They forget that operating with conventional categories and models is only part of the institutionalized scholarly process . It's not just the academic process, it's the scholarly process.
 The position of Russian scholars on Ukraine is the least interesting to analyze . They do not try to preserve even the status quo in the face of rapidly changing reality . But wholeheartedly succumb to excessive archaism and intellectual scarcity .
 The level of expertise on Ukraine has deteriorated in Russia to a state beyond any intellectual relevance . With rare exceptions, there are rare exceptions .
 Ideological censorship and political pressure encourage people in humanities and social studies to profess performativity and “ornamentalism’s’. People in humanities, social studies should not engage in truly critical thinking .
 The dominant discourse explains everything – from the Ukrainian crisis to Russian domestic problems – through the trope of “foreign agency,’s foreign agency, or aliens from outer space .
 Protesters spent weeks in the bitter cold on the Kyiv Maidan because they were paid for it, it seems plausible . Any external stimuli are perceived as more credible by default than an explanation through subjective motivation .
 People just do not believe in someone’s else personal agency, sincerity, and determination . People do not recognize the subjectivity of others, they don't recognize their own subjectivity .
 Parochial cynicism is employed to cover the profound frustration caused by the events people do not want to control – and therefore cannot control . Parochian cynicism is used to cover a profound frustration.
 Even the most self-conscious liberal segment of the Russian educated society is hopelessly stuck in the discourse of identities . Even the self- conscious liberal segment is stuck with the discourse.
 A society that is not a common sphere of contesting and negotiating individual subjectivities is nonexistent . No legally impeccable “cadasters of fixed social identities and references to past common fates can compensate for this emptiness .
 The postcolonial revolution of subjectivity in Ukraine threatens Russian society by the sheer contrast it unwillingly produced – between vibrant life and soulless social body .
 The tragedy is that they are doing this for no personal reason, just because they have no subjectivity as members of society, beyond immediate personal interests . The tragedy was that they were doing this.
 It is just that the twentieth century accustomed us to fake referendums arranged around phony agendas imposed by politicians . It's just that 20th century accustomed to fake elections.
 In revolutionary Ukraine, people define the political agenda for themselves as a true referendum . People define their political agenda as a real referendum .
 The case of Navalny proves that Russian society is not alien to processes unfolding in Ukraine . However, there are very bleak prospects of success in Ukraine.
 In Ukraine, it took at least a decade (since the Orange Revolution of 2004) to produce a new feeling of solidarity of individual subjectivities .
 The discussion gradually expanded from academic and semi-academic periodicals to the general media, then to the Internet . The discussion eventually expanded from blogs to Facebook posts, and finally to Twitter messages .
 A Russian-language Facebook post by the commander of the volunteer Donbas battalion, Semen Semenchenko, almost verbatim quotes from the Ukrainian-language column by Yaroslav Hrytsak published four months earlier .
 Despite their social and cultural differences, both of them belong to the common sphere of hybrid yet solidary subjectivity structured by common ideals .
 If offered a post in Cabinet of Ministers, I would have opted for Minister of Transport . I would prefer to be Minister of Transportation .
 The cost of train tickets would have been lowered for certain categories of population . It would have lowered the cost of tickets west to east, and east to west .
 The First Postcolonial Revolution is necessary to ‘sew Ukraine together’ by trains and cheap airlines . It is needed to “sewUkraine together” by trains, cheap airlines.
 Lviv and Donetsk with Luhansk should give a hand to each other and sew the country together . Lviv, Donetsk and Donetsk should give each other a hand and sew together .
 When we are tricked into confronting each other, we tell stories about Banderites and bandits from Donbas . The whole Ukraine suffers.
 At least ten years of debating values and goals cannot be “telescoped’ to a few months of propaganda even by the most talented and progressive political leaders such as Navalny .
 To make such a dialogue possible in Russia ten years from now, the public discussion should have been initiated yesterday, says Russian official .
 We should become an alternative to what Moscow was in the former Soviet Union . We should be an alternative. We should take on the role of the Soviet Union.
 It is to Kyiv, not Moscow, that Russian-speaking citizens of these countries should look. It is not Kyiv.
 Yaroslav Hrytsak suggests that the concept of ‘postcolonial revolution’ is better suited to integrate all the key features of the phenomenon in question .
 Most important, the revolution is characterized by the persistent manifestation of people’s subjectivity .
 The Ukrainian revolution is a postcolonial revolution because it is all about the people acquiring their own voice, says the author . The revolution is the result of a self-assertive act forging a new Ukrainian nation, he says .
 Gerasimov concludes with surveying the influence of the Ukrainian revolution on the international field of Russian Studies . He also looks at how it put to the test the convictions of those who preach a leftist agenda .
 Surprisingly many leftists in Europe and the U.S. have sided with the Russian regime against the new Ukrainian nation .
 A critical deconstruction of familiar clichés implies that one has to enter uncharted waters and embrace a new, unfamiliar reality of post-postmodern society and post-colonial revolution .