 Ukraine and Russia are at a standoff over the Ukraine-Russia crisis . The two countries have been locked in an ongoing crisis for years .
 Tensions between Ukraine and Russia have escalated sharply since the Russian coastguard seized three small Ukrainian vessels in the Kerch Strait on November 25 . The Kerch strait connects the Sea of Azov with the Black Sea .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko declared martial law in parts of the country in response to the crisis . He evokes the threat of a “full-scale war’ with Russia .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin warned Kiev against any and all “ill-advised’ action. For his part, he warned against all and all 'ill-Advised' action .
 Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula from Ukraine in 2014 . It is the first major conflict between Moscow and Kiev since 2014 .
 The incident led to protracted fighting between Ukrainian and pro-Russian forces in eastern Ukraine . More than 10,000 people have died and 1. million have been displaced in past four years .
 Ukraine’s then pro-Russian president Viktor Yanukovich abandoned a deal for closer cooperation with the European Union for one with Russia instead .
 The abrupt decision unleashed a wave of mass protests against Yanukovich's leadership in Kiev’s central Maidan Square . As many as 800,000 people protested against the Yanukovich leadership in December .
 Clashes between protesters and security forces intensified in early 2014 . Nearly 90 people were killed in Kiev in the past year .
 On February 22, Ukrainian parliament voted to oust Yanukovich, who fled to Russia . Yanukovich was ousted by the Ukrainian parliament .
 Putin says he "reserved the right to use all means, including force as a last resort" to protect Russian-speakers in Ukraine . Putin calls Ukraine a "coup d’état"
 In late February, 2014, clashes broke out between antiand pro-Russian protesters in Crimea, which became part of Ukraine in 1954 . The Crimea was part of the Ukraine, which is now Ukraine .
 Russian special forces quietly entered the predominantly Russian-speaking peninsula, taking up position at strategic points .
 On March 16, Crimeans voted overwhelmingly in favour of seceding from Ukraine to join Russia in a referendum . The vote was held in Ukraine on March 16 .
 Despite international outcry, Putin signed a treaty officially annexing Crimea on March 18 . Putin signed the treaty officially on March 19 .
 In April, 2014, a pro-Russia separatist movement, backed by Moscow, began to spread through Ukraine’s predominantly Russian-speaking east .
 Porochenko and Putin met for face-to-face talks for the first time on the sidelines of World War II D-Day commemorations in Normandy .
 The negotiations were attended by then French president François Hollande and German Chancellor Angela Merkel . They hoped to find a resolution to fighting in the eastern Ukrainian region of Donbass .
 A number of talks between Porochenko and Putin would be held in the years to follow, but to no avail .
 Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 was shot down over eastern Ukraine on July 17, 2014 . It was en route for Kuala Lumpur from Amsterdam .
 The U.S. and its allies immediately suspected Russian involvement in the incident . Moscow denied the claim .
 In May 2018, international crash investigators concluded that the missile used to down flight MH17 was Russian made . The missile used in the MH17 crash was also Russian made.
 Ukraine and pro-Russia separatists signed a peace accord in Belarus’s capital Minsk on September 5, 2014 .
 The next year, the two sides accepted another agreement known as "Minsk II" The two sides agreed to an end to the conflict . France and Germany agreed to end the conflict.
 Despite the ceasefire, fighting continued to flare on the frontline in eastern Ukraine .
 With the peace deal essentially dead, both sides rejected responsibility for its failure . The peace deal is essentially dead .
 Putin and Porochenko again met for talks mediated by Merkel and Hollande on October 19, 2016 . The two met again in October 2016 .
 The summit ended without an agreement, with both sides of the conflict at a stalemate . The summit, however, ended without a agreement .
 In July 2017, Ukraine announced that NATO had agreed to consider its bid for membership . Ukraine announced in July 2017 that it was considering its bid.
 In May 2018, Putin presided over the inauguration of a new bridge directly linking Crimea to Russia over the Kerch Strait . The bridge was built in May 2018 .
 The bridge was designed to reduce the annexed peninsula’s isolation . It was fiercely criticised by Western powers .
 Six months later, Russia seized Ukraine’s ships near the strait, thrusting the years-long conflict back into the spotlight . The conflict between the two countries began in 2010 .