 It remained neutral throughout World War Two even as neighbouring Nordic countries were invaded . During the Cold War, it remained neutral during World War two .
 A poll by Demoskop and commissioned by Aftonbladet newspaper showed 51% of Swedes are now in favour of NATO . That's up from 42% in January .
 Sweden's Defence Minister Peter Hultqvist said joining NATO was not an easy decision . He said it was not a decision that could be rushed based on recent events .
 Moscow says it is conducting a "special operation" to disarm its neighbour and capture leaders it calls neoNazis . Moscow calls it a 'special operation'
 Sweden and Finland already have very close cooperation with NATO . The two countries have been invited to recent summits .
 NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said in January the two countries could join the alliance ""very quickly" if they decided to apply for membership .
 Sweden took the decision this month to send weapons to Ukraine . First time since 1939 Sweden has sent weapons to a country at war .
 Nonfarm payrolls for the month grew by 678,000 and the unemployment rate was 3.8%, the Labor Department’s Bureau of Labor Statistics reported .
 That compares to estimates of 440,000 for payrolls and 3.9% for the jobless rate . That compared to Estimates of 440k for payroll, 3.8% for jobless rates .
 Wages up just 1 cent an hour or 0.03%, compared to estimates for a 0.5% gain . In a sign that inflation could be cooling, wages barely rose for the month .
 The year-over-year increase was 5.13%, well below the 5.8% Dow Jones estimate . The increase is 5.7% lower than expected .
 For the labor market broadly, the report brought the level of employed Americans closer to pre-pandemic levels . The report is still short by 1.14 million Americans, though still short of 1.4 million .
Labor shortages remain a major obstacle to fill the 10. million jobs that were open at the end of 2021 . A historically high gap had left about 1.2 million vacancies per available workers .
 leisure and hospitality led job gains, adding 179,000 for the month . As has been the case for much of the pandemic era, leisure has led to job gains .
 The job gap for that sector, which was hit most by government-imposed restrictions, is 1. million from pre-Covid levels .
 The unemployment rate for the industry tumbled to 6.6%, a slide of 1. percentage points from January . It's closer to the 5.7% of February 2020 than in January .
 December moved up to 588,000, an increase of 78,000 from the previous estimate . January’s rose to 481,000. December moved to 587,000; January's rose to 4,000 .
 The revisions added 92,000 more than previously recorded and brought the three-month average to 582,000 . Together, the revisions added 2,000 additional more than previous recorded .
 The labor force participation rate, a closely watched metric indicating worker engagement, moved higher to 62.3%, still 1. percentage points from the February 2020 pre-pandemic level . The Labor Force participation rate is still 1% higher than February 2020 .
 The trend for jobs is clearly upward after a wintertime surge of omicron cases . While exacting a large human toll, left little imprint on employment .
 The economy also has been wrestling with pernicious inflation pressures running at their highest levels since the early 1980s stagflation days . The economy has been grappling with inflation pressures.
 The Labor Department's main inflation gauge showed consumer prices rising at a 7.5% clip in January . The number is expected to climb to close to 8% when February’s report is released .
 Companies continue to hire, filling broad gaps still left in the leisure and hospitality sector . Other pandemic-struck industries are still struggling to fill the gaps .
 Monetary policymakers view the economy as near full employment . Prices have soared amid supply shortages and demand surges related to the pandemic .
 Inflation has come as Congress has pumped more than $5 trillion in stimulus into the economy . The Fed has kept benchmark borrowing rates anchored near zero .
 Fed officials expect this month to start raising interest rates . Market expectations that those hikes likely will continue through the year .
 Overall traffic crashes and people injured were down in 2020, but fatal crashes and fatalities increased in 2020 .
 In January, the United States DOT released the federal government’s comprehensive National Roadway Safety Strategy . The strategy is a roadmap to address the national crisis in traffic fatalities and serious injuries .
 The strategy adopts the safe system approach and builds multiple layers of protection with safer roads, safer people, safer vehicles, safer speeds and better post-crash care .
 President Biden's Bipartisan Infrastructure Law is complemented by unprecedented safety funding included in the law .
 The United States Department of Transportation and its Federal Aviation Administration is blocking Russian aircraft and airlines from entering and using all domestic airspace . The U.S. Department of transportation and its FAA are blocking Russian planes and airlines using domestic airspace.
 The Notice to Air Missions and regulatory orders suspends the operations of all aircraft owned, certified, operated, registered, chartered, leased, or controlled by, a person who is a Russian citizen .
 This includes passenger and cargo flights, and scheduled as well as charter flights . This is effectively closing U.S. air space to all Russian commercial air carriers and other Russian civil aircraft .
 Russian aircraft already banned from most U.S. destinations due to bans already imposed by Canada and Europe . Canada, Europe also imposed bans on Russian aircraft .
Delta, American, United and United Parcel Service have also suspended flying over Russian airspace . Many airlines, including Delta, American and United, are also suspended .
 International supply chains are taking a hit, with some airlines re-routing flights . Some airlines are canceling services that fly over Russian airspace .
 The greatest disruption is likely to be seen in the Asia-Europe corridor . The biggest disruption will be in Asia- Europe corridor .
 The country closed its skies to civilian aircraft on February 24, according to flight tracker Flightradar 24 . It averted potential tragedy for airline passengers and crew .
 The International Civil Aviation Organization Council has met to discuss the worsening situation . The council is meeting to discuss a worsening situation.
 The Council underscored the paramount importance of preserving the safety and security of international civil aviation . The Council urged the Russian Federation to cease its unlawful activities to ensure the safety of civil aviation in all affected areas .
 It called upon all concerned parties to seek to resolve the crisis through peaceful dialogue and diplomatic channels . It called on all concerned Parties to seek a peaceful dialogue .
 The Council also recalled with deep sorrow the human suffering that was caused as a result of the downing of flight MH17 in the east of Ukraine on 17 July 2014 .
 The Council reconfirmed its support to the Safer Skies initiative led by Canada . The initiative aims to safeguard civilian flight operations over or in the vicinity of conflict zones .
 SPD continues to grapple with being short-staffed . It appears as though that situation likely won’t be resolved any time soon .
 In early February, Mayor Bruce Harrell announced a so-called “hotspot” patrol initiative . The initiative is designed to target specific areas of the city experiencing disproportionate crime rates .
 SPD’s focus is now turning to Third Avenue and Pine Street . SPD's focus is on 12th Avenue and South Jackson Street .
 Diaz hopes to establish ‘a more visible presence’ throughout the downtown corridor . Business owners have voiced concerns over an uptick in crimes in downtown . Diaz is trying to stabilize the situation in the downtown area .
 The department is pulling officers from each of its precincts and having them walk downtown beats . It's exhausting any and all avenues to fill other gaps .
 News of damage to major Ukrainian nuclear-power plant rattled already fragile sentiment .
 Market participants are trying to assess how much the conflict and tough Western sanctions on Russia will damage global economic growth and further stoke inflation by disrupting commodity supplies .
 Russia’s central bank will keep the Moscow stock market largely closed for a fifth straight day . Local shares are expected to be closed for the first time in five days .
 The selloff in the Russian ruble stabilized, with the currency down 0.1% against the greenback, according to FactSet .
 Ukrainian officials say Russian shelling caused a fire at a nuclear power plant . Fears about Moscow's tactics and concerns about a nuclear disaster are intensifying .
 Officials say fire didn't affect essential equipment, lessening worries about reactor damage . Officials said the fire didn’t affectessential equipment, but it didn't cause reactor damage.
 As of early Friday, the management building at the plant was under Russian control .
 Front-month futures prices for Brent crude oil, the global benchmark, rose 0.1% to $110.61 a barrel .
 The United States equivalent, West Texas Intermediate crude, added 1.3% to $109.05 a barrel . The U.S. equivalent, W.T. Intermediate crude is a crude that is equivalent to a crude oil .
 In the previous session, WTI briefly topped $116 for the first time since 2008 . In the last session, it was $116 .
 In bond markets, the yield on the benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury note declined to 1.778%, down from 1.843% Thursday . The yield is down 1.7% in the benchmark10-year United States Treasury note .
 All three major U.S. indexes are up 2% or more since Russia invaded Ukraine last week . The three major United States indexes are now up 2%.
 Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell said he would propose a quarter-percentage point interest-rate increase at the central bank’s coming meeting . Powell's announcement alleviated concerns about a steeper hike .
 Mr Powell also warned Thursday that the conflict in Ukraine would likely push up inflation . However, he also warned that the war in Ukraine could push upflation .
 The worsening situation in Ukraine is driving investors to trim risk exposure ahead of the weekend, says Kenny Wen, wealth management strategist at Everbright Securities International .
 Asian stocks dropped in part reflecting Thursday’s action on Wall Street . Technology stocks sold off more than the broader market and U.S.-listed Chinese companies stumbled .
 Hong Kong’s benchmark Hang Seng Index fell 2.5%, registering its lowest close since March 2020 .
 The coronavirus started spreading across the U.S. campuses on the West Coast . It was quickly mirrored by the vast majority of offices across the country .
Today's skilled knowledge workers have no interest in going back to the way things used to be . Today, many skilled know workers are not interested in returning to the old way .
Tech firms will do what it takes to hire and retain people who feel empowered to demand the schedule and location of their choice . Tech firms and old-guard companies that need to find more techsavvy talent.
 Many tech leaders believe work flexibility will be a staple when the pandemic is over . People will spend their time differently than they did before, with designated hours they’re available to collaborate .
 She predicts bosses who force staffers back to offices in rigid ways will lose credibility with their workforces . She predicts that bosses who forced staffers to return to offices will lose their credibility with them .
Employees will be returning to the office a few days a week starting in early April .
 Twitter Inc. announced Thursday that it plans to start reopening its offices March 15 . Twitter was among the first to announce it would allow its employees to work from anywhere .
 CEO Parag Agrawal stressed that the company's ultimate return-to-work philosophy is employee choice .
 Covid has changed the workscape in recent years . Several high-profile executives chimed in on Twitter .
Brian Chesky, chief executive of Airbnb Inc. tweeted: "It feels like now the place to be is the internet"
 The head of Coinbase Global Inc., Brian Armstrong, said Silicon Valley had already relocated from California to the cloud . Armstrong says the head of the company is now in the cloud.
 Eighty-nine percent of new hires at the cryptocurrency exchange were somewhere other than the West Coast in the most recent quarter, he tweeted .
 Alyssa Henry, the head of the Square business within the newly renamed Block Inc., tweeted that 40% of managers on her team don't have any direct reports living in the same location .
 The tech industry isn’t the only one undertaking far-flung recruiting efforts these days .
 General Motors Co. said this year it plans to hire 8,000 high-tech employees . Many of them are based far from its Detroit headquarters, some in offices in Texas and some working from home .
 He took the job at the auto maker last year helping to oversee hiring, in part, because it allowed him to continue living in Massachusetts .
Tech companies explored ways for them to balance collaboration time with colleagues with focused time for individual work . Once teams scattered in the Covid era, teams started performing their roles from across the country .
Employees get to set their hours in part by what schedule best suits their lives . "asynchronous work" is a way to set your hours for the day .
 Slack Technologies Inc. has “core hours’ where team members are supposed to be available to jump on a call or huddle with their teams .
 Slack parent Salesforce Inc. encourages employees to set their Slack status to ‘focus time’ when they’re handling individual work or “connecting’ to signal their availability to collaborate .
 Salesforce recently tried its first ‘Asyne Week,’ where 20,000 of its nearly 70,000 employees canceled routine meetings to make more time for solo work . Salesforce spokeswoman: “Asyne week’s’ first “
 Of those who participated in the experiment, 72% said it made them more productive . 70% said the experiment made them less stressed and 70% reported it made they less stressed .
 Twitter is adopting a similar approach where teams come up with common hours that work for them to collaborate . Twitter is taking similar approach to working together .
 It recently experimented with a companywide “focus week where the majority of meetings were canceled and people could catch up on things like backlogged assignments . It also experimented with the companywide "focus week"
 Twitter encourages workers to think about ‘meeting hygiene,’ which could involve setting a tight agenda for efficiency, recording the meeting so people who can’t join can still listen at later time .
 There’s still a lot for companies to iron out to make asynchronous models run smoothly, Ms. Cevallos says .
 Workers can’t string together enough hours in a row to focus, so they sometimes work well beyond the traditional 9-to-5 schedule . Pings and dings signaling requests come from all over the internet .
 Dean predicts savvy employers will help people shrink their online time . He says savvy employers are helping people shrink online time. Dean says people will be able to find new ways to spend time online .
 Teams will do more front-end planning for projects and then send team members off with tasks and deadlines . Instead, teams will be doing more front end planning and then sending off team members with tasks .
 Some hybrid models can work where people come in on set days of the week . Other teams can work from an office for five days, two weeks in a row, to pound out a plan for a project .
 Gather Tech companies spent years selling their lavish office campuses full of perks like on-site massages, free food and exercise classes .
 Several companies say the spaces will still serve an important purpose . Most workers will only go back part time, but many will still use them .
 Meta Platforms Inc., the parent company of Facebook, last year signed a lease on Austin’s Sixth Street . It will add another 589,000 feet of square footage to its existing office space in the city .
 There are fewer desks and more meeting rooms and lounges for less formal team gatherings . Instead, it calls them “studios’s” instead of ‘studios.’
 The company said it plans to see how those experiments go before scaling them . The company says it will see how the experiments go.
 More companies are holding off-site meetings at hotels, coffee shops or coffee shops . The new way to gather groups is not pulling them into traditional offices .
 Salesforce has said its existing offices will be used for more collaboration and less individual work .
 Salesforce is bringing 10,000 employees to an employee retreat outside of Santa Cruz, Calif., this year . Workers will meet for training and bonding with their colleagues, in addition to hiking, yoga and cooking classes .
 The pandemic has ripped down the boundaries between employees’ personal and professional lives . Many executives say workers’ mental health and wellness concerns will continue to bleed into their workdays .
 Conversations that may have once taken place with friends outside of the office now feel natural among colleagues, says Francine Katsoudas .
 She says it will continue to be more acceptable for employees to talk about their mental health and the state of their personal lives at work . She says bosses should expect support from their bosses when they do .
After weeks of intense negotiations in Vienna, senior diplomats say they are now within reach of an agreement that would restore the 2015 deal . The United States and Iran, and Britain, and France, France, Germany, Russia and China, were involved in the negotiations .
 Most international sanctions on Tehran in exchange for strict but temporary restrictions on Iran’s nuclear work . That pact lifted most international sanctions in exchange.
 Iran has been pushing for more sanctions relief if the nuclear deal is restored . Iran is also pushing for a further increase of sanctions relief .
 The Foreign Terrorist Organization wants the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps to be taken off Washington’s most significant terror sanctions list .
 The United States has long pushed back against the demand given the Revolutionary Guard’s role across the Middle East . The Revolutionary Guard has backed designated terrorist groups such as Lebanon's Hezbollah .
 A final decision would almost certainly need to be cleared at the highest levels in the Biden administration . The Biden administration has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Biden administration will lift sanctions on dozens of terrorist-listed people and entities . The move is already sparking criticism in Washington .
 Iranian officials also cautioned that talks hadn't crossed the finish line . Iranian officials say talks hadn’t crossed the end line .
 The United States left the nuclear deal in 2018, with former President Donald Trump saying it did too little to stop Iran's pathway to a nuclear weapons .
 The U.N. says Iran has doubled its stockpile of highly enriched uranium . Iran is close to amassing enough weapons-grade nuclear fuel for a bomb, the agency says .
 The Vienna talks have focused on agreeing on the steps Tehran and Washington would need to take to restore the pact . The talks are focused on agreed steps Tehran, Washington would needs to take.
 European and United States diplomats have said a deal needs to be wrapped up in the next few days or they will exit the negotiations . European and U.S. diplomats say a deal is needed to be completed in a few days .
 Iran's nuclear advances mean it could soon be impossible to recapture the main benefit of the deal for the West, Russia and China . Iran is far enough away from having enough nuclear material for the bomb .
 Iran's “breakout time’s duration needed to amass enough nuclear fuel or a bomb could be as little as six months, U.S. officials say . The original deal came into force in January 2016 .
 The IAEA said its Director General Rafael Grossi would travel to Tehran for talks to resolve one of the final issues standing in the way of a deal .
 Mr Grossi is seeking an agreement with Iranian senior officials about how to handle a probe into undeclared nuclear material found in Iran .
 Iranian officials say they want to eliminate that investigation as part of a deal to revive the nuclear pact . Mr Grossi and Western officials have said that is unacceptable .
 The IAEA is considering some kind of road map, Western diplomats said . It could offer Iran reassurance the investigation won't be open-ended if Iran steps up its cooperation in answering questions .
 Iran wants the probe closed, Iranian and Western officials say . The IAEA could censure Tehran if it doesn't cooperate, they say . That could open the way for the issue to be sent up to the United Nations Security Council .
 Israeli Prime Minister Naftali Bennett called him to press his government's concerns about the nuclear deal and its position that the nuclear probe be continued .
 Mr Grossi will be visiting Israel in the near future, a senior Israeli official said . They agreed to speak again after the Tehran trip .
 European negotiators were posting on social media pictures of their teams at Vienna’s plush Palais Coburg hotel . Messages of thanks for the hard work.
 Iran's top negotiator returned from his capital and put back on the table demands that Tehran had previously made . Early this week, talks grew tense after Iran’s top negotiator returns to his capital .
 Iran’s contracts with Western firms won’t be ripped up if the U.S. quits the deal again, they say . They include demands for guarantees that if the United States quits it again, Iran's contracts with West firms won't be torn up .
 The United States and Europeans have said repeatedly that they can’t offer guarantees about what a future U.S. administration would do .
Western diplomats said Iran seemed no longer to be pressing the issue so strongly . By Wednesday evening, Western diplomats said the issue was no longer being pressed .
 Failure to reach a deal could lead Iran to move closer to nuclear weapons capabilities . Tehran has always said its nuclear program is for purely peaceful purposes . Iran has said it is for peaceful purposes.
Western officials don't believe Iran has fully mastered building a nuclear warhead or fixing it to a missile . Western officials don’t believe Iran is fully mastered.
 As of Feb., Iran has 33. kilograms of 60% enriched material, up from 17. kilograms in early November . The IAEA last reported that as of Feb. 2013, Iran had 17 kilograms of enriched material .
 Iran would need around 40 kilograms of 60% enriched uranium to produce enough weapons-grade nuclear fuel for a weapon . Iran would have to produce around 40kg of enriched uranium .
 The 90-minute call failed to deliver a diplomatic breakthrough . A senior French official said it left Macron convinced that “the worst is yet to come’ and Putin aims to take control of all of Ukraine .
 The conversation was initiated by Putin, the French presidency said . Ukrainian officials were set to hold talks with a Russian delegation, according to officials .
 There was no indication Thursday that a diplomatic solution could be in sight . But based on the two leaders’ exchange, there is no indication that a Diplomatic solution is in sight. The two leaders' exchange was a tense exchange .
 Putin disagreed “with many points’ raised in Macron’s address, the Kremlin news service says . He denied that Russia was behind the shelling of major Ukrainian cities, despite overwhelming evidence .
 Macron is the only Western leader who has been in consistent public contact with Putin since the invasion of Ukraine . The French presidency has described as an attempt to keep the doors to meaningful negotiations open .
 Macron traveled to Moscow last month to keep Putin engaged . Macron had led Western efforts to prevent an escalation of the crisis through diplomatic channels .
 Since mid-December, the two leaders have spoken over a dozen times, according to the French presidency .
 Macron has also been in frequent contact with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky . The most recent time on Thursday, following his call with Putin .
 The United States protesters inspired by the self-styled ‘Freedom Convoy’ that occupied downtown Ottawa for weeks headed out from Southern California last week for a cross-country trip to Washington .
 Washington County Public Schools in Hagerstown announced that students would be dismissed 2’ hours early on Friday because of expected traffic congestion caused by the convoy .
Ohio State Highway Patrol authorities are seeing a convoy headed to Lore City, Ohio . Those estimates are consistent with what they are seeing as the convoy heads to the city .
 Supporters have been joining and leaving throughout the trip . It is difficult to predict the size of the group before it reaches a given region .
 Illinois State Police spokesman says convoy traveled through his state earlier this week .
 The convoy is on Day 9 of its 11-day journey, traveling from Monrovia, Ind., to Lore City, Ohio . The convoy will travel from Monovia, Indiana, to Lore city, Ohio, on Day 10 .
 Supporters from other states have posted their own routes on social media . They hope to meet up with the group when it arrives in the Washington area .
 Social media posts showed people waving American flags on the side of a highway for a Northeast contingent of People's Convoy drivers coming through Pennsylvania . The group is part of People’s Convoy.
 Pennsylvania Department of Transportation officials monitoring traffic did not notice anything unusual throughout the day, spokeswoman says .
 There was about a mile of vehicles driving south on Interstate 81, approaching Franklin County, Pa., on Thursday night . Schreffler estimated may be the convoy .
 Organizers have emphasized that they have no plans to go into D.C. They have not publicized what they will do when they arrive or how long they will stay .
 People’s Convoy organizers have rallied people by calling pandemic restrictions and mandates an infringement on their freedoms . Many measures at the federal and local levels have been blocked or rescinded .
 A convoy organizer wants an end to the national emergency declaration in response to the coronavirus . Congress will hold hearings on the government's response to a pandemic .
 Organizers disagree with that characterization and have tried to frame the convoy as bipartisan . The convoy has been dubbed bipartisan .
Speeches, rallies and flags are full of pro-Trump and anti-Biden rhetoric . But speeches, rallies, flags and rallies are full.
 The possibility of a caravan of trucks and cars has heightened security . Police agencies from Maryland and Virginia will monitor the Beltway .
 The Civil Disturbance Unit remains activated as a precautionary measure . D.C. police spokesman Dustin Sternbeck said the department’s posture has not changed since additional security was ramped up .
 D.C. officers remain stationed along highway entrances to the District and some exit ramps . The Department of Public Works says roadways need to be blocked or diverted .
 Police declined to say specifically what they might do should the convoy try to enter the District .
 Large trucks are barred from many D.C. streets, with regulations restricting where they can park and how long they can idle . Authorities say large trucks are banned from many streets .
 Virginia troopers and other safety teams are preparing for this weekend . People can expect to see a larger presence of Virginia troopers, the agency says .
 Maryland State Police also said the agency is working with regional authorities to monitor the situation . The agency is also working with the regional authorities.
 consecutive cold fronts are set to surge across the Lower 48 in the next one to two weeks . The forecast into early next week is mostly springlike .
 The first, gentle front will dive into the Central States this weekend before pushing off the East Coast by Wednesday .
Record warmth is predicted to precede the onset of the chillier weather pattern in a number of areas this weekend into early next week . The cold will come as somewhat of a shock as record temperatures are predicted to be higher than usual .
 On Saturday, temperatures will stretch from Des Moines to Pittsburgh . The Central States will see highs from 65 to 70 degrees .
Record-challenging highs at or above 80 in many parts of the Southeast . By Sunday, the warmth will edge eastward, with high near 70 as far north as Columbus .
 On Monday, highs near 80 could creep as far north as Richmond and even Washington .
 The first of the two cold fronts pushes through the eastern U.S. Tuesday . Temperatures will return closer to seasonal norms by Wednesday .
 By late on March 10, or in about one week, frigid air is projected to have penetrated through the Rockies and as far south as the Texas Panhandle . By late in the week, it is expected to be in the middle of the week .
 The cold will then probably sweep through the Midwest and western Great Lakes by March 11 . Temperatures will be 30 degrees below normal in some areas .
 This could mean highs only in the teens and single digits with subzero lows . This could be the first time the teens have reached the high level of single digits .
 Places that had highs in the 70s and 80s this weekend may only be in the 30s and 40s that weekend .
 As the cold air arrives late next week, it could be accompanied by snow, particularly in the Upper Midwest, Great Lakes and interior Northeast .
 Sometimes models overpredict the intensity of cold snaps at long time ranges . Snow amounts still need to come into focus .
 An Arctic front will enter the eastern two-thirds of the Lower 48 late next week and bring widespread below normal temperatures . However, there is a strong model agreement that an Arctic front is expected to enter the east .
 The National Weather Service Climate Prediction Center’s 8to 14-day temperature outlook shows a high likelihood of below normal temperatures between March 11 and 17 over the Upper Midwest and Great Lakes .
 The zone of below normal temperatures to shift east when the outlook is updated to cover the period of March 12 to 18 .
Long range models do indicate temperatures should moderate back to near normal levels later that week . In the wake of the blast of cold — ending around March 15 — temperatures shouldmoderate back to normal levels .
Through the end of the month, models advertise a bumpy pattern with frequent swings in temperatures . It's probably not of the magnitude that we'll see over the next 10 days .
 The 29-year-old Ukrainian woman returned to her country of birth to become a soldier . She returned to Ukraine a year ago along Ukraine's eastern border .
 Ukraine has been the target of Russian-backed aggression in its eastern region of Donbas . She was fully aware of the danger she was getting herself into since 2014 .
 Kristina withheld her last name and location due to safety concerns, she told VICE World News . "We are not afraid of death; we are afraid to be slaves"
 Ukrainian women like Kristina to pick up arms to defend the country from Russian threats . Military has a higher share of women than most other armed forces in the world .
 At the beginning of 2021, there were around 57,000 women in Ukraine’s armed forces . 22. percent of the total, according to the ministry of defence .
 Only a handful of countries that conscript men and women on equal conditions have a comparable or higher level of female representation in their military . Norway and Sweden, such as Norway and Swedish, have a similar level of women representation .
 As Russia continues its attacks on Ukraine, the responsibility of defending the country has fallen in part to the growing ranks of formal and informal fighters .
 Anastasiia Lenna, who represented Ukraine at the 2015 Miss Grand International pageant, is a 79-year-old woman who recently learned how to fire a gun . Kristina, the former wedding singer, is also a former beauty queen and wedding singer .
 Women have been prominent among Ukrainian civilians fighting Russian forces . They have been making Molotov cocktails, dismantling road signs and dismantling signs .
 Ukraine's resistance can be traced to the Maidan protests in 2013, where a wave of mass demonstrations resulted in the ousting of Ukraine’s president Viktor Yanukovych .
 During the protests, women helped out in makeshift hospitals and joined self-defense units . The protests were vehemently opposed by the Russian government .
Ukrainian women joined the military in 2010, a year after it began to see a major uptick in women joining the military . Ukrainian society will do everything to protect its freedom and sovereignty, says Olesya Khromeychuk .
 When Moscow annexed Crimea and backed separatists in Ukraine’s eastern Donbas region in 2014, many women simply replicated the roles they were engaged in during the protests . This time in the armed forces, Khromeychuk said .
 Initially, women were not allowed to take up combat positions, though some still found a way around legal restrictions .
 Over the years, reports have emerged of gender-based discrimination, as well as allegations of sexual harassment .
 In 2018, the passage of a military gender equality law granted women equal rights as men in the army . But in 2018, it gave rise to a profound societal shift .
 Ministry of Defence regulations required women between 18 and 60 to register with the armed forces . Women between 18 to 60 deemed fit for military service to register .
 In February, Ukrainian authorities announced that they were looking to recruit over 1. million civilians into the Territorial Defense Force . The reserve branch comprises civilian reservists .
 Yevheniia Chekh decided it was her national duty to join such a unit . Last year, she decided to join the unit .
 A year ago, she was a beautician living in the Poltava region in central Ukraine . A year later, she is still living in Ukraine .
 Volunteers like Chekh are known as “weekend warriors,” people who hold civilian jobs but take part in military drills . They can be called upon to support the armed forces in resisting invaders .
 Chekh had been spending her Saturdays at military exercises, and with no prior sporting history, her experience has been an arduous one .
 The 46-year-old told VICE World News that she had “no fears and hesitations’ about going into combat . But she said she had no fears and hesitation about going in combat .
 Those with no previous military experience are an imperfect solution to the current crisis . But recruits like Chekh, those with no prior military experience, are a perfect solution to this crisis .
 Former Ukrainian president Petro Poroshenko speaks in a live television interview while behind him . A soldier accidentally drops his rifle magazine while he speaks to him .
 The soldier’s awkward mistake became an instant meme, sparking laughter and then sympathy .
 commenters took him to represent many Ukrainian civilians, including women, who have assumed military duties . It's unclear if the man was a professional soldier or new recruit .
 Toroshenko grew up in Montreal, thousands of kilometres away from her father's home . Her father had left to flee famine and conflict in the country .
 She has maintained strong connections to the country . But she has watched horrified as family and friends are trapped in war .
 Canada is home to 1. million people of Ukrainian descent . Canada is the world's second largest Ukrainian diaspora after Russia .
 The spires of their churches still dot rural landscapes and large cities . The spire of their Churches are still visible in rural landscapes .
Prominent community leaders and politicians are of Ukrainian ancestry . Canada’s deputy prime minister, Chrystia Freeland, is a Ukrainian .
 Ukrainians have braided their culture and history into the Canadian Prairies . Those cultural and political ties are particularly prominent in the country .
 Hundreds of one room schoolhouses were once named after Ukrainian figures and communities . In the provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta, hundreds of one rooms were named after Ukrainians .
 Nearly 30 towns and a handful of parks are named after places and people from Ukraine . The names include places, people and places in Ukraine .
 Toroshenko now lives in Vegreville, Alberta, where he lives, boasts one of the world’s largest pysankas .
 Regular people, as young as 18, defend their country, Toroshenko says .
As Ukrainian-Canadians pore over news accounts and social media the Russian invasion has also unearthed painful memories of their own family histories . Many of which are marked by conflict, dispossession and exile .
 Toroshenko traveled ten times to Ukraine as an elections observer . Toroshenko returned to her family's homeland as an observer .
As the war continues, she fears the democratic structures she and thousands of others helped establish over the years are under threat of collapse . She says she is the dream of what Ukraine could become .
 Chrystia Freeland grew up in a tight-knit rural Ukrainian community in the Prairies . She spoke last week to the country’s diaspora .
 Others have tried to shake off the sense of powerlessness, drawing instead on the tightness of the community . Others have also tried to try to shake it off .
 The Ukrainians who came before us were an inspiration to us. But to be able to see ourselves in the Ukrainians was an inspiration .
 Winnipeg-based artisan Zoya Kostetsky moved from to Canada from Ukrainian city of Lviv in 2005 .
 As she stood with her family at a recent rally, she was struck by how the grief she felt was shared across the crowd .
 Top Desperate to help in some way, she organized a raffle with prizes from local businesses . She raised more than C$20,000 to aid in relief efforts .
 If her family hadn't left, they too would be facing the prospect of fighting in the war . But the knowledge that her family hasn't left has left a heavy mark on her .
 Kostetsky says the gratitude from aid groups in Ukraine has kept her motivated . The funds she has raised have gone to help both citizens fighting and fleeing to neighboring countries .
 Alexei Trubetskoy knew he had to get out the moment he woke up and looked at his phone on the morning of Russia's invasion .
 Trubetskoy, who runs an English language school in Moscow, bought a ticket to Sri Lanka on the same day .
 A growing number of Russians have decided to leave their country following Vladimir Putin’s decision to invade Ukraine .
 Trubetskoy: "My future is taken away from me, the country won’t be the same. My future is taking away from my country,” he said .
 Russia has seen a major crackdown on those opposing the invasion of Russia . Russia has already seen a big crackdown on the opposition .
 More than 7,500 people have so far been detained at anti-war protests across the country, according to the independent monitoring site OVD-Info .
 Independent news outlets have also been forced to shut down . A number of the country’s independent news outlets are also forced to close .
Andrei Kolesnikov: Russia will see an exodus of its "quality working force" He says there is "no future" for Russia's quality working force .
 Russia's upper house of parliament is due to hold an unscheduled meeting on Friday . The exodus has been fuelled by rumours that authorities could declare martial law as soon as Friday .
 Such a move would be unprecedented in modern Russian history . It could involve mass mobilization of the male population as well as the closure of borders .
 Russian oil and gas firm booked the first plane available on Tuesday and flew to a random country I have never been before .
 The last time the federation council called an unscheduled meeting was February 22 . The body approved Vladimir Putin’s request to use military force outside the country, two days before the invasion of Ukraine .
 The federation council will officially meet to discuss a package of anticrisis measures in response to western sanctions . The council said it will officially discuss the package of measures .
 Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, dismisses speculation about martial law .
 A senior source working at one of the three major airports in Moscow said he believed it was ‘unlikely’ that the borders would close . The borders would be closed, the source said .
 speculation mounted in Moscow on Thursday. But as speculation mounted, a feverish mood was felt in Moscow .
 Those seeking to leave faced a severe lack of available flights after western countries closed their airspace to Russian airlines . Russian airlines have been forced to close their airspace.
 Flights to Yerevan, Istanbul and Belgrade were completely sold out for the coming days . A oneway ticket to Dubai was priced at over £3,000 — compared with £250 in ordinary times .
 Train tickets from St Petersburg to Helsinki were also sold out on Thursday and Friday . Train tickets for St Petersburg and Helsinki were sold out.
 Some men who left earlier this week said they were extensively questioned at the Russian border . Some said they had been questioned extensively at the border .
Andrei, a Moscow-based cinema director, said he was held at Moscow’s Sheremetyevo airport before boarding a flight to Baku .
 His luggage was searched, and an official went through his private chats on different messaging apps . The official's private chats were conducted on different apps .
 He asked me why I wanted to ‘flee’ and why I was reading independent outlets like Meduza . He asked him why he wanted to 'flee' and why he was readingindependent outlets .
 Elvira Nabiullina urges fellow Russians to stay calm amid growing uncertainty . The head of the central bank is urging fellow Russian banks to remain calm .
 Nabiullina: "We need to leave behind any disputes and just help our colleagues" The statement was aired on Russian state television .
 Russia earlier this week also introduced new laws to stimulate the country’s IT sector .
 Many Russians working in tech will likely be eyeing to leave the country given that their skills will be valued abroad .
 Some of the top of the Russian government have themselves evacuated their loved ones . But despite efforts by officials to convey a sense of stability, some have been evacuated .
 The daughter of a top Russian official has met Putin on multiple occasions . She says she was advised to leave as soon as possible .
 The Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, built between 1984 and 1995, is the ninth largest in the world . It is the largest nuclear plant in Europe and the world's ninth largest .
 It has six reactors, each generating 9SOMW, and a total output of 5,700MW . It is enough energy for roughly 4m homes . It has 6 reactors each generating a total of 9SomW .
 In normal times it produces one-fifth of Ukraine's electricity and almost half the energy generated by the country’s nuclear power facilities .
 The plant is located in Enerhodar on the banks of the Kakhovka reservoir on the Dnieper river .
 It is about 200km from the contested Donbas region and 550km south-east of Kyiv . It's about 500km from Kyiv and about 200 km from the Donbas .
 Fire broke out in a training building outside the plant in the early hours of Friday . Ukrainian authorities say Russian forces shelled the building in Ukraine .
 Ukraine’s foreign minister confirmed the reports at 2.30am . The Russian army was “firing from all sides upon Zaporizhzhia NPP, the largest nuclear power plant in Europe.
 He called for an immediate ceasefire to allow firefighters to control the blaze . He also called for immediate ceasefire.
 The third power unit at the plant was disconnected at 2.26am, leaving just one of the plant's six units still operating .
Early reports of the incident at the power plant sent financial markets spiralling . stocks tumbling and oil prices surging further .
 The United States also said their latest information showed no indication of elevated radiation levels at the plant . The U.S. also said the latest information did not show no indication that radiation levels were elevated .
 Russia has captured the defunct Chernoby1 plant, 100km north of Kyiv . Russia has already captured the plant .
 Some analysts noted the Zaporizhzhia plant is of a different and safer type to Chernobyl . Chernobyl was the site of the world's worst nuclear disaster in 1986 .
 Irwin is a former manager of the openpool Australian lightwater reactor, Australia’s only nuclear reactor . Irwin operated nuclear power plants in the UK for three decades .
 He said the PWR reactors are “a lot safer than the reactors at Chernobyl’s. He said they did not appear to be damaged yet . The reactors are not damaged yet.
 A surge in crude oil prices brought on partly by Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine has sent gas prices skyrocketing across the country . Washington has not been spared from that trend .
 Currently, the state is averaging $4.10 a gallon at the pump, trailing only California, Oregon, and Nevada, with even higher rates in cities like Seattle .
 As of early February, gas in the Seattle metropolitan area averaged $4.12 a gallon . Gas in the city averaged $3.6 a gallon, before rising to $ 4.28 a gallon in March .
 San Francisco is now averaging $5 a gallon, breaking the city’s previous all-time high of $4.73 set in October of 2021 . Comparatively, San Francisco has averaged $5 per gallon .
 In Portland, residents are reporting a handful of gas stations charging upwards of $6 a gallon .
Gas prices have been rising for the better of the last two-plus months . Russia’s incursion into Ukraine has sparked even more dramatic increases .
 The impasse shows how hard it is for Beijing and Moscow to circumvent the dollar-centric international financial system . China has some experience in helping other nations evade sanctions, even though China has had some experience.
 Western countries have imposed an array of penalties on Russia in the past week . The penalties include freezing much of its central bank’s foreign-currency reserves and booting some Russian banks off Swift .
 China has long been concerned about what it calls “dollar hegemony,” especially as the trade war with the United States worsened . China has found an ally in the Kremlin, which was previously sanctioned after its 2014 annexation of Crimea .
 The two countries increasingly trade with each other without using dollars . Russia is an important outlet for selling oil, gas and other products without touching the U.S. financial system .
 Just over a third of Russia’s exports to China were settled in dollars as of last September, the most recent data shows .
 A little more than half of China’s exports were settled in dollars, down from 90% in 2013 . A little over half of the country's exports were settling in dollars .
 Chinese banks aren’t likely to ride to Russia’s rescue. But this trade pales against the other markets now largely shut off to Russia .
 Chinese financial institutions have been less keen on the idea of banking Russian clients than their political leaders are . The first problem is that financial institutions are not keen on banking Russians .
 “The level of warmth has gone up,’ says Prof. Prof. John Sutter .
 2017 law allows the U.S. to penalize foreign entities that trade with sanctioned companies, countries and individuals . 2017 law also allows the United States to punish foreign entities.
 For any bank that wants to be able to transact in dollars, the consequences could be drastic . Bankers could be forced to make changes if they want to make money in dollars .
 "There’s now less room for Chinese companies and financial institutions to be doing business with Russian counterparts," he said .
 Carrie Lam lost access to banking services and had to collect her salary in cash . The United States sanctioned Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam in 2020 .
 China’s Cross-Border Interbank Interbank Payment System, or CIPS, has been touted as a potential workaround as Russian banks get ejected from Swift .
 Analysts and lawyers say it isn't fit for this purpose, at least yet . But analysts and lawyers says it isn’t fit for the purpose .
 CIPS was developed by China’s central bank to promote international use of the yuan . CIPS largely handles yuan-denominated trades between China and abroad .
 As of the third quarter of last year, it handled an average of just 13,000 transactions a day . It is raising questions about how quickly it could scale up .
 Swift processed more than 40 million messages a day over the same period . The comparison isn’t exact, but it’s not exactly exact .
 The two networks are also complementary as much as they are competing, since Swift is primarily a messaging system . Swift is mainly a message system .
 More than 80% of CIPS transactions rely on Swift telegram, according to estimates by ANZ economist Raymond Yeung .
 Swift messaging underpins transactions between the Moscow branch of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China Ltd.
 Beijing would be for Beijing to tap smaller lenders to deal with Russia . If Western sanctions stay in place and cause long-term damage to the Russian economy and China’s strategic interests, it would be a longer-term option .
 Small Chinese banks have previously facilitated trade with sanctioned countries such as North Korea and Iran . Some small Chinese banks are now facilitating trade with sanctions such as Iran .
 In 2009 the oil major China National Petroleum Corp. bought a Xinjiang-based commercial bank, which was later renamed Bank of Kunlun .
 The bank relied on deposits and other businesses from the CNPC family of companies, according to its annual reports .
 The Treasury Department sanctioned Bank of Kunlun, together with an Iraqi bank, for helping Iranian banks move millions of dollars . The bank was barred from accessing the U.S. financial system .
 Bank of Kunlun has in recent years wound down its activities in Iran . China diversifies its energy sources in the region .
 You have no business in any of the developed countries to begin with, says Prof. Professor.
 Chen was independent director of PetroChina, the listed arm of CNPC, between 2011 and 2017 . Chen was an independent director for PetroChina between 2011-2017 .
 The crack Ukrainian unit was trying to thwart Vladimir Putin’s plan for a rapid takeover of Kyiv some 20 miles away .
 Elite Russian airborne troops had landed in helicopters hours earlier on the first day of Russia’s war against Ukraine .
 If they could hold the airfield, Russia would be able to fly in hundreds of soldiers and move rapidly to seize the Ukrainian capital . Mr Putin's plan is to force a quick capitulation.
 The Russians, protected by a concrete barrier topped with barbed wire, were directing withering fire at Lt. Lt. Vladimir Putin .
 Russia’s bid to seize the airport embodied its military planners’ ambitious assumptions that Ukrainian defense would collapse under overwhelming firepower. Russia's attempt to seize airport embodied military planners' ambitious assumptions.
 Russian officials and propagandists have for years boasted that Moscow's forces could overrun its smaller neighbor in days .
 Kharchenko, backed by volunteer fighters, has slowed the Russian advance in the area around Hostomel Airport . The Russian advance has been halted entirely after a day of fighting .
 The airport standoff has emerged as the key to Ukrainian resistance . One big reason Russian forces have become bogged down so far .
 Russian military made gains in the south, penetrating the city of Kherson and pushing toward Zaporizhya . The Russian military is pushing toward the city.
 This account of scenes in one of the most significant battles during the week-old conflict is based on firsthand reports of two soldiers involved in the chaotic fighting, official military reports and videos and images .
 The first sign of war in Hostomel came at 7m. on Feb., hours after Mr Putin announced the invasion, when a cruise missile slammed into the ground meters from an apartment block .
 The airport has a long runway used to test aircraft and for cargo . The airport is a juicy target for airborne forces to seek control of .
Ukrainian National Guard unit defending airport was below full strength . The Ukrainian National Guard was defending the airport.
 Most of its heavy equipment and personnel were hundreds of miles to the east, on the front lines of the war . Russia had fomented eight years earlier .
 The elite Rapid Reaction Brigade was based at the airport because of its fighting skills and ability to deploy quickly . Still, this was the elite Rapid reaction Brigade .
Formed in 2015, it had spent years fighting Russian proxies in eastern Ukraine . The Ukrainian government has been battling Russian proxies for years .
 Andriy Kulish, 36, left his job in communications to join the army in 2014 . He had just made tea for two comrades a few hours after the missile hit .
 Ukrainian soldiers fired rockets and machine-gun fire on the airport and adjoining military base . Ukrainian soldiers were diving for cover .
 The Russian-led militants in the east have no air force . The unit has been forced to come under aerial bombardment .
 defenders, including officers, contract soldiers and conscripts, soon got their bearings . But the defenders were soon to get their bearings.
 They spread out throughout the base and the airport and fired back “passionately and fiercely” with everything they had, says Lt. Lt. John Sutter said .
 Ukrainian officials and soldiers defending the airport describe some 30 or more helicopters . Ukrainian officials say some 30 helicopters have been deployed .
 The aircraft flew in twos and threes, circling for strike runs on the airport and the base . The planes flew in two-and-a-half hours in the air .
 The Antonov airplane Mriya, Ukrainian for Dream, is the largest transport aircraft in the world .
 Kulish said he saw a plume of smoke rising from the hangar where the hangar was undergoing repairs .
 Kulish said the sheer number of bullets they pumped into two others forced them down despite their armor . Kulish: "The sheer number" of bullets forced them to drop down .
 Russian helicopters began to land and disgorge airborne troops, who fanned out and began firing . After nearly three hours of fighting, the Russian helicopters begin to land .
 Ukrainian defenders had run out of antiaircraft missiles and were running low on other ammunition . The Ukrainian defenders were running out of ammunition .
 The brigade commander ordered a withdrawal, stuffing the unit's flag down his jacket before they left .
 Kharchenko’s unit of 48 paratroopers jumped into three helicopters and sped toward Hostomel . The paratrooper's unit is part of a group of 48 that has been deployed in Ukraine since 2007 .
 The paratroopers spilled from their helicopters. Reaching a field west of the airport, they spilled from the helicopters .
 Kharchenko led the way quickly but silently across a road flanked by houses, a field and a ditch filled with trees .
 The paratroopers rushed forward, but then hit a 7-foot concrete wall topped with barbed wire . The wall was topped with a barbedwire .
Kharchenko cut a hole in the wire and started helping his comrades over the wall . Kharchenko is a former member of the Ukrainian army .
 Kharchenko radioed for help from another unit of Ukrainian paratroopers in armored vehicles . They were supposed to be assaulting the airport from the north .
 Kharchenko tried to calm the soldiers on the other side of the wall, worried that their screaming would direct the Russians to pick them off . The soldiers were worried that the screaming would lead them to take off .
 The paratroopers pulled out small shovels and hurriedly dug a tunnel under the wall . They managed to drag one of their comrades out of the tunnel .
Kharchenko called in coordinates for Ukrainian artillery to hit the enemy from the south . Kharchenko has been in charge of Ukrainian artillery for years .
Ukrainian unit was rushing in from the southeast in civilian vehicles . Another Ukrainian unit was also rushing in in civilian cars .
 The paratroopers set up a firing point for antiaircraft missiles in the field outside the wall .
Ukrainian commander told them over the radio that latest intelligence indicated the Il-76s had aborted their mission . The Ukrainian commander told the Ukrainian commander that the latest intel indicated the latest intelligence was not good .
 Kharchenko decided he would have to leave the men behind who were trapped on the other side of the fence . KhARChenko decided to leave his men behind.
 The paratroopers withdrew to the south, moving slowly because several were wounded, including Lt. Lt. John Sutter .
 It took them 40 minutes to cross a field that they had sped across in 10 minutes in the other direction . It took the pair 40 minutes.
Russian armored vehicles are heading their way. Suddenly, they hear the roar of Russian armored vehicles . The roar of the armored vehicles is heard in the background .
 They quickly set up an ambush, taking out the tank at the front of the column and firing rocket-propelled grenades at the other vehicles . The men quickly set out to attack the other vehicle, firing rockets at them .
 He saw a Ukrainian flag in the passenger window and collapsed inside with relief . Then he saw a Ukraine flag in a passenger window .
 The paratroopers hadn't retaken the airport, but they had foiled the Russian airborne operation .
 Ukraine quickly brought up reinforcements that have halted Russian forces on a front line around Hostomel and in neighboring towns that have seen heavy fighting in recent days .
 The soldier was smoking outside the day after the raid when a soldier he didn't recognize approached him . The soldier didn’t recognize him when he approached him.
 It was the first paratrooper who had jumped over the fence at the airport . It is the first time a paratroop has jumped over a fence at airport .
 He crawled out despite severe back wounds from a grenade and was taken to a hospital by locals . He had crawled out.
 Russia’s subsequent invasion of its neighbor is forcing Beijing into adjusting its foreign policy . The move risks damaging relations with the U.S.-led West and undoing years of efforts to paint itself as a responsible world leader .
 Officials and advisers say the ripple effects of the move are now sinking in . The move may cost China dearly, they say .
 Some officials say they are fearful of the consequences of getting so close to Russia at the expense of other relationships . Russian aggression against Ukraine is isolating Moscow in much of the world .
 Many politicians from Washington to Brussels have grouped Beijing together with Moscow as a new “axis’s”
 Mr Xi was making remarks such as ‘The East is rising, and the West is in decline,’ as China’s economy roared back .
 Beijing was trying to shape and inhabit a role for itself as a leader on combating climate change . Beijing was ramping up nationalistic rhetoric, including around its claims to Taiwan .
 China has placed itself on one side of a gulf that has almost all of the world on the other side . This year, Xi is expected to break with precedent and seek a third term in power .
 What Beijing will do next depends on how hard the U.S. will push sanctions on Russia, say foreignpolicy advisers .
 Beijing needs to keep Russia around as its most important strategic collaborator even if it isn’t an outright ally . Mr Xi likely will continue to maintain his partnership with Mr Putin .
 China is facing an increasingly difficult diplomatic position . But that will require China to continue to straddle an increasingly tough diplomatic position. China's diplomatic position has become increasingly difficult .
 Xi-Putin summit in late November, as soon as Mr Putin accepted invitation to attend the opening of the Beijing Winter Olympics .
 At the time, Western nations were laying the groundwork for a diplomatic boycott of the Games over China’s human-rights record . The U.S., the U.K. and Canada were laid the groundwork.
 The Biden administration was about to kick off a Summit for Democracy in early December . It sought to establish a clear alternative to Beijing’s autocratic rule .
 Officials and advisers say the moves infuriated Beijing and drove its decision-making . The move infuriated the Beijing government, say officials and advisers .
 One of Xi’s objectives was to lay out an ideological foundation for the partnership between China and Russia, people said .
 The Chinese ambassador to Washington teamed up with his Russian counterpart in publishing an unusual joint opinion piece . The Center for the National Interest is a conservative think tank established by former President Richard Nixon .
 The two argued that democracy ‘can be realized in multiple ways’ and isn’t the prerogative of any one country or group of countries .
 The joint statement said both countries “have profound democratic traditions rooted in a thousand years of development,’ a phrase reflecting Xi’s ideological views .
 A thousand years ago, China was in the emperor-ruled and feudal Song Dynasty, known for a highly developed bureaucracy .
 Beijing suggested including that the two countries’ friendship has “no limits’ It was Beijing that suggested that the pair’s friendship has no limits, according to officials and advisers .
 The intention was less a declaration China would stand by Russia in case of war than a strong message to the United States about the resolve the two have in confronting increased American threats .
 Moscow’s increasingly heated rhetoric on Ukraine, those people said . What didn’t factor into Beijing's planning was Moscow's increasingly heated language on Ukraine .
 Beijing dismissed that scenario as unlikely as unlikely . Chinese officials were presented with American intelligence on a likely Russian invasion .
 China saw Mr Putin’s brinkmanship as already getting him desired results, people said . And, these people said, China saw him already getting his desired results .
 Xi's endorsement of Putin's opposition to NATO expansion in the statement focused the attention of many in the West on China's role in the Ukraine crisis .
 China's top leadership disappeared from public view after Mr Putin's Feb. declaration . As soon as Mr Putin left Beijing, China’s top leaders huddled to form a response to the Ukraine crisis .
 More than a week later, they emerged to embark on a series of statements that showed a desire to dial back or clarify Beijing’s embrace of the Kremlin .
 China has been walking what many foreignpolicy experts call a diplomatic tightrope . Since the Russian troops marched into Ukraine on Feb. 2013, China has not been seen as much as it has been .
 Russia is locked into having to help Russia and has little interest in seeing Moscow collapse economically . It is trying to stick to its foreign-policy principles around sovereignty and trying to prevent its relations with the United States and Europe from completely collapsing .
 Beijing has refrained from coming to Moscow’s aid in a significant way . Beijing has not come to Moscow's aid in any way .
 Some Chinese bankers fear Russia will lose access to the dollar-dominated global trading system . But it is complying with the more damaging financial sanctions the United States has imposed on Russia .
 They say their default position is to comply with sanctions unless higher-ups tell them otherwise . They say they will comply with the sanctions unless they are told otherwise .
 China’s ambiguous stance on the Russia-Ukraine war will likely speed up moves by countries from the U.K. and Australia to Japan to guard against Beijing .
 Beijing's coercive behavior toward some of its trading partners and increased military activities near the Taiwan Strait . They were already firming up economic and military ties with the United States and each other .
The Biden administration is preparing to further harden its economic policy toward China . The Biden administration has been criticized for its policies on China .
 Beijing is finding greater resistance to its effort to deepen its relations with Central and Eastern Europe . Beijing has been trying to deepen relations with the region for years .
 Prospects are dimming for the European Parliament to unfreeze the legislative process for ratifying the European Union’s investment pact with China . The deal could bolster economic ties between the bloc and Beijing, say business executives .
 A planned summit between China and the EU for April is now likely to be dominated by discussions of China’s position on Ukraine .
 Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi and his Ukrainian counterpart spoke Tuesday . The phone call illustrates Beijing's conundrum in trying to adhere to its foreign-policy stance .
 China has built its foreign policy around the principle that a country’s territory is inviolable . Its internal affairs should be free from interference by others .
 China's argument that the rest of the world should stay out of its claims on Taiwan is the foundation of its argument . China regards the self-ruled island as a part of China .
 China's commitment to that principle would force it to condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine . China has refrained from doing that, something it has refraining from doing .
 Its policy statements have called for dialogue to resolve the crisis, avoiding the word invasion .
 Russia's actions could embolden China to step up its own long-stated goal to bring Taiwan into its fold . Western officials worry that Russia’s actions based on the argument that Ukraine is historically a part of Russia could encourage China .
 Mr Xi has made himself the dominant force in China’s foreign policy and put emphasis on what he calls “big-power diplomacy’ The more centralized and aggressive foreign-affairs approach, the foreign-policy advisers say .
Despite Chinese state media's pro-Russia rhetoric, some advisers privately question whether the partnership could cut China off from Western technologies .
 China's opening to the U.S. and its allies has propelled enormous Chinese growth in the past four decades . It is China’s opening to its allies.
 China and Russia’s shared interest in confronting the U.S. has helped drive their relationship to its closest point since early in Cold War .
Xi and Putin have visions of restoring their countries to past glory, even if past was centuries ago . Xi and Putin are authoritarians who have visions.
 Mr Putin has shown Mr Xi the kind of respect he has sometimes withheld from other world leaders .
 Sergey Radchenko, an international-relations professor at Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, pointed to instances where Putin would be deliberately late for meetings with foreign dignitaries .
 Mr Putin was terrified of dogs when he met Angela Merkel . He brought out his dog to a meeting with then-German Chancellor Merkel .
 Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelensky hosted his first news conference since the war began . He invited journalists into his office building now fortified with sandbags .
 Mr Zelensky has made him a symbol of Ukrainian resistance to the Russian invasion . He laid out the state of negotiations with Russia and voiced pride in his people .
 The news conference seemed intended to signal that his battered government is at least still functioning a week into the war .
 Mr Zelensky said he was particularly proud of ordinary Ukrainians’ resistance to the Russian attack . He said he is particularly proud.
 He said that no senior officials had fled the country . Several top aides turned up at the news conference .
 Mr Zelensky said he had appealed to Western leaders for additional military support . He said he was also pursuing negotiations with the Russian leadership .
 The second of two rounds of talks with Russia in recent days took place on Thursday . The second round of talks took place in the past two days .
 negotiations wrapped up with an agreement on cease-fire corridors for civilians to escape heavy combat, but no progress on a settlement . Mr Zelensky’s negotiator at the talks said later Thursday.
 He said he was ready to compromise on some points, but he did not specify which . He did not say which, but said he would not bend on conditions threatening Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Reporters arrived at the presidential office in minivans that wove through concrete barriers and steel Ibeams welded into crosses and placed on the streets to slow tanks .
 Kyiv is usually a quiet, leafy neighborhood of offices and elegant, 19th century apartment blocks . In the government district of Kyiv, armored cars blocked crossroads .
 The vans sped through a warren of courtyards and into a back entrance to the presidential office building .
 Security officials escorted journalists by flashlight through darkened corridors filled with soldiers .
Firing positions were in place to shoot from inside Mr Zelensky’s office compound onto the street outside .
 He was, though, animated and gestured energetically to drive home points . He was also animated, but gestured energgetically. He was.
 The briefing was held in a conference room to suggest some modicum of normality . Soldiers with assault rifles stood in the room and the windows were blocked by piles of white sandbags .
 The Russian leader has rebuffed his request for direct talks with President Vladimir V Putin . He has also rebuffed both before and after the start of hostilities .
 The Russian army did not intend to repatriate its war dead to avoid stirring antiwar sentiment at home, he said . “This is a nightmare,’ he said, of the conflict and what he described as reports the Russian army didn't intend to do so .
 Many of the Russian soldiers were 18and 19-year-olds, said Mr Zelensky, 45, who is 45 .
 Mr Zelensky said he had asked Mr Scholz and Mr Macron to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine .
 The idea has been largely rebuffed by Western governments as all but impossible, for risking direct conflict between NATO and Russian forces .
Russian aggression would only spread if not stopped in Ukraine, he said . But he said that Russian aggression would not only spread in Ukraine if not stop .
 He criticized German officials for working at cross-purposes with Western efforts to pressure Russia into a settlement in eastern Ukraine war . He criticized Germany for working with the West to build a new natural gas pipeline to Russia .
 The pipeline was intended to provide cheap energy for Germany’s economy . The project is now suspended .
 Mr Zelensky said he was aware that his repeated televised appeals for resistance had turned him into a symbol of bravery and defense of democracy .
 Prime Minister Naftali Bennett of Israel has balanced support for Ukraine with an effort to maintain ties with Russia . Mr Zelensky did have caustic words for the Prime Minister .
 A Russian missile killed five civilians on the territory of a Holocaust memorial site in Kyiv, Babyn Yar . Mr Zelensky, who is Jewish, noted that a Russian missile this week killed 5 civilians .
 Mr Zelensky said he was inspired to see images of people praying at the Western Wall in Jerusalem wrapped in blue and yellow Ukrainian flags .
 He suggested it was time for the Israeli government to take a moral stand .
 Asked if he was afraid of dying in the war, he said everybody has such fears .
President Obama says he doesn't have the right to be afraid . He says he's not afraid, but as president, "I simply do not have theright to be fear"
 If he were not president, he probably would have joined volunteers who accepted rifles when the military started handing them out last week . He said he would be facing risks in any case .
 He said he might also have chosen to help by handing out food to soldiers instead . He said it could have been easier to do so than hand out food for soldiers .
 Moscow's forces have run into logistical problems, according to Western military and intelligence assessments . Defiant Ukrainians, bolstered by a huge influx of weapons from NATO countries, have put up surprisingly effective resistance .
 Russian forces cut off Mariupol, a port city to the east, while to the west, they seized the city of Kherson on Wednesday . They advanced on the port of Mykolaiv, leaving them just 60 miles from Odessa, a vital shipping center .
 Belarus, Russia and Ukraine agree to establish “humanitarian corridors’ in dangerous areas . They also agree to allow food and medicine to reach those places . The talks were held in Belarus and Ukraine .
 Fire breaks out at a complex in southern Ukraine that is home to Europe's largest nuclear power plant . Russian troops fired on the area, Ukraine’s foreign minister says .
 Security camera footage shows a building ablaze inside the power complex near a line of military vehicles . The Times verified the footage by The Times .
 The videos appeared to show people in the vehicles firing at buildings in the power plant . It was unclear if the vehicles were Russian or Ukrainian .
 President Biden spoke with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine about the fire on Thursday night . He urged Russia to “cease its military activities in the area and allow firefighters and emergency responders to access the site, the White House says .
 President Vladimir V Putin of Russia has been building what amounts to a massive military staging area in Crimea for eight years . Forces stationed there appeared well equipped to charge out of their bases and seize swaths of southern Ukrainian territory .
 Russia’s near-monopoly on naval power in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov should have provided additional firepower to assist ground troops . Russia's naval power should have been given more firepower.
 Ukraine's military has been hampered by operational breakdowns and a seeming inability of commanders to coordinate disparate military forces . If combined, Ukraine's defenses should have easily overwhelmed Ukraine’s defenses .
 An enormous Russian military convoy has stalled for three days near the capital, Kyiv . While Russian forces have extensively shelled large cities like Kharkiv, Chernihiv and Kyiv, causing civilian casualties .
 Russians have seized a coastal corridor along the Sea of Azov, linking their forces in Crimea to those in southeastern Ukraine .
Only Mariupol held out on Thursday, despite a massive Russian bombardment that had cut power, water and heat to the city . In that stretch, only Mariupols held out.
 The mayor, Vadym Boichenko, painted a grim picture of the siege of a city blockaded by land and sea . The mayor said the siege was a 'siege of the city'
 Putin said he would pay the equivalent of almost $50,000 to the family of each Russian soldier killed .
 The Chechen conflict is already the bloodiest conflict for Russia’s military since the 1999-2000 Chechen war . Such figures could not be verified.
 Mr Zelensky has emerged as an anti-Kremlin hero in the West for defying Mr Putin and remaining in Kyiv . He held his first news conference since the invasion, in a room lined with sandbags .
 He expressed willingness to compromise but did not specify on what issues . He held out little hope of reaching an agreement anytime soon .
 President Emmanuel Macron of France emerged pessimistic from a long phone conversation with Mr Putin, an aide to Mr Macron said .
 One million people have fled Ukraine for neighbors to the West, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees says . More than 300,000 people had fled Ukraine in the day before, the official says .
 Hundreds of thousands of others have been displaced from their homes but remain within Ukraine, or fled or were evacuated eastward, into Russia .
 Ukraine’s railroad agency said westbound trains were only for evacuation .
 Before the invasion, many military analysts believed that Russia would make short work of the Ukrainian forces .
 Ukraine’s own generals predicted that a full-scale Russian assault with shock troops and air power could overwhelm their military in days .
 Ukrainian troops are armed with anti-tank and antiaircraft missiles . The Territorial Defense Forces is an auxiliary to the military . 50,000 Ukrainians have returned from abroad.
Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s secretary general, met with Gen. Jens Stolltenberg after meeting in Brussels .
 Kherson, a shipbuilding center ordinarily home to 300,000 people, is one of Ukraine’s three largest ports . The city, Mykolaiv, has a peacetime population of almost 500,000, and one of the Ukraine's three biggest ports .
 As of Thursday morning, there had been no shelling inside the city, he says . Ukrainian forces on the perimeter were targeted with rocket fire, he said .
 Charging further into Ukraine could put Russian forces in danger of stretching themselves too thinly, says Michael Kofman .
 Ukraine forces in Ukraine’s south and elsewhere appear to have outpaced logistical units, forcing them to wait for supplies .
 preparations continue to shore up defenses in Odessa, Ukraine’s largest port . Odessa is a city of one million and Ukraine's largest port.
 Gennady Trukhanov visited an industrial area on the outskirts of the city . Teams of men were filling sandbags from a mountain of yellow dirt for barricades .
 Several Russian naval ships have left Crimea, headed toward Odessa .
 Ukrainian officials said the ships could have been deployed to assist an attack by Russian land forces . By evening there was no clear sense of the vessels’ whereabouts .
 Mr Kofman said it was unlikely the Russian Navy would mount an amphibious assault on the city until its forces were also ready to attack by land .
 Many Russian soldiers, including some taken prisoner, had no idea they would be sent into Ukraine, says Mr Zelensky . Some Western officials say some Russian soldiers were aghast to learn of the war .
 Russians are awakening to the reality of a war many had not expected and did not want . As word filters back of death, injury and capture, Russia is awakening to a reality of war .
 Ukrainian officials and ordinary citizens are posting to social media photos and videos of Russians killed or captured, or burned-out or abandoned Russian military vehicles .
 Rumors swirled through Russia of impending martial law, conscription and closed borders . Rumors of martial law and conscription were circulating .
 In just a week, sanctions and boycotts have deeply wounded the Russian economy . More punitive measures are expected to be expected .
 Volkswagen, Mercedes-Benz, Toyota, Ford, General Motors, Apple, Spotify, Accenture and Ikea are among the companies suspending operations in Russia .
 Major oil companies have called off joint ventures with Russian counterparts .
 The government is cracking down on the last vestiges of independent media, limiting access to information about the conflict . Some prominent Russians have denounced the war .
 Lawmakers propose prison sentences of up to 15 years for media that publish “fakes’s” Lawmakers proposed prison sentences for media who publish ‘fakes,’ widely taken to mean anything that contradicts Kremlin line .
 The television channels Dozhd and TV Rain suspended operations indefinitely . The channels have been suspended indefinitely .
 Dmitri Muratov said his newspaper, Novaya Gazeta, could be close to having to shut down . He shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year .
 Dozens of top Russian chess players made statements opposing the war . Ian Nepomniachtchi, the top-ranked Russian and recently a finalist for the world championship . Alexandra Kosteniuk, a former women’s world champion, and Alexander Grischuk.
 Putin has insisted that Ukraine is rightfully a part of Russia, not a real country . He is bent on reestablishing Moscow’s hold over much of Eastern Europe .
 He has called NATO’s eastward expansion a threat, particularly the prospect that Ukraine might join someday .
 The war has hardened anti-Kremlin attitudes in Ukraine, a former Soviet republic, and far beyond . But the war has softened anti-Russian attitudes in the former Soviet Republic .
 NATO has ramped up forces on its eastern flank, and an array of countries are sending advanced weaponry to Ukraine .
 Germany, a NATO member that had not sent arms into a conflict zone, has begun helping to arm Kyiv’s forces . Sweden and Finland, nonmembers that had tried to remain neutral in East-West clashes.
 After Russia invaded, Ukraine applied for membership in the European Union . Georgia and Moldova may do the same, officials say .
 The rule banning online sales of untraceable components for homemade weapons will not be completed until June . The official told a gathering of weapons manufacturers that the rule would not be complete until June.
 The president is demanding action on gun violence and an industry-friendly subordinate pumping the brakes . This jarring split screen infuriated some Biden allies .
 Mr Richardson's leadership of A.T.F., they believe, reflected the White House’s waning focus on gun control after the defeat last year of David Chipman .
 Senate Republicans are blocking the White House's executive actions through an underfunded agency . The White House is trying to pursue limited executive actions. But Senate Republicans have blocked him .
 progressives see Mr Richardson's low-key leadership of A.T.F. as part of the problem .
 Administration officials say Richardson is making the best of a thankless job . He has spent much of his time focused on deploying agents to deal with gun violence .
 Dena Iverson's leadership “has been critical’ to combating the recent national rise in shootings, a Justice Department spokeswoman says .
Anti-gun groups have stepped up pressure on the White House and Attorney General Merrick B Garland . The administration continues a protracted search for a new nominee to lead the bureau .
 Mr Biden has been urged to create a special gun violence office in the West Wing . He has established a special office for climate policy .
 Susan Rice's proposal has been rejected by Susan Rice, the president's domestic policy adviser . Rice is the president’s domestic policy advisor .
 Fred Guttenberg's daughter was killed in the school shooting in Parkland, Florida, in 2018 . She has told gun control activists that there is no need to hang another "shingle" in the West Wing to deal with the problem .
 A coalition of 43 groups sent a list of action items to Mr Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris last week . They urged them to move faster on an A.T.F. pick, create the new office and “use the authority of the White House to inject a new
 Mr Richardson appeared at the convention alongside Lawrence G Keane, the general counsel for the National Shooting Sports Foundation . The event was hosted by the gun industry’s main trade group, the NRA .
 Mr Keane has teamed with A.T.F. on several campaigns to limit illegal firearms purchases . He has known Mr Richardson for years and has known him for years .
 Mr Chipman led a scorched-earth effort to block a man he viewed as an existential threat to his industry . But he also helped lead the campaign that sank MrChipman’s nomination .
 Keane has publicly questioned Mr Biden's age and mental capacity . Mr Chipman has accused him of endangering his family by reposting a photograph purporting to show him standing in the ashes of Waco .
 Mr Richardson has been at the A.T.F. for more than 30 years and is expected to retire in the next year . He was not the only bureau official to attend the convention, known as the Shooting, Hunting, Outdoor Trade Show, or SHOT Show .
 The event typically attracts 55,000 attendees and raises $35 million for the National Shooting Sports Foundation . The event usually attracts 55.000 attendees .
 A total of 65 A.T.F. employees went this year, and eight of them were assigned to security details of top bureau officials .
 On average, about 55 staff members have attended the three-day event each year since 2015, an administration official says .
 A.T-F. officials say it is necessary to deploy such a large contingent in the presence of those they regulate to answer technical questions about compliance with federal law .
 Critics of the bureau say the presence of so many A.T.F. employees is emblematic of the agency's too-cozy relationship with the industry .
 Mr Keane said he did not view Mr Richardson’s attendance as an endorsement of his views .
 He said he saw it as a good-faith effort to coordinate enactment of the ghost gun regulation . He said the rule banning the use of high-capacity “bump stocks’ later in the year and a new electronic bookkeeping system .
 He defended his previous comments about Mr Biden, saying they were a reaction to the president's threat to pass a law removing the gun industry's immunity from civil lawsuits .
 Mr Richardson dedicated 30 A.T.F. staff members to process what was the largest-ever response to a firearms proposal .
 White House officials say Richardson misspoken and rule will be finished by early April . But they say the rule would, in fact, be finished early April.
 Another claim by Mr Richardson, that enforcement of the regulation would begin 90 days after the rule was completed, was also off base, and that the gap would be closer to 60 days .
Anti-violence groups and local officials in California say a delay of even a few weeks will allow manufacturers extra time to pump out untraceable components that can be used in crimes .
 White House officials say the president is doing all that he can to address the crisis . Senate Republicans have refused to consider restrictions on some semiautomatic weapons, red flag laws .
Mr Richardson had tried his best to balance the bureau's concurrent roles as a law enforcement agency and a regulatory body .
 Even the agency's harshest critics concede that its employees work under intolerable conditions and praise A.T.F.F.'s deployment of its investigative resources .
 The NYPD's intelligence division is in the same Lower Manhattan office with the Police Department’s intelligence division . To ensure closer cooperation, he took the highly unusual step of ordering his agents to work with his agents .
 The United Nations predicted that 10 million Ukrainians, about a quarter of the country's population, could be displaced by the Russian invasion . Canada announced similar relief on Thursday, as did the European Union .
 Lawmakers and advocacy groups have been calling for the relief, known as temporary protected status .
 Some have estimated that 28,000 to 30,000 Ukrainians could be eligible for the designation . The designation gives them permission to stay and work in the United States for 18 months .
 It will not apply to any Ukrainians who entered the country after March 1 . In this case, it will not applied to anyone who entered after March 2 .
 The Biden administration moved quickly on the designation, even as advocates have been pleading with the government for months to offer similar relief to Cameroon .
 Daniel Tse, the founder of the Cameroon Advocacy Network, said he saw a racial component to the decisions . Tse said he sees a racial element in the decisions.
 Homeland Security decides when to grant temporary protected status in close coordination with White House . Department of Homeland Security did not immediately respond to a request for comment .
 Previously, Mr Mayorkas has said that the immigration system treats all migrants equally .
 Both Republican and Democratic lawmakers have called for the administration to offer the benefit to Ukrainians .
 Senator Bob Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, praised the administration for giving this relief to Ukrainians .
Citizens of Cameroon, Ethiopia and Afghanistan are eligible for the same benefit . But he also urged the White House to designate citizens of Cameroon and Ethiopia .
 The administration also paused deportations on commercial flights to the region, an official says .
 On March 1, three Ukrainians were scheduled for deportation to Kyiv on a commercial flight . They were scheduled to be deported on a flight .
 More than 1,000 Ukrainians were caught crossing the southwest border of the United States from October to January . The increase is a significant increase compared with previous years .
 There are currently more than 400,000 people living in the U.S. under temporary protected status . There are also immigrants from Burma, El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Nepal, Nicaragua, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela and Yemen .
 Advocates for limiting immigration have been critical of the program . They say it lets people who receive the designation stay in the United States permanently .
 The federal agency that handles applications for the temporary benefit reports about a six-month wait period .
 Ukrainian immigrants who qualify for the program can also apply for authorization to work in the United States . Ukrainians who qualify can work in U.S.
 Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada announced a new program for fleeing Ukrainians to be granted quick, temporary immigration status in the country . Ukraine has a large Ukrainian population .
 Ukrainian-Canadians can sponsor family members fleeing Ukraine to settle permanently in Canada . The government also announced a special program, through which family members can stay in Canada.
 The world spent months wondering whether Russian President Vladimir Putin would invade Ukraine .
Trying to define Mr Putin's ultimate endgame in attacking Ukraine has become consuming questions .
 The Kremlin's immediate goal is to drive Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy from power and install a friendly regime that toes the line on Mr Putin's security demands .
 Such a government would immediately sever Kyiv’s growing ties with the West, end its quest to join NATO . It would provide a major shot in the arm for Mr Putin's larger ambition to rebuild Russian influence across Eastern Europe .
 Russia may be able to topple the Zelenskyy regime, but maintaining full control over Europe’s largest country would require a massive, long-term military presence and Soviet-style repression .
 Mr Putin already facing growing protests at home, and the West’s unprecedented economic pressure on Moscow would make the prospects of a drawn-out guerrilla war in Ukraine a tough sell to a Russian population that has shown minimal enthusiasm for the war .
 Ukrainian military and its cache of Western weapons are more than capable of wreaking havoc on Moscow in the form of a highly motivated insurgency . Mr Putin's forces are chipping away at troops’ appetite to fight.
 The lack of clarity about Mr Putin’s endgame has fueled talk that he may not have one .
 Any Russian attempt to take over all of Ukraine and govern it as a satellite state harks back to the failed invasion of Afghanistan in the 1980s .
 The campaign exposed the limits of a military as mighty as that of the Soviet Union . That campaign exposed that campaign .
 The end of the U.S. military’s 20-year effort to stop another insurgency in Afghanistan offers the Kremlin a second cautionary tale .
 The two nations are back at the negotiating table . With a full Ukrainian surrender seemingly off the table, the two countries are back in talks .
 Mr Zelenskyy on Thursday expressed openness to talking directly with Mr Putin, raising the possibility of some sort of negotiated settlement .
 Mr Zelenskyy: We don't threaten anyone, we are not terrorists . We don’t threat anyone, he says .
 Mr Zelenskyy said it’s not so much that he wants to talk with Mr Putin but he probably has to .
 A peace deal, in theory, could include assurances from Ukraine that U.S. and NATO troops won't operate on its soil . Ukraine will never host any long-range missiles or other weapons that could be used to target Russia .
In addition to a slow-burning insurgent war against Russian troops, possibilities include a Ukraine that is cut into two .
 Some analysts have dubbed that scenario the ‘Cyprus model’ in reference to a split of the country after a Turkish invasion in 1974 to support the Turkish Cypriot population .
 In Ukraine, that might mean a Russian-dominated eastern half of Ukraine, representing rump independent states recognized by few countries around the world .
 An independent Ukrainian government would continue to hold sway in the west . An independent government would still hold sway.
 Mr Putin has laid out a set of grievances dating to the fall of the Soviet Union . He has made a string of speeches, essays and even his declaration of war last week .
 NATO’s expansion across Eastern Europe and the Balkans includes the fate of ethnic Russian populations “trapped” in other countries . The “color revolutions’ in Ukraine and other countries that are trying to topple Kremlinfriendly regimes, he said .
 Mr Putin feels strong enough to rebuild the great power status of the Soviet Union, analysts say .
 Few nations outside of close Russian allies would recognize any Kremlin claim over Ukrainian territory or a Russian puppet state claiming control over Ukrainian soil .
 The world has largely rejected Mr Putin’s claim to the Crimean Peninsula . The international community would certainly follow suit if Russia tries to split Ukraine .
 If Russia is defeated or bogged down by a bloody insurgency, Mr Putin could lash out with something more drastic .
 The erratic Russian leader this week put his nuclear forces on high alert . He may dramatically escalate the situation if his forces can’t secure a quick victory .
 Putin laid out that vision in a 90-minute phone call with French President Emmanuel Macron .
 Mr Macron ended the phone call convinced that Mr Putin was determined to take control of all of Ukraine .
 U.S. and NATO almost certainly would reject any Moscow-backed government .
 The West could recognize Mr Zelenskyy or another leader who takes his place as the head of a Ukrainian government in exile with headquarters elsewhere in Europe .
 The prospect of Ukrainian resistance forces based in neighboring NATO countries carrying out a guerrilla war against the Russian puppet government is just one more nightmare scenario for Western planners .
 The Biden administration has staunchly rejected the idea of U.S. forces fighting in Ukraine . It hasn't entertained questions about a Russian military victory .
 Foreign policy specialists say such an outcome would be chilling and would raise the danger of conflict between Russia and the West .
 The U.S. and its allies would have to decide whether to continue their massive economic sanctions campaign on Russia or relax measures over time if the fighting stops .
 "These two responsibilities ... will not necessarily be compatible," they wrote .
 Russian and Ukrainian officials tentatively agreed to create ‘humanitarian corridors’ to evacuate citizens from combat zones . But they failed to reach any major cease-fire Thursday . Russia’s military pushed deeper into Ukraine, battling to control a key electricity-producing hub in the south
 President Biden announced that the United States was widening the number of Russian oligarchs to target for economic sanctions . The move comes from the Kremlin's decision to invade Russia .
 He said he was working with European and other allies around the world to freeze assets of wealthy Russian elites with ties to Vladimir Putin .
 He said in a short speech to the nation that the week-old invasion was proceeding ‘according to schedule’ Despite signs that Moscow's ground advance on Ukraine’s capital in the north has apparently stalled .
 A huge armored column was at a standstill outside Kyiv, and Ukrainian forces were putting up an unexpectedly tough fight against a larger and better-armed Russian army .
 Russians have launched hundreds of missiles and artillery attacks on cities across Ukraine . The Russians have brought their superior firepower to bear.
 Kyiv confirmed that the southern city of Kherson had fallen, making the Black Sea port of 280,000 people the first major city fully seized .
 Russian troops also made significant ground gains along Ukraine’s southern coastline . Russian troops made significant gains toward a goal of cutting Kyiv's access to the Black and Azov seas .
 Russia is building a land corridor to the Crimean Peninsula, which Moscow seized in 2014 . Such a development would deal a major blow to Ukraine’s economy .
 The Crimea annexation gave Russia a logistical advantage with shorter supply lines that smoothed the Russian military’s offensive in that part of Ukraine . A senior U.S. defense official said on the condition of anonymity.
 Heavy fighting also continued on the outskirts of another strategic port, Mariupol, on the Azov Sea, plunging it into darkness . It knocked out most phone service and raised the prospect of food and water shortages .
 Ukrainian officials said their missile defense systems have parried numerous attacks . Kyiv Mayor Vitali Klitschko said explosions overnight in the capital were Russian missiles being shot down .
 Kyiv has stared down the Russian aggression by calling on Ukrainians to rise up and wage a guerrilla war against the invaders . Kyiv calls for Ukrainians to fight back against the Russian invasion .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said his countrymen are not afraid of anything and will continue to resist the Russian invaders .
 Small-scale protests simmered in Russian cities, and high-profile artists, scholars, athletes and chess players publicly condemned the war .
 Mr Putin insists the week-old invasion was unfolding according to plan . Still, Mr Putin insisted that the invasion was not planned .
 At the start of the invasion, he falsely claimed that one goal was the “de-nazification’ of Ukraine’s leadership under Mr Zelenskyy .
 Putin has been criticized for promoting deliberate disinformation about Mr Zelenskyy, who is Jewish . Western analysts have criticized Mr Putin for his comments .
 Mr Putin separately praised Russian forces and announced that the Kremlin would pay compensation to families of Russian soldiers killed in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian officials reported it as far higher as possible . The actual number is not clear .
 The number of Ukrainians who had fled to Poland, Moldova and other neighboring countries topped | million . More than a million more are still on the way, U.N. officials say .
 A Macron aide told the Agence France-Presse news agency that the French president heard “nothing that could reassure us from Mr Putin’s Russia . “The worst is still to come” in Ukraine, the aide said .
 Ukrainian and Russian delegations met for a tense second round of talks in neighboring Belarus . Ukraine and Russia held talks for the second time in a week .
 Both delegations emerged saying they had agreed to establish tentative cease-fires in areas designated as ‘humanitarian corridors’ inside Ukraine .
 The apparent goal is to establish pathways for civilians to escape and facilitate the delivery of food and medicine to areas hit by the heaviest fighting .
 Long lines formed outside pharmacies and bakeries that remained open in Kyiv .
 Russian forces battled for control of Enerhodar, a crucial energy-producing hub on the Dnieper River . It accounts for about one-quarter of Ukraine’s power generation .
Mayor of Enerhodar, the site of the biggest nuclear plant in Europe, said Ukrainian forces were battling Russian troops .
 Video shows flames and clouds of black smoke rising above the city of more than 50,000 .
 People streamed away from the inferno past wrecked cars as sirens wailed .
 The United States and its allies have avoided a direct military confrontation with Russia . The U.S. and allies have not been involved in any military confrontation .
 Ukraine has responded to the invasion by channeling more weaponry to Ukrainian forces . Instead, it has implemented a massive economic sanctions campaign against the Russian state and political elites who back Putin government .
 U.S. has leveled a fresh slate of sanctions directly targeting Russian oligarchs with ties to Mr Putin .
 Notable targets of the sanctions included Alisher Burhanovich Usmanov, a wealthy Russian whose yacht was just seized by German authorities .
 Administration officials said 19 Russian oligarchs and 47 of their family members will face visa restrictions from the State Department .
 Others sit atop Russia's largest companies and are responsible for providing the resources necessary to support Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, fact sheet says .
 I don’t believe this is going to be the last set of oligarchs’ to be sanctioned. I don't believe this will be the first time this has been sanctioned .
 The U.S. and allies also issued sanctions on 26 Russia and Ukraine-based people who play central roles in spreading disinformation about the invasion .
 Some Russian oligarchs have come out in opposition to the war, including billionaire tycoon Oleg Deripaska . The war had been sanctioned by Western nations .
 He warned that potential damage to Ukraine’s nuclear power facilities as a result of the combat could endanger lives in Ukraine and Europe as a whole .
 Mr Deripaska is the latest in a number of Russian oligarchs targets of sanctions from the West . The West are calling for an end to the invasion of Ukraine .
 Others on the list include Mikhail Fridman, Pyotr Aven, Oleg Tinkov and Aleksei Mordashov . The list also includes billionaires Mikhail Fidman and Pyotsr Aven .
 Mr Zelenskyy appealed in a press conference for face-to-face talks with Mr Putin .
 He joked that they should not be separated by a 30-foot table as other Western leaders have been on recent Kremlin visits . Other Western leaders are on recent visits to Russia .
 He excoriated NATO nations for refusing to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine to challenge Russian air superiority . He excored NATO nations.
 Putin accuses foreign mercenaries of attacking the Russian military and supply convoys taking part in the invasion of Ukraine .
 Mr Konashenkov said such “acts of sabotage’s are being carried out with weapons supplied by the West .
 There is a rash of videos of foreign volunteers on social media sites, he says .
 Ukrainian officials have lodged their own charges that Russian mercenaries are assisting in the invasion of Ukraine . Ukrainian officials say Russian mercenaries were assisting the invasion .
 President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said the Wagner Group had hired mercenaries to try to assassinate him and other top figures in the Ukrainian government . The Wagner Group is a Russian private security firm .
 Demand for COVID-19 vaccines collapses in many areas of the U.S. states are scrambling to use stockpiles of doses before they expire .
Public health departments are shuffling doses around in the hopes of finding providers that can use them . Some of the least vaccinated states, like Indiana and North Dakota, are moving doses around .
 State health departments have tracked millions of doses that went to waste, including ones that expired, were in a multi-dose vial that couldn't be used completely .
 Nearly 1 million doses in Michigan, 1.45 million in North Carolina, 1 million in Hlinois and almost 725,000 doses in Washington couldn't be used . Nearly 1.5 million doses were used in Michigan and 1.25 million in Washington .
 The percentage of wasted doses in California is only about 1.8% . California has received 84 million doses and administered more than 71 million of them . That equates to roughly 1.1 million doses .
 California Department of Public Health says doses must be kept until they expire, then properly dispose of them .
 More than a million doses of the Russian Sputnik vaccine expired this week in Guatemala . The problem is not unique to the United States .
 Vaccination program managers say that tossing out doses is inevitable in any inoculation campaign . The difficulty in aligning supply and demand for a product with a limited shelf life is the reason for the decision .
 The coronavirus pandemic has killed nearly 6 million people and shattered economies across the globe . Every dose that goes to waste feels like a missed opportunity considering how successful the vaccines are in preventing death .
 People desperate to get the vaccine attempted to jump in line to get ahead of those deemed higher priority . It comes only about a year after people attempted to get it in line. It also comes about ayear after people tried to jump into line for the vaccine .
 Hospital board members, their trustees and donors around the U.S. got early access or offers for vaccinations . The developing world had virtually no doses .
 13 countries in Africa have less than 5% of their population fully vaccinated . Many poorer nations still have low vaccine rates, including 13 with less than five% of the population vaccinated .
 T hey are plagued by unpredictable deliveries, weak health care systems, vaccine hesitancy and some supply issues . But inventory is markedly stronger than earlier in the pandemic .
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now advises doctors that it’s OK to discard doses if it means opening up the standard multi-dose vials to vaccinate a single person .
 Joseph Bresee directs the COVID-19 Vaccine Implementation Program at the Task Force for Global Health in Decatur, Georgia .
 The Department of Health and Human Services also said that redistributing states’ excess doses to other nations is not feasible . The difficulty in transporting the shots, which must remain cold, is not cost effective .
 The vaccines are authorized in the U.S. by Pfizer, Moderna and Johnson & Johnson . They can last for up to six months from the time of manufacture .
 A senior HHS official would not say how many doses nationwide have already been marked as wastage . The official says states would have the most accurate figures .
 The official took issue with the word "wastage" saying it implies mismanagement when states are effectively overseeing their inventories .
 The average number of Americans getting their first shot is down to about 70,000 a day . The lowest point since the U.S. vaccination campaign began in December 2020 .
 About 76% of the U.S. population has received at least one shot and roughly 65% of all Americans are fully vaccinated . About 75% of Americans have received a shot and about 65% have been vaccinated .
 states will undoubtedly be confronted with more waste in the months ahead, although they will benefit from any booster expansions .
 Idaho, for example, has 230,000 doses on hand but is only averaging fewer than 2,000 a week . Idaho is averaging less than 2.000 doses a week.
 Oregon’s vaccination rate is slightly higher than the national average . Health authority says they have “significant excess vaccine on hand’ because of the recent drop in demand .
 The state is trying to use up as many of the 716,000 doses in its inventory as possible as possible . The state has tried to use as many as possible.
 Rhode Island has the highest percentage of residents who are fully vaccinated in the nation . The health department reported having 137,000 doses on hand .
 Health officials say they need them for a big push to increase the vaccination rate for booster doses . The vaccination rate is expected to be increased by 20 per cent .
 Health officials in some states have developed “matchmaker’s” programs to connect vaccine providers with providers seeking doses . The programs are designed to connect providers with vaccine providers.
 Many said they’re attempting to redistribute doses with expiration dates that are quickly approaching . Many are trying to distribute doses that have expiration dates.
 New Jersey has a task force that has transferred more than 600,000 doses around the state since June .
 West Virginia has offered to transfer Pfizer adult doses to nearby states . West Virginia is offering to transfer adult doses.
 Immunization managers have been asking for single-dose vials, especially for pediatricians, but it may not work for manufacturers to package it that way .
 HHS said states are ordering prudently, paralleling the drop in demand . States are ordered prudently.
 The minimum order for Pfizer used to be nearly 1,200 doses but now it's 100 . Moderna reduced the number of doses per vial .
 Numerous interviews with Russian captives have been circulating on Ukrainian social media channels . Yet there are numerous similar interviews with captives .
 Eight days after Vladimir Putin's invasion it is clear that a significant number of his servicemen are demoralised and reluctant to fight .
 Others have abandoned their vehicles and set off back towards the Russian border on foot, videos suggest . Others have set off on foot with weapons and kitbags .
 The Kremlin's tactics shift to brutal shelling of civilians in Ukraine . These episodes do not mean that the Kremlin will fail in its attempts to conquer Ukraine .
 Russia's blitzkrieg plan to overwhelm Ukraine appears not to have progressed at the speed Putin would have wanted . Low morale among invading troops might be one reason why Russia’s Blitzkrieg plans appear to have been slow .
 The assumption in Moscow was that the operation would be swift and successful. The assumption was that it would be quick and successful .
 Soldiers given food and fuel supplies for only two or three days, videos suggest . Soldiers were given food, fuel and food supplies for just two and three days .
 The Kremlin appears to have had a totally fantastical idea of the reception they would get . The Kremlin also appears to be having an idea of a reception they'd get .
 Several prisoners of war said they had been assured Ukrainians would welcome them as liberators . Several prisoners said they were assured they would welcome Ukrainians .
 Russian forces are expecting flowers and cheers, not bullets and bombs, they said . Russian forces were expecting flowers, but not bullets .
 English teacher Artem Mazhulin says he didn't anticipate resistance . "They didn’t anticipate resistance," he says .
 Mazhulin said his uncle and aunt, Viktor and Valentina, had talked with Russian soldiers when they rolled past their house in Kupiansk, in north-east Ukraine, close to the border . Mazhulin said his aunt and aunt had talked
 The soldiers explained they were looking for Banderivtsi, or followers of the second world war Ukrainian nationalist leader Stepan Bandera . The soldiers said they are looking for the second World War War leader .
 Kovzhun said the Russian general staff had thought the invasion would be ‘easy peasy’ He said the invasion was a repeat of the operations to seize Crimea in 2014 .
 Ukrainian civilians had stood in front of enemy tanks, blocked armoured columns with their bare hands . Instead, they had sung the national anthem and blocked the armoured columns .
 Ukrainian figure for killed enemy soldiers is likely to be more reliable than the Russian estimate .
 There is little to show how the Ukrainian authorities have arrived at their own total, he said .
 The several thousand dead tally could itself be a slight exaggeration, he said . The several thousands dead tally may itself be an exaggeration .
 Ukraine is utilising the discomfort of captured soldiers for propaganda purposes . There is no doubt Ukraine is using the discomfort to make propaganda .
 Several videos show young men calling their mothers back in Russia, who have no idea their sons are fighting in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian authorities have opened a hotline for worried Russian relatives . The hotline is in response to a PR scoop .
 There is an authentic sense that many Russian servicemen regret ever having come to Ukraine . Some have died or been disillusioned in Ukraine .
 No changes in radiation has been recorded, but any loss of ability to cool nuclear fuel would lead to “significant radioactive emissions’s” that could ‘outgrow all previous nuclear power plant accidents’
 The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael Mariano Grossi, offered to travel to Ukraine to facilitate talks with Russia . The talks are aimed at guaranteeing the safety of nuclear plants during the conflict .
 The situation “continues to be extremely tense and challenging,’ he said . The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, appealed directly to Russians to stage protests .
 The death toll from Russian airstrikes in a residential district of Chernihiv rose to 47, regional authorities said . The blaze took hold in a training building on the site's perimeter .
 e Russian forces were in control of local and regional government buildings in the strategically important Black Sea port of Kherson . A third round of talks is set to take place next week .
 Russian forces appeared to be moving to cut Ukraine off from the sea via its key southern ports . E Concern is mounting over the movements of a huge column of Russian military vehicles outside Kyiv .
 "deconfliction" line has been established, but not officially announced . Multiple news organisations confirmed the news .
 Players Association agrees to suspend all Covid-19 protocols, effective immediately, returning teams and players to pre-pandemic operations for the first time since March 2020 . Players Association agreed to suspend the protocols,effective immediately, after March 2020.
 The N.F.L., which is not in season, is the first of the U.S. major professional sports leagues to halt its coronavirus-related policies . It is not the first major sports league to halt the policies .
 Players and team staff members will no longer be required to wear masks inside facilities . Each team will have to comply with local ordinances governing mask mandates .
 There will be no mandatory testing cadence for anyone who self-reports coronavirus symptoms . Teams are expected to provide an area where P.C.R tests can be run on-site .
 Those who test positive will be required to isolate for five days, as per current recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Those who tested positive will need to isolate.
 New case numbers and hospitalizations have fallen sharply from the nationwide peak in January .
 The N.F.L. said it would work with the players’ union and medical experts to monitor whether protocols needed to be reimposed in full or in part . The memo said in the memo that it would also work with players' union, medical experts .
 The circuit will return to pre-pandemic access to facilities including locker room, dining room and fitness area . A PGA Tour spokesperson said the circuit would return next week to the facilities .
 The tour discontinued testing last summer for players and caddies unless they were symptomatic . The tour still had limited other staff and visitors’ access to the mainly indoor facilities used by players .
 The N.B.A. and the N.H.L. are among the leagues that relaxed, but did not eliminate, their protocols in January . The leagues relaxed their protocols, but didn't eliminate them.
 The league did not report any positive tests between the divisional round playoff games and the Super Bowl . But the league didn't report any test results between the two games .
 In the final weeks of the 2021 season, the league dropped testing of asymptomatic players, regardless of vaccination status . The league dropped tests of players regardless of their vaccination status.
 The league mandated in December that all team staff members who were in close contact with players receive a booster shot . All team members who are close to players who are in contact with them receive the shot .
 Last month, the league said only about 10 percent of players had been boosted . But that number may have gone up since the end of the season .
 The C.D.C. announced its new strategy of assessing coronavirus community levels to help return the country to some version of normal life . That figure is up from 70 percent last week, when the C.S. announced the new strategy .
 C.D.C. shared updated guidance, cities and states were quickly shedding mask mandates . Cases of the Omicron variant declined and calls for relaxed measures grew louder .
 The recommendations no longer rely only on the number of cases in a community to determine the need for restrictions such as mask wearing . The recommendations will no longer be used to determine whether or not mask wearing is needed .
 counties can calculate whether the risk to their residents is low, medium or high . Only areas of high risk should require everyone to wear a mask, according to the agency .
Unvaccinated people should wear masks even in low-risk areas, the agency says . But unvaccination people should not wear masks in low risk areas .
 West Virginia and large swaths of Kentucky, Virginia, Nebraska and Montana remain at a high risk according to the C.D.C. data .
 Among the communities considered high risk in the state is Kanawha County, which includes Charleston, the capital .
 The gap has become especially pronounced among children who are eligible for vaccines . Vaccination rates for 5to 11-year-olds are twice as high in urban areas as in rural ones .
 Vaccination rates tend to be markedly lower in counties where a majority of residents voted to re-elect former President Donald J Trump in 2020 .
Covid has taken a devastating toll on the most Republican parts of the country since the Delta variant began circulating .
 The number of Americans dying each day from Covid has fallen in recent weeks as Omicron cases have plummeted . The death toll has fallen as the number of people in the city has fallen .
 More than 1,800 people are now dying on average per day in the Delta . The daily death toll remains nearly as high as it was during the worst days of the Delta surge .
 The C.D.C. study examined how many people in almost all U.S. counties had received at least a first dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech or Moderna vaccines or a single dose of Johnson & Johnson vaccine .
 vaccination coverage among people at least five years old was 59 percent, compared with 75 percent in urban counties . In rural areas, vaccination coverage in rural areas is 59 percent .
 The gap was more than twice as high as it was among American adults in April 2021 . eligibility was widened to include all adults, the C.C. said .
 Many rural areas suffered from inadequate access to health care, scientists say . In addition to problems overcoming partisan resistance to vaccines, C.D.C. scientists say that many rural areas suffer from inadequate health care .
 Nearly 40 percent of rural parents have reported that their child’s doctor did not recommend a Covid vaccine . 8 percent of parents in urban areas have not had a vaccine, the C.D.C. said .
 C.D.C. says coverage of booster doses is lagging in urban and rural areas alike . But coverage is lagged in rural areas, the C.C.'s report says .
 Roughly 50 percent of those eligible for a booster shot or additional dose had received one in both urban and rural counties .
Mask masks will no longer be mandatory in public settings like grocery stores, restaurants and bars . Starting on Friday, masks will be no longer mandatory in places like restaurants, bars and grocery stores .
 Proof of vaccination or negative test results will no longer be necessary to enter indoor bars, wineries or most other businesses .
 California state rules still require proof of vaccination or negative test results to enter large indoor events . The state also requires masks on transit and in other high-risk settings .
 Los Angeles County is in the low-risk category, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's updated measures .
 Ferrer says masks are strongly recommended, and individual businesses could opt to keep in place . Ferrer said that masks were strongly recommended .
 The moment marks a major symbolic milestone for Angelenos who have weathered some of the nation's deadliest surges . Los Angeles will still require bars, restaurants and many other indoor businesses to check vaccine status .
 Ferrer has been a particular voice of caution, even as her department has faced frustration from residents . Residents believed stringent rules were unnecessary .
 Ferrer has shifted her focus toward measures to prevent surges, hospitalizations and deaths . Ferrer, along with other public health officials across the country, is focusing on preventing surges and hospitalizations .
 County will continue to help residents get vaccinated, county spokeswoman says . She says her department will track case data closely to intervene before outbreaks at schools or businesses .
 The county would work to ensure that all communities have equitable access to therapeutics for people who get sick with Covid-19. Ferrer emphasized that the county would be working to ensure all communities had access to treatments .
 The governors of California, Oregon and Washington jointly announced that on March 12, they would lift statewide mask requirements in schools . Some of the last remaining statewide restrictions were last remaining restrictions in schools.
California officials lifted a mask mandate for unvaccinated people in indoor public spaces on Tuesday . California officials lifted the mask mandate Tuesday .
 In March 2020, for the first time in the U.S. agency’s nearly 60-year history, Peace Corps temporarily suspended its operations . More than 7,000 volunteers were evacuated from posts in more than 60 countries .
 The organization will send initial cohorts of new volunteers and volunteers to Zambia and the Dominican Republic later this month .
 The Peace Corps first sent a small group of 21 volunteers to the Dominican Republic nearly 60 years ago in the summer of 1962 .
 The organization was created by President John F Kennedy in 1961 . The organization is an independent agency of the United States government .
 The Peace Corps sends volunteers abroad to help with social and economic development projects . Volunteers dig wells, teach in schools and train people in everything from sewing to breastfeeding .
Volunteers deployed in Zambia will provide education about the coronavirus and promote access to vaccines . The volunteers will engage with communities to provide education and promote vaccines .
 Dominican Republic will support communities to overcome challenges that were exacerbated by the pandemic . Those in the Dominican Republic are also helping to recover literacy skills and prepare young adults for the work force .
 Peace Corps officials have ambitions to send increasingly more volunteers internationally . About 50 volunteers in total make up the two initial cohorts of 50 volunteers .
 The organization has targeted communities in Africa and Latin America for the initial returning deployments because of the regions’ reliable medical evacuation points . The organization is also targeting communities in the region for the return deployments .
 One third of Hong Kong’s ambulance workers have tested positive for the coronavirus . One third are isolating because they are close contacts of positive cases .
 That's nearly 1,000 employees, said Saphine Yip at the Fire Services Department .
 The longest wait time for an ambulance was a day and 15 hours, she said . The longest waiting time for a ambulance was 15 hours .
 Officials are battling the city's worst coronavirus outbreak, with 56,827 cases reported on Thursday . The outbreak is the city’s worst.
 The city has recorded 1,153 deaths since the Omicron variant began to spread in January . The majority of deaths have been among the older people who are not vaccinated .
Hong Kong avoided massive outbreaks by employing tough border controls and social distancing rules . For much of the pandemic, Hong Kong avoided major outbreaks by using tough border control and socialdistancing rules.
 Officials recorded singleor doubledigit daily cases for the last two years . Most of those were considered imported cases from travelers who had recently arrived in Hong Kong and were still in quarantine .
 Hong Kong is becoming a cautionary tale, with scenes that recall the earliest — and most fearful — days of the pandemic .
 Hospitals have run out of beds in isolation wards and are operating at near full occupancy rate . Dead bodies have piled up in hospital hallways because of limited manpower to move dead to public morgues .
 Healthcare workers and emergency responders have been faced with soaring demand for their services from the public . Officials have appealed to those with mild symptoms to stay home instead of using precious government resources .
 New cases fell by 16 percent last week, according to new data from the World Health Organization . The World Health Organisation released the data Tuesday .
 Deaths dropped by 10 percent, in a continuation of the downward trends reported by the agency the previous week .
 The W.H.O.’s Western Pacific region reported a 32 percent increase in new weekly cases .
 Despite high vaccination rates in China and Vietnam, new cases have multiplied rapidly over the past two weeks . New cases have been reported in both countries .
 56 percent of the global population is now fully vaccinated, W.H.O. officials say . Vaccine supply and delivery constraints have improved, they say .
 More than 10 billion doses of the vaccine have been administered, according to Our World in Data . The vaccine has been administered over 10 billion times .
 Leaders of countries and municipalities have interpreted the decline in cases and deaths as a signal that life could return to normal in the near future .
 In recent weeks, pandemic restrictions such as mask mandates governing public spaces and schools have fallen away in many communities .
 The toll on mental health has been steep and gaps in care persist, the W.H.O. said in a report on Wednesday . But the toll on the mental health is steep, the report said .
 depression and anxiety had increased by 25 percent in the pandemic's first year . The agency found that in the first year, depression had increased 25 percent .
 The report named a long list of stressors aggravating mental health issues, including social isolation, loneliness, fear of infection, financial duress, the suffering and death of loved ones and grief after bereavement .
People with pre-existing mental health disorders were not predisposed to contracting the virus . They were more likely to be hospitalized, become severely ill and die if infected .
 The pandemic has also disproportionately affected the mental health of young people and women, the report says .
 Pregnant women have been particularly vulnerable, according to W.H.O. officials .
 New Zealand is being walloped by a major outbreak of the Omicron variant . The virus is spreading at what may be the fastest rate in the world .
 The country reported 23,194 new cases, a once unthinkable number in a small island nation of about five million people . The current wave was in the low hundreds .
 The explosion in cases has come as the government loosened its strict regulations meant to prevent the spread of the virus . The highly transmissible Omicron reduced the effectiveness of the controls that remained .
 Many New Zealanders have anxiety as they learn to live with the pandemic-related risk that the rest of the world has grappled with since early 2020 . That has filled many with anxiety.
 Roscosmos announced it would stop selling rocket engines to American companies . Also announced it will stop selling rockets to U.S. companies .
 The moves, both fallout from Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine, stand to further isolate the Russian space agency from its Western space partners, and limit Russia's private space activities dramatically .
 OneWeb was rescued from bankruptcy in 2020 by the British government and other investors .
 It was scheduled to launch 36 satellites aboard a Russian Soyuz rocket from Kazakhstan on Friday . The launch was scheduled for Friday .
 Mr Rogozin also posted a video on Twitter showing Roscosmos personnel on a platform next to the rocket covering up British, American and Japanese flags .
 The space agency’s ultimatum came just three days before the previously planned launch . British officials and OneWeb shareholders decided Wednesday night to cease all future launches from Baikonur .
 Mr Rogozin suggested on Twitter that OneWeb’s decision would plunge the company into another bankruptcy proceeding .
 OneWeb’s chief of government affairs, Chris McLaughlin, dismissed the warning . McLaughlin is the chief of Government affairs .
 Britain does not possess its own ability to launch large payloads to orbit . Britain has not been able to launch its own payloads .
Mr McLaughlin said OneWeb would look to alternative launch providers in Japan, India and the U.S.
 The company was rescued from bankruptcy in 2020 by India's Bharti Enterprises, OneWeb’s largest shareholder . Britain's $500 million public investment in the satellite operator aimed to boost Britain's space economy .
 OneWeb's aim to complete its mega-constellation faces serious disruption . Without rockets to launch on, OneWeb’s aim is to complete the mega- constellation .
Starlink constellation is competing with SpaceX’s Starlink constellation to beam internet to remote regions around the world .
 OneWeb faced pressure from British politicians to follow energy companies in severing Russian business ties . OneWeb had already faced pressure by British politicians.
 The company had paid for its Russian launches in bulk through Arianespace, the French rocket company, and had six more missions remaining under the contract . The launch lineup likely worth hundreds of millions of dollars .
 OneWeb is set to enter negotiations with Arianespace to determine how to retrieve the money for the suspended Soyuz missions . OneWeb official says he was not authorized to disclose the details .
 The 36 satellites currently in Russia for Friday’s now-canceled mission will be stored while OneWeb searches for a different launch provider . The official added it was unclear to OneWeb executives when or how the 36 satellites would be stored .
Launch contracts of this size are typically signed two years in advance, says Mr Henry .
 Russia's move to hobble the business of one of its biggest commercial clients was perhaps the strongest example so far of how the war in Ukraine was spilling over into space . Russia has for decades found cooperation with countries that were once its Cold War adversaries .
 Roscosmos withdrew more than 80 Russian personnel from French Guiana last week . The European Space Agency has its only launch site and flies commercial Soyuz missions .
 ESA said a joint robotic mission to Mars by the agency and Russia is now “very unlikely to proceed on time’ The mission is expected to launch later this year .
 Roscosmos said it would stop cooperating with Germany on joint space station research projects . The Russian space agency said it will stop cooperating on the projects .
 Roscosmos's isolation from its Western partners seemed inevitable, says Victoria Samson .
 NASA has said it intends to continue cooperating with its Russian counterparts . NASA and Roscosmos jointly manages the International Space Station .
 The two partners had been negotiating an agreement to launch Russian astronauts on Crew Dragon, a SpaceX vehicle that carries NASA astronauts .
 Russia says it will halt the sale of rocket engines to American companies . The move would be beyond cooperation with NASA .
 SpaceX also provides this service to the space station, as do spacecraft launched by Japan and Russia .
 Russia will no longer provide assistance in the use of a different Russian engine already purchased and in use by United Launch Alliance for Atlas 5 .
 U.L.A.’s chief executive, Tory Bruno, played down the effect of the loss of technical aid from Russia . New tents were setup Thursday a block away .
 City crews removed the infamous encampment from a field near Mercer and Highway 99 on Wednesday . But tents have now appeared across the street .
 Some business owners say the city is just moving the problem around instead of solving it . That has led to frustration for some business owners .
 When crime and safety problems were across the street from Copiers Northwest, employees there said it was bad enough .
 The firm's workers now fear things will get worse with campers moving to their doorstep . The company's workers are now worried that campers will move to the doorstep .
 KOMO News saw some of the relocated campers openly doing drugs at the site . Some campers were seen doing drugs .
 The encampment on Mercer Street had a history of violent crimes caught on camera . A machete attack, a deadly hit-and-run, tent fires and robberies were among the crimes .
 Hope Team said 33 people accepted offers for shelter after camp was clear . Another 17 turned down the help .
 Some campers have even barricaded themselves in a vacant building, an outreach worker says .
 As more tents takeover the sidewalk, they're demanding to know what the end game is .
 The videos appeared to show people in the vehicles firing at buildings in the power plant .
 The blaze went out after 6m. Ukraine’s state emergency service later said the blaze was caused by a fire .
 The fire did not affect essential equipment at the plant, the International Atomic Energy Agency says . The plant is in Ukraine, the agency says .
 Ukraine's nuclear regulatory inspectorate says Russian military forces are now occupying the complex . About an hour after dawn, Ukraine’s nuclear watchdog says .
 All of the site’s power units remained intact and no changes in radiation levels had been observed . It said that all of the power units remain intact .
 The fire broke out after a Russian attack on a training building outside the perimeter of the plant, Ukraine's state emergency service said .
 Andriy Tuz told Ukrainian television that shells had set fire to one of the plant’s six reactors that was under renovation and not operating .
 Ukraine’s nuclear inspectorate later said one unit of the six was operating, another was in “outage,” two were being cooled down . Two others had been disconnected from the grid .
 President Biden spoke with Mr Zelensky about the fire . He urged Russia to “cease its military activities in the area’s area and allow firefighters and emergency responders to access the site .
 The United States has not detected elevated radiation readings in the area, says Jennifer M Granholm .
 Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain said he would seek an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council about the blaze .
 The fire was reported by Ukraine’s foreign minister . A large number of Russian tanks and infantry had entered Enerhodar, a town next to the plant .
 The director general, Rafael Mariano Grossi, said troops were “moving directly toward the reactor site’s reactor site .
 The Zaporizhzhia nuclear complex is the largest in Europe . It is on the Dnieper River roughly a hundred miles north of Crimea .
 According to the International Atomic Energy Agency, its six reactors produce a total of 6,000 megawatts of electric power . The agency's six reactors are located in New York City .
 Chernobyl plant in northern Ukraine produced 3,800 megawatts — about a third less than Chernobyl . In comparison, the plant in north Ukraine produced about athird less .
 The four reactors of the Chernobyl complex were shut down after one suffered a catastrophic fire and meltdown in 1986 . One of the four reactors in the complex was damaged by a fire in the early 1980s .
 Many acres of open pools of water behind the complex where spent fuel rods have been cooled for years . The Zaporizhzhia site is the site of the site where the fuel rods were cooled .
 Experts fear errant shells or missiles that hit such sites could set off radiological disasters .
 Enerhodar residents set up a giant barrier of tires, vehicles and metal barricades to try to block a Russian advance into the city and the reactor site .
 President Vladimir V Putin is fighting a parallel battle on the home front . He is dismantling the last vestiges of a Russian free press .
 The pillars of Russia’s independent broadcast media collapsed under pressure from the state .
 Echo of Moscow, the freewheeling radio station founded by Soviet dissidents in 1990, was ‘liquidated’ by its board . The station symbolized Russia’s new freedoms .
 TV Rain, the youthful independent television station that calls itself “the optimistic channel’s optimistic channel, said it would suspend operations indefinitely .
 Dmitri A Muratov shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year . He says his newspaper Novaya Gazeta could be on the verge of shutting down .
 Russian Parliament to take up legislation on Friday that would make news considered “fakes’s war in Ukraine punishable by yearslong prison terms . The outlets’ demise were plans by the Russian Parliament.
 The Russian authorities have already made it clear that the very act of calling it a ‘war’ is considered disinformation . The Kremlin prefers the term “special military operation’s’ term ‘special military operations’
 The crackdown on independent journalists added to the sense of crisis in Russia . Many fled the country this week, fearing that even worse repressions were to come .
 The economy continued to reel from Western sanctions as airlines canceled more international flights . Ikea, the Swedish furniture retailer, is a totem for Russia’s middle class and the employer of some 15,000 Russians .
 President Emmanuel Macron of France said his aim of securing “the demilitarization and neutral status of Ukraine’s Ukraine would be “achieved no matter what,” according to the Kremlin .
 A second round of peace talks in Belarus yielded no breakthrough . Ukraine said Russia had agreed to “humanitarian corridors’ to allow civilians to leave areas of intense fighting .
 Putin for the first time personally acknowledged Russian casualties in the fighting . He praised Russian troops as heroes who were fighting “fascists’ akin to Hitler’s invading army .
 Mr Putin said Ukrainian resistance was only evidence of the population being brainwashed by Western propaganda and by neo-Nazis .
 Russian independent media led by Echo of Moscow, TV Rain and Novaya Gazeta had given those Russians a voice . And up to now, the independent media had given them a voice.
 Mr Venediktov argues the Kremlin is intent on controlling the narrative of its “special military operation in Ukraine’s Ukraine . He says it controls the news media more intensely than it otherwise controls the media .
 Echo of Moscow is owned by Gazprom, the state energy giant, but has often broadcast sharp critiques of the Kremlin . Gazprom has been owned by the Russian government .
 Analysts believed the station survived thanks to Mr Venediktov’s personal connections to the ruling elite .
Russian opposition leader Aleksei A Navalny was jailed last year . He inspired a wave of protests across Russia early last year.
 Echo of Moscow has featured interviews with Ukrainian journalists who described the horrors of Russia’s invasion . The decision appeared to cross a line.
 The authorities took Echo of Moscow off the air for the first time since the Soviet coup attempt in 1991 . On Thursday, its board of directors decided to shut the station entirely .
 TV Rain was founded in 2010 by media entrepreneur Natalia Sindeyeva and TV director Vera Krichevskaya . TV Rain is based in Russia .
 It became a symbol of free-minded journalism, and a place where young journalists could launch their careers . It is a place for young journalists to start their careers.
 The Kremlin created challenges for the channel, but always found a way to persevere .
In 2014, cable networks removed TV Rain from their bundles, costing about 80 percent of its audience . In 2014, the channel was removed from its bundles, cost about 80% of its viewers .
 TV Rain broadcast a full news report on YouTube on Thursday .
 Sindeyeva announced that the outlet was shutting down, at least for the time being . The outlet was shut down by the end of the year .
 Roskomnadzor, the Russian telecommunications regulator, blocked the outlet on Tuesday . The regulator accused it of inciting extremism, abusing Russian citizens, causing mass disruption .
After TV Rain's final broadcast, some employees appeared on a livestream on the company's YouTube channel . Some employees had just fled the country .
 In speeches that turned emotional and tearful, they talked about their work, the state of the Russian news media and the channel's accomplishments .
 Tikhon Dzyadko has left Russia out of concerns for his safety . He is the editor in chief of TV Rain .
 At the end of the livestream, those who Zoomed in left, and everyone else walked out of the studio . The livestream was live on YouTube .
During the 1991 attempt to overthrow the Soviet Premier Mikhail S Gorbachev, Soviet state television played ‘Swan Lake’ on a loop .
 The country waited for the party leadership to select successors to Soviet premiers Leonid Brezhnev, Konstantin Chernenko and Yuri Andropov . It did the same as the country waited to select successor to the Soviet leaders .
 Mr Muratov has felt the pressure of the government closing in . Like his colleagues, he has felt pressure of government closing.
 In the last several days, he said the newspaper he runs, Novaya Gazeta, had received fines totaling 1,300,000 rubles, or about $12,000 . The newspaper's owner says he has received about 1,000 fines .
 Echo of Moscow would be considered banal in a “regular country,’s president said . Mr Venediktov said that in a regular country, the decision would be made .
 Echo of Moscow refused to stick to official themes of triumph and progress . Instead digging into the problems and the culprits .
 He drew the example of Mr Navalny, an opposition figure in Russia whom Mr Putin does not refer to by name . Mr Putin doesn't refer to him by name.
 Its pilots and air defenses have prevented Russian fighter jets from conquering the skies . Russia's air defenses and pilots have prevented them from taking over the skies.
 Ukrainian cyberwarriors are so far beating Moscow in an information war . They are inspiring support at home and abroad .
 Analysts say Ukrainian troops are mounting a stiffer-than-expected resistance to Russian forces . U.S. analysts say it could trip up Russian troops for weeks or months to come .
 The Ukrainians are also exploiting a bungled beginning to Russia’s all-out assault . The Ukrainians have been exploiting the bungled start to Russia's assault .
 The Russian armored convoy was carrying out a march that was expected to take a handful of days into possibly weeks . Armed with shoulderfired anti-tank weapons, they have attacked a mileslong Russian convoy bearing down on Kyiv .
 The strategic southern city of Kherson fell on Wednesday . The Kremlin's army has intensified its bombardment of Kyiv and other cities . Ukrainian leaders say they desperately need more weapons to destroy Russian tanks and down Russian warplanes .
 Ukrainian government has publicized its victories and Russian attacks that killed civilians . It has said far less about battlefield losses of its mechanized units .
 Russian officials are keen not to present the operation as a war, and so they have not put out information about the engagements their forces have won . For their part, they are keen to not present the operations as war .
 The Ukrainians are turning the tables on the Russians in the information campaign . The result, in these early days of the invasion, is that the Ukrainians have turned the tables.
 The Ukrainian military is conducting a hugely effective and mobile defense, says Gen. Gen. Vladimir Putin . Russian forces are using their home turf to stymie Russian forces on multiple fronts .
 Mark A Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said on Thursday .
 General Milley said some of the tactics employed by Ukrainian troops included using mobile weapons systems to bedevil the Russians wherever they could .
 U.S. officials have been impressed with the fighting prowess of Ukrainians . But their assessment that Russia has the superior military has not changed .
 Ukraine has succeeded in slowing the Russian advance, but has not been able to stop it, nor is the resistance strong enough to shift Russian President Vladimir V Putin's war aims .
 U.S. officials say it will be difficult for Ukraine to continue to frustrate the Russian advance . Over the long term, they say, it will have to be difficult.
 Hodges is the former top U.S. Army commander in Europe . He is now with the Center for European Policy Analysis .
 Ukraine has one of Europe’s largest militaries, with 170,000 active-duty troops, 100,000 reservists and territorial defense forces . Ukraine has at least100,000 veterans .
 The Ukrainian army has been training for further Russian encroachment ever since Russia seized Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in 2014 . Russia began supporting separatists in the Donbas region, in eastern Ukraine .
 Many of Ukraine’s veterans fought in those battles, so there is a subset of the population that is trained and knows how to fight Russians .
 United States Special Operations Forces have also trained Ukrainian military forces . U.S. Special Operations forces have also training Ukrainian forces .
 Leaders in Kyiv assigned those soldiers to conventional units, allowing them in turn to train a larger portion of the army . Leaders then assigned them to conventional soldiers, allowing the larger portion to train .
 American analysts say that training has made a difference on the battlefield . The U.S. military says that training is making a difference .
 The United States has provided more than $3 billion in weapons, equipment and other supplies to Ukraine’s armed forces since 2014 .
 In eight years, U.S. military advisers have trained more than 27,000 Ukrainian soldiers . The Yavoriv Combat Training Center near Lviv in western Ukraine.
Michael R Carpenter hailed a Ukrainian marine, Vitaliy Skakun, in Vienna on Thursday . The U.S. representative to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe hailed the Ukrainian marine .
 The marine had blown himself up on a bridge in the southern Kherson region to prevent a line of Russian tanks from crossing .
 Ukraine’s underdog military has sought to flip the script on the more than 150,000 Russian forces massed on its borders .
 Ukrainian troops repelled an attack by Russian airborne and special forces on a key airfield north of Kyiv last Thursday in the initial hours of the war .
 As Russians approached Kyiv and Kharkiv, the Ukrainians were able to shift their forces to critical locations faster than the invading forces .
 Ukrainians moved more nimbly, they also made good choices about where to concentrate firepower . Not only have the Ukrainians moved nimbley, they made good decisions about where and where to focus firepower .
 Russian forces have made tactical errors that the Ukrainians have been able to capitalize on, an analyst says . Thomas Bullock, an open-source analyst from Janes, said Russian forces made tactical mistakes .
 The Russians “have stuck to main roads so that they can move quickly and not risk getting bogged down in mud’s mud. The Russians have stuck to the main roads to avoid getting stuck in mud .
Ukrainian attacks on Ukrainian roads and supply routes are overly exposed to Ukrainian attacks . But they are advancing on winding roads and their flanks and supplies routes are over-exposed to Ukrainian attack .
 Ukrainian counterattack has pushed the Russian troops west and forced them to call in reinforcements, an expert on the Russian military says .
 The Ukrainians have taken advantage of the Russian decision to use too small a force, sometimes only two battalions at a time, to take key points .
 Ukrainians have been far more successful in the north, defending Kyiv and Kharkiv, the country’s second-largest city, than they have been in the south . Better trained Russian forces in Crimea have had more success, where better trained Russian troops have had success .
 U.S. officials believe that Mr Putin is likely to redouble his assault on the Russian leader . The United States government officials believe Mr Putin will continue his assault .
 Some analysts say that growing Russian casualties, increasing economic disruptions in Russia could upend that strategy . But some analysts say the likelihood of an enduring Ukrainian insurgency could also upend the strategy .
 In Situation Room meetings in recent days, the issue has come up repeatedly, three officials say .
 U.S. intelligence officials have told the White House and Congress to double down when he feels trapped by his own overreach .
Ukrainian authorities have described a series of possible reactions, ranging from indiscriminate shelling of Ukrainian cities to cyberattacks directed at the American financial system, to more nuclear threats .
 The debate over Mr Putin's next moves is linked to an urgent re-examination by intelligence agencies of the Russian leader’s mental state . Whether his ambitions and appetite for risk have been altered by two years of Covid isolation.
 Defense Secretary Lloyd J Austin II announced Wednesday that he was canceling a previously scheduled Minuteman nuclear missile test . It was a sign of the depth of American concern .
 There is no evidence that the U.S. is considering steps to reduce tensions . A senior official says there is no interest in backing off sanctions .
 President Biden announced expanded sanctions on Thursday, aimed at Russia's oligarch class .
 Dmitri S Peskov, Mr Putin’s spokesman and one of his close advisers. Many of those named rank among his most influential defenders and beneficiaries of the system he has created .
 S&P dropped Russia’s credit rating to CCC-, the credit-rating agency said . S&p dropped Russia's credit rating after he spoke .
 Russia was ranked at a few days after the invasion, and just two notches above a warning that the country was going into default . That is far below the junk bond levels Russia was ranking at a couple days after invasion .
 Putin’s effort to ‘sanctions-proof’ his economy had largely failed, according to the report . It suggested that Mr Putin's attempt to “sanction-proof the economy has largely failed.
 The Russian leader has so far shown no interest in taking a cease-fire or pulling back his forces . At least for now, there is no discernible off-ramp for the Russian leader .
 Jen Psaki said she knew of no efforts to show Putin a way out . The press secretary said that she knew no efforts were made to show him a wayout .
 A senior State Department official said there were nuances in the administration’s approach that point to possible outs for the Russian leader .
 Mr Biden’s policy was not one of seeking regime change in Russia, an official said .
 The idea, he said, was to influence Mr Putin’s actions, not his grip on power . He said the idea, not to influence Putin's actions, is to influence his actions .
 The sanctions were designed not as a punishment, but as leverage to end the war, an official says . The sanctions, he says, were designed to be used as leverage .
 The administration would calibrate its sanctions, and perhaps reduce them, if Mr Putin begins to de-escalate . But the administration would probably reduce the sanctions, if he de- escalates .
 Putin could spin some kind of de-escalation into a victory, a Russian official says .
 Many of Putin’s instincts are based on open, unclassified observations . But hope collides with the assessments of Mr Putin's instincts, many of which is based on unclassified observation .
 William J Burns, the C.I.A. director, was an early advocate of the view that the Russian leader planned to invade . Burns: "I was not massing troops around Ukraine simply to gain leverage in some kind of bargaining game"
 He seems unlikely to accept any result that does not achieve his goal of bringing Ukraine closer to the Russian fold .
 The Russian military's poor performance in the first week of the war could weaken its hold on power .
 Some U.S. officials have warned in closed meetings that the crisis could be to redirect the conflict toward Washington . The strategy is to distract from the Russian forces’ attacks on civilians in Ukraine, they say .
 Tatyana Bolton, the policy director for cybersecurity and emerging threats at the R Street Institute, expressed confidence on Thursday that the financial industry was ready . Bolton: Financial industry is ready .
 Morgans of the world spend more on cybersecurity than many government agencies, says Ms. Morgans .
 Bolton is a former senior official in the Department of Homeland Security . His family immigrated from Russia .
 Members of Congress have also raised concerns that Mr Putin could unleash Moscow’s network of criminal hackers .
 Mr Putin will threaten to push further into Moldova or Georgia, which, like Ukraine, are not members of NATO . Another possibility is that he will push further in Moldova and Georgia .
 Secretary of State Antony J Blinken is making a reassurance tour of Moldova . The trip began on Thursday .
 Belarus passed a referendum that amended its constitution to allow for nuclear weapons to be based on its territory . Last Sunday, as the fighting accelerated, Belarus passed the referendum .
 American officials are expecting that President Aleksandr G Lukashenko may well ask Mr Putin to place tactical weapons in his country . U.S. officials say they would be closer to European capitals .
 Putin has shown twice this week that he is ready to remind the world of the powers of his arsenal .
 Mr Putin is likely to further intensify his operations in Ukraine, which would almost certainly result in more civilian casualties and destruction .
 Lukoil, Russia's second-largest oil company, appeared to distance itself from President Vladimir V Putin on Thursday by calling for a “fast resolution’ to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine .
 Lukoil is one of the most recognizable Russian brands in the U.S. Lukoil has been a popular Russian brand for years .
 Many lawmakers are pressing the Biden administration to ban the purchase of Russian oil by U.S. companies and impose sanctions on Russian energy companies .
 Shares of Lukoil on the London Stock Exchange have fallen more than 40 percent since mid-February . Lukoil has been on the market for more than two months .
 Lukoil has long projected a more independent image than Rosneft, the state-controlled company that dominates the Russian oil industry .
 Lukoil was founded in 1991 as a state-owned enterprise as the Soviet Union was falling apart . Lukoil is now a Russian-owned company .
 The company went private in 1993, and seven years later it acquired Getty Oil . Lukoil gave Lukoil a network of U.S. filling stations .
 It was not clear whether the move was a sign that executives of Russia’s largest private enterprise were breaking with Mr Putin .
 petroleum products are the biggest Russian import in the U.S. and Europe . Russian products and sports teams have become pariahs .
 Several states have banned the sale of Russian vodka . restaurants, restaurants, stores and bars across the United States have taken Russian spirits off their shelves .
 Newark City Council voted on Wednesday to suspend the business licenses of local Lukoil gas stations .
 Lukoil stations in the U.S. sell fuel produced in many countries, including the United States . The fuel is produced by Lukoil station in the US .
 Lukoil are operated as independent franchises, and make up a small fraction of Lukoil’s operations . They are operated by independent franchises. They are also owned by Lukoil.
 The company has subsidiaries in roughly 30 countries, including Azerbaijan, Egypt, Colombia and Iraq . The company is involved in exploring and producing oil and gas in Egypt, Egypt and Colombia .
 The company's biggest reserves are in Russia, particularly western Siberia . The company’s biggest reserves in Russia are in Siberia .
 South Africans are defending their loyalty to another autocrat — Vladimir V Putin — and sitting out the global outcry over his invasion of Ukraine . Now South Africa is defending its loyalty to the Putin regime .
 The striking tally reflected the ambiguous attitude across much of the continent . With a handful of exceptions, the Ukraine war has been greeted with conspicuous silence . Western countries are expanding sanctions, seizing oligarchs’ yachts and pressing for war crimes investigations .
 In recent years a growing number of countries have contracted with Russian mercenaries and bought Russian weapons .
 A few African countries have condemned Russian aggression as an attack on the international order . Kenya and Ghana have also condemned the Russian aggression .
 25 African nations voted for the United Nations resolution that denounced Mr Putin’s actions on Wednesday .
Deep divisions in the continent’s response were apparent from the start . But deep divisions in Europe's response to the crisis were evident from the beginning .
 Sudan's deputy leader of Sudan flew into Moscow on the first day of the conflict . He exchanged warm handshakes with Russia's foreign minister as warplanes bombed Ukrainian cities .
 Morocco, a longtime American ally, offered a watery statement, annoying American officials who nonetheless kept quiet . Morocco is a longtime ally of the U.S.
 Russian flags flew at a ceremony in Ethiopia on Wednesday to commemorate a famous 19th century battle against Italian invaders . Russian volunteers sided with Ethiopian fighters who sided with Ethiopia fighters .
 Ukrainian border guards forced African students to the back of lines as they attempted to leave the country, raising a furor over racism and discrimination . African sympathies for Ukraine were also diluted by reports of border guards forcing African students into back lines .
 President Muhammadu Buhari of Nigeria decried the reports . Nigeria has 4,000 students in Ukraine .
 Putin has partly sidestepped opprobrium in Africa by calling in chits that date back to the Cold War . Moscow backed African liberation movements and presented itself as a bulwark against Western neocolonialism .
 Russia’s foreign ministry paused its focus on Ukraine to remind South Africa of its support for the fight against apartheid . The foreign ministry also reminded South Africa, in a Tweet, of support for apartheid .
 Putin has divided African opinion thanks to his own efforts to expand Russian influence across the continent . But Mr Putin has also divided African opinions thanks to a combination of diplomacy, guns and mercenaries .
 Mr Putin hosted a glitzy summit in the southern Russian city of Sochi in 2019 . The summit was attended by 43 African heads of state .
 Russia's economy strained under Western sanctions imposed following the annexation of Crimea in 2014 . Russia could not afford the expensive enticements offered by other powers in Africa, like China's cheap loans or Western development aid .
 In recent years, Wagner mercenaries have fought in Libya and Mozambique . They are currently guarding the president of the Central African Republic .
 In January, Wagner fighters appeared in Mali, as part of a deal to combat Islamist insurgents . France last month declared it was pulling its own soldiers out of Mali .
 The military junta ruling Mali denies inviting Wagner into the country . The U.S. military officials say as many as 1,000 Russian mercenaries are already operating there .
 Russia accounts for nearly half of all arms imports into Africa, according to Russia’s arms export agency and organizations .
 One of Mr Putin's staunchest defenders in the past week was a powerful figure in Uganda . He was a major customer for Russian weapons .
When the USSR parked nuclear armed missiles in Cuba in 1962, the West was ready to blow up the world over it, he said .
 Russia is engaged in a fresh bid for influence in Africa, but driven by right-wing nationalism . Now, Russia has been engaged in an effort to gain influence in the region .
 A similar divide has emerged in Asia where nations with authoritarian leaders or weak ties to the West have embraced Mr Putin’s war or avoided criticism of Russian military aggression .
 The Automobile Association of South Africa predicted that rising fuel prices would reach a record high in the coming weeks .
 Russia and Ukraine are major sources of wheat and fertilizer in Africa . Many African countries are still reeling from the pandemic. Food is getting more expensive too .
 The war could also have an economic upside for Africa, albeit one that could take years to be felt . But the war may also have a economic upside.
 As Europe pivots away from Russian gas imports, it could turn to African countries looking to exploit recently-discovered energy reserves .
 President Samia Suluhu Hassan of Tanzania is seeking a $30 billion investment to tap a huge gas discovery in the Indian Ocean . He said invasion of Ukraine could provide an opportunity .
 Mr Putin is still benefiting from his image as a thorn in the West’s side . Elsewhere, Mr Putin's image is still being criticised by the West .
 Many South Africans remember that the U.S. supported the apartheid regime until the 1980s . The United States supported the South African apartheid regime.
 South Africa is motivated to call for diplomacy rather than fighting because that approach aligns with the country’s stance on international conflicts for the past 30 years, she said .
 The BBC said this week that it would use radio frequencies that can travel for long distances . It would broadcast its World Service news in English for four hours a day in Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital, and Russia .
 Russian projectiles struck the main radio and television tower in Kyiv. On Tuesday, Russian projectiles hit the mainRadio and TV tower .
 Shortwave radio has been a go-to vehicle to reach listeners in conflict zones for decades . It has been used to deliver crackling dispatches to soldiers in the Persian Gulf war, send codes to spies in North Korea and pontificate through the Iron Curtain .
 BBC retired its shortwave transmissions in Europe 14 years ago . But more modern forms of radio and the internet eventually pushed shortwave out of favor .
 Over the last week of February, viewership of BBC's Ukrainian language site more than doubled from a year earlier to 3. million visitors .
 Millions of Russians are also turning to the BBC, the broadcaster said . Millions of Russian people are turning to BBC, it said .
 Other Western news outlets have also experienced a surge in viewership . Other Western media outlets have experienced a rise in viewership.
 The BBC “plays a determined role in undermining the Russian stability and security,’s Ms. Ms. Kohn says .
 BBC's Russian service reported problems accessing its site in Russia early Friday .
 Some local spots say they still plan to require proof for now . However, some local spots still say they plan to need proof .
 Gislason said they want everyone to come and feel comfortable, but their priority is health, safety and the comfort level of staff .
 She and her colleagues are hopeful someday soon COVID and vaccinations won't be a factor . She says she and colleagues hope someday soon.
 Seattle restaurants posted on social media that they plan to continue checking for proof of vaccination . They're just one of a number of Seattle restaurants that posted on Twitter that they're checking for vaccination .
 Gislason said they aren't trying to make anyone feel uncomfortable . He said they hope customers will be amenable and understanding .
 The Octopus Bar had to close for two weeks in December as cases skyrocketed after she got sick and the rest of the staff followed . Gislason said the Octopus bar had to shut down for a week in December .
 People tend to have their masks off once they're eating or drinking anyway, and they hope to end the vaccination requirement when everyone is comfortable . They do expect to let the mask mandate go away .
 For now, they hope people will bear with them and respect their staff . But for now they hope they will be treated as well as their staff.
 Seattle Councilmember Sara Nelson agrees to interview with KINGS on corner of Third and Pine . There has been rampant open-air drug dealing, retail theft, and assaults, Nelson says .
 Third Avenue has been a criminal hotspot for years, but this week flared up again . A series of shootings and stabbings have been reported this week .
 Business owners have threatened to close, or have done so already, because of unchecked activity in the heart of downtown . Business owners are concerned about the unchecked activity.
 Seattle Police Department parked a mobile precinct in the middle of the street on Thursday . The visible criminal activity seemed to dissipate, police say .
 Interim Seattle Police Chief Adrian Diaz and Mayor Harrell's accounts have been understaffed .
 Lewis was on the council that voted to cut SPD jobs and reallocate resources in 2020 . Lewis takes exception when asked about the fact that he was on that council . He says he was not on that vote .
Council members say they're ready to dust off a dormant plan to rebuild and remodel Third Avenue . Council members also said they're prepared to dust-off a dormant plans to rebuild Third Avenue.
 The 'Vision' first pitched by the Downtown Seattle Association in 2019 . It sought to revitalize and brighten the transit corridor with trees and improved pedestrian thoroughfares .
 Both Nelson and Lewis say big changes won't happen overnight, but immediate changes should also be expected .
 It will be the 10th property purchased for the program, which aims to rapidly develop permanent supportive housing for homeless residents . The program will buy apartment buildings and hotels for homeless people .
 Kirkland City Manager Kirk Triplett posted to the city’s Facebook page to voice support for opening the hotel to the homeless after residents began asking questions about the project .
 Kirkland Mayor Penny Sweet says the conversion of the hotel into permanent supportive housing continues Kirkland's commitment to being a safe, inclusive and welcoming community .
 County and city will partner to schedule public meetings this spring to give community members a chance to give input . The county and city are planning to hold public meetings in spring .
 The property, located at 10530 Northup Way, is adjacent to Eastside Preparatory School . One concern from residents in the past was that the property is located adjacent to the school .
 Others said they believed the project would lead to more police activity . Others said it would be good for police to get involved in the project .
 The hotel will offer 24/7 onsite staffing that will provide case management as well as services for both behavioral and physical health .
 Comments made at a city council meeting have sparked debate over whether the city should be considering one .
 Brier, a city of just 7,000 people, has been struggling to fill its six-person police force . The city has been trying to fill the force with six people .
 Almquist is looking to fill three positions, which is half the department . Almquist wants to fill two positions, one of which is full of women .
 Mayor Dale Kaemingk said residents are adamant the city has its own force . Residents are adamant they have their own force, he said .
 The Snohomish County Sheriff's Office is relying on the Sheriff's office for assistance . The sheriff's office is looking for help .
 I felt that was a really great thing for him to work on and he has brought some really strong candidates . I felt he had brought some strong candidates. He has brought a lot of strong candidates to the table .
 At least three of the candidates Almquist mentioned during the February 22 council were fired from their previous jobs because of the vaccine mandate .
 Martin Krienke voiced his concerns about hiring unvaccinated officers .
 Councilmember Valerie Roman said it could become a problem if there's an outbreak in the department . Roman said there could be an outbreak within the department.
 Councilmembers discussed whether there would be an issue with public perception . Council members also discussed whether public perception would be a problem .
 The county should issue a mandate for the county to create a mandate. The comments and discussion led to debates on community pages from residents about the mandate .
 Kaemingk said he isn't aware of any future action to formally consider a COVID19 vaccine mandate . He said he doesn't know if there will be a mandate.
 He argues he's not aware of any law enforcement department in Snohomish County requiring the vaccine . He says he doesn't know of any police department requiring vaccine .
 The mayor says he's received the vaccine and encourages others to get vaccinated . He says he has received a letter from the city .
 COVID-19 cases in Snohomish County are declining and that the CDC has relaxed its indoor masking recommendation .
 He taught me by example to first be a good listener and work hard at understanding the position of those I disagree with . He also taught me to be good listener, work hard to understand those he disagrees with .
 Much of the strike involves a company named CalPortland, which is owned by a Japanese company, Taiheiyo Cement .
Teamsters gathered at the Japanese consulate on Thursday to up the pressure against them . Teamsters gathered to up pressure against the Japanese government .
 The strike has been getting international attention, especially as the striking teamsters turn their focus to the Japanese business . The strike is getting more international attention .
 Strikers said the strike is much more than a story about business, but it's affecting their livelihoods . The strike has been called off for a week .
 Four other concrete companies that have been impacted by the strike issued a response . Workers were offered an 18% increase in wages over a three-year period, and it was rejected .
 The pass will cost $1,699, with a $100 discount for those renewing from this season . It's a steep increase from the current season in which full-price season passes cost $999 .
 The news coincided with the announcement of a major capital investment in the busy ski area near Mount Rainier National Park by owner Alterra Mountain Company .
 The new Crystal Legend Pass will not be a member of the Ikon family, which provides access to some 45 ski destinations worldwide . The new pass will be available to all of the world's top ski destinations .
 It will cost an additional $300 to add an Ikon Pass onto the new allaccess Crystal pass . It will also cost $300 for an extra $300.
 The infrastructure investment will begin in April, when the resort intends to break ground on a $25 million, 25,114-square-foot lodge with new dining, retail and ticket-sales facilities . The resort plans to build a new dining and retail facility .
 The United States Justice Department has created a task force to go after the assets of Russian oligarchs . The Biden administration has vowed to seize their yachts, luxury apartments and private jets .
 Oligarchs became more prominent in Russia in the 1990s, but they are not unique to Russia .
 Many Russian oligarchs are heavily involved in and benefit from Russian President Vladimir Putin's regime, with some serving in political positions .
 The bridge was built by his friend Arkady Rotenberg's company and the truck he drove across it was made by Sergei Chemezov's state corporation Rostec . The Carnegie Moscow Center focuses on domestic and foreign policy .
 Dmitry Patrushev was appointed as Russia's minister of agriculture . He is the son of Russian Security Council Secretary Nikolai Patrus he was appointed .
 Numerous Russian oligarchs and government officials were sanctioned by the United States in 2018 . The sanctions were in part for the regime's occupation of Crimea and for continuing to instigate violence in Ukraine .
Rotengberg's son and Patruskev were included in that round of sanctions for their involvement with the regime . Rotengberg was also included in the sanctions for his involvement in the regime.
Task Force KleptoCapture aims to enforce the sweeping sanctions, export restrictions and economic countermeasures that the U.S. and its allies and partners have imposed on Russia following its unprovoked invasion of Ukraine . The Justice Department says the new multi-agency initiative known as Task Force
 The task force aims to hold the sanctioned Russian elite accountable following the country's invasion of Ukraine . tracking down and seizing their assets will not be easy .
 These extraordinarily wealthy and powerful individuals — including Vladimir Putin himself — have taken elaborate steps to protect their wealth around the globe . Putin himself is among those taking elaborate steps.
 Some oligarchs are trying to dodge penalties by moving assets into territories where sanctions don't apply . Their property cannot be seized or their assets frozen .
 Financier and anti-corruption advocate Bill Browder told CBS News senior investigative correspondent Catherine Herridge that the goal is to get oligarchs to pressure Putin to stop war .
 Some wealthy Russians have spoken out against Putin's attack on Ukraine . Some have spoken against the Russian leader's attack.
 Mikhail Fridman founded one of Russia's largest private banks . He does not believe war should be a solution, he said .
 Alexander Lebedev, whose father is a former KGB agent turned bank owner, is a British citizen . "I ask you to save Europe from war," he wrote .
 He is considered an ally of Putin, but wrote that "peace is very important" and talks to end the war should begin "as soon as possible," he said .
 Young people are back at schools and universities for the first time in years . Many of them are back in schools, universities and colleges for first time since 2008 .
Life in South Asia is returning to a sense of normalcy after the COVID-19 pandemic . It isn’t quite how things were before the pandemic, but with infections steadily declining .
 The mental scars from last year's delta-driven surge persist, especially in India, where health systems collapsed . But across the region high vaccination rates and hope that the highly contagious omicron variant has helped bolster immunity are giving people reasons to be optimistic .
Experts agree that opening up was the right move amid falling case numbers . But they caution that optimism should be tempered with lessons from the past two years .
 New variants remain a concern, especially if the virus mutates into a more lethal version while retaining its infectiousness . She said that new variants are a concern .
 Hundreds of thousands of people gathered at the Pashupatinath Temple in Kathmandu for a festival of the Hindu god Shiva .
 Some restrictions remain on the island — masks are mandatory in public places . The government hopes that foreign tourists will return soon, helping bolster its faltering economy .
 The island nation was so short of hard currency during the pandemic that authorities had restricted imports of cars and fertilizer .
 Now it's using its dwindling reserves to pay for ever more costly oil needed to keep the economy running .
 The pandemic also made millions poorer, including many who were among the most vulnerable .
 The stringent lockdown, announced with a few hours’ notice in 2020, forced thousands of people to walk home to their villages from the cities where they worked .
 Those workers have now begun returning to cities, as activity picks up at factories and construction sites .
 If we don't eat, we die, says Devendra Kumar, a young laborer working in New Delhi .
Sales have increased from $400 daily in January to twice that in February, says owner . Kuldeep Singh Tomar, 38, owns a shoe shop in New Delhi .
 In Bangladesh too, people are cautiously taking off their masks while dealing with the fallout of the pandemic .
 The European Medicines Agency has authorized Moderna's coronavirus vaccine for children aged six to 11 . It also recommends booster shots of Pfizer's vaccine for those aged 12 and over .
 The Moderna vaccine for younger children will be a half-dose of what is given to older teens and adults . Marco Cavaleri said the Moderna Vaccine will be available to younger children .
 Young children had an immune response comparable to that seen in older populations, says researcher .
 Cavaleri said the Moderna shot was also being recommended for use as a booster dose in people who had received other vaccines . The Moderna vaccine is also being used to boost the effectiveness of other vaccines.
 The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine was previously granted a green light for use in children aged five and over last November .
 A third dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine in children 12 was safe and effective, Cavaleri says . Data from countries including Israel and the U.S. showed that a third dose was safe .
 Children are typically at much lower risk of severe coronavirus disease but are still vulnerable amid high levels of transmission . Children are usually at lower risk but still at high risk of disease .
 Some European countries have started offering their older populations a second booster dose based on concerns their immunity may fade quicker . EMA has made no such recommendation .
 In recent weeks, COVID-19 cases and deaths across much of Europe have dropped significantly after peaking in late January . The drop has been attributed to a drop in the number of deaths across Europe .
Numbers are still rising in some places with lower vaccination rates elsewhere, including Russia and Turkey . But there are still low vaccination rates in some countries, including Turkey and Russia .
 In the spring of 2021, every adult became eligible for the vaccine . Over 2 million people a day were getting their first dose .
 In recent months, vaccination rates have plummeted . Most of those willing to get their shots now inoculated have now been inoculated .
 The number of Americans receiving their first COVID-19 vaccine now stands at a pandemic low . Fewer than 80,000 Americans initiating vaccination each day .
 Since December, the rate of people getting boosted has also fallen significantly, dropping from 1 million booster shots administered a day to less than 140,000 .
 tens of millions of Americans remain unvaccinated and unboosted . There are certainly fewer un vaccinated people in the U.S. than vaccinated people .
 More than 58 million eligible Americans remain unvaccinated . 87. million Americans - about half of those currently eligible to be boosted - have yet to receive their supplemental dose .
 Some scientists and health officials say it is possible Americans could need an additional booster this fall or seasonal boosters in the future . New coronavirus variants may be the reason .
 The experts interviewed by ABC News are concerned about how to convey that message while maintaining trust and maintaining trust . The experts are also concerned that additional doses might further exacerbate inequities in access and care around the country .
 Since the fall, immunocompromised Americans have already had the option to receive a fourth mRNA dose . The first mRNA dose was given in the fall .
 For the general public, the benefit of additional doses still is not clear . However, for the generalpublic, the benefits of additional dose still are still not clear.
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is studying data on a "month-by-month basis" Officials will have to decide whether to begin offering a fourth dose, particularly to those at higher risk, such as the elderly .
Data suggests Americans need a fourth dose of a fourth shot. But data may present a new set of challenges for Americans .
 Shira Doron, an infectious disease physician and hospital epidemiologist at Tufts Medical Center, told ABC News . Doron is an infectious diseases physician and epidemiologist .
 Some people point erroneously to the increase in breakthrough infections as a reason to not get vaccinated, she said .
Public health experts say vaccination reduces the risk of developing severe illness or dying if infected . Experts say it is important for public health experts to emphasize the benefit of vaccination .
 In December, unvaccinated people were 14 times more likely to die of COVID-19 compared to people who received the one-shot Johnson & Johnson shot or two shots of Pfizer and Moderna vaccines .
 Health experts also caution that if a fourth dose is eventually needed, it will be important for health officials to outline what the purpose of an additional dose would be .
 Evidence exhibiting protection against severe illness and death will ultimately be paramount, Brownstein added . Evidence exhibitingprotection against severe illnesses and death, will ultimately become paramount, he said .
 Experts are concerned about the continued growing racial disparity in the current booster drive . The impact such gaps in uptake could have on populations already at increased risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes .
 Black and brown Americans are currently lagging in the booster effort, with only 39.5% of eligible Hispanic/Latino Americans boosted . 43.8% ofeligible Black Americans boosted, and 43.7% eligible Black Americans boost .
 Asian Americans lead every race/ethnicity group, with 58.9% of eligible population boosted . Asian Americans are the most eligible group in the world .
 If additional shots are needed in the future, experts worry about deepening inequities . If more shots were needed, experts say, it could be a problem .
Health officials plan for the months and years ahead, Doron says . There are several potential ways to proceed, including switching to an annual vaccination .
Experts say it will be essential to convince Americans of the importance and benefits of vaccines . Low COVID-19 vaccination rates could not only undermine recovery prospects, but potentially also lead to another surge of infections in a new variant .
 Firefighters responded to Friendly Garden Apartments in Silver Spring, just outside Washington, D.C., about 10:30m. Firefighters were called to the apartment just outside the city's Silver Spring .
 Video footage from a nearby resident's outdoor security camera shows an explosion obliterating an end unit of one building .
 Steven Inman was cooking in a nearby apartment when he heard the blast . He was in the kitchen when the blast occurred .
 My father yells out to me and I was already running over here, he says .
 Inman helped a woman and her small child get out of the building and found another woman with third-degree burns over much of her body . Inman said he helped the woman and a small child escape the building .
 Montgomery County Fire and Rescue Service Chief Scott Goldstein said 10 people were taken to the hospital, three with serious injuries . The fire and rescue service chief said 10 are in the hospital .
 Goldstein: "I do not have a number to provide you at this point" Goldstein said at a news conference .
 The building that exploded, as well as those immediately adjacent to and across from it, have been declared unsafe to reoccupy .
Search dogs could indicate bodies or survivors could be in rubble, Goldstein says . Goldstein says there are “possible indications of alerts’ by search dogs, he says .
 Crews will need to bring in heavy machinery to remove an unstable freestanding wall in order to facilitate the search, he said .
 Video from the scene showed flames shooting from the roof of a building and debris scattered on the ground .
 Goldstein indicated that most of the flames had been extinguished by Thursday afternoon . Most of the fire has been extinguished, Goldstein indicated .
 Authorities were hoping to escort residents back into the buildings that have been declared unsafe . Residents could retrieve belongings before being taken to shelter or hotels, and to allow residents to reoccupy three other buildings .
 Larry Hogan tweeted that his team has been in contact with county officials about the explosion . State fire marshal, state police and state emergency management officials were offering their support .
 Washington Gas, a utility that serves the area, says it was aware of the incident . The fire department is assisting the fire department .
 In 2016, two children and five adults were killed, and 68 people were sent to the hospital after an explosion and fire at the Flower Branch apartments a few miles away . The explosion happened at the apartment complex in Flower Branch, near where two children were killed .
 Washington Gas’ faulty equipment was the most likely cause of the explosion, officials say . The National Transportation Safety Board has been investigating the explosion for three years .
 The board found multiple communication gaps and missed opportunities to correct the leak that might have prevented the 2016 explosion . The board also found several communication gaps.
 People around the complex smelled natural gas six times in the weeks and months before the explosion, investigators say . Nobody ever called the gas company to report a possible leak, investigators said .
Lead nuclear authorities were concerned about damage to the power station . Leading nuclear authorities weren't panicked about the damage .
 The assault triggered phone calls between Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and U.S. President Joe Biden .
 The United States Department of Energy activated its nuclear incident response team as a precaution . The U.S. Department of energy activated the response team.
 The attack on the eastern city of Enerhodar and its Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant unfolded as the invasion entered its second week . Another round of talks between the two sides yielded a tentative agreement to set up safe corridors to evacuate citizens .
 Nuclear plant spokesman Andriy Tuz told Ukrainian television shells were falling directly on the facility . He said shells had set fire to one of its six reactors .
 That reactor is under renovation and not operating, but there is nuclear fuel inside, he said .
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba tweeted a plea to the Russians to stop the assault . Firefighters cannot get near the flames because they are being shot at, he said .
 U.S. Energy Secretary Jennifer Granholm tweeted that the Zaporizhzhia plant’s reactors were protected by robust containment structures and were being safely shut down .
 Zelenskyy said he feared an explosion that would be "the end for everyone" In an emotional speech in the middle of the night, he said he fears an explosion would be the end for all .
 The International Atomic Energy Agency said the fire had not affected essential equipment . Ukraine's nuclear regulator reported no change in radiation levels .
 The American Nuclear Society concurred, saying that the latest radiation levels remained within natural background levels .
Jon Wolfsthal served during the Obama administration as the senior director for arms control and nonproliferation at the National Security Council . He said the plant's reactors have thick concrete containment domes .
 The nuclear plant could lose power at the plant, which could imperil its ability to keep the nuclear fuel cool .
 The mayor of Enerhodar said earlier that Ukrainian forces were battling Russian troops on the city's outskirts .
 Video shows flames and black smoke rising above the city of more than 50,000 . People streaming past wrecked cars and cars .
 The Ukrainian state atomic energy company reported that a Russian military column was heading toward the nuclear plant .
 Energoatom says they are breaking down doors and trying to get into the apartments of local residents . They say they are trying to break into apartments .
 A livestreamed security camera linked from the homepage of the Zaporizhzhia plant shows armored vehicles rolling into the facility’s parking lot and shining spotlights on the building where it was mounted .
 There were what appeared to be muzzle flashes from vehicles, followed by nearly simultaneous explosions in surrounding buildings .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal called on the West to close the skies over the country's nuclear plants .
 The U.S. and NATO allies have ruled out creating a no-fly zone since the move would pit Russian and Western forces against each other .
 Vladimir Putin's forces have launched hundreds of missiles and artillery attacks on cities and other sites around the country . Putin’s forces have made significant gains in the south .
 Kherson, a vital Black Sea port of 280,000, is the first major city to fall since the invasion began a week ago .
 Heavy fighting continued on the outskirts of another strategic port, Mariupol, on the Azov Sea .
 The battles have knocked out the city's electricity, heat and water systems, officials say . Most phone service has also been knocked out .
 Video from the port city showed the assault lighting up the darkening sky above deserted streets . A 16-year-old boy inside a clinic who could not be saved was killed .
 The child was playing soccer when he was wounded in the shelling, his father says . He cradled the boy’s head on the gurney and cried .
 Ukraine's access to the Black and Azov seas would deal a crippling blow to its economy . Russia seized by Moscow in 2014 .
 Russia appeared to have expected a swift victory over Ukraine . Overall, the outnumbered, outgunned Ukrainians have put up stiff resistance .
 Russia's seizure of Crimea gave it a logistical advantage in that part of the country, a senior U.S. defense official says . But a senior United States defense official, speaking on condition of anonymity, says shorter supply lines that smoothed the offensive there .
 Ukrainian leaders called on the people to defend their homeland by cutting down trees, erecting barricades in the cities and attacking enemy columns from the rear .
 In recent days, authorities have issued weapons to civilians and taught them how to make Molotov cocktails .
 The second round of talks between Ukrainian and Russian delegations was held in Belarus . The talks were held in neighboring Belarus .
 Putin told French President Emmanuel Macron he was determined to press on with his attack "until the end’s end," Macron's office says .
 The two sides said they tentatively agreed to allow cease-fires in areas designated safe corridors . They would seek to work out the necessary details quickly .
 A Zelenskyy adviser also said a third round of talks will be held early next week . A Zelenkyy Adviser also said the talks will also be held next week.
 Putin claimed that the Russian military had already offered safe corridors for civilians to flee . But he asserted without evidence that Ukrainian “neo-Nazis"" were preventing people from leaving and were using them as human shields .
 He hailed Russian soldiers as heroes in a video call with members of Russia's Security Council . He also ordered additional payments to families of men killed or wounded .
 The Pentagon set up a direct communication link to Russia's Ministry of Defense to avoid a miscalculation, a U.S. defense official says . The link had not been announced .
 The Russian and Ukrainian delegations gathered in the Brest region of Belarus for the second round of talks in four days . The talks will take place in the Belarus region of Brest .
 Ukraine's presidential adviser, Mykhailo Podolyak, tweeted following the meeting . " Unfortunately, the results Ukraine needs are not yet achieved," he tweeted .
 Ukrainian officials have previously said they want Russia to withdraw all troops from Ukraine . Ukrainian officials say they want all troops to be withdrawn from Ukraine.
 Russia is ready to negotiate, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov says . Russia's foreign minister says Russia is prepared to negotiate .
 Russia says it cannot allow military infrastructure to remain in Ukraine as a threat to Russia . Lavrov says Russia will continue its military operation while the talks are ongoing .
 Zelenskyy on Thursday expressed no interest in demilitarizing and issued a warning to Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Zelenskyy said he is ready to meet and talk directly with Putin . He repeated his calls for a "no-fly" zone over Ukraine immediately . Zelenskiy said it would act as a deterrent .
 Zelenskyy: "We are a nation that broke the enemy's plans in a week" He praised his military forces and Ukrainian civilians who have taken up arms to defend the country .
 Putin has called Ukrainians and Russians "one people" and that his troops are fighting against "neo-Nazis" A claim that has been debunked by the United States and its Western allies is debunked .
 Nearly 1,100 manatees died in 2021, according to a lawsuit filed by Save the Manatee Club . The lawsuit was filed by the Center for Biological Diversity and Defenders of Wildlife . Nearly 20% of the east coast population of Manatees are in the
 Rose is the executive director of Save the Manatee Club . The non-profit is dedicated to protecting manatees and preserving their natural habitat .
 The group tells ABC News that popular waterways for manatees have suffered years of pollution from sources like failed septic tanks, improperly treated sewage and fertilizer that deposits nutrients into water .
 The Florida manatee was first listed as an endangered species in 1967 . USFWS designated areas where manatees are found as a “critical habitat’s” in 1976 .
 Critical habitats are specific areas that have biological and physical features that are important for the survival of a species . Critical habitats can be found in areas that are critical for survival of species .
 When the critical habitat was first established, important components of the habitat, such as the seagrass, were not considered .
 The manatee's critical habitat designation was adjusted by 2008 . The lawsuit was filed by the U.S. federal government .
 Environmental groups requested that USFWS update the term in 2008 . The agency agreed, but never followed through, according to the lawsuit .
 The United States Fish and Wildlife Service did not respond to an ABC News request for comment on the lawsuit .
 Save the Manatee Club hopes the USFWS will work with us now to ensure that seagrasses and warm water habitat are better protected . The club says the loss of so many manatees is "critically important" to the future survival of manateees
 Save the Manatee is appealing to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to upgrade water quality standards so seagrass will not die from pollution .
 If the court rules in favor of environmental groups, it will result in higher standards and stiffer penalties for pollute waters which kill seagrass .
Until standards are raised, the manatees and ecosystems will continue to be under threat, according to Rose .
 The sanction targets include Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov, as well as one of Russia's richest men, Alisher Usmanoy, according to the White House .
 Germany has already seized Usmanov's superyacht, the White House says . Both the boat and the private jet would be blocked for use in the U.S. or by Americans .
 It said the elites sanctioned provided direct and indirect support to the Russian government through their business empires, wealth and other resources .
 Usmanov described as one of Russia’s wealthiest billionaires with vast holdings across multiple sectors of the Russian Federation economy as well as internationally .
 This superyacht’s estimated worth is believed to be between $600 and $735 million .
 Dilbar has two helipads and one of the world’s largest indoor pools ever installed on a yacht . The yacht has one of world's largest indoor swimming pools .
 The estimated cost to run Dilbar is $60 million per year, Treasury says . The estimated costs are $60million per year .
 Usmanov’s aircraft, an Airbus A340-300, is believed to cost between $350 and $500 million .
 Secretary of State Antony Blinken is in Brussels for a full day of meetings with NATO, the G-7, and European Union counterparts . He weighs in on the new sanctions .
 The Department of State is imposing substantial costs on Russia’s defense enterprises by sanctioning 22 defense-related firms . The statement also said the department was imposing substantial cost on Russia's defense enterprises .
 Russia's invasion of Ukraine will likely further magnify the high inflation that has engulfed the U.S. economy .
 Powell says he is committed to doing whatever it will take to slow inflation . The Fed is raising interest rates enough to stem price increases without tipping the economy into another recession .
 The Fed chair addresses the Senate Banking Committee on his second day of semiannual testimony to Congress . He says the economy is strong enough to withstand higher borrowing costs .
 The Fed can engineer a "soft landing" in which the economy would slow enough to ease inflation even while hiring and growth remain healthy, he testified Wednesday .
 Consumer prices jumped 7.5% in January compared with 12 months earlier . Consumer prices are already rising at their fastest pace in four decades .
 Gas prices have soared 40% over the past year . Gas prices, a key driver of that increase, have risen 40% .
 The surge in inflation is largely a consequence of a shortage of labor and components resulting from bottlenecked supply chains . Much of it resulting from the global economy’s swift rebound from the pandemic recession .
 Montana Republican Steve Daines says inflation is generally thought to rise about 0. percentage point for each $10 increase in the price of a barrel of oil .
 Richard Shelby, an Alabama Republican, urged Powell to do “what it takes’s to control inflation .
 He praised Paul Volcker, who led the Fed in the early 1980s, who sharply increased the Fed’s benchmark short-term rate to choke off the double-digit inflation of the 1970s .
 Powell stressed his belief that the Fed can bring down inflation without triggering a recession . But Powell stressed that he doesn't expect a recession in the future .
 The economy grew last year at the fastest pace since the 1980s, the Fed chair said . The unemployment rate is at a low 4% and hourly pay is rising steadily .
 Job openings are near a record high, Powell says . Americans are quitting their jobs at a record pace, usually for better, higher-paying positions .
 Pay gains over the past two years have slightly exceeded price increases . For these workers, pay gains have been slightly higher than the previous two years .
 Powell had said he would propose a quarter-point rate hike at the Fed's next meeting in two weeks . It would be the first rate increase since 2018 .
 The Fed chair repeated Thursday that if inflation didn't decline this year, he is open to bigger hikes at some later central bank meeting .
 opaque communication from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and drugmakers has led to confusion and angst .
 Some parents are tracking every press release, investor report and social media announcement to glean information . Some parents have even lied about their kids’ ages to get their children vaccinated .
 Parents have been told that vaccines for little ones are coming “soon’s over and over. Parents told to expect vaccines for children to be available soon .
 Pfizer’s CEO Albert Bourla said two-shot data for 2to 4-year-olds would be available “before the end of the year,” with submission to the FDA soon after .
 Pfizer adds a third shot to its list of three shots . Pfizer added a second shot in the second round .
 FDA to consider authorizing two doses first while waiting for data on the third . Anthony Fauci suggested authorization could happen sometime in February .
 The FDA then delayed that meeting, saying that new information had led it to decide it was better to wait for more data . In the latest twist, the FDA then said it would wait for new information .
 The delta variant, then omicron, sent an increasing number of children to the hospital, filling up pediatric wards . All of this happened as first the delta variant was first the Delta variant .
 Parents urged to get vaccinated as soon as possible to prevent catching the highly infectious variant . Some parents were frustrated not to have that option for their children .
 I laid them on their back when they were babies so they wouldn’t suffocate,’s Dr. Dr. John Sutter says .
Vaxes are preventing deaths in kids over 5, it pains her that one isn’t available for her 3-year-old .
 FDA officials at the agency, Moderna and Pfizer as well as pediatric vaccine experts. To bring some clarity to the conversation, I dug into FDA policy .
 What I learned dispels a widespread myth, adds context to the factors officials are deliberating and provides an update on timing . What we learn dispels the widespread myth.
 Children under 5 are much less vulnerable to the coronavirus than adults, they are not invulnerable to serious consequences . Children under five are less vulnerable than adults to the virus .
 Kids ages 5 to 11 have died at a higher rate than kids ages 5-11, according to the agency . They’ve been hospitalized and have been hospitalized, the agency says .
 Scott Krugman, vice chair of pediatrics at the Herman & Walter Samuelson Children's Hospital at Sinai, is vice chair at the hospital .
 A source of anxiety for many parents is that it’s hard to predict which kids may have bad outcomes .
 The condition can be serious and even deadly . Many different organs including the heart, lungs, kidneys and brains become inflamed .
 Experts have been telling parents that they can keep their children safe by surrounding them with people who are vaccinated, boosted and masked .
 Many parents point out that restrictions are easing and people are becoming more active . But many parents say the risk is actually increasing for their children .
 Some parents are worried that their vaccinated older kids could bring the virus home to their unvaccinated younger siblings .
 Jeremy, 4, was born with a rare gene mutation that causes brain malformations . He is particularly at risk of experiencing a seizure if he gets sick .
 Whittington lives in rural West Virginia and said that the low vaccination rate in her area has made her have to keep Jeremy out of pre-K .
 The agency isn't considering Whittington’s situation in isolation . It has a far more complicated calculus to make .
 FDA official: "I really want to know that, if the FDA tells me I’m going to have to give this to my kid or I should give it to my child, I want toknow that it really works,” FDA official says .
 Only 1 in 4 children ages 5 tol1 was fully vaccinated as of March 1, polling shows . About a third of parents want to “wait and see,’ while another third do not plan to get their child the shot .
 The agency would consider authorizing two shots of the Pfizer vaccine for kids under 5 while waiting for the rest of the efficacy data on a third shot .
 The thinking was that those kids could get a head start on the vaccine series before the third shot was authorized . The thinking is that those children could get an early head start.
 The plan hung on the presumption that the third dose would do the trick . But the plan also hung on a presumption that it would be a third dose .
 Peter Hotez is a pediatrician and dean for the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine . He is also the dean of the Baylor University of Medicine in Texas .
 C Buddy Creech, professor of pediatrics and director of the Vanderbilt Vaccine Research Program, is a professor of pediatriciatrics . He is also a director of Vanderbilt's Vaccine research program .
 Pfizer reportedly found that its shots were less effective against the omicron variant . Pfizer was gathering data in real time .
 The FDA decided to delay and wait for data from all three shots to come in before considering authorization .
 Risk for children overall has dropped as omicron cases have fallen. One factor in the decision was that risk for children Overall has dropped .
 The agency has a challenging job of balancing the need for thoroughness with speed, says Dr. Dr. John Sutter .
 Paul Spearman, director of the division of infectious diseases at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, is in Cincinnati .
 Children's vaccine trials take longer than adults' because of additional steps needed to find correct dosage for different age groups, Spearman said .
 Ian Stone, parent of a 4-year-old in San Diego, said he’s willing to wait for a vaccine .
 I don't want it to be pushed forward because we have to have something, he said . I don’t want to push it forward, he says .
Public relations worker says unexpected delay “may cause more harm than good’ But Stone says he thinks the unexpected delay may cause more damage .
 Misinformation has further confused parents, causing unnecessary concern that vaccines will be further delayed . Misinformation is further confusing parents.
 Pfizer said that two shots were found to be safe for all kids under 5 . But children under 2 generated antibody levels similar to what has been seen in 16to 25-year-olds .
 The drugmaker said it would start testing a three-shot regimen to see if that could increase the level of protection . In response to the results, the drugmaker says it will start testing the regimen .
 A myth sprung up and circulated around the internet, printed in traditional media and repeated by doctors . The FDA had a policy that prohibited it from authorizing vaccines for age groups out of order .
 Age de-escalation describes how some clinical trials are run, including the COVID-19 vaccine trials . The trials are part of a new generation of clinical trials .
 Adults are enrolled first, and once the vaccines are proven safe and effective, then the trial extends to younger and younger age groups . The trial is expected to last for a year, until the vaccine is proven safe .
 Pfizer hasn't sought authorization for kids under 2 first . Pfizer also didn't seek authorization for children under two first .
 The FDA is tightly limited by regulation and cannot publicly discuss trial data before approval outside of specific circumstances, such as an advisory committee .
 Pfizer's data in infants made the drugmaker or FDA determine it wasn’t sufficient for authorization . Until data becomes public, it is impossible to know .
 Moderna's vaccine for 12to 17-year-olds has been held up in the United States because of concerns that it could cause myocarditis, inflammation of the heart muscle .
 Moderna is now testing a smaller dose for adolescents and 6to 11-year-olds . The company expects data from its trial of kids under 5 in March .
 Moderna could not ask the FDA for authorization for the youngest kids before the teens had access to the vaccine, it has been speculated .
 Two companies could have data on vaccines in kids under 5 in a matter of weeks . It could be in a few weeks .
 Pfizer has said it’ll have data on three doses “in spring’s’II have data by the end of March . Moderna has said the company will have data ‘in spring'
 If the data looks good, there’s nothing to stop the FDA from authorizing a vaccine for kids of a certain age group . If an older cohort misses the mark or hasn’t yet gotten the green light, the vaccine will be approved .
Creech and Spearman both expect authorization by April or, in a worst-case scenario, May .
 The bad news is that this far into the pandemic, communication is still floundering in the face of a public that is increasingly distrustful of scientists and health agencies .
 The FDA is legally limited in discussing data particulars and manufacturers are traditionally secretive about ongoing trials . It’s true that the FDA is legal.
 Many parents would like to see more data to be reassured that their kids’ health is a priority. What is apparent is that while many parents want more data, what they want even more is to be reassuring that their children's health is an important priority .
 It grieves us too that it’s been so complicated, said Jennifer Martin, a parent of three in Seattle .
 I wish it could have come earlier, more often and been on the record, but I hope it provides some parents a bit of reassurance that they’ve been heard .
 The antiwar hackers have also gone after pro-Russian hackers, swiping and leaking thousands of internal chats from the Conti ransomware group, as well as military communications and more .
 Anonymous accounts reported that they’re now battling Russian disinformation and trolls .
 Anons say pro-Russian elements are circulating a hit list to report their social media accounts . Anons also said pro- Russian elements were circulating a social media hit list .
 Ukraine supporters urged to hijack hashtags that were trending on Twitter in support of Russia and President Vladimir Putin .
 Hackers were using #OpRussia, #OpKremlin, and similar hashtags to announce actions against Russian sites . Similar to the #OpISIS campaign that targets the terror group’s deluge of online propaganda and #OpKKK campaign .
 Latest cyber ops claimed by hackers include breaching and leaking files from the Rosatom State Atomic Energy Corporation . Also broadcasting Ukraine’s national anthem on Gazprom Media Radio .
 Hacker vOg3lSec posted files that they said came from a private service hosted by Russian State Space Corporation ‘Roscosmos’ and contained space agency data on Luna-Glob moon exploration program .
 NB65, a hacking group affiliated with Anonymous, claimed earlier that it breached the control center of Roscosmos and cut off the agency's control over its spy satellites as part of the ongoing cyber-offensive .
 An Anonymous video posted Feb. threatened to “take hostage’s industrial control systems if the crisis escalated . Since #OpRussia began, hackers have claimed breaching a Russian Linux terminal and gas control system in North Ossetia .
 One Anonymous account posted a long list that they said was IP addresses and ports for industrial control systems in Russia . The list includes IP addresses, ports and IP addresses.
New networking equipment that were brought to replace old ones got infected . New networking equipment was brought to replaced old ones .
 DHS’ Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency and the FBI issued a joint Cybersecurity Advisory Saturday . The advisory provides an overview of destructive malware that has been used to target organizations in Ukraine .
 Department of Homeland Security warned in January that Russia would consider a cyber attack against the United States if the U.S. or NATO respond to Russia's potential invasion of Ukraine .
There's a flood of intel on Russian military, nukes and crooks, says dark-web intel expert Vinny Troia . Even with Conti ransomware gang shuttering its Jabber chat server, Troia says .
 Conti ransomware gang crooks conjecturing that the National Security Agency was maybe behind the mysterious, months-long TrickBot lull .
 Some of the sensitive data is being hacked out of Russia in the cyber war zone . The war erupted even before the country invaded Ukraine .
ShadowByte, a dark web threat intelligence and cyber fraud investigations firm, is based in the U.S.
 The Conti gang shut down its Jabber servers on Wednesday, Troia says .
 Intelligence experts are now slogging through the mountain of data about Russia that intelligence experts are trying to figure out . He visited the Threatpost podcast to update us on the mountain.
 Vinny Troia, cybersecurity PhD, is the founder of ShadowByte, a dark web threat intelligence and cyber fraud investigations firm . Troia is also a cybersecurity PhD and founder of shadowByte, an investigation firm .
Today, we're going to focus on all of the data that's being leaked on Russia as a result of its invasion of Ukraine . It's not the first time we've seen such a leak in the past .
 "I come from a DOD background did a lot of work for surface deployment command. So my background I come from an DOD background," he says . "I came from a very different background"
 I was there for about six or seven years before moving over to private sector, he says . He says he was in private sector for about 6 or 7 years before leaving .
 While he was there, he did a lot of work in compliance and random security hacking projects, he was also involved in red teaming, pen testing .
 Our focus now is primarily dealing with a lot of ransomware cases, incident response, and ransom negotiations . Fast forward to today, our focus is mainly dealing with ransomware cases and incident response .
 We’re constantly focused on dark web threat actors and any of the players, really, really . We're always focused ondark web threats, really.
 The dark web activity around Ukraine and Russia has been a flurry this past week . This past week must be just a flurry with the dark webactivity around Ukraine .
 The world has been hacking Russia and dumping critical data on military nuclear plants, etc. So in an email, you were talking about how everyone is so focused on Russia hacking .
 There was a lot of data coming out about Ukrainian citizens, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "I'd say last month, there was a lots ofData coming out"
 "It was kind of interesting, almost like a precursor to what was happening," says the author . "So that was sort of interesting," he says . "It's kind ofinteresting, almostlike a precursor"
 It's almost like the rest of the world that’s really pissed and started hacking back and you’re seeing so much data coming out .
 I’m actually looking for sorry, as we speak, I'm going through some of this data . I'm actually looking at some of the data. I'm really looking for Sorry, as I'm looking forSorry .
 There's stuff on a nuclear plants, some of their air force capabilities, I mean . I mean, there’s stuff on nuclear plants. I mean. There's things on anuclear plants, there's stuff for air force .
 There are about a hundred thousand military members with photos, passport numbers, things like that . There's another database that I just recently came across that is about 100,000 military members .
Anonymous of course has jumped in to wage war on behalf of Ukraine, cyber war. I mean, I know that anonymous of course, has jumped into the war . I'm not surprised, but I'm glad to see that, and I'm sure it's not anonymous .
 Cyber experts can put out a call for help from cyber experts on this too. And I know that you can put a call out for help on this.
 Joe Biden didn't mention security once in the state of the union last night . It was such a big deal and everybody’s been talking about it.
 The news has been all about cyberattacks and Russia’s capabilities . But it just wasn’t even mentioned once .
 The world kind of banded together to really come after Russia. I just find that really strange, but regardless, it’s nice, it's nice to see the world banding together, says CNN's John Sutter .
 One of the most fascinating things is all these leaks that have been occurring regarding the Conti ransomware . The most interesting thing is that all the leaks are related to the ransomware .
 The ransomware group is one of the top few largest ransomware groups in the world . They are also known to be the largest or at least one of world's largest groups .
 The most recent chat logs that came out of the chat logs came out, so somebody still has access to their servers . I mean, as early as today, as recently as today. I haven’t even had a chance to read the ones from today .
 That’s not even going to be usable to anybody because it was for an older version . It was for the older version, but it's not even being used to anybody .
 One of the gang’s groups got hit by this and everybody else is pretty much doing fine. Another one of my sources was telling me that just one of the gangs got hit. Another source told me that one of his sources was told that justOne of the
 TrickBot is a piece of software called TrickBot . The NSA came after TrickBot specifically, it says .
 TrickBot shut down for a few months, but I didn't know that about the NSA piece . I didn’t know that. Everybody knew that TrickBot pretty much shut down.
 It's presumed to be the NSA, given the level of skill that was involved, we'll call it finesse . It’s presumed to have been the NSA .
 A handful of officials are talking about how they were shut down and how they basically had to rebuild their infrastructure . "It’s basically a handful of people talking about it," says one official .
 They were down for a little bit, but eventually they came back, but it just shows that they were being targeted by nation states . It just shows they are being targeted.
 The majority of Russia's economy is coming from some sort of crime, he says . He says the majority of the country's economic growth is from crime .
 underground members say “protect the motherland, the motherlands protects you.’ The underground members are called “motherland’s protect you.
 New code is written on top of old code and it’s not like it was replaced completely . I think I saw some keys floating around as well, but new code is not like the old code was replaced entirely .
 There will be some fallout from the code base, says author . He would imagine that there will be a fallout from that code base .
 The new technology could be used in the future, according to the company . It's not clear what can be done with all of it, but the point is it's there and in the right hands .
A couple of hours ago we had more leaks from their Jabber server, he says . "No, and like I said, like he said, we have more leaks," he adds .
I would imagine whoever has access to access has been able to pull off a lot, and I think actually just shut it down finally . I would imagine Whoever has access will be able to pulled off a a lot .
 The Jabber account was hacked by someone who had access to their Jabber logs . But they figured out that somebody did have access to the account .
 Conti's out doesn't mean that the problem is going away anytime soon, he says . I would say that, just because Conti’s out doesn’t mean that, he adds .
Be diligent and keep up with your passwords and make sure that you actually have fresh passwords .
 The majority of hacks are still caused by reused passwords, says John Sutter . Sutter: Even now, even now, most hacks are caused by reuse passwords .
 We can get some intelligence out of the exploits that they’re targeting. We can also get some information out of these exploits .
 I think I saw Zerologin was mentioned as one, and of course we know a lot about their tooling right now. I think he saw it, and I saw it as one of them .
 I know that we’ve got email addresses of some of the members of the gang. I’m not sure if we have any of them. I know we have some of them .
 You can look for other accounts and potentially reverse back to maybe who they are . You can use that to look for others and potentially start to reverse back.
 The leaks haven't stopped, and we don't even know how many that is promising . So the takeaways for listeners are that these leaks haven’t stopped, says CNN .
 I don't know what else is going to be released in terms of tools, but I’d say all of this has probably put a dent in everything they’re doing for a little bit . I don’t know what other tools will be released.
 The ransomware groups are being investigated, says Krebs . He says he hasn't even made it to the set about how the ransomware groups were being investigated .
 Someone high up in the group basically told them they didn't have anything to worry about .
 The U.S. may have taken action on Russia's part to make the United States shut up . "I think REvil" was the one I was thinking about when I alluded to this kind of token law enforcement action .
 Vinnie has been in the news for more than a decade . He says he will not let you go if you have anything else to add to the story .
 ContiLeaks, the source of the leaks, is not believed to be the same entity as vx_underground, which disseminated the leaked files .
 The first is a severe flaw found in versions 2. and later of the BD Viper LT system . The system is an automated specimen processing and integrated molecular testing tool .
 The device uses hard-coded credentials, which could allow an attacker to access, modify or delete device data, including protected health information and personally identifiable information .
 CVE-2022-22765 is ranked 8. in severity and has a low attack complexity . CVE- 2022-22365 is rated 8. In severity and is ranked 6th in severity .
 The flaw is not exploitable remotely and there are currently no known public exploits specifically targeting it . There is no known known public exploit specifically targeting the flaw .
 BD simultaneously issued an alert for another hard-coded vulnerability found in a long list of its automated medication dispensing systems .
 A successful exploit could allow a threat actor to gain access to protected health information or other sensitive data . A successful attack could allow the actor to access protected health data .
 The alert also notes that BD manages the credentials, which aren’t visible or used by customers to access the impacted devices .
 BD voluntarily reported these flaws to CISA and is currently working on remediating the hard-coded issues . BD's recommendations for voluntarily reported flaws were released by CISA .
 The vendor intends to raise awareness of the flaw and its recommended compensating controls for systems using hard-coded credentials .
 The Viper LT devices have been affected by the Viper LT system . Only authorized end-users can access the impacted systems .
 Where applicable, the system should be disconnected from network access . The system should also be disconnected.
 If access is necessary, entities should use standard network security policies and procedures, according to security experts .
 BD recommends entities secure the impacted BD Pyxis products by using compensating user controls . This includes limiting physical access to authorized personnel, tightly controlling the management of system credentials .
 Entities are encouraged to work with the vendor or recommended remediation steps . All patching and virus definitions are up to date, according to the vendor .
 Disclosures critical to the healthcare sector’s ability to maintain the security of highly complex medical device security infrastructures .
Working with the vendor directly on best practices can expedite the process . While challenging, working with the vendors directly onbest practices can be helpful .
Financial services was the most impersonated industry of 2021, with six brands in the Top 20 that represented 35% of all phishing pages .
 Chase, PayPal, and Wells Fargo were the most impersonated financial services brands . Chase and PayPal were most impersonating financial services companies .
 Organizations and employees are bombarded with phishing emails, says Saryu Nayyar, founder and CEO of Gurucul .
 Nayyar said with the sophistication and deceptions used by threat actors, invariably someone will click on one of these emails, compromising an organization . NayYar said the sophistication of the emails is used by the threat actors .
All brands are heavily dependent on mobile apps, says Approov vice president George McGregor .
 cloned and modified apps are increasingly being used as an attack vector with fake or modified apps used to steal consumer data and divert transactions . McGregor said cloned apps are being used to divert transactions.
 Vade’s data runs in line with what his team has been seeing, says Patrick Harr .
 SlashNext's threat lab has seen more targets to Microsoft products . Harr said SlashNext’s threat lab is more focused on Microsoft products than its own .
 Facebook has seen a 57% increase from Q4 2021 to the first months of 2022 . Facebook is expected to increase by 57% in the first year of 2019 .
 phishing starts to ramp up on Sundays in the U.S. because this is Monday morning in other parts of the world where much of the cyberattacks originate .
 Social engineering remains one of the biggest headaches that IT and security teams have to deal with . Hank Schless, senior manager, security solutions at Lookout, added that social engineering remains a big headache .
 Schless said organizations need to implement a security strategy that protects users, devices, and data from the individual endpoint up to the cloud . Schless: Organizations need to protect users and devices, devices and data .
 These assets include databases, remote access sites, and cloud services . These assets included databases,remote access sites and cloud service .
 86% of companies have at least one exposed remote access service, 80% expose network assets, and 63% expose back office internal networks .
 Just over half of the cybersecurity firms have at least one exposed database . Just over one of the largest cybersecurity firms in the world have exposed databases .
 The study showed that more than two-thirds of companies exposed PostgreSQL databases . More than half exposed Oracledb databases, the study found .
 A majority of exposed services are in the organization’s “unofficial perimeter,” which means they are less likely to be monitored . One concerning finding is that, except for storage and web assets, a majority of the exposed services were in the �
 More than 40% of the vulnerabilities affecting exposed services have a “high” or “critical’s severity rating . More than 30% of vulnerabilities affecting expose services have “ high’ or ‘critical” severity rating.
 IT Army of Ukraine was formed by cyber-specialists in the country . The results of its operation became evident quickly .
 The group also exposes the personal details of opinion-makers in Russia and other people who play a significant role in the conflict .
 Check Point reports that the phenomenon is growing as more fraudsters jump in trying to seize the opportunity to scam well-intended individuals . Check Point says that the number of fraudsters is growing.
 The third category that’s booming is news feeds that bypass mainstream outlets and post unedited, uncensored feeds from the war zone, 24/7 .
 Many of the news posted on these groups are not checked or verified and could very well be fabricated .
 geopolitical analyst Michael Horowitz admitted when posting footage of a realistic-looking, computer-generated air dogfight created on a video game engine . This is even a problem for vetted social media platforms as Horowitz admitted .
 Check Point reports that these channels still are still amass a large number of users . Check Point says that many channels are still being used .
 The ‘Ukraine War report’ has 20,000 members, while ‘Russia vs. Russia vs. Ukraine’ is the most popular report on the war .
 ‘Ukrainian Witness’ (CBugetesb Yxpanust) has reached 100,000 members . Another news channel aimed at exposing Russian war crimes, ‘ Ukrainian witness’ has reached100,000 .
 It's nearly impossible for users to distinguish between real and fabricated reports . Some channels may post accurate information, but it's almost impossible to distinguish .
 The platform is considered a haven for cyber-criminals who have been selling illegal material and even services to other pseudonymous users for years now . This is why the platform has been considered a safe haven for criminals .
 You should treat all new requests with suspicion and avoid sending money to anyone no matter the claims and presented assurances .
Deep Instinct says its data shows that execution, persistence, and privilege escalation were the top three attacker actions . The report suggests that adversaries had focused on initial infiltration and payload execution .
 The increased adoption of ransomwareas-a-service has resulted in a 15% increase in detected ransomware threats . The Dark Web is easily accessible on the Dark Web .
 The threat landscape is going to be extremely treacherous in coming months, says Shimon Oren, vice president of threat research and AI intelligence for Deep Instinct . Russia's war on Ukraine is making defensive agility very important, says Oren .
 57% of business professionals rating the surge in ransomware as their top concern . Ransomware and incidents are now the top concern for businesses in 2022, according to Allianz Risk Barometer 2022 .
 Seven out of 10 financial firms had suffered a ransomware attack, with the average ransom topping $91,000 . 70% of firms would or have refused to pay the ransom, according to Egress, a cybersecurity firm .
 Tony Pepper, the firm's CEO and co-founder, says companies need to harden their network, processes, and people .
 Most companies are focused on mitigating overall business risk, rather than the specific cybersecurity dangers . Most companies focus on mitigating the overall risk of cybersecurity .
 83% of companies are spending on anti-phishing, 72% maintained a cyberinsurance policy . 64% retained outside legal counsel, and 55% invested in a forensic investigation, report says .
 Return on Investment is all about return on investment, hitting organizations that can afford to pay with multiple attacks . It's all about returning on investment.
 triple extortion is the favored method to pressure companies into paying . Currently, triple extortion includes encrypting data, stealing data, and using a denial-of-service attack .
 As long as the returns exceed the costs, ransomware will continue, says Rotem Salinas, senior malware researcher at CyberArk . Salinas: "Ransomware will continue"
 Attackers are becoming increasingly sophisticated in ways of obfuscating their malware, making it harder to detect . Attackers have also become more sophisticated in how to hide their malware .
 The attacker goes for a quick, impactful attack or a slower, stealthier spread depends on its motivations and goals .
 In either case, the defensive focus should be on hardening the information-technology environment, says Deep Instinct's Oren .
 CyberArk's Salinas says ransomware will continue to become more sophisticated and evolve quickly .
 STOP and REvil malware families accounted for the vast majority of ransomware detected by the firm . The STOP and Revil malware Families accounted for most of the malware families .
 Officials from California, Florida and several other states issued similar warnings . Officials from other states also issued similar warning .
 The T-Mobile breach involved tens of millions of former or prospective customers of the wireless company .
 The stolen data is attractive for identity theft and other financial crimes . The stolen information can be used to help victims of financial crimes and identity theft .
 Law enforcement agencies from multiple states are investigating the breach . The breach is believed to have occurred in the early hours of the morning .
 In some cases, the hacker accessed people's names, dates of birth, Social Security numbers and driver’s license or ID numbers . The hacker accessed the names of people, dates, dates and driver's license numbers .
 The company also said technical data — including international mobile equipment identities and international mobile subscriber identities — were compromised .
 IMEIs are a unique fingerprint for a device that cannot be reset . They are often used for advertising purposes .
 The state attorneys general noted that identity protection services already have alerted many of the affected consumers about the dark web activity . The state attorney general also noted that Identity protection services have already alerted many consumers about dark web activities .
 Cybercrime forums have been under increased pressure by state, federal and international law enforcement agencies . But the buying and selling of people's personal data is still an active criminal industry .
 Millions of Americans fall victim to identity theft and fraud each year, resulting in billions of dollars in losses . Millions of people are victims of identity theft, fraud and identity theft .
 Few resources exist to help Americans, experts and the news media understand digital fraud, says Emily Snell, President of Allstate Identity Protection .
 Allstate Identity Protection is launching a report designed to shine a light on the latest lines of attack being used by identity fraudsters .
 Between October and December 2021, total identity theft and fraud cases increased by 11%, led by rapid spikes in instances of fraudulent credit and/or loan account creation, inquiries, and applications . Many falling victim to identity theft, fraud and fraud.
 Fraudulent creation of new credit and loan accounts grew by 61% from 2020 to 2021 . Fraudulent creations of new Credit and Loan accounts grew from 2020- 2021 .
 This type of fraud accounted for over half of our total identity theft cases . By December 2021, this type of Fraud accounted for more than half of the total identity fraud cases .
 42% of cases from October to December 2021 were instances of credit and loan applications . Another 42% were cases of credit, loan applications from October-December 2021 .
 scammers may be turning to the state-level agencies that oversee disability benefits . Be on the lookout for disability fraud .
 Between November and December 2021, there were open cases involving false disability insurance claims in California double compared to previous months . The cases were open between November andDecember 2021 .
 As this year’s tax season gets underway, Americans should watch out for signs of disability fraud .
 Victims may receive a letter related to disability benefits for which they did not apply, or an employer may notify the victim that someone has filed for disability in their name .
 Reports of unemployment and tax fraud continue to decline, with both constituting just 1% and 0.6% of total remediation efforts between October 1, 2021 and December 31, 2021 .
 Unemployment fraud at one point accounted for nearly three-quarters of all remediation cases . The pandemic has been blamed for many of the cases .
 SSU revealed this in a tweet further distributed by Ukraine's State Service for Special Communication and Information Protection to Ukrainian Twitter users .
 The enemy has broken into some sites of regional authorities and local governments and spreads through them . The SSU said the alleged 'capitulation and signing of a peace treaty with Russia'
 Ukraine has been under a constant barrage of cyberattacks since Russia's invasion . Ukraine is also targeted by phishing, malware attacks .
 The Computer Emergency Response Team of Ukraine and Facebook warned of phishing campaigns against Ukrainian officials and military personnel . Facebook and the Computer Emergency response team of Ukraine warned of the threat .
 cybersecurity firm Proofpoint said it spotted spear-phishing attacks targeting European government personnel aiding Ukrainian refugees .
 This campaign aligns and is likely related to July 2021 phishing attacks also to the Ghostwriter hacking group . This campaign is likely to be similar to the July 2021 attacks on Ghostwriter .
 SSSCIP says a separate series of phishing attacks began one day after the start of the war . Ukrainian officials are not the only ones targeted in such attacks, it says .
 warnings come on the heels of malware attacks using ransomware decoys and destructive HermeticWiper and WhisperGate wiper malware .
 The ethics watchdog, which regulates lobbying at the State Capitol, says an investigation has been launched to determine the scope of the attack and who was behind it .
 The Commission shut down systems, including its lobbying application and financial disclosure statement online filing system as a precaution . The Commission also shut down its lobbying applications and online filing systems .
 The Commission is in the process of notifying the regulated lobbying community and financial disclosure statement filers of the security incident and its impact . The Commission said that it is in a process to notify theregulated lobbying community .
 Extensions will be automatically granted for any filings due at the time of the attack . Extensions could not be submitted because of the outage. extensions will be automatic granted.
 JCOPE said the period of extensions would be determined once the systems have been brought back online . The period of those extensions will be determined after the systems are brought back.
 Seattle-based Expeditors expects fallout from attack will have a "material adverse impact" on its finances . The company says it continues to repair information systems and restore services to freight customers .
 The world’s sixth-largest freight forwarder by revenue, according to research group Armstrong & Associates Inc. The company said it had been hit by a targeted cyberattack .
 Expeditors asked federal regulators to exempt it from requirements to publish ocean freight rates for 90 days to “allow time for it to cope with the consequences of the attack’s attack, it said .
 Numerous cyberattacks have roiled the operations of the logistics industry in recent years .
 The fallout from logistics company hacks includes the challenge of tracking down cargo that’s traveled while systems have been down .
 Financial services firm Cowen Inc. on Thursday cut its 2022 earnings estimate for Expeditors to $7.25 . The cyberattack’s shortand long-term costs were cited as the reason for the cut .
 Fisman, an epidemiologist and physician, has been outspoken about Covid and public health . Fisman is an epidemologist and physician .
 Even when he tweets something innocuous, he still receives a flood of angry pushback . Even when the banal statement “kids are remarkable,” he still gets angry push back .
 He posted about topics like requiring vaccination and improving ventilation to prevent the spread of Covid . The nasty responses never came, and he posted about the topics.
 No support for the trucker convoy, no calls to try the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, for treason . No calls for the prime minister to be tried for treason.
 Those who frequently encounter bots or angry responses are now seeing a significant drop-off . Others have observed the same phenomenon .
 Covid misinformation has often trended on social media over the past two years . It seems to be taking a nosedive, which has often been trending on Twitter .
 The reasons for this ‘bot holiday’ are probably varied, as Fisman calls it . Many of them point to the Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 Russia’s information war with western nations seems to be pivoting to new fronts, from vaccines to geopolitics . Russia's information war has been turning into a new front.
 Social media has proven a powerful tool for Ukraine, with images of Zelenskiy striding through the streets of Kyiv and tractors pulling abandoned Russian tanks . Growing campaigns of misinformation around the world could change the conflict's narrative, and the ways the world reacts .
 Russia began limiting access to Twitter on Saturday . sanctions have been levied against those who could be financing disinformation sites and bot farms . Social media companies are more attuned to banning bots and accounts spreading misinformation .
 Conspiracy theories around the so-called 'New World Order' converged narrowly on Ukraine, according to emerging research .
 Ukraine and Canada and the virus and the global economy, he says . At the same time, ‘whereas before the topics were very diverse,’ he said .
 Online activity has surged by 20% since the invasion of Ukraine . New hashtags have cropped up around Ukraine that seem to be coordinated with bot-like activity, Finkelstein said .
 Users pushing new campaigns frequently tweet hundreds of times a day . Users can catch the eye of prominent authentic accounts .
 Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy is being controlled by the west and the need to dissolve Nato . Finkelstein says it's difficult to believe that it’s not involved in the crisis .
 influencers who previously demonstrated against vaccines are now turning their support to Russia .
 Social media users may see a topic trending and not realize its connection to conspiracy theories or disinformation campaigns .
 In this case, it seems “their orders got changed because priorities shifted, he says . In this cases, it appears “Their orders got change, he said .
 Russia has coordinated significant misinformation campaigns to destabilize western countries, according to reports . The 2016 election and the pandemic are among the topics that have been linked to Russia .
 Inauthentic accounts are not fully responsible for real hesitations and beliefs, say experts . Inauthentics are not responsible for any hesitations or beliefs .
 But they amplify harmful messages and make pushback seem more widespread than it is . But they amplify harmful messages, make push back seem moreidespread than it's been .
 These sites frequently sow division on controversial issues, research finds . These sites make it more difficult to spot disinformation online .
 The escalation of narratives like these could have wide-ranging consequences for policy, says CNN's John Sutter . "The escalation of these narratives could have wider-ranging implications for policy," he says .
 Russia's actions are against the moral order of the modern world, says Putin . It's clear that what Russia’s doing is against themoral order of modern world.
As the war becomes prolonged, and people become exhausted, that may change, Finkelstein says .
 The research around these changing campaigns is limited, Carley cautioned . The research is limited to looking at thousands of tweets in the early days of an invasion .
 conspiracies tend to follow current events even when there aren’t coordinated campaigns . It’s very early to understand what direction the misinformation is going and who is behind it .
 "That does not mean that all the disinformation, all the conspiracy theories about Covid are not still there," she said .
 Misinformation campaigns can quickly morph depending on the target, giving them more longevity than some other conspiracy theories .
 It may be too soon to say what’s emerging during the invasion of Ukraine, she says . Leaders should understand what terms are emerging in conspiracy theories and disinformation campaigns .
 A global agreement on how to address misinformation or disinformation would be key, Carley said . The agreement would also be key to addressing misinformation and disinformation .
Social media is all connected very tightly throughout the world in social media . It doesn't matter that one country has some strong reactions because it’ll still go from another country’s machines.
 Such rules would also need to have teeth to prevent further campaigns, she said . Such rules could also be needed to prevent more campaigns, the woman said .
 And educating the public about how to parse misinformation and disinformation is also important .
 A request for information from the surgeon general’s office demanded that tech platforms send data and analysis on the prevalence of Covid-19 misinformation on their sites .
 The notice asks the companies to submit “exactly how many users saw or may have been exposed to instances of Covid-19 misinformation,” as well as aggregate data on demographics .
 Vivek Murthy demanded information from the platforms about the major sources of Covid-19 misinformation . He also demanded information about the sale of unproven products, services and treatments .
 The notice is the first formal request from the Biden administration of the tech companies to submit Covid-19 misinformation data . Denying requests for information does not carry a penalty, but the notice is not a penalty .
 Murthy used his first formal advisory to the United States to deliver a broadside against tech and social media companies . He accused the companies of not doing enough to stop the spread of dangerous health misinformation .
 The request for information is part of President Biden’s Covid National Preparedness Plan . Covid-19 causes “minimal disruption,’ according to the White House . The White House detailed the plan on Wednesday .
 Mr Biden first revealed details of the plan during his State of the Union address Tuesday night .
 The surgeon general called on health care providers and the public to submit information about how Covid-19 misinformation has negatively influenced patients and communities .
 Andy Biggs, R-Ariz., is a ranking member of the Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security . He penned the request to subcommittee Chair Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Texas, in part on grounds that “There is no known case in which a foreign national who
 The silent treatment should come as no surprise in this era of sharp partisanship, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The GOP co-signatories probably understood this when they sent the letter . The letter was sent by the GOP to the White House .
 The case at the root of this partisan kerfuffle is too serious for stupid swordsmanship. But they had to send it anyway because the case was too serious .
 This one deserves a real hearing, perhaps an inspector general investigation, says John Sutter . Sutter: "This one deserves an Inspector general investigation," he says .
 Issam Bazzi's release into the U.S. interior is just the latest such incident that raises serious questions . The case of Lebanon-born Venezuelan Issam is the latest to raise serious questions.
 The historic mass-migration crisis at the U.S. southern border has seriously degraded national security. Chief among them is whether the historic mass migration crisis has seriously damaged national security .
 Venezuelans began crossing the Rio Grande in escalating numbers last November . The United States was handing out free passes into the interior of Venezuela .
 Some 25,000 turned themselves in at the border in December and another 22,000 did in January . The border was closed in December .
 Bazzi flew with his wife and daughter to Monterrey, Mexico, in early November, then swam the river into Brownsville, Texas .
 His name and fingerprints flagged him as on the FBI’s terrorism watch list . A mistaken identity is unlikely .
 Bazzi is described in the documents as a “Category 5 group member,’ which can mean not considered armed and dangerous . In the lexicon of the U.S. Customs and Border Protection, he is described as a "Category 5 Group member"
 “America’s Covert Border War,’ danger level is irrelevant for what is supposed to happen with any border-crossing terrorist group member on the FBI watch list .
 FBI agents operating in line with post-9/11 protocols interrogate watch-listed migrants and others from countries of national security interest .
 Bazzi was flagged as a suspected terrorist in Brownsville, Texas, after crossing .
Migrants suspected of terrorism are deported to their home countries even if they have no “highly derogatory” intelligence information on their records, FBI says .
 U.S. could not have deported Bazzi to Venezuela because of American diplomatic estrangement with Nicolas Madura regime .
 DHS would have known that the Biden administration was working on an agreement with Colombia to air-deport Venezuelan border-jumpers there .
 Starting January 31, the United States began deporting Venezuelans to Colombia under that agreement . The United States started deporting Venezuelaans on January 31 .
 ICE headquarters in Washington D.C. ordered Bazzi released into the United States on his own recognizance to pursue an asylum claim in Michigan . He had family in Michigan, where he had family .
 Bazzi was claimed to be at heightened risk from Covid-19 in the detention center due to a “Chronic Care Condition — Overweight,’ the leaked DHS documents said .
 LeDuff told me he made contact with Bazzi and relatives who, in brief telephone communications, denied he was a terrorist . They said they had no idea why he was on a terrorism watch list .
 U.S. authorities denied Bazzi a tourist visa in 2019 to visit relatives in Detroit area .
 All thinking Americans on either side of the political aisle should find unity in asking why Bazzi's illegal crossing of the southern border got him inside the country .
 The obvious initial indicator is that a border defense failed in an important national security function, most probably because of a mass migration crisis of historic proportions .
 Overloading 2 million apprehensions during 2021, the most since the nation began counting in 1960, has broken management systems down there .
 Bazzi's illegal border crossing has him living free on his own recognizance pending the outcome of an asylum case . The border crossing will allow him total freedom for years because of a vastly expanded immigration court backlog .
 The Bazzi case is now the second one I have found where border counterterrorism protocols apparently broke under the weight . One reason to suspect the mass migration crisis has heightened a once fairly managed national security threat is that the Bazzis case is the second .
 Mexican immigration in April 2021 caught a Yemeni just as he was about to cross into Del Rio, Texas .
 At that early stage of the mass migration crisis, collaborative protocols with the Americans seemed to be working . "America’s Covert Border War" seems to beWorking.
 Yemeni national Ahmed Mohammed Ahmed was a “Category 5’ member of a terrorist organization’s terrorist organization . Ahmed was also a member of the terrorist organization.
 An American law enforcement source told me the Mexican intelligence officers prematurely left him at a European transit airport and returned to Mexico . The source said the officers left him prematurely at the airport in Mexico and returned.
 The Mexicans caught him again in July 2021, preparing to cross into Del Rio . He was arrested in July 2011, and he was arrested again in August 2021 .
 Mexico let Ahmed go free, an act the Americans would never have previously agreed to . But instead of deporting him, Mexico let him go free .
 Ahmed was supposed to check in weekly with immigration once a week . But he disappeared. Ahmed was never seen again .
 The release so alarmed the Americans that they sent out a “Be On The Lookout’ bulletin to law enforcement on the Texas side to capture him .
 Australia lists the entire Palestinian Islamist group Hamas as a terrorist group . The move is a deterrent to political and religious violence and bringing Australia in line with the United States, the European Union and Britain .
 Australia had for two decades proscribed Hamas's paramilitary wing, the Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades . It flagged last month that it wanted to upgrade the listing to the whole organization . The process involved consulting Australia's state and territory leaders .
 The change puts Australia into lockstep with its allies, which have also been moving to tighten their opposition to the Gaza ruling body . Australia has also been moved to tighten its opposition to Gaza, citing its access to sophisticated weaponry and terrorist training facilities .
 Ukraine's Jewish refugees look to the future . "The hateful ideologies of terrorist groups and those who support them have no place in Australia," Home Affairs Minister Karen Andrews said .
 Listing organizations was a deterrent to violent extremism, she said . Australia condemned the use of violence to achieve political, religious or ideological aims .
Proscribing an organization in Australia makes it illegal to give it funds, support or services . Proscribing a group in Australia is illegal to provide funds or support .
 Gaza Strip has ruled the Gaza Strip since a civil war in 2007 . It expelled forces loyal to Western-backed Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas .
 Abbas remains dominant in Palestinian self-ruled areas of the Israeli-occupied West Bank . Abbas is still dominant in the West Bank area .
 Australia has been building its list of designated terrorist groups, which now number 28 . Australia has now been building the list of terrorist groups .
 Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham and the Nationalist Socialist Order are based in Syria . They are a group based in the United States .
 The global Covid-19 pandemic, now entering its third year, has wreaked havoc on the safety, health and well-being of societies and communities .
 As of 1 March, 2022, there have been 435,626,514 confirmed cases and 5,952,215 deaths as reported by the World Health Organization .
 Global socio-economic, geopolitical, and conflict landscapes have been impacted by this crisis . The daily lives of many are being altered due to this crisis, according to CNN .
 Resources and political attention have been refocused on public health, distracting from counterterrorism efforts .
 The pandemic has allowed terrorist recruiters and extremists to exploit financial, health and personal concerns to advance their own movement and ideology all while using propaganda to reinforce power .
 Violent extremists have continued to utilize low-tech, low-cost tactics such as improvised explosive devices . Shooting attacks and vehicle ramming often defy detection and disruption .
 The AOAV's own database on global IED attacks was analysed . We sought to discover if dialogue and strategy impacted tactics, specifically IED usage, and capability .
 AOAV's data is gleaned from English language media reports and does not profess to capture ever single incident .
 Especially in the age of pandemic, reporting of explosive violence may well have been under-powered and neglected .
 The Islamic State Covid-19 introduced yet another threat to the already battered and fragile political orders in Iraq and Syria, putting further strain on the failing health care systems there .
 Subsequent statements from al Naba newsletter called disease a "painful torment" for all "Crusader nations" in the West .
 followers were warned not to travel to Europe . They were urged to protect themselves through physical precautions and prayer . Western governments and their militaries have been paralyzed by paralysis .
 The group also stated that followers should free ISIS prisoners being held in camps in Iraq and Syria .
 Present proxy militias, civil unrest due to high unemployment, ethno-religious grievances, a lack of government trust and vulnerable borders in Iraq, that is about to enter its eleventh year, has aided this re-establishment .
 ISIS claimed responsibility for 28 of the 2020 IED attacks . The PKK 2 and the PKK 2 had unknown perpetrators . The remaining attacks had unknown perpetrator .
 2020 had the lowest number of IED attacks for the three year period, mainly attributed to a decline in attacks during the first half of 2020 .
 ISIS claimed responsibility for the highest number of attacks during 2019 with a total of 62 . ISIS also claimed responsibility of the highest amount of attacks.
 The IED attacks over the three year period focused mainly on soft targets, urban residences, villages, agricultural land, places of worship or markets .
 This was mainly attributed to a marked decline in IED attacks in Syria for the second half of 2021 . This was mostly attributed to the decline in the IED attack in Syria .
 Landmines accounted for almost 10% of the attacks in 2019 and 2020 and 15% of attacks in 2021 . 18 of the Attacks for the three year period were suicide attacks . Of the attacks were victim-activated, this accounted for 20% of all IED attacks .
 The IED attacks were car bombs, 60 were road side IED's, 2 were multi-explosive IEDs and the remaining attacks were nonspecific . Soft targets were again with roads, markets, villages and urban residences accounting for a large number of
 Al Qaeda and Affiliates has been characterized as stemming mainly from its affiliates . In recent years, officials have characterized the Al Qaeda threat as stemming mostly from affiliates .
 In March 2020, an AQ affiliate group issued a declaration on the Media Network Al-Thurur, rejecting a cease fire . The group called for an intensified battle against a crippled West .
 Hayat Tahrir al Sham in Syria instructed its followers not to let the virus distract them from their fight against Shiites and other non-believers .
 In its Iba' newsletter they stated that the virus had been sent by God to kill disbelievers . In its newsletter they said the virus was sent byGod to kill unbelievers .
 Markets, public spaces, schools and mosques were closed down and HTS instructed people to keep their distance from others . HTS told people to stay away from others.
 AQ, HTS and A-Shabaab "have used official propaganda channels to emphasize their governance and state-building credentials, and to present the effectiveness of their respective 'Ministries of Health' within their pseudo-states .
 IED Attacks in Somalia Al-Shabaab is the largest, wealthiest, and most violent AQ associated group in the world .
 For the past three years, Al Shabaab has been responsible for half of all IED attacks in Somalia . The group is responsible for most of the attacks in the country .
 Soft targets accounted for 90% of all IED attacks . 23% were used as car bombs and the remaining were non-specific IEDs .
 IED attacks over the three year period were by remote detonation . 54 were suicide attacks, 24 were vicitim activated, and the remaining had an unclear activation method .
 The Taliban's response to Covid-19 has been in stark contrast to other extremist groups . The Taliban The Taliban has been compared to other extremists in the past .
 They have been eager to profess their readiness and aptitude for handling the crisis . They are hoping to reinforce their political legitimacy and social status .
Public health awareness campaign during Covid pandemic has been welcomed . Co-operation with the Afghan government has varied district to district .
 Social media pages connected with the group have shown Taliban members in white gowns and gloves distributing soap and educating on proper hand hygiene . Taliban members are shown distributing soap.
 The World Health Organisation and the Red Cross began to cooperate with them . Remarkably, they began to cooperate with the World Health Organization and Red Cross .
 Many top Taliban members have left leadership roles vacant, leaving security and financial operations vacant . This unexpected response may have resulted from many members of the Taliban contracting the virus .
 The US withdrawal from Afghanistan has renewed concerns that it will become a safe haven for terrorist and extremist groups . Many of these efforts aided by government and NGO health workers will be discontinued .
 A video of the Taliban's acting Minister of Public Health, Qalandar Ebad urging the people in Afghanistan to get vaccinated gives hope . The United Nations reported the plummeting of covid testing and vaccinations .
 There were a total of 1,072 recorded IED attacks in Afghanistan during the period of 2019-2021 . IED Attacks in Afghanistan were recorded in the same period .
 As the lowest number of attacks have occurred most recently, it is likely correlated to the Taliban takeover .
 Soft targets: Urban residents, urban residents, villages, and markets were the most common targets . The most common target was urban residents and markets .
 Only 8% of all attacks were on hard targets, 12% used car bombs, 0.1% were multi-explosive IEDs . The remaining 34% were non-specific IED's .
 Extremist groups have used the instability that the Covid pandemic has presented to their distinct advantage . The instability has presented a distinct advantage to them .
 Dialogue has reinforced ideological beliefs and has been used as a tool to further strengthen strategy and to gain legitimacy . Dialogue has also been used to strengthen strategy, gain legitimacy.
 IED attacks and tactics have remained fairly consistent over the past three years . extremist organisations’ ability to maintain their operational capacity has remained consistent over this period .
 The last six months of 2021 have provided the lowest IED attack totals during the three year period for Syria, Afghanistan and Somalia . The last year's IED totals were the lowest for Syria and Afghanistan .
 Only in Iraq has the most recent six month total for IED attacks at its highest level for the three year period . IEDs in Iraq have been at their highest level in three years .
 IED attacks levels, tactics and targets in all four countries will remain consistent with end of year 2021 levels . Similar trends have already been seen from the AOAV database from January 2022 .
 extremist groups look likely to continue to embrace unpredictable, smallerscale IED attacks, while continuing to expand their growth and increase their operational capabilities . As 2022 progresses, extremist groups are likely to be more aggressive .
 A blast struck the mosque during Friday prayers, and gunmen pushed inside, opening fire on worshipers .
 Pakistani police tweeted that at least two assailants carried out the attack . The attack took place at a mosque in central Peshawar .
 The tweet said one officer was killed and a second was critically wounded . The tweet also said a second officer was wounded .
 Video released by police showed victims being loaded into ambulances as additional security forces arrived at the scene .
 Militant attacks have increased in Pakistan along border regions with Afghanistan since the Taliban takeover of Kabul last year . Militants have increased along border areas with Afghanistan.
 Some leaders of extremist groups long active in Pakistan have said the Taliban's rise next door has emboldened their forces .
 The case was brought by Abu Zubaydah, a Guantanamo prisoner who was arrested in 2002 . He has been held without charge ever since . The court allowed the government to block the psychologists from giving evidence in the case .
 The majority of the justices granted the government the privilege of “state secrets’ The power prevents the public disclosure of information deemed harmful to national security . The majority also granted the public access to ‘state secrets'
 Zubaydah wanted to call psychologists, James Mitchell and Bruce Jessen to confirm that he had been unlawfully detained and tortured in Poland . He wanted the psychologists to confirm he was unlawfully detained in a so-called CIA “black site’s’
 The prisoner was tortured in a number of black sites in several countries between 2002 and his transfer to Guantanamo four years later . It is public knowledge that he was tortured.
 He was waterboarded 83 times, a form of controlled drowning . The torture techniques were used against him, including waterboarding .
 The nine justices of the supreme court divided along unusual lines that crossed the traditional conservative-liberal divide . In Thursday’s ruling, the nine justices were divided on unusual lines .
 The majority opinion was written by Stephen Breyer, the court's senior liberal justice . Breyer is retiring at the end of this term .
 The location of a CIA black site in Poland was already publicly known . Breyer argued that the government was entitled to assert the “state secrets’ privilege .
 Breyer agreed with the CIA that “clandestine’s relations between the U.S. and foreign intelligence services were based on trust and had to be protected in the interests of national security .
 Two justices dissented from the opinion — the liberal justice Sonia Sotomayor and conservative Neil Gorsuch . The two justices were both liberal justices .
 The torture to which Zubaydah was subjected had been extensively chronicled in official reports, books and movies . In a lengthy rebuttal, Gorsuch pointed out that the torture had been documented in books, movies .
 "We should not pretend it will safeguard any secret,’ he wrote . But respectfully, he said, we should not pretending it will protect any secret .
 Elena Kagan, the court’s third liberal justice, stood apart from the majority opinion . Kagan argued that the case should have been allowed to proceed in a lower court .
 Mark Denbeaux, a lead lawyer for Zubaydah, said the court’s ruling would have a detrimental impact on public accountability .
 Denbeaux says the evocation of the state secrets privilege was entirely in line with the past 20 years . The CIA had relentlessly labored to keep the details of the torture program from being revealed .
 The Zubaydah case failed to dent the wall of secrecy that has been erected around the CIA’s torture program .
 The supreme court heard arguments in the case in October . Several of the justices openly referred to the prisoner's interrogation as a form of torture .
 The nation's highest court has used the “torture’s word with regard to Guantanamo detainees and their treatment in the wake of the terrorist attacks on 9/11 . It was the first time that the nation's high court had used the word .
 An AeroMéxico flight from Toronto to Mexico City was diverted to Houston early Thursday morning . Three passengers who appeared to be intoxicated were removed .
 The passengers, two men and a woman, were told they weren't allowed to consume alcohol by a flight attendant . They were advised to finish their beverages, according to police reports .
 The flight attendant alerted the captain, who diverted the plane to Houston . The plane was diverted to Houston.
 Two passengers were transported to Houston's Sobering Center . People can be transported without being arrested to avoid criminal record for public intoxication .
 Houston Airport System confirmed that Houston Police and CBP met the flight and removed the passengers from the aircraft .
 "The flight departed shortly after to Mexico City," Bernal said via email .
Nearly 6,000 reports of unruly behavior logged by the FAA last year . The FAA has logged nearly 6,500 reports of passenger behavior .
 The agency said in mid-February that 80 of the disruptive incidents on aircraft since the start of last year have been referred to the Justice Department to consider criminal prosecution .
 In February, an American Airlines flight attendant hit an unruly passenger in the head with a coffee pot as he tried to open the plane's exit door and the flight was diverted .
 The FBI was involved in that case and the passenger was charged with one count of assaulting and intimidating a flight attendant . The passenger was also charged with assaulting and intimidated a flight attendants .
 The FAA does not have authority to prosecute criminal cases . The FAA can propose fines of up to $37,000 per violation for unruly behavior .
 In November, the FAA proposed $161,823 in civil penalties against eight passengers for alleged incidents of unruly behavior involving alcohol .
 Boch's Bentley was one of 1,500 rare cars on board the Felicity Ace when it sank .
 Vessels the size of Felicity Ace can carry at least 4,000 vehicles . It's not clear how many cars were on the ship when it went down .
 The ship was on its way to Rhode Island from Germany when a fire broke out 13 days prior to its fiery demise .
 The Bentley's 12-cylinder Lamborghinis are a rare, exotic car Boch said might never see the road again . The Lamborghini is a 12-year-old luxury car .
 The ship's sinking comes as the auto industry deals with supply chain issues that have made it hard for many Americans to find vehicles .
 Boch, who owns multiple car dealerships in Massachusetts, thinks that could create more issues for car owners in the U.S.
 Boch told WJAR his Bentley has been re-ordered and car manufacturers are working with other affected customers . Boch said his Bentley is now working with others affected customers.
Hurricane Laura destroyed homes across coastal Louisiana in 2020 .
 Hurricane Ida hit in 2021, leaving the entire city of New Orleans without power for days .
Extreme weather is becoming more common in the Gulf of Mexico region, a U.N. report says . It's just one of the warnings in the report released this week .
 The devastating effects of climate change in the region also include rising seas, collapsing fisheries and toxic tides . Even if humanity somehow manages to limit global warming to 1. degrees Celsius above the pre-industrial era, the effects will be devastating .
 The report, an “atlas of human suffering, details numerous ways in which climate change will affect the gulf . The report was released on Tuesday .
 The entire U.S. Gulf coast is under serious threat from rising seas as the planet's polar ice caps melt, the U.N. report says . From Texas to Florida, the Gulf coast has the longest coastline of any state .
 The region is home to major oil and gas production in Texas and Louisiana and tourist destinations in Mississippi, Alabama and Florida . Republican leaders have stressed adaption to climate change .
 The Republican-led Florida House of Representatives refused to add clean energy measures to a plan to bolster the state against sea level rise and flooding .
 Petersburg-area congressional seat, was disappointed lawmakers didn't do more . Petersburg- area congressional seat is in a tough district .
 People considering 30-year mortgages are already looking for homes and commercial buildings that pose lower flood risks .
 Tampa Bay area is considered one of the most vulnerable places in the nation for storm surges . In Miami Beach, streets already flood on sunny days, especially during the King Tides .
 Sea level rise poses an existential threat to much of Louisiana . So much of the Mississippi River delta has been sinking due to human interventions .
 The loss of sediment from leveeing the river and saltwater intrusion caused by coastal oil and gas development are two big culprits .
 In Florida alone, the decline of the reefs could translate into $24 billion to $55 billion in economic losses by 2100, the report says .
 Miami-Dade released a strategic sea level rise response plan in 2021 . It calls for adapting infrastructure, elevating roads, building on higher ground and expanding waterfront parks and canals .
 The city of Miami Beach has already spent more than $500 million installing pumps to flush water off the island . No guarantees that this will keep tourists’ feet dry .
 The city of Miami is spending potentially billions of dollars to keep the ocean at bay and limit saltwater intrusion into freshwater supplies . The city is spending millions to keep water at bay .
 Louisiana's Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority has a plan with “very specific projects,’ the U.N. report says . The plan includes dredging to replenish wetlands and rebuilding barrier islands damaged by storms .
 Louisiana also announced a plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050 .
 Outbreaks of red tide have become more frequent and more deadly because of warmer air and water, experts say . Red tide is a natural toxic organisms originally noticed by Spanish explorers .
 The increasing outbreaks kill more fish and sea life and harm the tourist industry . Smelly fish-strewn beaches, poor fishing and the possibility of harms to human health .
 The warmer water also fosters algae blooms, caused by pollution from agricultural, urban and other sources . The lack of seagrass has led to a record die-off of manatees in the past year .
 The state resorted to feeding one group of starving manatees romaine lettuce instead of lettuce . The state has been trying to feed a group of menatees with lettuce .
 The jet's resting place in international waters had fueled speculation that China might want to attempt its own salvage operations of the world's most advanced stealth fighter jet . China may want to try to salvage its own stealth jet.
 The jet crashed on the carrier's deck while attempting a landing in the South China Sea . The jet was conducting regular flight operations.
 Seven sailors, including the pilot, were injured in the crash . It ultimately slid off of the deck into the ocean waters and seven sailors were injured .
 The Navy said shortly after the incident that it would attempt to recover the jet that ultimately was located at a depth of more than two miles . The Navy has said it will attempt to recovered the jet.
 The plane was recovered using a remotely operated vehicle known as the CURV-21 . The vehicle attached specialized rigging and lift lines to the aircraft so it could be raised by the crane aboard the Picasso .
 The Navy confirms the aircraft was taken aboard the aircraft carrier . The aircraft was seen floating in the water after the crash .
 Five sailors, including a junior officer, were later charged with leaking a second video that showed the crash that had been recorded by one of the ship's surveillance cameras .
 Tattoos that bedeck his entire body express his fealty to one of the largest gangs in the U.S. Now 36, the longtime Latin King enforcer is trying to leave anyway .
 He is seeking to scrub his past by erasing his gang tattoos through a new gang-cessation and jobs program . He and 11 other inmates signed up for the program at a Chicago-area jail .
 The Associated Press got exclusive access over two days to the first 12 inmates enrolled in the largely privately funded program at the DuPage County Jail and to their cellblock .
Eck, jailed on burglary charges, earned the nickname “Hollywood on the street for his swagger . Eck was jailed for burglary charges .
 nightmares jarred him awake for days before he recently walked into the jail’s new tattoo-removal wing .
 One goal is to land the inmates jobs in horticulture, welding and other fields they're learning, says program's civilian director and chief architect .
There's booming interest among businesses scrambling to address COVID-19-driven labor shortages . He said there’s booming interest in businesses scrambling for jobs .
 Jobs training was available previously, but the gang and tattoo emphasis was added this year . Jobs training is now available in the UK .
 JUST of DuPage was founded by a Roman Catholic nun to develop reentry programs for inmates . ‘As long as they show up for work, we don’t care what they did,’ said Beary, a longtime business owner and executive director of the nonprofit JUST
 If they graduate, they do get help searching for work and relocating away from their gangs . But if they graduate they will get help looking for work, they will be able to find work .
 To graduate, participants must have their gang tattoos removed or covered with other tats . Participants must also have other tattoos removed .
 DuPage County Sheriff James Mendrick: It’s proof they’re serious about forsaking their old lives . He says it's proof they're serious about abandoning their old life .
 The first tattoo Eck had covered was one on his arm of the Latin Kings’ initials . Eck had also covered a tattoo on the arm of his arm.
 Jail-sanctioned tattooist Tom Begley inked the image of a deer over it in a four-hour session .
 A roaring lion — a favorite Latin Kings symbol — was recently converted to a roaring bear . The lion is a favoriteLatin Kings symbol .
 Eck has to be careful to pick animals that aren’t other gangs’ symbols .
Meagan Begley and his wife, Meagan, of the suburban Electric Tattoo Parlor, jumped at the chance to lend their skills . Begley's wife Meagan is a member of the Electric Tatto Parlor .
 Inmates painted a mural on a wall in the jail’s three-chaired tattoo studio .
Tom Begley transformed a Satan Disciples tattoo on Jaime Marinez’s forearm from a Christian cross fashioned from rifles into the image of a vulture .
Nearby, Meagen Begley removed hand tattoos of 27-year-old Latin Count leader Gilberto Rios . He used a pen-like tool to scrape off outer skin, then injecting saline solution .
 Rios' hand was a symbol of disdain for Marinez's gang, she says . One she removed was a backward “D,’s’S’D, a symbol for disdain for the gang .
 Mendrick, elected sheriff as a Republican, contends violent crime in his county is often committed by gangs from Chicago . Mendrick is elected as a GOP sheriff in Cook County .
 Mendrick is convinced the program, funded partly by church donations, will help reduce crime . Mendrick says the program is funded by the church .
 The program also offers classes on the Bible, anger management and decision-making .
 The killing of Eck's best friend two months before he was jailed began changing his perspective . Eck was jailed a year ago for the killing of his friend .
 A Latin King coveted his friend’s higher perch in the gang hierarchy, Eck said . It was an internal hit by a Latin King who coveted the friend's high perch .
 Eck says guilt at having hurt others also began weighing on him . "It was like, enough is enough," he says .
 Tom Begley traced a new image over a scar on Marinez’s chest from when he was shot last year at a stoplight .
 The tattoo is of a clock set to 6:20, memorializing the date his father died of a heroin overdose on June 20, 2016 .
 The 21-year-old knows he’s putting himself in peril by spurning his gang .
Eck credits Beary, whom he describes as a father figure, for persuading him to join the program . Eck describes Beary as a "father figure"
 One more criminal conviction could send him to prison for life, he said . He said he could be sent to jail for life .
 Speaking on a recent afternoon, he appeared startled when he realized what pronoun he was using to talk about Latin Kings .
 As he struggles to reinvent himself, he says he wants nothing to do with his gang persona . He says he is trying to find a new way of life .
Shocking videos emerged in China of a mother of eight chained by her neck to the wall of a shack . Zhang Xiuhong felt torn between two possibilities of human trafficking .
 Yao Li went missing after leaving home for school 14 years ago . Zhang's teenage daughter went missing when she was 14 years old . She hoped for a moment that the woman in the videos was her long lost girl, Yao Li .
 Zhang studied the face of the woman in the videos closely . She had the same square-shaped face as Yao, her only child. Zhang studied her face closely .
 Zhang suspects Yao had been abducted and sold either as a sex worker or a wife to a rural man away from home . Like many parents with missing teenage daughters, Zhang suspect Yao was abducted .
 A traditional preference for sons has led to sexselective abortions in China . A heavily skewed sex ratio in China is blamed for the skewed ratio .
 In some rural places, the demand for brides has fueled trafficking businesses . Criminal gangs take women from even less developed areas and sell them to bachelors unable to find local matches .
 In late January, one victim became the face of such exploitation that spurred a national outcry .
 The woman was seen shivering in a doorless shed in a village in the eastern province of Jiangsu . She was seen standing with a chain around her neck and a lock hanging below her chin .
 The videos also reveal that the woman had given birth to seven sons and one daughter . The videos were also revealed that the mother had also given birth.
 Dong Zhimin, the father of the children, casually said he had many children to earn respect from fellow villagers .
 The abuse of the woman incensed millions across a country that has for the most part emerged from poverty and moved on from dated practices such as forced marriages .
 Zhang’s daughter left home for school with a ponytail and never returned . Zhang's daughter never returned to her mother's home after she left home with the ponytail .
 Zhang received an unexpected phone call from her daughter's school in April 2008 . China hosted its first-ever Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008 .
 Zhang worked at a family-run restaurant near her home in suburban Beijing .
 Yao had said goodbye just an hour ago to her daughter, Yao, who headed out on a bicycle to go to school . Yao's mother said goodbye to daughter, who had been going to school for an hour .
 Yao attended a weekend tutoring session at her junior high school to prepare for demanding exams . It was Saturday, but like many students in China, it was Saturday .
 Teacher called and asked why her 14-year-old daughter was absent . But the teacher asked why she was absent.
 Zhang and her husband searched every spot on the teenager’s way to school and asked every person who might have seen her .
 In the late afternoon, Zhang spotted Yao’s white sneaker next to a pile of trash and weeds . Zhang spotted the sneaker by the cornfield .
 Zhang has held on to the shoe as the last sign of her daughter's existence . She holds out hope of seeing her again one day, like some have in tearful reunions .
 sociologists say human trafficking once prevalent in large swathes of China . They attribute it to a mix of economic and social factors .
 Globally, more than half of human trafficking victims were trafficked for sexual exploitation, according to a 2020 United Nations report .
 Of every 10 victims detected worldwide, five are adult women and two are girls . Of every ten victims detected, five were adult women, two were girls .
 China held its second Olympic Games earlier this year . The videos of the chained woman shattered any notion that human trafficking was a thing of the past in the rising power .
 Chinese citizens openly questioned just how many trafficked Chinese women are subjected to inhumane abuse today . The authorities were mindful of managing its global image as the spotlight fell on sporting spectacles .
 Internet censors have battled with internet censors to vent their anger and petition for change . They have battled for change in the past.
 Police in China record a few thousand trafficking cases involving women and children every year . A few thousand cases involving children and women are reported each year .
 Chinese court records and anthropological studies showed female victims of human trafficking were typically brought from Vietnam, Myanmar, North Korea and China’s southwestern border to bachelors . The male-to-female ratios are highly disparate and economic development stagnated .
 In exchange, the women’s parents receive cash payments and the often-false promise that their daughters would live a comfortable life with their husbands .
 Many other victims were deceived with promises of job opportunities away from home . Many others were deceived by promises of jobs away from the home .
Official data likely only account for a small fraction of the trafficking, forced marriage, and sexual assault committed against women . Many are living with violence, stigma, and poverty are unable to pursue a criminal investigation .
 The chained woman in Feng county, Xuzhou city, Jiangsu province could be one of the numerous women who have been suffering in silence .
 Authorities' years of negligence of the cruelty committed to her, and their perceived attempts to cover up the crime, are fueling the outcry .
 Dong’s father found the woman when she was begging on the streets in 1998, Feng county says . Dong's father found her in 1998 .
 Dong started putting chains on her because she was supposedly afflicted with mental disorders, government investigators said . She was allegedly smashing objects and beating up family members, they said .
 Officials say the woman was someone nicknamed Xiaohuamei, or Little Flower Plum . She is from a remote village on the Chinese-Myanmar border populated by ethnic minorities .
 She allegedly got lost when a fellow villager took her to eastern China to get medical treatment . She 'got lost' when she was taken to a villager to get treatment .
 People are pushing for an investigation into trafficking networks and a chance for a woman to speak for herself . These inconsistent explanations, coupled with internet censorship, did not ease public anger .
 Former investigative journalists went to the woman's hometown to look for her relatives . Most state-controlled media outlets have been silent on the controversy .
 People who sympathized with the woman handed out flyers on the streets of Shanghai to advocate for her .
 Two young women embarked on a journey to visit her in hospital, cheered on by tens of thousands of internet users . Police soon detained them and accused them of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble,’ one of them wrote on Weibo .
More evidence of the prevalent bride trade surfaced and began to garner public attention . More evidence of bride trade has surfaced .
 Court of Feng county found to have rejected at least two women’s requests to end their forced marriage . The court also ordered them to treasure their families .
 A photo album documenting the lives of mentally ill women sold into sex slavery went viral .
 People are again sharing the 2007 drama film Blind Mountain, which depicts the kidnapping and trafficking of a female university student . The film was based on the kidnapping of a student at the University of Cambridge .
Director Li Yang said people could share his film to support the campaign against trafficking . He wouldn't pursue copyright charges and would not pursue charges .
 A 32-year-old woman surnamed Ke told VICE World News that videos of the chained woman prompted her to pursue an investigation into the trafficking of her own mother . She was also sold to Feng county in the '80s from the northwestern province of Shaanxi .
 Ke said her mother was locked up by another household and gave birth to a daughter . Ke said she had been given birth to her daughter by a family member .
 Ke’s mother made a report to police in 2008, but it was dismissed due to a lack of evidence . In 2008, Ke's mother made the report to the police, but was dismissed .
 DNA tests confirm the chained woman is Little Flower Plum from Fugong county, Yunnan province . The government said DNA tests confirmed the woman was from Fugongs county, Fugong province .
 The woman, born in 1977, was lured to Jiangsu province in 1998 and sold three times to different men . After one failed marriage, she ended up in the shed in the province .
 Three people, including the father of her eight children, have been arrested for trafficking . 17 local officials were given penalties for trafficking.
 State media also released a video showing the woman receiving schizophrenia treatment in hospital .
 She lost her teeth due to severe gum infections, the hospital said . Internet users doubt this, but internet users doubt it .
 The Chinese Ministry of Public Security said it would conduct a campaign against the trafficking of women and children .
 For some villagers in the more developed eastern China, it is cheaper to buy a bride from remote mountains or neighboring countries than to pay dowry gifts to a local woman . Local cadres sometimes turn a blind eye, and local cadres often turn ablind eye .
 China’s skewed sex ratio at birth, itself a result of selective abortion of female fetuses, is often blamed for bride trade .
 Activists say women are properties of their fathers, brothers, and husbands without their own free will . But activists say the root cause is the view that women are property of their dads, brothers and husbands .
 Authorities are failing to protect women from trafficking, sexual violence, and other domestic abuse, activists say . Authorities are trying to preserve stable families and boost birth rates .
 Zhou Xiaoxuan, a leading figure of China's #MeToo movement, said the chained woman’s mental illness, poverty and ethnic minority background had contributed to her extremely cruel exploitation .
 Among child victims of trafficking, girls are much more likely to be sold as spouses or sex workers after they were abducted or deceived with fraudulent job offers .
 The idea that missing girls would one day be found in a forced marriage like the chained woman has been a tormenting hope for their parents .
 Zhang, the mother of the missing teenager Yao Li, moved to Beijing from the northeastern province of Heilongjiang . She lost her job at a steel company amid massive layoffs at state factories in the ‘90s .
 She washed dishes and chopped ingredients at a restaurant run by her sister . Her husband took up gigs as a cleaner and security guard near the Beijing railway station .
 She used to listen to songs by Taiwanese girl group S.H.E. on an MP3 player gifted by a relative .
 Zhang regrets her decision to buy a pair of skates. She loved roller skating but the family could not spare the money to get her a skates .
 Yao dreamed of becoming a flight attendant, but she had never boarded a plane . She had never been on a plane.
After he punched her in the face and wielded a meat cleaver at her about a year ago, Zhang moved out . He punched her and then used the cleaver in her face .
 Yao takes care of her own parents, while doing livestreams on social media to spread the word about her parents . Yao is the cheapest way to gather help for her parents, and now she takes care herself .
Like other parents in search of their children online, Zhang repeats the same story over and over again during her daily livestream . Like other parents, Zhang repeated the same stories during her live stream .
 ADL’s research found that 4,851 cases of distributing white supremacist propaganda were reported in 2020, compared with 5,125 the year before . The numbers remain at worryingly serious levels .
 Throughout 2021, white supremacist propaganda was reported in all states except Hawaii .
 The ADL found that in 2021, at least 38 white supremacist groups distributed propaganda, including pieces that presented Ashli Babbitt, a January 6 rioter, as a martyr .
 The ADL tracked 38 white supremacist groups tracked by the ADL . Three groups were found to be responsible for 91% of all propaganda activity .
 Patriot Front, a Texas-based alt-right group, was responsible for 3,992 of all the propaganda incidents in 2021 . More than 82% of nationwide incidents were propaganda incidents, according to the group .
 ADL distributed propaganda in every state except Hawaii and Alaska . According to ADL, the group distributed propaganda.
 The group’s activities were largely concentrated in Pennsylvania, Virginia, Massachusetts, Texas and Maryland . Its members were responsible for 82% of propaganda distribution across college campuses .
 NJEHA’s propaganda campaigns were found to have targeted Jewish people, Black people, immigrants or the LGBTQ+ community .
 FRM, a hate group created with the intent to spread national socialism, was responsible for the third highest number of propaganda incidents in 2021 .
 The group was responsible for 50% of antisemitic propaganda incidents last year . The group also was responsible.
 Its activities were recorded in 19 states but were mostly found in Minnesota, Mississippi, Arizona, Colorado and Texas . It was recorded in Minnesota and Mississippi .
 ADL found that antisemitic propaganda distribution has skyrocketed compared to the previous year . In addition to tracking white supremacist propaganda, the ADL also found that white supremacists have increased in recent years .
 A judge in Snohomish County Superior Court ordered a mistrial in the case . But on Wednesday, a judge in the county's Superior Court orders a mist trial .
 Judge Richard Okrent agreed with Meza's defense attorney that an accumulation of "errors" may have prejudiced the jury when it convicted him .
 Snohomish County Prosecutor Adam Cornell said his leadership team would review court documents to decide what to do next . The decision could include appealing the decision .
 Meza was charged with second-degree murder for Peterson’s death on a Community Transit bus . Meza is accused of killing Peterson on the bus .
 According to Meza's trial testimony, Meza confronted Peterson about smoking drugs on the bus . Meza had confronted Peterson on a bus, according to testimony .
 Lake Stevens man charged in Snohomish County Superior Court with second-degree murder . He claimed self-defense when he shot and killed a passenger on a Community Transit bus last month .
 Security footage showed it was the hand of Peterson’s friend reaching in .
 Police say Meza told them he shot Peterson intentionally . He then shot Peterson again, intentionally, police say . Police say he then shot him again .
 A jury convicted Meza of a lesser charge of first-degree manslaughter . After a weeklong trial, a jury found Meza guilty of manslaughter .
 Firefighters at the scene determined the fire to be arson after finding a possible pipe bomb near the car . Firefighters found the fire was arson.
 The police department's bomb unit was called to the scene and concluded the improvised explosive was no longer a threat . The bomb unit’s bomb unit said the explosive was not a threat.
 The police department is boosting its presence in the troubled neighborhood near Third Avenue and Pine Street . The department is expanding its presence.
 A 15-year-old boy was murdered Wednesday night around 7:30m. That’s where he was murdered, police say .
 Residents in the neighborhood woke up to a mobile police precinct and strong police presence of officers on bike patrols on Thursday .
 The block of Third Avenue between Pike and Pine streets was also clear from the usual mass of people there . The block is also clear.
 Many say it shouldn’t have taken the murder of a teen for the block to be cleared . But many say it should have taken a teen to be killed for a block.
 The latest deadly shooting comes after another man was murdered here Sunday . Another man was shot in the face last Monday, and another was shot Monday .
 A 15-year-old shot at 7:15 at night is "absolutely devastating and unacceptable,’ said Detective Valerie Carson with the Seattle Police Department .
 Business owner Brandon Davis runs Profit 3D, a 3D printing company near Third and Pike . Business owner Davis runs profit 3D.
 The police presence at Third and Pine is similar to the response Seattle police launched nearly two weeks ago at 12th and Jackson in Little Saigon, another trouble hot spot .
 Carlos Manuel was working in Little Saigon on Thursday .
 In the past two weeks since 12th and Jackson was cleared, violence near 3rd and Pine has escalated . Three shootings in 10 days, including deadly incidents on Sunday and Thursday nights, have been reported .
 patrol officers at 12th and Jackson will be replaced with non-patrol personnel to staff the mobile precinct there . Diaz said the move would free up officers downtown .
Seattle's downtown area is defined by chaos, dysfunction, and tragedy, says author . "My heart is filled with sorrow for the victims," she says . "For people across Seattle who should see downtown as a thriving beacon for our city and region"
 "We are launching a comprehensive and collaborative approach to address this crisis," says Chief Diaz . "Working with Chief Diaz, law enforcement partners and community advocates," Diaz says .
 Seattle must be safe for everyone, I encourage you to apply to join our police service today . To those who share my belief that Seattle must Be safe, I urge you to be part of the solution .
 Two Seattle Police officers were working the block near 12th Avenue and Jackson Street . It's clear things are changing .
 What was once described as an open-air drug market is now an empty sidewalk . It's a big deal for the drug industry .
Volunteers started walking the streets as an extra set of eyes and ears during the start of the pandemic . Woo is part of the CID Community Watch .
 Seattle Police Department parked a mobile precinct in the area last month . The department has maintained a visible police presence in the neighborhood .
 We’re not entirely sure if this is going to be a short-term fix, quick fix. We're not completely sure if it will be a quick fix .
 We’re hoping to work with the city on long-term sustainable solutions, Woo said . The city is trying to find a solution to its problems .
 Seattle police warned of a man who pushed a woman down a flight of stairs at a light rail station . The man is believed to have stabbed a second person, police say .
 Seattle Mayor Bruce Harrell is expected to address the crime on 12th Avenue and Jackson Street . Harrell will likely touch on what's happened on 3rd and Pine during a press conference Friday morning .
 Video shows Ellis being repeatedly punched and choked, and officers using a Taser and kneeling on him . Ellis was punched, choked and kicked, and police used Taser on him.
 His death was later ruled a homicide by the Pierce County Medical Examiner’s office . He was found dead at the scene of his death .
 Pastor Gregory Christopher, President of the Tacoma Ministerial Alliance, says there's no honor . He's buried, but there’s no honor, he says .
 Since Ellis’ murder, Tacoma has seen changes to its city council and police department, including a new chief . Tacoma's new chief is a new police chief .
 Ellis's death has not changed the employment status of the three officers who were charged for Ellis’s death . But what hasn’t changed is the employmentstatus of the 3 officers .
 Timothy Rankine, Christopher Burbank, and Matthew Collins all remain fully employed by the Tacoma Police Department . LegallyBlack founder Tisha Marie said only pours salt in a deep wound .
 Ellis family's attorney says they have no intention of stopping until justice is served . But James Bible, the attorney for the Ellis family, says the consequences go much further . The Ellis family says they will not stop until justice has been served .
 KING 5 reached out to the Tacoma Police Department, but they said they cannot comment on an open investigation .
 The trial date for the three officers charged in Ellis's murder is scheduled for October 3, 2022 . Ellis's trial date is set to be held in October 2021 .
 The businessman they knew as administrator of that chat had just been arrested . He organized philanthropic efforts such as a Christmas toy drive for needy children and renovations for an elementary school .
 Conor Vincent D’Monte, known as Johnny Williams in Puerto Rico, was allegedly a leader of a violent gang . Canadian authorities sought him on charges including first-degree murder .
 Authorities don't know exactly when D' Monte, 44, arrived in Puerto Rico . They believe he had been using the alias “Johnny Williams’s’ in the island for at least several months .
 The six-foot-one-inch fugitive settled into a rural, eastern mountain community near El Yunque rainforest . He lived in a house with no name in a working-class neighborhood .
Every month, D’Monte would accompany employees of a nonprofit organization known as Karma Honey Project to a farmer’s market .
 D'Monte remains in federal prison in Puerto Rico as he awaits an extradition process . He is being held in federal jail in the U.S.
 D'Monte, who has Canadian and Irish citizenship, requested that the consulates of those countries be notified . His public defense attorney declined comment .
 He was invited to the governor’s mansion last month for his role in trying to save honeybees after Hurricane Maria . He even met with Puerto Rico's agriculture secretary and a local senator .
 Its president, Candice Galek, is a Miami entrepreneur and former model . Galek is a former model and entrepreneur .
 In its 2020 annual report, the company says its volume of business did not exceed $3 million .
 Its balance sheet noted that it had no assets or liabilities, according to filings with Puerto Rico’s Registry of Corporations and Entities .
 D'Monte was known as ‘Johnny Teeth’ because his teeth were so white and straight . He said he met D’Monte in the early days of the pandemic after being added to his WhatsApp group .
 The businessman described D'Monte as a ‘tremendous sales guy’ who was very jovial . The businessman said D’Monte was a “tremendedous sales man’s’
 It's unclear why D’Monte chose Puerto Rico or if he knew anyone in the U.S. territory .
 He is accused in the killing of a rival gang member at a Vancouver strip mall in February 2009 . British Columbia was experiencing one of the worst gang violence outbreaks in its history, police say .
 D’ Monte is accused of conspiring to murder two alleged rival gang members known as the Bacon Brothers . He is also accused of plotting to kill two alleged rivals .
 McConnell said it's highly unusual for fugitives to be on the run for as long as D'Monte and to successfully assimilate themselves into a community .
 D’ Monte has traveled to Spain and Asia and is associated with a drug network in Mexico . He was last seen in the Vancouver area in January 2011 .
 He vanished until he reappeared in Puerto Rico more than a decade later . After that, he disappeared until he returned to Puerto Rico .
 U.S. Marshals Service says high-profile fugitives often assume the profile of a very wealthy person because they have the means .
 D’Monte was arrested three weeks before his arrest, Torres said . Torres said his agency finally had enough information to identify the fugitive .
 As D’Monte drove through the popular tourist district of Isla Verde on Feb., the agents closed in .
 Brett Hankison, the former police officer charged with recklessly shooting into a neighboring apartment during the course of the raid that ended with the death of Breonna Taylor, not guilty on all three counts of wanton endangerment .
 Hankison was charged with three counts of wanton endangerment . He fired multiple shots into a neighboring apartment that endangered three people on March 13, 2020 .
 The jury deliberated for just three hours before returning its verdict . The jury returned its verdict after deliberating for three hours .
 Hankison fired 10 shots into Taylor's apartment, prosecutors say . Several of the shots entered a neighboring apartment where a man, child and pregnant woman were living .
 Prosecutors said Cody Etherton, Chelsey Napper, and her son, Zayden, were all sleeping at the time of the shooting . Prosecutors said Etherton was shot in the head and head .
 Bullets and casings from Hankison's gun were found at the scene and retrieved from a common wall of Taylor and her neighbors .
 Hankison alleged that he saw muzzle flashes and was "certain" at the time he heard an AR-15 rifle firing out of the apartment . He was interviewed by Louisville Metro Police Department's Public Integrity Unit .
 No AR-15 rifle or corresponding bullets or casings were found on the scene . The scene was not clear when the scene was first reported .
 Hankison, and fellow officers Myles Cosgrove and Mattingly, fired 32 shots into Taylor's apartment while serving a "no-knock" warrant . Hankison and other officers shot 32 shots in the apartment .
 plainclothes officers were serving a warrant searching for Taylor's ex-boyfriend . They allege he was dealing drugs .
 Kenneth Walker thought someone was breaking into the home and fired one shot from a 9 mm pistol at the officers . He was not at the residence, but his current boyfriend, Kenneth Walker, thought someone had broken into the house .
 Mattingly was struck in the leg and three officers opened fire, killing the 26-year-old Taylor .
 Two bullets that had entered the ceiling were also found in the apartment above Taylor's apartment . Two bullets were found in a room above the apartment .
 Walker's lawyer, Frederick Moore IL, said in a statement following the ruling . "Napper, or her young son," Walker's attorney said .
 Hankison told the court in his testimony on Wednesday that he was not aware of the layout of the apartment or apartment complex prior to the execution of the warrant . Hankison said he did not know the layout.
 Taylor's death sparked outrage nationwide and protests calling for the officers to be held accountable for the killing . Taylor was shot dead by a police officer in 2011 .
 Kentucky Attorney General Daniel Cameron: "We appreciate the hard work of our prosecutors and respect the decision of the jury" The verdict was read on Thursday .