 Benjy Goodwin examines the state of Ukraine, five years on from the beginning of the Euromaidan protests .
 Last week marked five years since the start of Euromaidan that ended in revolution . The momentous protests on Kyiv’s maidan nezalezhnosti.
 Many of Euromaidan participants have been reflecting this week on the mixed results of the country . Many of its participants have also been reflecting on the crossroads at which the country still stands .
 The protests came in response to what many in the country saw as a betrayal . The protests were held in protest against what many saw as betrayal .
 The President at the time, Viktor Yanukovych, had just decided not to sign the long-negotiated Association Agreement with the EU . Instead his government was seeking to align with Putin’s pet-project, the Eurasian Economic Union .
 Pro-European Ukrainians were enraged after social media appeals to come to the Maidan . The protests began after a series of social media posts were posted on Facebook .
 Yanukovych fled, and early presidential and parliamentary elections were scheduled . Yanukovych fled. Yanukovych fled .
 Vladimir Putin, enraged at the ousting of his ally, saw opportunity amidst chaos . However, Vladimir Putin saw opportunity amid chaos .
 He sent agents into Crimea and the Donbas region of Eastern Ukraine to sow discord and support separatist movements, he said . The Russian military and a war in Eastern Ukraine between Russian-supported separatists and the Ukrainian army have been ongoing .
 Euromaidan was a movement for a brighter, more Ukrainian and more European future . For its participants, Eurom Maidan was an event for a better future .
 Many in Ukraine refer to it as the Revolution of Dignity . It was against corruption, cover-ups, and foreign interference .
 President Petro Poroshenko’s resounding election victory in 2014 was meant to deliver this bright future for Ukraine .
 Fast-forward to the present day, and things do not look quite so positive . Things don't look so positive.
 The promised political and economic upheaval has failed to materialise, according to a report . The promises of political upheaval have failed tomaterialise, the report says .
 Euromaidan did revitalise Ukrainian civil society, and many independent organisations were formed in its wake . But the struggle is ongoing .
 Kateryna Handziuk, a prominent activist, was attacked under suspicious circumstances earlier this year . She recently succumbed to her injuries after being attacked .
 If they really cared about addressing this, they might have taken the whole thing a little more seriously .
 Ukraine has a way to go on being a comfortable environment for activists, journalists and the LGBT+ community, after a trans rights rally was disrupted by far-right demonstrators .
 A Canadian journalist was assaulted, as were several protesters, while the police turned a blind eye . A Canadian police officer was assaulted .
 Crimea remains under Russian control – and there appears to be little chance of Ukraine wrestling control of the peninsula in the near future .
 The war in the east continues, in violation of the ceasefire agreed more than three years ago . Over 10,000 Ukrainians have died as a result of the conflict, according to reports .
 A fresh conflict in the Sea of Azov appears to have opened between Russia and Ukraine . The conflict appears to be between the two countries .
 An open attack by Russia on Ukraine is certainly a worrying development . We do not yet know where this will lead, but we do not know where it will lead .
 Ukraine's parliament votes to approve a 30-day period of martial law as a result of attacks . developments in Ukraine at present remain uncertain .
 The extraordinary legal system will provide authorities with emergency executive powers in 10 regions of the country that could be rather draconian . The extraordinary law will provide the authorities with the powers of emergency powers in the country .
 Poroshenko's justification is in part based on his claim to have seen plans for a larger Russian invasion .
 Waving a stack of documents in front of the cameras, he demonstrated his love for theatrics .
 The veracity of these claims is unknown, and we can only hope that the ‘plans’ fail to materialise .
With parliamentary and presidential elections around the corner, some are even suggesting that his support for martial law after Sunday’s events is a means of interfering with the elections .
 More than 80% of people disapprove of the actions of Ukraine’s parliament, and more than 70% disapproving of Poroshenko . The public's trust in its institutions has fallen to new lows, poll shows .
 The current 30 day period would not prevent the elections from going ahead as planned . Such claims about the President's motives remain mere speculation at this stage .
 The elections provide an opportunity for Ukraine to accelerate its reforms . Ukraine's elections provide a chance for the country to accelerate reforms .
 The candidate leading in almost every poll is former prime minister and controversial figure Yulia Tymoshenko . The candidate is also a controversial figure .
 Batkivshchyna party has a poor record of voting for anti-corruption measures . As part of Ukraine’s oligarchic elite for the last twenty years, she is unlikely to take reform seriously .
 Many place their hopes on the pop star Svyatoslav Vakarchuk, who many speculate will run . At this stage his potential candidacy indicates little more than blind hope .
 Five years on, there is much to be said about the success of Euromaidan .
 Ukraine’s civil society is progressing, it has ratified the EU Association Agreement . At long last its new Anti-Corruption Court is being established .
 Ukraine's reforms are far from complete, and Ukraine still has several serious problems . But the fact is that these reforms are still not complete, according to the government .
 The West must redouble its efforts to support Ukraine’s territorial integrity, and to guide it in making necessary reforms . In the face of military threats in both the east and the Sea of Azov.
 The election of a populist, reactionary leader in 2019 is the last thing Ukraine needs. With that in mind, Ukraine needs a populist leader in the next year's election .