I recently met with Ilya Yashin, a Russian opposition leader, political activist and former colleague of assassinated politician Boris Nemtsov . He is also a former colleague.
 Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, American President Franklin Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill seated together during the Yalta Conference, February 4-11, 1945 .
 Yashin's main point was that governments and organizations must support Ukraine . He said the West could help those brave enough to defy the Russian regime .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin invaded Ukraine foremost because he was worried that the country's liberal revolution might inspire the Russian people to mount their own Euromaidan . Putin was worried about the country’s liberal revolution, he said .
 Putin is doing everything he can, including going to war, to demonstrate that toppling the strongman is a bad idea . Putin is therefore doing everything that he can.
 The West didn't simply stand by while European borders were being redrawn by force of arms for the first time since World War II . Putin found himself in the cold.
 He demonstrated that his strategy is to make himself a necessary partner to the West in the fighting occurring in Syria . The Soviet Union became indispensable to the Allies in their fight to defeat Hitler .
 Syria's President Bashar Assad wants to break Russia out of its current isolation . It looks like his plan is to create a temporary alliance of convenience with the West in Syria .
 Putin hopes that after the Syrian conflict has been neutralized, the main powers involved will meet in a modern version of Yalta to divide the world into spheres of influence .
 Such an arrangement could give Russia a free hand in the former Soviet space . It could also give Russia an opportunity to take advantage of Russia in space .
 Ukraine is one of the most important countries in the world, according to Russia's president .
 Those who miss the so-called "stable" days of the Cold War should recall that during that era, Eastern Europe's population lived under an oppressive totalitarian system for half a century .
 One only needs to look at the difficulties of reforming Ukraine today to see just how deep the wounds of that "world order" go .
 Ukrainian people threw out former President Viktor Yanukovych, not to promote chauvinistic "nationalism" as Kremlin propaganda would have people believe . It was in order to finally free themselves from the shadow of Yalta that the Ukrainian people throw out Yanukovych .
 Many in the West may have forgotten about Ukraine in the wake of the November 13 attacks in Paris .
 Putin is gambling that everyone's eyes are fixed on Syria and Iraq. Putin certainly hasn't .
 Violence erupted in the Donbas again after a period of relative calm .
 Spetsnaz units were once again operating at the front lines, Ukrainians reported . Russian irregular forces have been using heavy weapons and several Russian artillery and motorized units .
 Russia also announced that it was sending yet another "humanitarian convoy" into the Donbass, usually a bad sign .
 Putin is using similar tactics in both Syria and Ukraine, creating military facts on the ground . Putin is forcing those who want peace to take his position into consideration .
 This doesn't mean that Putin is planning a new massive offensive in Ukraine, says CNN's John Sutter . It doesn't need to say that he's planning a massive offensive, he says .
 Russia has been conducting a slow war of attrition since its first big mechanized intervention in April 2014 . A much less costly alternative would be to continue to continue the slow war. Russia's first mechanised intervention in 2014.
 Putin hopes to kill Ukraine with a thousand cuts. Putin has failed to knock out Ukraine.
 The main Russian army works as a deterrent behind the lines and the threat of "real war" looms . Ukraine's leaders have been distracted from carrying out critical reforms .
 This has the effect of tiring potential investors and pressuring Ukraine, via Western politicians, to concede to the rebels' demands . The rebels' demand is to remain armed in exchange for honoring other parts of the Minsk agreement .
 As long as Russia's regular forces have escalation dominance, they will likely continue this pattern . Russia'sregular forces will likely be more aggressive in the future .
 Western strategists should ensure the Ukrainian Army has plenty of advanced anti-tank weapons to deter Russian armor . The true cease-fire more likely.
 Ukraine needs constantly updated satellite imagery that the West can provide to stay ahead of Russian movements . Ukraine also needs constant updates to keep up with the Russian movement .
 The West can help with financial assistance but only Ukraine's leaders can change their country . Only Ukraine's leader can change the country.
 Putin's narrative of "authoritarianism or chaos" is false, says Yashin . In doing so, reformers will not only help themselves but also reformers likeYashin who can then show the Russians that Putin's story is false .
 The West needs to be vigilant of new Russian propaganda offensives, says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Putin's idea of "dividing and sharing" the world may sound attractive to some . But with Putin it only means that the strong rule the weak, and that a unique set of rules and norms should apply across large parts of the Eurasian continent .
 Everyone who remembers the true tragedy of Yalta should reject its resurrection, says author .
 Putin has been following the Stalinist playbook, and the "international anti-terrorism coalition" gambit may well be a red herring to distract the world from Ukraine .
 Ukraine's President Vladimir Putin appears to be taking on ISIS . He is supporting his Syrian ally and softening European resolve on behalf of Ukraine .
 Russia's economic wherewithal is sinking concurrently with his plans, while Ukraine's military capability has been growing . Fortunately, Russia's own economic where withal is slipping concurrently with its plans .
 What remains absolutely crucial for Ukraine is the fight against corruption, the reform of government, and economic growth . Ukraine's economy is expected to grow in the coming years .
 U.S. and EU experts fully understand Putin's game-plan and disinformation, but new anti-Islamic tide is too obsessed with terrorists to comprehend Ukraine's critical importance to Europe's and the West's future .
 Preserving Europe or the U.S. from terrorism does not need Russia's support and standing with Ukraine is not inconsistent with fighting Islamic radicalism . Preserve Europe or United States from terrorism is not a priority for Russia.