 The 2018 North Atlantic Treaty Organization Summit is concluding . The focus of the international media’s attention turns to the Helsinki meeting between Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin .
 Friction between Washington and several European capitals as well as tension between President Trump and his domestic opposition cast a shadow over the summit . The U.S. leader will cave to the demands of the Russian president.
 President Trump has been accused of being comprised by Russian intelligence . Such concerns stem from charges that he is at least sympathetic to Moscow .
President Putin has been accused of being Putin's American counterpart . Putin is accused of making a bad impression of the U.S. President .
 Michael McFaul, President Barack Obama's former Ambassador to Russia, argues that Putin could give President Trump a history lesson about Ukraine and Syria . McFaul says the president somehow says he will reverse his own administration's policy .
Klimov argues that this is a chance for President Trump to hear the other side of the story . President Putin will behave as he has at past meetings with United States leaders, he says .
 Russian journalist Leonid Bershidskiy adds that Helsinki will present a chance for Putin to make himself look like a reasonable leader on the world stage .
 Russo-American relations are highly unlikely, but it is worth examining some of the individual points of contention . Russia's goals are with respect to each of them, and whether Trump administration is willing or able to concede .
 Russia's annexation of Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula in 2014 and its sponsorship of an insurrection in the country's eastern Donbas region proved to be major factors in the deterioration of Russo-American relations . Russia’s annexation of the Crimean Peninsula and its subsequent sponsorship of the insurrection in Donbas
 Western media focus on the upcoming Trump-Putin summit . They are also a major focus for Western media and politicians with regard to the summit .
 Figures fear that President Trump’s “comprised’ state could lead him to ‘surrender’ Ukraine and Crimea to Russia .
 Russia strongly desires a U.S. withdrawal from interference in Ukraine’s affairs .
 The Maydan uprising was an illegitimate coup d’état designed to draw Ukraine away from Russia’s sphere of influence . The Kremlin argues that it rightfully belongs to Ukraine .
 Moscow was disturbed by how the revolution brought to power anti-Russian, ultra-nationalist political parties like Praviy Sektor and Svoboda .
 President Trump has previously stated that Crimea is rightfully Russia’s because the population there speaks Russian .
 It is unclear whether this remains his official position, with him only saying ‘we’re going to have to see’ if the U.S. will recognize the peninsula as part of Russia .
 In any event only the U.S. Congress can grant official American recognition of Crimea as a republic of the Russian Federation .
 National Security Advisor John Bolton insists Crimea is notpart of Russia and Congress is unlikely to lift sanctions . For his part, Bolton insists that Crimea isn't part of Russia .
 NATO advisors have become a mainstay in Ukraine’s armed forces . American weapons are already in the country and NATO advisors are in Ukraine .
 Russia is unlikely to consider anything with regard to Ukraine until after Ukrainian presidential and parliamentary elections next year .
 Some suggest that Putin will reintroduce the idea of stationing peacekeepers in Ukraine . Yet, some suggest that he will introduce the idea.
 Europe wants an international force to police Ukraine, forcing Russian mercenaries and special operators out and ensuring the reintegration of Donetsk and Luhansk oblastiwith the rest of Ukraine .
 A compromise with regard to the Ukrainian conflict favoring Russia is unlikely to be reached at the upcoming Helsinki summit . European leaders most likely will not agree to such a proposal.
 A further concern among European leaders is the rather hostile rhetoric that President Trump directs toward NATO member states .
 He has initiated a trade war with Europe by putting tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from the European Union .
 Russia was expelled in 2014 for its annexation of Crimea . President Trump called for the readmittance of Russia into the Group of Eight .
 European leaders concerned that if President Trump is sincere in his statements, he will be open to manipulation by President Putin . Many analysts believe Putin will be plotting to divide the West through subversion and immobilize the Atlantic Alliance .
 NATO expansion is a major point of contention in Russo-American relations . The expansion of NATO is a key issue in relations with Russia .
 Moscow’s view of the encroachment of the West into its traditional sphere of influence left it with no choice but to engage in military actions . The 2008 intervention in Georgia and the sponsorship of insurrectionists in eastern Ukraine were among the reasons for the intervention .
 President Putin wants to destroy the Western world order, especially by using President Trump as an asset . However, allegations that Putin wishes to destroy world order stand on flimsy ground .
 President Trump does not have the authority to readmit Russia into the G8 . President Trump doesn't have the power to do so .
 The other members are stalwart in their convictions that Russia should not be welcomed back . The other member of the Russian parliament is stalwart.
 Russia is still a member of the G20, which gives President Putin the opportunity to schmooze with such figures as China's Xi Jinping, India’s Narendra Modi, and Turkey's Recep Tayyip Erdogan .
 Russia, as a major aluminum and steel producer, will suffer from President Trump’s trade war with Europe . Russia is also a major metal producer and aluminum producer .
 Europe is a major customer of Russian-supplied energy, and Western corporations have long desired to invest in Russia . Much of the wealth held by Russian oligarchs is kept in banks in the West .
 The U.S. government does not appear to be in line with President Trump's more drastic proposals, such as a significant troop withdrawal from Germany .
 James Mattis and Mike Pompeo have spoken positively of the Alliance . The Trump administration continues to put pressure on it European allies to maintain sanctions on Russia .
 Moscow's desire more so for a return to the pre-Crimea status quo than for the destruction of the liberal-democratic West through right-wing sleeper agents . In short, the upcoming Helsinki summit is unlikely to result in any sort of dramatic restructuring of the Atlantic world order .
 Russia and the U.S. have been at loggerheads over Syria, Russia’s primary client state in the Middle East . Protests against President Bashar al-Asad began in 2012 and morphed into a violent jihadistand Islamist-led insurgency .
 The United States took advantage of the situation by providing arms to anti-Asad rebels . Some of the rebels ended up in the hands of more hardline Islamic insurrectionists .
 At the same time, the U.S. launched a bombing campaign against the Islamic State jihadist group in eastern Syria .
 The Kremlin has long opposed U.S. regime change efforts in Middle Eastern states such as Iraq, Libya, and Syria . The Kremlin argues that they only empower jihadist factions hostile to the rest of the world .
 The Russian military intervention in Syria served to prevent Syria from becoming a haven for such elements as Libya has .
 Russia renews the leases on the Tartus naval replenishment facility and the Khmeymim air base . Russia further demonstrated its opposition to U.S. regime change ambitions by renewing the leases .
 Both facilities will undergo considerable expansion and host weapons platforms such as anti-aircraft batteries and air superiority fighters designed to counter Western military technology . Both facilities are expected to undergo significant expansion .
 President Trump has expressed an interest in withdrawing the 2,000 U.S. troops stationed in Syria . President Trump, too, has expressed interest in withdrawal .
 The Syrian Arab Army would police this zone with Russia’s assurances that Hizbullah and Iran not be allowed to operate there .
 The area in question is Syria’s Daraa province, which is under relentless bombardment from Syrian and Russian air forces .
 The assault forced over 45,000 refugees to flee the city with Jordan opposed to any of them crossing its borders . Jordan opposes any of the refugees crossing the borders .
 As this region borders Israel, Tel Aviv is also opposed to the presence of Iranian and Hizbullah forces in Daraa .
 Russia appears somewhat willing to compromise on this issue, and it may be the most plausible breakthrough in Russo-American relations to emerge from Helsinki conference .
 President Putin may try to convince the leaders of these countries that he can provide guarantees they seek .
 Israel has called for Russia to rein in Iran and Hizbullah in Syria . Israel is a country with greater ties to Moscow than most would expect .
 Russia's willingness to orchestrate an Iranian/Hizbullah withdrawal from southern Syria is a separate issue from its ability to do so . Russia’s willingness to orchestrate an Iranian-Hiz Bullah withdrawal is a different issue .
 Russia’s alliance with Iran and Hizbullah was a temporary one to combat IS and retard the collapse of the Syrian government . Russia's alliance with Hiz Bullah was to combat the collapse.
 In June of this year, Russia deployed its troops to the Lebanese border without consulting Hizbullah . Russia deployed troops to Lebanon without consulting the Lebanese government .
 SAA personnel took overt he positions occupied by Russian forces . In a compromise, SAA staff took overt positions occupied.
 On 17 May, President Putin said that all foreign forces should withdraw from Syria .
 He emphasized that this includes Turkish, Iranian, American, and Hizbullah forces . He emphasized this includes Turkey, Iran, and U.S. forces .
 Israeli officials concur that only Syrian soldiers should be stationed in southern Syria . Israeli officials say only Syrian troops should be in Syria .
 Iran is a longtime partner of the Syrian government as is Russia. Ultimately, Iran is the partner of Syria's government .
 Iranian troops arrived in country at Damascus’s request before Russia began its formal military intervention in Syria .
 Moscow is unlikely to compromise its relationship with its chief Middle Eastern client state . It will have to contend with Syria’s decisions with regard to keeping Iranian troops in country .
 Russia and the U.S. are the major points of contention between them currently . There are a few others worth mentioning briefly here .
 The New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty expires in 2021 . The Helsinki summit is arguably the best forum for U.S.-Russia nuclear arms talks .
 Nuclear arms have been a major point of contention between the two countries since the U.S. withdrawal from the ABM Treaty in 2002 .
 This event was followed by the stationing of ballistic missile defense installations throughout Europe . This is the first time the event has been held in Europe .
 Russia feels that these systems prevent it from achieving strategic parity with the U.S. Russia feels it will give America a clear advantage in the event of a nuclear war .
 President Putin may raise the issue at the summit . Such insecurities likely prompted Russian violations of the 1987 Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty .
 Trump's campaign “colluded’ with the Kremlin to secure his win, according to reports . Also overshadowing the Helsinki meeting are allegations of Russian meddling in America’s 2016 election .
 President Trump has cast doubt on assertions that Russia meddled in the U.S. 2016 presidential election .
 He denies any collusion between his campaign and figures linked to the Russian government . He also denies collusion between him and Russian government figures .
 Trump administration officials said that the president would discuss election meddling with the Russian leader . The president would also discuss the issue with Russian President Vladimir Putin .
Special counsel Robert Mueller announced the indictment of 12 Russian officers affiliated with the Main Intelligence Directorate for their role in the hacking of Democratic National Committee e-mails in 2016 . The indictment comes just days before the summit .
 President Putin and his entourage will likely continue their usual tactics of deflection, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ushakov recently issued a statement arguing that those who oppose improving U.S.-Russia relations should not be allowed to speculate on Russian interference in the election . He said raising such issues was harmful to any reconciliation between the two countries .
 The upcoming Trump-Putin summit will yield any results disproportionately favorable to either state . In conclusion, though, it appears that the upcoming summit will be more favorable to both states .
 A true reconciliation would involve Russia ceasing to challenge the U.S.-led order and the United States to recognize Russia as a partner in the international sphere .
 The Helsinki forum will only moderate the confrontation and is not likely to lead to any fixed outcomes . They argue that the forum will not be able to solve any problems .
 Russia recognizes that because so much of the U.S. foreign policy bureaucracy is at odds with President Trump, it is unlikely that Moscow will achieve any of the results it most desires .
 Russia will continue to make such offers to the U.S. in the coming months, a state of affairs largely similar to the pre-Helsinki status quo .
 Russo-American relations have deteriorated following the summit . Moscow should not get what it wants from Russia, according to Russian media reports .
 Professor Cohen argues that a lack of progress in a Putin-Trump summit could have disastrous consequences in Moscow for American national security .
 President Putin could become convinced that negotiating with the West is futile, leading to a more hostile Russian foreign policy and a further deterioration of relations between Washington and Moscow .
 GRU officers bankrolled a failed but potentially violent coup against Milo Djukanovic, then-prime minister of Montenegro . New evidence has emerged.
 At the time, Montenegro was preparing for ascension into NATO, and it became a member state in early 2017 . The country was preparing to become a member states .
 Such violent subversive activities on Russia’s could become more commonplace if the coming summit convinces President Putin that it is futile to negotiate with the West .
 Russia will undertake more drastic steps to curtail Western interference in its sphere of influence . Russia will take more drastic measures to curb Western interference .