 A very busy week, not just in the DPRK, but also in Russia and Ukraine .
 Steve Bannon told an audience in Prague that NATO countries in Europe need to start paying more to protect themselves from Russia . He said the U.S. should stop being a “protectorate of the United States.
 Bannon spoke at a forum sponsored by a Czech defense contractor on May 22 . He said while Russia is a “kleptocracy’s being “run by bad guys,’ the real geostrategic threat to the world is China .
 The North American Aerospace Defense Command, or NORAD, is responsible for detecting incoming threats and protecting airspace above the United States and Canada .
 Britain’s 2015 defence plan fell apart. A new review offers a door to new discussions .
 Poland says Russian networks were trying to foment Polish hostility to Ukraine . Poland says Russia was trying to stifle Poland's hostility to the Ukraine .
 The Russian Army has long emphasised its artillery arm, adding new targeting techniques . The Army is once again upgrading conventional tube artillery .
World has been given insight into Russia’s land warfare playbook. Samuel Cranny-Evans, Mark Cazalet, and Christopher F Foss report on the country‘s more flexible approach to fire missions .
Modernisation efforts have had a profound affect on the strategies and equipment used in artillery formations . Much of its current warfighting strategy relates to modernisation efforts that began in 2008 .
 Russian developments have focused on dramatically increasing accuracy and rate of fire . But the country has also decreased the size of artillery formations .
 Russia claims that the ground-based missile system is capable of intercepting hypersonic missiles, drones, aircraft as well as stealth warplanes like the F-22 and F-35 . Russia also claims that it is able to intercept hypersoni missiles and drones .
 Russia quietly conducted the world's longest surface-to-air missile test, according to sources with direct knowledge of United States intelligence .
 The Russian Navy says a nuclear-powered submarine has successfully test-fired four intercontinental ballistic missiles on the country’s northwestern coast .
 U.S. Ambassador to Moscow Jon Huntsman says he has experienced ‘frustration’ due to the reluctance of some Russian officials to meet with him because of the state of affairs between the two countries .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has approved a new cabinet, leaving several key officials in place . The son of longtime ally Nikolai Patrushev is appointed as agriculture minister .
 President Vladimir Putin has nominated former Finance Minister Aleksei Kudrin as head of Russia's Audit Chamber . The lower chamber of parliament says the nomination was made by Vladimir Putin .
 Before the 1917 revolution, Nicholas II used Cossack units to attack political opponents and ethnic and religious minorities .
 Vladimir Putin appears set to repeat the tsar’s mistake, moving from attacking protesters with his “Cossacks’ to undermining non-Russian nations .
 Putin's move may be even more dangerous to his position that Nicholas II’s was to his . Unlike the Cossacks of later imperial times, the neo-Cossack bandits Putin is using are ideologically hostile to dissent .
 Kazan company gave 1. million rubles to Moscow's Central Cossack Host that took part in the March 5 mayhem . He points out that there is a Kazan link even to the Moscow events because a company there gave the rubles .
 He provides disturbing information about the appearance and growth of “Cossack villages and units in the Middle Volga. But he provides disturbing details about the growth of "Cossacks"
 The Cossack rebirth at the end of the 1980s involved both real Cossacks and those who wanted to participate in a militarized movement . The movement was inspired by both real and real.
 The former would like to see their regions returned to them or even to gain independence, things Moscow opposes . But the latter has proved to be extremely useful to the powers that be .
 Garifullin continues. Many of them have been profoundly affected by the propaganda of Orthodox autocracy and conservative values .
 The regime uses them to suggest that “Orthodox society’s” is behind its repressive policies . The regime also suggests that ‘Orthodox Society’ is behind the repressive policies.
 Putin's "Cossacks" don't talk about because it is inconsistent with their "Black Hundreds" views . That is a part of the history of the Cossacks Putin’s ‘Cossack’ don’t talk about .
 Neo-Cossack communities, supported by grants from the Russian Presidential Administration, have appeared in parts of the Middle Volga .
 Often used as supplements to the police, but they are also being used to try to halt the de-Russification of the area .
 The support of the neo-Cossacks for Orthodoxy and imperial traditions is, an analyst says . "An element of cultural policy, a unique ‘soft force’ in this case," he says .
 The introduction of these ‘Cossacks’ in places where Cossacks never existed before represents “an ethno-cultural factor’ designed to undermine and threaten the non-Russians even as it encourages the ethnic Russians to remain where they are.
 Garifullin says such efforts carry with them real risks, including violent clashes with non-Russian nations . But such efforts are also dangerous, he says .
 "The intensification of propaganda of one religious may promote radicalization," he says . "It may be in response among those who are of a different faith"
 Putin-style could end by triggering an outburst of Islamist radicalism in the Middle Volga . “Cossackization’’s’
 Andrei Illarionov: Nothing quite like that has ever happened before, and its consequences are likely to be both fateful and far reaching .
 Russian commentator says nepotism is far from unknown in Russian history . Of course, he says, it's not unknown in Russia's history .
 There have been cases when the offspring of senior officials have later risen to positions of power without the intervention of their parents .
 Such events are often referred to as nepotism, but they really are not, Illarionov says . Such events can be called nepotistic, but are not.
 He named his son deputy and then first deputy foreign trade minister and his son in law deputy and first deputy interior minister . He also named son deputy, then first Deputy Foreign Trade minister and son inlaw deputy .
 He did not in those cases or others put these children into the top jobs, he said . But he did not put those children into those top jobs .
 Patrushev’s son became minister of agriculture in the current case . It has involved his willingness to see the offspring of senior officials become ministers .
 North Korea, Syria, Azerbaijan and Chechnya are both successful cases . Ukraine is still in the process of preparation – Belarus .
Thirty years ago, Soviet Sakhalin stood in the squares and called for the authorities to account for the impoverished condition of the people .
 The 1988 events echo today. She picks up on the memoirs of those day that have been assembled by a regional news agency, KrabikMedia .
 To be sure, no one died, but only because they could go into the forests or to the rivers and sea and find food for themselves .
 People had to stand in long lines, and they were offended by the fact that the communist party elite continued to live well and to do nothing, even as their own lives deteriorated . People were offended that the party elite did nothing, and that they stood in line .
 Vera Boltunova is a member of the CPSU and an employee of the regional gas and oil prospecting trust . She says everything began when the appeals of Moscow and local officials diverged .
 Moscow was talking all the time about glasnost and perestroika, she says . But local party bosses demanded that people vote for the only candidate they put forward .
 Boltunova says that a party boss would do that was no surprise but that a Soviet journalist would talk about it . Boltunov says that others do as well very much was .
 On May 21, small groups of people began to assemble in front of the local theater . On May 20, they began to gather outside the theater .
 At the invitation of several people in the crowd, they began to share their grievances with the obkom secretary .
 Some protesters led by bulldozer operator Sergey Mikhail kept order . There was no extremism in this, and some of the protesters kept order.
After a few hours, they elected ‘an initiative group’ and it undertook to organize similar groups in workplaces and in neighborhoods .
 The idea that the people could take things into their own hands spread like wildfire. The idea is to spread things like wildfire like wildfire .
 Regnum journalist says new bosses are living well and amassing enormous wealth . But most believe they have stolen from the people, he says .
 The island’s residents are complaining about collapsing housing, about shabby hospitals, the lack of places in schools, and other misfortunes .
 Demidenko implies, if and when they will act as their parents did 30 years ago . It is thus an open question, he implies .
 Moscow is doing what it can to block integration of ethnic Russians living in other countries . Moscow is attempting to Russianize and even Russify non-Russians .
 Moscow views them only as irredenta, he says, "for one simple reason" He says Moscow has been the case for years .
 For Moscow, the millions of ethnic Russians in the former Soviet republics are to remain as they were so that they can become a pretext for ‘reunification’ in the framework of a single common state .
 Moscow has done what it can to block “the integration of ethnic Russians into the political nations of those countries in which they are fated to live.’
 The idea that Russians could live according to interests not of Moscow but of their new capitals is viewed as treason” in the Russian capital .
 According to Kazarin, “the Kremlin never needed the adaptation of ethnic Russians.’s never needed to adapt, he says .
 It opposed the idea of ‘Russians for Ukraine’ insisting that they were Russians for Russia even in Ukraine . It opposed idea of 'Russians' for Ukraine insisting they were Russian for Russia .
 Moscow “isn’t interested’ in the Russians but only in itself. And all of this reflects the fact that Moscow ‘isn't interested” in the Russian.
 The interests of ethnic Russians are “secondary relative to the interests of the Russian leadership’s interests. In Ukraine, for example, the interests are ‘secondary relative’ to Russian leadership, according to a report .
 Russians recognize this and that has had consequences Moscow can’t possibly want . But Russians recognize it and that's had consequences for Moscow .
 Ethnic Russians began to integrate into Ukraine as a result of an independent choice which they made between their own motherland and their new one .
In the next census, the number of people identifying as ethnic Russians is likely to decline far more than anyone now expects . Their new identity is replacing their old one, commentator says .
 Vladimir Putin is reviving many features of the Soviet and even tsarist past . It is less widely recognized that many are discussing these new-old things as if they were almost a carbon copy of originals .
 In three key cases, Putin's innovations are different and much worse. In fact, they are not; and in three key Cases, Putin’s innovations are not . In one case, they're not; in three cases, it's not .
 The first is the promotion of social strata or as they were and are called in Russian sosloviya . The second is the Promotion of social Strata, which is defined not by their relationship to the economy .
 The return of such strata as a defining feature of Putin's Russia has been highlighted by the increasing amount of nepotism among the Kremlin leader's cronies .
 The parallels with the post-Petrine Russian imperial state are obvious . In that state all subjects were defined by their relationship to the tsar . The parallels are obvious because in that state.
 There are many elements of that in Putin’s Russia, but there is at least one major difference . The absence up to now of a formalization of these divisions is a major difference.
 In Putin's Russia, the wealthiest are entirely dependent on the state . The state has moved against education and science in ways that limit the emergence of a counter-elite .
 The Putin arrangements restore the worst features of the pre-1917 arrangements, while largely precluding some of the circumstances that reduced these consequences and ultimately led to revolution .
 The second case in which Putin’s copy is worse than the original concerns his use of people whom he calls and who call themselves ‘Cossacks’ even though such people are radically different and far more dangerous to Russia than were their namesakes .
 Aleksey Makarkin of the Center for Political Technologies has pointed to this difference and its dangers . Makarkin is a Moscow analyst who has pointed out the dangers and dangers of political technology .
 Before 1917, “the Cossacks were in military service and thus subject to military discipline’s “military discipline.’
 The Cossacks before 1917 followed orders, good, bad or indifferent, regardless of what their own political views may have been .
 The Cossacks of the Putin era are profoundly “ideologized’s” people who have their own agendas and are prepared to exceed their authority in the pursuit of them . But “Cossacks’ of thePutin era are “
 Many of the ‘Cossacks’ of today are extremely “archaic’ in their views . Many of these “Cossack’s of today” are very “Archaic” in their view .
Young people look to the Sovietpast for their “moral orientation,’s parents or other relatives did, they say . They find the present-day city offensive, believe young people are too free and easy .
 Russian powers have used them as adjuncts to the state’s police power, and refused to punish them for their excesses . That is bad enough, but what is worse is that the Russian powers that be taken them under their wing, used them.
 Putin and his regime are, Makarkin says . That is not how the tsars acted, but it is how Putin's regime is, he says .
 Instead, it represents a radical and dangerous redefinition of the basic categories of the Eurasianists . The Eurasianist group has been dubbed the Eurasians .
 The ethnic Finns and Ingermanlanders lived in the northwestern portion of the USSR near Finland .
 The Finns have suffered from the first years of Soviet power up to now . But if the Finns ultimately had a country to go do, the Ingermanlanders have suffered . They have suffered.
 At the time of the first Soviet census in 1926, approximately 130,000 people declared themselves to be Ingermanlanders . As a result of repressions in the 1930s and 1940s, their number fell to less than 30,000 – even before they were deported as a
 At the conclusion of World War II, the Ingermanlanders were briefly allowed to return to their immemorial homes . That didn't last .
Only the death of Stalin in 1953 did any of them have the chance to return home . Only the death in 1953 was the only chance to get back home .
Only on June 29, 1993, did the post-Soviet government lift these restrictions . The post- Soviet government lifted these restrictions in June 1993 .
 At present, there are only a few thousand Ingermanlanders living near St. George's Park .
 Inkerin Liito, the officially recognized one, is represented by two groups . Many feel the policies of Stalin by working closely with the special services and the regional governments .
 The Free Ingria group's leaders have been forced into exile . The group enjoys significant support among the local Ingermanlanders who show up at its demonstrations .
 Russian people deserve better treatment from the Russian government and more support from people around the world who care about rights and freedoms of small ethnic groups .
 The arrival to urban centers and the countryside of millions of Muslim labor migrants from Central Asia is at the center of what could emerge as Russia's most radical ethnic makeover in centuries .
Retired FSB General Ivan Mironov commands the pseudo-Cossack unit . His members were filmed beating anti-Putin protesters in Moscow on May 5 .
 Mironov has tried to remake himself as a guardian of Russian Orthodox tradition . He is an old-school product of the Soviet security agencies with a murky history .
Aleksei Navalny has also been jailed for 30 days following his detention in Moscow . The host of the YouTube channel of jailed opposition politician and anticorruption campaigner Aleksei navalny has been jailed .
 Activists have announced a global campaign to demand the release of Ukrainian filmmaker Oleh Sentsov . Sentsov opposed Moscow's 2014 annexation of Crimea and is now on hunger strike in a Russian prison .
A community of top Soviet scientists created an isolated pocket of freedom and openness . Until Brezhnev stamped it out.
 The Siberian village of Loshchinka is plagued by alcoholism and unemployment, all-too-common symptoms of Russia’s crumbling countryside .
 Garbage is piling up on the streets of Nizhneudinsk, in Russia's Irkutsk region, after the Defense Ministry closed the town's main dump . The Defense Ministry is closing the town’s main dump.
 The head of Tatarstan’s symphony orchestra has come under fire for comparing Tatar music to a hodgepodge salad .
 Another aide of jailed Russian opposition politician Aleksei Navalny has been jailed over nationwide protests against President Vladimir Putin . Another aide has also been jailed.
Villagers painted “SOS’ in big letters on their roofs to get help from authorities in Tatarstan, Russia .
 The last public buses were in March. Their houses are crumbling, they have no running water, and the last public bus was in March .
 Soccer's world governing body has declared Russia’s World Cup players free of doping . But it will continue to investigate other soccer players in the country .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin and Bulgarian counterpart have hailed their common cultural ties . Putin and his counterpart have vowed to revive economic links between the two Black Sea nations .
 The United States on May 22 gave United States customers of Russian van manufacturer GAZ more time to wind down business with the company . GAZ owner Oleg Deripaska is the latest softening of sanctions against GAZ .
 Voters in Moldova's main cities of Chisinau and Balti are heading to the polls to elect their mayors for one year .
 Ukraine has done everything to cross the Rubicon and return to the EU, Poroshenko said . Poroshenko says Ukraine has been doing everything to return to Europe .
 The Russian Federation has shown itself ever more ready to take steps to bottle up Ukrainian shipping in the Sea of Azov . The use of its naval power would severely harm Ukraine's economic and security situation if it goes unchallenged .
 Kyiv must ‘do an analysis and secure ratification by Ukraine’ to the full list of international conventions and agreements concerning maritime operations . Kyiv also must “do an Analysis and secure ratified by Ukraine.’s government’
Ten measures are likely to inform Kyiv’s policies in the coming days if as expected Russia moves to tighten its control over the Sea of Azov and the Kerch straits .
 Russia's actions in the Sea of Azov are aimed at providing political and economic pressure on Ukraine, says Lieutenant-General Vasyl Bohdan .
 Russia’s attempts are aimed at diverting public attention and causing serious losses, Bohdan said .
 Estonian President Kersti Kaljulaid will be the first leader of a foreign state to visit the Ukrainian-controlled Donbas area . The area was liberated by the Ukrainian army from Russian occupation forces .
 The U.S. State Department has called on Russia to end its aggression in Ukraine due to the increase in violence in the past week . The increase is due to a rise in violence.
 Russia perpetuates the violence in eastern Ukraine by pouring money, soldiers, and resources into the region . The Russian economy continues to stagnate, Nauert said .
 Russian-backed forces have suffered huge losses in Donbas over the past day . Russian- backed forces have been losing ground in the area since the start of the week .
 As of 07.00 on May 23, it was reported four fighters of the Russian-terrorist forces had been killed .
 The Ukrainian Armed Forces destroyed an enemy position near the village of Troyitske in Donbas, eastern Ukraine .
 The purpose of the Ukrainian military attack on Horlivka is to “tighten the noose’ around Donetsk, a source told Strana.ua news outlet .
 If the territory around Horlivka is owned, the separatists will surrender Hor livka without a fight .
 He stressed that Horlivka is a strategic bridgehead to attack Debaltseve and Yenakiieve . He stressed the two are strategic bridgeheads to attack the two women .
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine do not formally violate the Minsk agreements . Also, the armed forces of Ukraine are not formally violating the agreements .
 An officer of Ukraine’s Armed Forces noted that such movement is not considered an offensive .
 On May 20, the separatists near Horlivka tried to push the Ukrainian Armed Forces out, but were driven back . The separatists tried to pushed the Ukrainian armed forces out.
 Two Ukrainian servicemen were killed and four were injured in the firefight with the separatists . Later, it became known that in the southern outskirts of Pivdenne settlement near Horlivka, two Ukrainian serviceman were killed .
 Europe's forgotten war in the east of Ukraine is far from being a frozen conflict . Europe’s forgotten war is not a frozen war, it is a forgotten conflict .
 The Armed Forces of Ukraine sustain casualties almost every single day . The armed forces of Ukraine have suffered almost every one day .
 In summer of 2015, Russian-hybrid forces attempted to capture Maryinka, a southwestern suburb of Donetsk, but the attacks were repelled .
 Ukrainian army and volunteer battalions retook a village of Shyrokyne on the coast of Azov Sea after a long period of positional engagements . The village was retook in winter of 2016 after long periods of military engagements .
 There are no significant territorial gains in the Donbas since early 2015 . The second direct invasion of the Russian regular forces led to the occupation of Debaltseve .
 The SBU Security Service of Ukraine keeps on public informing about recording results of Russian war crimes in the territory of Ukraine .
SBU operatives established that the urgent withdrawal of Dozors was conducted by the PMC Wagner logistics platoon . The SBU operatives set up that the immediate withdrawal was conducted.
 The Russian-led forces resorted to Grad multiple rocket launchers and 122mm artillery systems . The number of attacks on Ukrainian troops in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, to 58 incidents in the past day .
 A reconnaissance and subversion group of the 46th separate assault Battalion “Donbas’ of the Ukrainian Joint Forces captured three enemy troops during a short battle on May 20 .
 The Joint Forces handed the three captives and their personal firearms over to the SBU Security Service of Ukraine . The three captives were given the weapons by the Joint Forces . They were handed over to SBU security service of Ukraine.
 Russian-backed forces have blown up a bridge on the Khrustalniy-Luhansk route near the village of Ivanivka .
 The building of the Center for Socio-Psychological Rehabilitation has been damaged . 28 children were injured in shelling by Russian occupation forces on Monday .
 The windows in the center building were damaged during the shelling . There are no casualties, according to the National Police in Donetsk .
Administration of the centre appealed to the police with a request for assistance in the evacuation of 28 children aged 3 to 17 years .
 Seven apartment buildings were damaged by shelling in the morning of May 21 .
 Two children have been taken to intensive care and 34 more are under the supervision of doctors . An unknown substance was sprayed in a Mykolaiv Regional State Administration school . Deputy Head of the State Administration Yevhen Shevchenko has written on Facebook .
 Ukraine and Canada have signed an agreement on military training, the Ukrainian Interior Ministry has reported on Facebook .
 Joint Forces Operations Commander Serhiy Nayev expresses dismay at the loss of life of civilians on both sides of the demarcation line .
 Monitoring officials say clashes between Ukrainian forces and separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine have escalated in recent days to some of the fiercest fighting of 2018 .
 Ukraine’s main security agency has warned of a potential Russian cyberattack ahead of Champions League final match . Ukraine's security agency warns of a possible Russian cyber attack ahead of final match of the tournament .
 Russian social media accounts circulate rumours that three Canadian soldiers working in Ukraine were killed by a landmine . Federal officials flatly deny online rumours that the soldiers were killed .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has signed a law under which Ukraine's airmobile forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine were renamed the Air Assault Forces . The law was signed by President Poroshenko .
 The move is an important phase in the further development of the Ukrainian army . The Ukrainian army is in the midst of a major development in the country .
 A new type of troops may appear in the Armed Forces of Ukraine . The military department is considering the possibility of granting the status of a separate type of territorial defense troops that are now part of the Land Forces.
 Forces of defense were formerly created at military commissariats . They were transformed into separate battalions and erected in the territorial defense brigade .
 The brigade consists of eight battalions of TrO, company of fire support, anti-diversion fight, mortar unit, units of combat and logistics . The brigade is part of the TrO brigade, which is based in London .
Military personnel and reservists make up the majority of the units . They are completed both by military personnel and by reservists .
 reservists will be regularly trained at the gathering, according to the plan . The final of which is to hold brigade exercises .
 The 119th brigade of territorial defense in Chernihiv region will be deployed to full strength and combat coordination in June this year . The first, in June, will be deploys to the military training ground .
 During the exercises, actions will be taken to cover the state border . One of the five tasks assigned to territorial defense .
 Poland, using the experience of Ukraine, began to create its territorial troops in 2015 . Poland's territorial troops are just as a separate species. Poland's troops are based on Ukraine's experience .
 Last year, the Polish Territorial Defense Forces Command officially gained abilities and took over the first brigades .
 In April, the Chief of the Medical Service of the Armed Forces Colonel, Igor Khomenko said at a briefing about plans to create another separate type of troops .
 Crimea's Russian-installed leaders have failed to live up to promises to free up public access to beaches . Crimea’s Russian- installed leaders have not lived up to their promises to open beaches .
 Crimean bridge links Russia with Russian-occupied peninsula . Deputy Chairman of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar People Ilmi Umerov says it has become ‘a bridge to nowhere’ for occupiers .
 This bridge is unlikely to justify itself from the economic point of view in the near future . The bridge is likely to be built in the coming years .
 The Head of State noted that the American anti-tank complexes had shown extremely high efficiency . The Head Of State said that the U.S. anti- tank complexes were very efficient .
 The absence of the seeker for ATGW makes it impossible to develop missile complexes of the third generation . The rest of our parts are made serially and used on domestic missile systems of the second generation .
 Skif man-portable anti-tank guided missile system developed for a foreign customer . In middle May, Skif conducted a successful final test of the Skif anti- tank guided missiles .
 The design of the advanced AT guided missile system ‘Skif’ has undergone a number of changes in accordance with the requirements of the potential customer .
 All modifications aimed at adapting the launcher for use in soft soil and sand . All modifications are aimed at adapting the launcher to soft soil, sand .
 The thermal imager can destroy targets with the first shot, despite the difficult weather conditions, day and night . The imager could also be used to destroy targets in the night .
 The missile was designed for use in all climatic and weather conditions, without exception . The missile itself has not changed, as originally was designed to be used in all conditions .
Ukrainian scientists are intensively developing new air-based EW systems and facilities for various purposes .
 Already there are developments in the direction of creating complexes of individual protection .
 This is reported by the National Industrial Portal with reference to the command of the air forces of the Armed Forces . This is said to be the first time air forces have been in charge of air forces .
 The new on-board defense complexes used to be equipped with the upgraded MiG-29, Su-25 and Su-27 aircraft . The new complexes are equipped with upgraded Mi G-29 and Su -27 aircraft.
 This complex will protect aircraft from missiles fired from enemy aircraft and ground-based air defense . The complex is designed to protect aircraft and air defense from missile attacks .
 The new Ukrainian BKO to protect the aircraft from missiles of various modifications of air defense equipment .
 The system of towed decoys has several “false targets of the active type’s active type. The system has been called ‘false’
 The decoy is received by the signal from the enemy radar, amplifies and re-emits the received signal, thereby simulating an echo from the aircraft that is being protected .
 The radar signature of the decoy is much larger than that of the airplane . The ground-based radar homing head of the missile perceives a trap for the target .
T towed decoys repeatedly proved their effectiveness as a countermeasure against the missile threat in Kosovo, Afghanistan, Iraq and Syria . Such towed decoy repeatedly proved the effectiveness of such decoys in the region .
 Only in Yugoslavia, they diverted themselves to at least ten anti-aircraft missiles fired by F-16 aircraft . In addition, only in Yugoslavia.
 Manufacturers are working on options for independent multifunction decoys . They are dropping the aircraft from aircraft and operating in an autonomous mode .
 Collective means protect not only the equipment on which they are installed, but other airplanes of the strike group . The strike group is a strike group that has been in action for more than two years .
 Designers plan to place the funds in suspended containers on the underwing points of the aircraft suspension .
 Suspended containers are made in the form of transitional beams . They provide for the possibility of hanging aircraft launch devices to them .
 This design allows you to maintain a regular ammunition of the aircraft’s armament .
Group's aircraft can provide protection for their aircraft at a distance of up to 2 km . Their principle of operation is similar to individual, but they are more powerful and more powerful .
 Systems and means of EW of group protection are able to detect and suppress control systems for aviation and air defense, as well as for reconnaissance of air targets .
 They will be installed on special aircraft of the REB, as well as on military transport aircraft . The REB will be used on military aircraft and special aircraft .
 They will receive much more powerful transmitters of active interference . They will get much morepowerful transmitters.
 The next-generation combat vehicles are to enter into service of the Ukrainian Army in 2020 .
BMP-U, a new IFV, is to replace BMP-1 and BMP2, which is to be replaced by BMP1 . The designers and engineers of the SE “Kharkiv Morozov Machine-Building Design Bureau’
 Kharkiv Morozov Design Bureau has already developed design documentation for the prototype . manufacture of the prototype and testing will take place in 2019 .
 BMP-U is intended for transportation and fire support of ground forces . It is intended to be used for transportation, fire support, and for fire support .
 It provides reliable protection for the crew of 3 members and 7 paratroopers . It also provides protection for 3 members of the crew.
 The engine transmission compartment is located in the front of the vehicle, which guarantees a greater level of crew protection . In addition, the engine transmission compartments are located in a front-seat compartment .
 The Kyiv-born aviator fled the Bolshevik Revolution and created the helicopters that have served presidents from Eisenhower to Trump .
 Ukraine has banned Russia’s state news agency RIA Novosti, according to a recently expanded list of prominent Russians and entities subjected to Ukrainian sanctions .
 Ukraine has imposed personal sanctions against fugitive Ukrainian oligarch Serhiy Kurchenko . Kurchenko is a former business partner of ex-President Viktor Yanukovych . He is also a former energy minister in Ukraine .
 Sanctions were also imposed on a number of officials from the Russian-occupied Crimea .
 The Beskydy tunnel was opened in Lviv region, western Ukraine, on Thursday . The tunnel was built in the Lviv area of Ukraine .
 This is one of the largest constructions that appeared in Ukraine over the past 15 years . This is the largest construction in Ukraine since the 1990s .
In an effort to draw attention to the 1932-33 Holodomor famine in Ukraine, activists and students offered passersby the type of food people were forced to eat in order to survive .
 Serhiy Loznitsa has won a best director prize in the Cannes film festival’s Un Certain Regard competition for Donbass . His odyssey about the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
 President Vladimir Putin hailed Russia's economic and military ties with India . Putin hosted the country's prime minister in the Black Sea resort of Sochi .
 President Trump canceled the highly anticipated summit with North Korea that was set for next month . He called the talks ‘inappropriate’ following the “hostility’ displayed in the latest comments from Kim Jong Un .
 The Americans and the North Koreans were all set for a historic meeting . The meeting was held in New York City .
 President Donald Trump was making a short walk to his private residence when he made a detour to the press briefing room .
 The abrupt decision exposed rifts in the administration, and Trump personally dictated the cancellation letter to Kim Jong Un .
 Trump is now taking steps to reassure North Korea’s Kim Jong Un after he threatened to cancel an upcoming, historic summit with Trump .
 Trump’s policies are exposing the reality that China has a vested interest in a continuing North Korea crisis and diplomatic stalemate .
 A top Pyongyang official lambasted “political dummy’ Mike Pence and cautioned the U.S. against making “ignorant’s” remarks . The official also cautioned the United States against making the remarks .
 North Korean leader Kim Jong Un is reportedly anxious about a planned summit with President Donald Trump set to take place in Singapore next month .
 Kim is said to be worried about a military coup or other hostile actors who might try to depose him while he's away .
 The president sought Moon Jae-in's interpretation of North Korea’s shift to a harder-line position on denuclearization .
 President Donald Trump canceled his June summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un because of “tremendous anger and open hostility” in recent statements from Pyongyang . U.S. stocks fell after the cancellation of the summit .
 Treasuries extended gains and gold rose with the yen as investors moved into safe-haven assets .
 North Korea has a clear eyed approach to North Korea. Only through a cleareyed approach can we hope to develop strategies that will have resonance and traction and make the most of the opportunity we may now be presented with .
 South Korean President Moon Jae-in and U.S. President Donald Trump held discussions on Sunday to ensure that the North KoreaUnited States summit remains on track . North Korea threatened to pull out of the high-level talks on Sunday after North Korean threats .
 The more prepared Trump is, then the less likely it is that the North Koreans will take him for a ride .
 A training exercise involving United States B-52 bombers and South Korean planes was scrapped this week . Seoul expressed concerns that it could generate tensions before President Donald Trump’s summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un .
 We should set aside for a minute our demand that it disarm before any other negotiation, we say . We should also set aside a minute for any other negotiations .
 The U.S. and South Korea canceled a long scheduled military exercise named Max Thunder this week . The exercise was called Max Thunder .
 The exercise was canceled after South Korea “expressed concerns’ over North Korea’s threat to withdraw from the June 12 Singapore summit .
 South Korea didn’t want to participate in a joint military drills with America and Japan than involved B-52 bombers . The Wall Street Journal says South Korea wanted to keep North Korea happy .
 North Korea appeared to destroy at least three nuclear tunnels, observation buildings, a metal foundry and living quarters at its Punggye-ri nuclear test site on Thursday .
 North Korea did not invite any independent nuclear monitors to verify the dismantlement . The event was captured by foreign journalists, but North Korea does not invite independent monitors .
 North Korea declined to accept a list of South Korean journalists hoping to observe the closure of its nuclear test site . The defections came after North Korea refused to accept the list of journalists .
 US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said Wednesday that an incident involving a U.S. government employee stationed in China has medical indications that are “very similar” to those experienced by American diplomats posted in Havana .
 A U.S. government employee in southern China suffered a brain injury after reporting strange “sensations of sound and pressure,’s State Department says .
 The United States State Department issued a health alert after a government employee in China was diagnosed with a mild traumatic brain injury . A government employee stationed in China is diagnosed with the injury .
 A U.S. State Department employee has suffered “subtle and vague, but abnormal, sensations of sound and pressure” that later lead to a diagnosis of “mild traumatic brain injury’s” while working in China .
 U.S. officials reported symptoms consistent with a “sonic attack’s or exposure to harmful frequencies while abroad . Cuba recalls a similar spat of reports from the United States .
 It warned that if you experience any “unusual acute auditory or sensory phenomena accompanied by unusual sounds or piercing noises’ to leave immediately .
 Beijing has hinted that its new J-20 stealth fighters will conduct patrols in Taiwan’s airspace to coerce the island nation to reunify with China .
 The move is likely to further fuel concerns about Beijing’s expansive claims over the disputed region .
 China says it has landed long-range bombers for the first time on an island in the South China Sea . It is the latest in a series of maneuvers putting Beijing at odds with its neighbors and Washington over China’s growing military presence around disputed islands .
 Chinese state media released a video showing a long-range nuclear-capable bomber landing on an island in the South China Sea for the first time . The Pentagon said the move raises tensions in the region . China's president pledged not to militarize the disputed area .
 China’s air force has landed bombers on islands and reefs in the South China Sea . It is part of a training exercise in the disputed region .
 China's first-ever landing of a heavy bomber on a disputed island in the South China Sea . China has solidified its claims to one of the world’s busiest shipping lanes .
 The number of buildings on the island are about double that of China’s other large islands in the same Spratly Islands region .
 Experts are concerned about the growth of China’s militarization of the South China Sea . A large number of troops on Subi Reef could be part of that plan .
 President Trump was surprised and angered by a statement issued by the North’s chief nuclear negotiator . He declared that the country would not swap its nuclear weapons capability for economic aid .
 The Kims of North Korea have a wearisome routine for getting concessions from the West . This time may actually be different .
 Seven Chinese military trade companies will take their best products to participate in an exhibition of weapons and military equipment to be held in Kazakhstan from May 23 to 26 .
 China’s State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defence exhibited Chinese military products . They include land, sea and air armaments, such as the FM-3000, an advanced medium range air defense missile weapon system, the Wing Loong unmanned aerial system and the J
 This is the first exhibition held under the auspices of the Ministry of Defense and Aerospace Industry of the Republic of Kazakhstan .
 It will be attended by domestic and foreign enterprises of the defense-industrial complex and space industry . The event will also be held by leading design bureaus and research institutes .
During the years of the exhibition ‘KADEX’ it became one of the world’s leading exhibition platforms for demonstrating weapons, military and special equipment, technologies in the field of information security .
 It sees international economic competition as war by other means – and intends to win in any way it can . It sees the world's economy as a matter of war.
 The United States has withdrawn an invitation to China to participate in the world’s largest international maritime warfare exercise . The Pentagon said the U.S. has withdrawn the invitation .
 The Chinese giant salamander is capable of growing up to 5. feet in length . The salamanders can grow to 5 feet in height .
 China's top diplomat Wang Yi has told his Australian counterpart on the sidelines of a G20 meeting in Argentina . Australia should remove its “colored glasses’ to get relations back on track with major trading partner China, Wang Yi said .
 China has issued a fresh rebuke to Australia as tensions between the two nations continue to simmer . The two nations have been at odds for years.
 Rafael Advanced Defense Systems has been selected by the Australian Department of Defence to supply its Spike LR2 anti-tank guided missile for the Australian Army .
 Australia becomes the second export customer for Spike LR2, after Latvia ordered an undisclosed quantity earlier this year .
 The USS Milius is one of the U.S. Navy’s most advanced guided missile destroyers . North Korea has launched a series of ballistic missile attacks in the past .
 U.S. may not be able to scuttle the planned Nord Stream 2 project to bring gas to Germany .
 U.S. warned it was “exerting as much persuasive power’ as possible to stop Nord Stream 2 . Russia said the situation was ‘rather challenging’ after the United States warned .
 Russia’s gas pipeline Nord Stream 2 is a geopolitical project of the Kremlin, says Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko . The pipeline aims to destroy the unity of Europe, Poroshenko has said .
In his article for Germany’s Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper, Poroshenko emphasized that Nord Stream 2 is a tragic mistake .
 The Kremlin begins to respect international law and order, the president wrote . Today there are no grounds to think differently, until Russian aggression against Ukraine and the West is not actually stopped, he wrote .
 Poroshenko expressed confidence that any large-scale pan-European project with the Kremlin would mean pacification of the aggressor, rather than a manifestation of force .
 He warned of trust in the promises of “bright dividends’ of the Kremlin. In addition, he warned of trusts in the promise of "bright dividends" of Kremlin .
 Gazprom has failed to recognize the Stockholm arbitration decision in favor of Ukraine . Gazprom's reliability has been significantly compromised, according to the report .
 Poroshenko: "It’s hard to be a reliable partner when you are called to be an energy lever of the Kremlin in its geopolitical games"
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says that gas supplies to Europe via Ukraine via Ukraine may continue even after the launch of a new prospective Germany-bound pipeline under the Baltic Sea .
 Gazprom has reached an agreement with EU regulators, avoiding fines in an antitrust case that has dragged on for seven years . The Russian state-owned energy firm has reached a deal with European regulators .
 Russia is not seen as a major security threat in Europe and the world . There may be a collective sense in Vienna and Berlin that security has worsened in Europe .
 Nicolás Maduro won a second term as president of Venezuela . Critics said the contest was heavily rigged in his favor . Many voters shunned Maduro, which many shunned .
 Germany gave the final green light for the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline . Gazprom has double its gas supplies to Germany from Russia .
 Russia will be able to use it as an instrument of hybrid warfare against the West . Russia will use it to fight the West in a hybrid war .
 Vice President Pence called Venezuela’s recent election, a sham . President Nicolás Maduro won a second term, a second time, on Monday .
 The executive order was meant to prevent the country's leaders from liquidating assets . It follows an election that returned Nicolas Maduro to power amid an opposition boycott .
 Operations in so-called megacities will be unavoidable in future conflicts, meaning command-and-control issues might be as well .
 America's aging workforce could limit the Pentagon's ability to keep up with other nations, a new government report warns .
 The industrial base for electronic attack and radar capabilities is potentially at risk in the future, a new report has found .
 A new version of the Air Force’s JSTARS battlefield management and control aircraft would be vulnerable to being shot out of the sky .
 EMP: We are enormously frustrated to see amateurs, academics, reporters, and even some scientists untrained and uninformed as experts . We have worked in EMP for professional lifetimes for professional lifeetimes .
 A test flight of the fifth generation Su-57 fighter jet with a developmental engine installed on it has been caught on camera in Russia's Zhukovsky .
 The Air Force will be making major decisions regarding its fighter jet inventory this year . The Force will make major decisions about its fighter jets this year.
 The United States Navy wants to stop production of America’s most useful long-range missile . The Navy is betting that a replacement will arrive without delay .
This is when the rotors pivot, in flight, from vertical lift mode to fully forward facing . This is when they pivot, and when they move to full-forward facing . The rotors move from vertical lifts to full forward facing.
 The flight was completed on May 11 at Bell’s assembly facility in Amarillo, Texas .
 Laser weapon plus military grade ATV equals blasting enemy drones out of the sky . Laser weapon is a laser weapon plus a military-grade ATV .
 This is an ingenious way to provide easily movable defense against the growing threat of attacks from enemy drones . This is a great way to protect yourself from attacks from drones, says the author .
 Terrorist drone destroying Raytheon laser weapons mounted on military Polaris Defense ATVs could soon be destroying enemy drones before they can harm U.S. forces with explosives .
 The MRZR will be used to support an area under attack by a swarm of small drones . It will look like the warrior has something resembling “R2D2’s’ head out of the backseat .
Terrorists will quickly learn it is not a cute robot, it is a powerful drone slaying laser weapon . But terrorists will soon learn it's not cute robot .
 Last autumn the Raytheon and Polaris team proved that destroying drones with the MRZR HEL armed weapon works .
 As long as there is power, U.S. forces will never run out ammunition with a laser weapon .
 This is an outstanding solution to immediately provide U.S. forces with more options to protect the force from flying threats . The United States needs to provide more options for the force to protect its forces .
 Polaris Defense MRZR will be able to reach teams in remote areas with difficult terrain and provide them a laser weapon for their arsenal . The Polaris DefenseMRZR can also be used to provide laser weapons for the military's arsenal .
 Raytheon’s Multi-Spectral Targeting System is a high energy laser combined with electro-optical and infrared sensors . The laser is a combination of high energy and infrared laser combined.
 Recent reports suggest the system can already detect an enemy drone at more than 16,400 feet . The system can deliver 20 to 30 blasts on about the same electricity as a fridge .
 United States forces could soon drive these to forward operating bases to protect teams there . U.S. forces could also use landing strips to protect arriving aircraft .
 The Fort Benning hosted a live-fire demonstration of a new Stryker weapon’s system . The U.S. Army announced on 17 May that the FortBenning hosted the demonstration .
 The upgraded Striker armored fighting vehicle has demonstrated its capacity during a live-fire event held at the Fort Benning in Georgia . The vehicle is equipped with new medium calibre turret .
 The United States Army Armament Research, Development and Engineering Center in cooperation with the CMI Defence developed new variant of Stryker armored fighting vehicle armored with medium caliber turret .
 EVA presents a self-propelled autonomous artillery system with automatic loading of ammunition . The system uses both direct and indirect aiming .
 SpGH ZUZANA 2 overtakes maximum assemblies and design solutions verified within the course of demanding testing and tender trials performed in Slovakia and abroad .
 South Korean company Hanwha Defense Systems could outrun Russia at the arms market after Pantsir-S1 failure in Syria .
 Israeli rockets hit a Russian-made Pantsir-S1 surface-to-air missile and anti-aircraft artillery system . Israeli rockets also hit an anti-Aircraft artillery systems .
 Russian air defence system could not bring down cruise missiles . Pantsir has a number of difficulties in combating lightweight drones .
 A proposal from South Korea interested a large number of potential customers . The Russian system is under the backdrop of problems with the Russian system .
 The Hybrid BIHO consists of a 30mm self-propelled anti-aircraft defense system ‘BIHO’ combined with the portable surface-to-air guided missile system . The system intercepts low altitude infiltrating enemy aircraft and helicopters .
 The Hybrid BIHO can carry a total of 4 guided missiles with an effective range of 5km with upgraded potential to 8-10 km . The hybrid BIHO has a range of fivekm and can carry four guided missiles . It can also carry an upgraded range of
 That includes phones, smartwatches and other devices that can transmit, store, store and receive data . That includes smartphones,smartwatches, and other gadgets that can store and store data .
Hackers have already attacked your home network, whether or not it has already been attacked by hackers . Here's how to secure your home networks .
 Britain will tackle “the Wild West elements’ on the internet from cyberbullying to online child exploitation by introducing new laws for social media companies, digital minister Matt Hancock says .
 Digital Secretary Matt Hancock and Home Secretary Sajid Javid announced the move . New research shows that internet users often felt threatened by internet users .
 European lawmakers hit Mark Zuckerberg with a series of pointed questions at a hearing .
 Facebook CEO responded to questions with familiar talking points about his openness to regulation and commitment to protecting elections . The Facebook CEO was asked about misinformation campaigns and data privacy .
 Zuckerberg talked up Facebook's investment in security and played down concerns about its potential monopoly power .
 Mark Zuckerberg has apologized to the European Parliament for failing to prevent ‘fake news’ and allowing users’ data to be stolen . Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg apologises for causing “harm’ by failing to stop “fake news.”
 Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg suggested most people don’t care about one of the most invasive features on the site .
 He made his comments in Paris just a day before Europe’s strict new privacy legislation was due to kick in .
 Facebook said it looked forward to the meeting and was happy for it to be live-streamed . Facebook said the meeting was looking forward to being live streamed .
 Stefan Halper is a well-known CIA operative with ties to the Bush family and a shady past . The FBI has depicted Halper as a covert intelligence asset .
 Arizona senator's twilight struggle with Donald Trump is so bitter because they're more alike than you think . The Arizona senator’s struggle with Trump is more like you think.
 Ukraine’s president has lashed out at a BBC report that asserted a secret $400,000 payment was made to U.S. President Donald Trump's longtime lawyer last year .
 News agencies say U.S. authorities deported a former Russian executive previously convicted of arranging corrupt payments linked to Russian state nuclear company Rosatom .
 America’s best weapons now rely on parts from an increasingly shrinking industrial base . In some cases, it is totally reliant on Chinese-made materials .