 The paper provides a timeline of the major events in the Ukraine-Russia crisis since Crimea was annexed by Russia.
 In November 2013 the Ukrainian government of pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych decided not to sign a planned Association Agreement with the European Union . Demonstrations ensued in the capital Kyiv .
 The ‘Euromaidan’ demonstrations turned violent in early 2014 . Some European foreign ministers mediated a compromise, involving a unity government and early elections .
 President Yanukovych disappeared from Ukraine after the collapse of a power-sharing agreement on 22 February 2014 . New government was installed by the Ukrainian parliament .
Unidentified military figures, widely thought in the West to be Russian personnel, surrounded the airports in Crimea . Crimea is a majority-Russian peninsula in Ukraine .
 In March 2014 a declaration of independence was issued by the assembly and a subsequent referendum on union with Russia was held . The referendum was held in March 2014 .
 Russia has maintained its control over Crimea and supported pro-Russian separatist forces . Pro-Russian separatists also took control of parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of eastern Ukraine in 2014 .
 Fighting between Russian-supported separatists and Ukrainian government forces has continued in the Donbas for the last eight years . The Minsk Agreements in 2014/2015 called for a ceasefire, the withdrawal of all foreign armed groups and constitutional reform .
 Russia began building up military forces along the borders of Ukraine, for the second time in a year . Current crisis in early November 2021.
 More than 100,000 Russian military personnel and assets were deployed in Crimea and in the Voronezh, Kursk and Bryansk regions of western Russia . More than 1,500 Russian troops were deployed to Crimea in Crimea .
 Russian naval assets from Baltic and Northern fleets deployed for exercises in the Black Sea . Further Russian forces deployed to Belarus for exercises close to the Ukrainian border .
 Tensions escalated following a U.S. intelligence assessment in December 2021 . It suggested Russia could be planning an invasion of Ukraine in early 2022 .
 Russia launched military action in Ukraine in February 2022 . Forces crossed into the country from Belarus in the north, Russia in the east and Crimea in the south .
 Russia's actions came just days after President Putin officially recognised the self-declared independence of the Donetsk People’s Republic and Luhansk People's Republic . The regions of eastern Ukraine are under the control of Russian-backed separatist forces .
 Western sanctions are being imposed on Russia, military assistance is being provided to Ukraine . discussions are underway between Western allies on collective next steps .
 This paper provides a timeline of the major events that happened in the Ukraine-Russia crisis from November 2013 to the present . The purpose of this paper is to provide a timeline for the events that occurred in the country .
 This paper looks at the process for joining NATO and the expansion of the Alliance since its creation in 1949 . A timeline (2 MB) is a timeline .
 It discusses Sweden and Finland’s application, and how Russia views NATO enlargement . It also discusses Sweden's application and Russia's view of NATO .
 Commonwealth leaders will meet in Rwanda from 20 to 25 June 2022 . Key issues will be key issues for Commonwealth leaders in the country .
 Discussion may include global health, Rwanda's human rights record and the position of the Secretary General . Discussion may also include Rwanda's Human Rights record .
Re-use our content freely and flexibly with only a few conditions under the Open Parliament Licence . Re-use your content freely. Re- use our content free and Flexibly with just a few Conditions .