 Ron, United States Senator from Wisconsin, says he has prepared a statement . Kasparov, chairman of the U.S. Senate, is also a senator from Wisconsin . He says he's prepared to make a statement.
 The Brookings Institution has released a statement on the issue . The statement includes a statement from former President of Georgia, Mikheil, and chairman .
 International Advisory Council On Reforms of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine 5 Prepared statement 8 Shaheen, Hon. Shaheens .
 The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:09m., in room SD-419, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Hon. Hon.
 I want to start off by thanking all the witnesses for taking the time, traveling here, and preparing some thoughtful testimony . I want the witnesses to take their time, and prepare some thoughtful testimonies .
 I also want to offer my condolences to all of those who knew Boris Nemtsov, who considered him a friend and comrade . I also wants to offer his condolences to those who were friends and comrades .
 It certainly was not one of the things I wanted to talk about, certainly nothing we contemplated . It was not a thing we contemplated. It was just a matter of a few things we wanted to discuss .
 The story that needs to be told is what has become of Russia since Vladimir Putin has come to power . It is to tell a story, and the story needs to tell, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Unless we are willing to face the reality, Vladimir Putin will continue his aggression, says Peter Bergen . It will destabilize the entire efforts of all those who want to seek peace and prosperity in the world, he says . Bergen says .
 Boris Nemtsov is a very courageous man who brought to his office a list of people who needed to be added to the Magnitsky list . He brought to my office a longer list of the people who need to be add to the list .
 The next picture of Senator Gardner is a picture of Boris Nemtsov having been assassinated with the Kremlin in the background .
 The assassination would be similar to an assassination carried out on Constitution Avenue with Capitol in the background .
 Putin's ascension to power in Russia is the first time the Russian president has been in power . He has said he wants people to pay attention to the history of Russia's history .
 The most powerful part of that timeline are the 29 assassinations of political figures, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Prohahly the most powerful" part of the timeline is the 29 murders that have never been adequately solved .
 This picture is actually a Ukrainian rebel talking about the number of Russian troops that he was thankful for that had entered Eastern Ukraine .
 Malaysian Flight Number MH17 was shot down out of the sky on July 17 of 2014 .
 Vladimir Putin's aggression is a little pictorial history of the results of Vladimir Putin’s aggression, and that is the story that needs to be told .
 Today's hearing is the subcommittee's first hearing in the 114th Congress . It is about documenting the history of Russian aggression in Ukraine and Eastern Europe .
 Ukraine needs our help in the form of defensive lethal military equipment, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Ukraine needs to face harsh reality, says Obama .
 Crimea was annexed by Russia in March 2014, with hardly any pushback from the West . In March 2013, Crimea was annexed by Russia .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk came to America last year asking for help in his country’s battle to ensure its territorial integrity .
 We should have provided a minimal level of defensive lethal aid that Ukraine so desperately wanted. We should not have provided such a level of lethal aid, says Ukraine .
 U.S. needs to show leadership and strength now, not only in Ukraine but around the world . America needed to show resolve then, and it desperately needs to do so, says Ukraine .
 Ukraine gave up the world’s third-largest nuclear weapons stockpile in return for security assurances against threats or use of force against its territorial integrity and political independence .
 Russia has blatantly broken its promise by brazenly violating the territorial integrity of Ukraine . 20 years later, Russia has brazenly violated its promise to Ukraine .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin's behavior is not surprising. No one should be surprised by this behavior from the Russian President .
 Russian aggression against its neighbors has been building for years. Under his leadership, Russian aggression has been built for years .
 The summarized timeline of Russia’s destabilizing actions clearly demonstrates the threat Putin represents to neighboring democracies . The timeline shows that Putin represents a threat to neighboring countries .
 Putin is appointed head of the Russian Federal Security Service . Galina Starovoitova, a prominent liberal member of Russia’s Parliament, is shot to death .
 Putin sends Russian troops back into Chechnya in the wake of a series of bomb explosions in Russia which are blamed on Chechen extremists . Yeltsin resigns, Putin becomes acting President .
 Boris Berezovsky, once the richest of the so-called oligarchs who dominated post-Soviet Russia, was found dead in his home outside of London . He was a close ally of Yeltsin who helped install Putin as President .
 Ukraine is not the only answer, but it is a necessary part of the answer . Providing military equipment to Ukraine is a crucial part of Ukraine's military equipment .
 Ukraine needs economic and governance reforms, but those can succeed only in a peaceful and independent nation . Ukraine needs political and economic reforms, according to the UN .
 President Poroshenko addressed a joint session of Congress on September 18, 2014 . He told Congress that his country needs more military equipment .
 I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today on Russian aggression in Eastern Europe . We will also learn how we can best support our allies in confronting this regional destabilization .
 Senator Shaheen will turn it over to her for her opening comments, she said . "I want to thank the witnesses, and I will turn over to Senator Sha heen"
 Shaheen is a U.S. Senator from New HAMPSHIre . He is a former New Hampshire Senator .
 The hearing was held in New York City, New York, on Tuesday . The hearing will be held in the U.S. for the second time in a week .
I want to echo your comments about the tragic killing of Boris Nemtsov . I want to repeat your comments on the tragic death of Boris Nemtsov, I say .
 He was a tireless voice for all Russians and a firm believer in a bright future for the country . He was also a firm supporter of Russia's future .
 The Russian Federation's outward aggression is seen as a sign of Russia's repression in Russia . Russia has a history of violence and violence in the past .
 Former President Saakashvili is back with the committee today . He will submit his full statement for the record .
 The Ukraine crisis has been described as one of the worst in the country's history . Ukraine is one of Ukraine's most troubled regions . Ukraine has been declared a state of war in the past and has suffered from a series of problems .
 Jeanne Shaheen Thank you, Chairman Johnson. Thank you.
 I want to commend you for your focus and leadership on this critical foreign policy issue and for your work to bring this hearing together today before the Subcommittee on Europe .
 Boris Nemtsov was a tireless voice for all Russians and a firm believer in a bright future for that country . I also want to echo your comments about the tragic killing of Boris NemTsov .
 The Russia Federation's outward aggression, clearly, is under President Putin. Even as we focus here today on the Russia Federation’s outward aggression. We cannot ignore the repression inside Russian today under Putin.
 Russian people and the world demand a transparent investigation into Mr Nemtsov’s murder . I sincerely hope we will see that. The Russian people are demanding a transparent probe into his murder .
 Russia's refusal to allow some foreign officials to attend his funeral was not a promising sign . Russia’s refusal to let some foreign Officials to attend the funeral is not a good sign .
 Russia has a pattern of interference and aggression in Eastern Europe, says the Chairman . The Chairman noted that we have five impressive witnesses here to help us better understand Russia’s patterns of interference .
 Russian foreign policy flouts international norms and responsibilities, a foreign policy that is based on political, economic, and even military intimidation and aggression . Today, we see a Russian foreign Policy that flouts global norms and responsibility .
Airspace violations, disinformation and propaganda campaigns, energy corruption and trade restrictions are just a few of the tools used by Moscow . Airspace violations and disinformation are among the tools the city uses .
 The U.S. is providing substantial support to European partners, including Ukraine . The United States is already providing support to Ukraine .
 Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia should look for opportunities to help them strengthen their political systems and economies, says U.S. ambassador to Georgia .
 Congress, and particularly this committee, has played a critical role in this effort . Congress has played an important role in the effort, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Congress passed the Ukraine Freedom Support Act last December . It authorized the President to provide military assistance to Ukraine and tighten economic sanctions on Russia .
Congress is looking at what more we should be looking to do in Congress . I welcome your suggestions for what we should do in congress .
 We look forward to hearing from each of you. Once again, thank you all for being here . We will be able to see each of us again .
 "We do have a vote that is going to be called, and I believe that what is happening with that vote is we will be sitting in our chairs," he says . "I believe that we are going to sit in their chairs"
We will put this hearing into recess, and we will come back because I do not want anybody to miss the testimony . We will put it into recess. We will be back in session because I don't want anyone to miss this hearing .
 President Saakashvili, former President of Georgia, will start off with a visit to Georgia . He will be the first person to visit Georgia's capital city of Georgia .
Ukrainian President Poroshenko appointed him to serve as chairman of the International Advisory Council on Reforms of the President of Ukraine .
 MIKHEIL SAAKASHVILI, FORMER PRESIDENT of GEORGIA, FORmer President of GEorGia, and CHAIRMAN, INTERNATIONAL ADVISORY COUNCIL on REFORMS of President of UKRAINE, K
 I want to thank you, the committee and subcommittee, for the invitation . The committee's invitation is an invitation to the committee .
 The former President of one nation has served in the U.S. Senate for more than a decade . He has served as President of the United States since 2001 . He is now serving in the Senate .
 Ukraine and Georgia are on the front lines of the fight that may seem far away, but it is very much the fight the U.S. people understand more than anybody else in the world .
 This is not a fight about territory, about railway junctures, this or that town, it's about territory . This is a fight for territory, not territory, this is about railwayjunctures .
 This is a fight to determine whether we can escape from this curse of Soviet corrupt, cronyist, inefficient societies to being efficient democracies based on rule of law .
 Ukraine gave up 1,800 warheads, one-third of the Soviet nuclear arsenal, to help secure peace in post-cold-war Europe .
 The United States, among other big powers, was the guarantor of Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty . The Ukraine gave up their weapons in 2010 .
 The Ukraine has diminished its defense capabilities from having almost 1 million people serving in the military down to 120,000 . The country's defense capabilities have fallen from 1 million to 1 million .
 Russia has incapacitated 6,000 tanks for the last decades . It was the time when they were complying with all their treaty obligations . Russia was building up their military protection .
 Ukraine has given all this up hoping that they will be guaranteed peaceful future . Ukraine has not given up hope of a peaceful future.
 Russian tanks deep into their territory, as well as some of their weapons, are under attack . They are asking for several thousand antitank missiles to defend themselves .
 Ukraine has a strong, strong democracy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Ukraine is a country that needs to build a viable, strong Ukrainian democracy . Ukraine is one of the most important countries in the world, he says .
 U.S. security is now imperative to the world’s security and the world's security, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The old markers of Putin’s reign are the gravestones of his critics and opponents .
 Every marker we can think of at this time is about increasing control of Russia or the Russian-speaking world .
 In September 1999, as director of FSB, Putin sent troops into Chechnya . In September 1998, as head of F SB, Putin ordered troops into the country .
 The constitution was changed to assure Putin that when Putin returned to the Presidency, it would be a 6-year term . Three months later the constitution was change to assure that Putin would return to the presidency . The constitution is now set to be changed .
 Putin's military excursions are always the prelude to the centralization of his personal power . Putin’s military excursion is always the precursor to his own personal power.
 This has made Russia more unpredictable and Europe and the U.S. less secure, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia has been more unpredictable, he says .
 One year ago as the corrupt regime of Yanukovych fell, Russian forces moved into Crimea, then Ukraine, then there was downing of a passenger jet . The passenger jet was downed by Russian forces.
 President Poroshenko addressed the Joint Session of the Congress . Poroshenko: "We are grateful for this opportunity"
 Russia will continue to establish facts on the ground that will give them stronger position in the kabuki of future negotiations, he says . He also asked that Ukraine requires defensive assistance because if not given that, he said .
 Russia is seizing the whole southern flank of Ukraine, seizing most of the east, and then going after the government in Kiev . Russia is killing the very idea of Ukraine democracy, he says .
After the war in 2008, a de facto ban on arms sales to Georgia was in place . As then, opponents were saying that providing Ukraine with lethal weapons would provoke Russia to escalate .
 Putin’s aim is to destabilize Ukrainian democracy. But this appeasement ignores that Putin's aim is destabilizing Ukrainian democracy . This appeasements ignores that Russia is trying to undermine Ukraine's democracy .
 In 1980, shoulder-fired Stinger missiles raised the cost to the Soviets in Afghanistan . The missiles were used in Afghanistan.
 That was the most decisive factor in the eventual defeat of the Soviet Army . The Soviet Army was defeated by the Russian Army in the 1980s .
 U.S. should join forces with countries like U.K. and Baltics to help arm and train the Ukrainian Army, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 I have focused on the case for arming Ukraine because without this there will not be a country to rebuild . Without this, without this, there won't be a nation to rebuild, I say .
 Ukraine's government is fighting corruption, bringing the economy out of the shadows, increasing revenues to the state budget and delivering better lives to the people of Ukraine . Its success will equally be determined by fighting corruption.
 U.S. support of all these efforts for the Ukrainian economy is critical, but time is short, the Russian plan is clear . American support for all the efforts is critical.
 As I said, they will depose the government in Kiev if not checked in time . The government will be deposed in time, he said .
 America and the free world won Second World War, and they won the cold war . Americans won the First World War and won the Cold War . America won the first World War .
 What we are seeing is a dramatic situation where all these gains might be reversed, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "What we are see is a Dramatic situation"
 Georgia is a small country, but when we were invaded in 2008, it took the U.S. and many members of this very Congress to stop them by starting the humanitarian military operation .
 The Russian government is trying to prevent encroachment of the Russian narrative into our politics and media . It is about controlling minds, and in this war we have yet to begin to fight back, says Putin . We have to empower the Russian people to look at their own country and their own
 America, the origin of many of these ideals, was always further away from the front, writes John Sutter . Sutter: America was more able to resist the seeming appeal of realist moral compromise .
 Ukraine is the last nation between the revanchist Russia and America, and, overall, the free world . Ukraine is a democratic, secure Ukraine, says the U.S.
 I want to thank the Foreign Relations Committee for the invitation to speak here today . I will be speaking at the end of the week .
 President of one nation representing the interests of another before the U.S. Senate . President Barack Obama has been in the Senate since 2008 .
 Ukraine and Georgia are on the front lines of a fight that may seem far away from here . The fight is expected to take place in Ukraine, Georgia.
 Ukraine gave up over 1,800 warheads to help secure peace in post-cold-war Europe . Ukraine earned right to aspire to Western integration when it gave up more than 1,000 warheads .
 Twice since, the people of Ukraine have taken to the streets to defend this right. Twice since.
 Supporting Ukraine is now imperative to American security, says U.S. State Department . Supporting Ukraine, including by giving them the arms they need to fight for their future, is a priority .
 The road-markers of Putin’s reign are the gravestones of his critics and opponents . Putin's opponents are the most prominent opponents of his reign .
 His years in power can be measured by the rollback of federalization, rights, freedom, and opportunity, he says . He says .
Every marker we can think of in his timeline is about increasing control of Russia and the Russian-speaking world .
 In September 1999, as director of the FSB, Putin sent troops into Chechnya .
 The constitution was changed to ensure that when Putin returned to the Presidency, it would be for a 6-year term . Three months later, the constitution was change to ensure the term would be 6-years .
 This has made Russia more unpredictable, and Europe and the U.S. less secure in economic and military terms . This has also made Russia and Europe less secure, according to the United States .
 One year ago, as the corrupt regime of President Yanukovich fell, Russian forces moved into Crimea .
 Russian military and intelligence operatives stirred up unrest in the Donbass region of Ukraine . Tens of thousands of Russian regular forces participated in the unrest .
 Russian air defenses had been illegally brought into Ukraine in August 2014 . The downing of a Malaysian passenger jet by Russian air defense forces had been illegal .
 In September, President Poroshenko addressed a joint session of Congress with the request to provide Ukraine with defensive assistance . In September.
 Ukrainian officials have continuously submitted requests for assistance and defensive weapons . In bilateral talks with the U.S. officials have been in bilateral talks for years .
 Ukraine has been provided some nonlethal assistance, including radars to help detect mortars, bulletproof vests, and some other basic aid and equipment . Ukraine has also been given some basic aid.
 Ukrainian defense will be strengthened with lethal weapons, including antitank weapons . But what will strengthen Ukrainian defense is lethal weapons .
 Russia will take the territory when Russia knows there will be little cost to them to take it . Russia will be able to use the territory if there is no cost to it .
 They will continue to establish facts on the ground that will give them a stronger position in the kabuki of future negotiations . They will be able to make their case for future negotiations in the country .
Opponents say that providing Ukraine with lethal weapons will provoke Russia to step up its military involvement . As then, opponents say that Russia will step up military involvement and escalate the conflict .
 Putin's aim is to unseat the government in Kiev and fully destabilize Ukrainian democracy . But this appeasement ignores that Putin’s goal is to destabilize Ukraine's democracy .
 Putin’s popularity soars post-Crimea, the one crack in his armor is the mounting, secret human cost of his war .
 To raise the cost for the Kremlin — on the front line and at home — further advances have to come with the fear of increased casualties . The Kremlin is raising the cost of the Kremlin to raise the costs for the Russian government .
 Ukraine has little reason, historic or contemporary, to hope for German support . But Ukraine has no reason,Historic or contemporary. But there is no reason to hope.
 The United States should take the lead, empowering regional actors 9 like Poland and other neighbors of Ukraine . The U.S. should join with supportive nations like the U.K. and the Baltics to create a coalition to arm and train the Ukrainian Army .
 I have focused today on the case for arming Ukraine because without this, there won’t be a country to rebuild. I've focused on the issue of arming Ukraine, and I'm focused on it today .
 Ukraine is fighting corruption, bringing the economy out of the shadows, increasing revenue to the state budget, and delivering better lives to the people of Ukraine . But this is not to say its success will be equally determined by fighting corruption .
 U.S. support of all those efforts, and support for the Ukrainian economy during the war, is critical . American support for Ukraine is critical.
 The Russian plan could not be more transparent. But time is short, and underneath the deception and the information war, the Russian plan is not more transparent . The Russian government is trying to make the plan more transparent, but it is not yet clear .
 Ukrainian troops will seize more of the east and south of Ukraine . They will send defeated Ukrainian troops back to Kiev . Pressure mounts and the democratically elected President and Government of Ukraine collapse or are overthrown .
 Putin sent tens of thousands of troops to invade Georgia . Georgia is a country of 4 million people and is a nation of 4million people .
 Since 2008, Russia has spent well over a billion dollars propping up the budgets of Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Russia’s payments to South Ossetia have increased by 19 percent . In 2015, the Russian state budget is being cut by 10 percent across the board .
 Add to the costs of military deployments to and arrangements with, these regions . Add to that the costs.
 Tbilisi is trying to rapprochement with an aggressive and bullying neighbor . The costs of backing anti-European, xenophobic groups are costing the government money .
 Russia has funded to blame the 2008 war on Georgia and its NATO aspirations . The costs of the media and documentaries and reports are funded by Russia .
 Putin is willing to commit to ensure Georgia will not have a future that Russia does not dictate . This is what Putin is committed to ensuring Georgia does not have the future Russia doesn't dictate. This is the same thing he is willing.
 He did this only to ensure that NATO could not offer Georgia a concrete pathway to membership . He did not want Georgia to become a member of NATO .
 Putin has made clear that Ukraine is a nearly divine cause for him . And as Putin made clear, he has made it clear that it is his country's fate .
 According to U.N., over 6,000 people have been killed in the fighting in eastern Ukraine . The fighting is ongoing in the east of Ukraine .
 Up to 20 percent of the industrial capacity of Ukraine has been removed or destroyed . Up to 30 percent of Ukraine's industrial capacity has been taken off or destroyed.
 Russia has backed political parties, heavy propaganda, and sharp economic pressure to erode support for Europe in Moldova . In the past year, Russia has also backing political parties and heavy propaganda . The Russian Army is now closer to Moldova’s door .
 Moldova is a far larger, richer, and more strategically important nation . If Europe hasn't helped Ukraine, Moldova will become a footnote of the regional conquest .
 The price Putin is willing to pay, and to exact, is higher than we want to imagine . Putin's price is not what we want, but the price he will pay is more than we imagine .
 In Georgia, in 2008, we fought because if we didn’t fight for our sovereignty and our democracy, no one else ever would . In 2008, in Georgia, they fought because they didn't fight for their sovereignty and democracy .
 We couldn’t win a military war with Russia, but it is the ideological war that we believed needed to be fought, and won. We couldn't win the military war, but we believed it needed to.
 Ukraine fights now for the same reason, and its Western friends are no less uncomfortable with their war . Ukraine fights in the same way as its friends in the West are no more uncomfortable with its war .
 When he makes the calculation that the time is right, he will cross the Article 5 line, probably in ways that are not expected . When he does it, he'll cross the article 5 line.
 Putin will be fighting, and winning, an ideological war against the only force that has ever been able to contain and turn back expansionist Russian exceptionalism .
 The Russian government is trying to prevent the encroachment of the Russian narrative into our own politics and media . In that war, we have yet to begin to fight back to help empower the Russian people .
 A democratic, secure Ukraine is the last nation between revanchist Russia and America . Ukraine is a democratic nation between Russia and the United States .
 We will recess at this point in time and hopefully he will be back in about 10 to 15 minutes . He will be able to return to the scene in time .
 I apologize for that, but, again, this is an important hearing, and we are looking forward to your testimony . I apologize, but again, I am looking forward, and I am sorry for that .
 He is the chairman of the International Council of the Human Rights Foundation . He is also the head of the World Human Rights Council .
 Mr Kasparov is a Russian pro-democracy leader, global human rights activist, author, and former world chess champion .
 Mr Kasparov is a Russian-born businessman and businessman . He is also known as the "Huge RIGHTS RIGHTS FOUNDATION"
Sen. Johnson invited me to the subcommittee and to Senator Johnson for inviting me here today . My thanks to subcommittee and Senator Johnson.
 Boris Nemtsov was murdered in front of the Kremlin last Friday night . He also wants to honor his memory by pressing the case for ending the regime of Vladimir Putin in Russia .
 The first days after an atrocity are very important because people outside Russia quickly forget and move on . I have learned from painful experience that these first days are veryimportant .
 Boris was an outspoken critic of a police state that has no tolerance for critics . Boris was a critic of the police state.
 His imposing presence regularly embarrassed an increasingly totalitarian dictatorship . He could not permit even the smallest amount of truth to leak out .
 His latest report was to be on the presence of Russian troops in Ukraine, fighting Putin's war against a fragile democratic state in Europe .
 Sergei Magnitsky Act brought sanctions against Russian officials for not a brutal murder, but that of anticorruption attorney Sergei Magnitky in 2009 . Boris also actively promoted the Magnitski Act, a piece of bipartisan 2012 legislation .
 Putin and his elites believe that after 15 years in power, there is nothing they cannot do, no line they cannot cross . Putin and the elites believe they can't cross .
 Russia's sense of impunity, combined with an atmosphere of hatred and violence and Putin’s propaganda, has created a lethal combination . Putin's propaganda has created in Russia a deadly combination.
 Georgia, Ukraine, and the stability of the modern world order are also under attack .
 Ukraine was always a tempting target, and the recent leaks have shown that an invasion plan existed before the fall of Viktor Yanukovych .
Independent journalists and opposition activists are portrayed as dangerous national traitors in language lifted directly from the Nazis .
 Ukraine and what it illustrates about Putin and his regime that are more consequent to today's hearing. But it is Ukraine and it is what it shows about Putin, his regime .
 Since Putin took power in 2000, one Western administration has declined to confront him on human rights at home or even his increasing belligerence abroad . Since Putin has taken power, he has become increasingly belligerent .
 The timeline of Russian repression circulated today does an excellent job of listing many of the worse moments of Putin’s crackdown .
 There could also be a parallel timeline of all the meetings, deals, and smiling photo ops the leaders of the free world took with Putin .
 The Western engagement policy that should have been abandoned as soon as Putin showed his true colors over a decade ago was continued at every turn . The West was emboldened Putin and delegitimized our opposition movement .
 Putin rebuilt the police state in Russia in full view of the outside world . He is confident enough of his power to export that police state abroad to Georgia, to Ukraine, to Moldova .
 Putin also provides a role model for the rest of the world dictators and thugs by defying the superior forces of the free world . Putin's role model is to be seen as a model for other dictators.
 Putin's Russia provides both materiel support and what I would call amoral support. From Iran to Syria to Venezuela, Putin’s Russia providesboth materiel and support, he says .
 The United States and the rest of the free world are fighting whether it admits it or not . It is a front line of a war the U.S. is fighting .
 6 months ago, Putin was not enough to deter Putin, and he must be deterred. Sanctions are important, but it is obvious that they were not enough .
 Stop treating Putin like any other leader who can be negotiated with in good faith . Stop treating him like any others who can't be negotiated in goodfaith .
 Stop legitimizing his brutal regime at the expense of the Russian people . Stop legitimization of his regime. stop legitimizing it at the cost of the people .
 The opposition movement Boris and I believed in and that Boris died for should also be openly supported . The West championed the Soviet dissidents, the former Soviet leader says .
 Ronald Reagan told us that he knew it was our leaders, not us, who were his enemies . Let the people of Russia know that they have allies abroad, he says .
 Putin does not enjoy broad public support in Russia, as was proved by hundreds of thousands of people mourning Boris in the street .
 If you are truly popular, you can allow free media and free elections, and your critics are not gunned down in the streets . You can allow your critics to be shot in the street, and you can also allow free elections and free media .
 Putin's oligarch supporters must be forced to choose between giving him up and a doomed isolation . Putin’s oligarchs must choose whether to give him up.
 The people of Russia want to be free, but defeating a globalized and energy-rich, heavily militarized dictatorship is too much to ask . Russia has the tacit support of the free world.
 Boris Nemtsov always dreamed it could be. He must be isolated and removed, for only when Putin is gone can Russia be a free, strong, and independent country .
 Boris Nemtsov was murdered in front of the Kremlin last Friday night . He is also pressing the case for ending the regime of Vladimir Putin in Russia .
People outside of Russia quickly forget and move on. I have learned from painful experience that these first days after an atrocity are very important, because people outside of Russian quickly forget .
 Boris also actively promoted the Magnitsky Act, a piece of rare bipartisan 2012 legislation that brought sanctions against Russian officials for another brutal murder, that of anticorruption attorney SergeiMagnitsky .
 Putin and his elites believe that after 15 years of power there is nothing they cannot do, no line they cannot cross . Putin and the elites believe they can't cross .
 Putin's propaganda has created a lethal combination of hatred and violence in Russia . Putin’s sense of impunity, combined with the atmosphere of hatred, is a deadly combination .
 Ukraine was always a tempting target, and recent leaks have shown that an invasion plan existed before the fall of Viktor Yanukovych .
 Of course I feel deeply the loss of my friend Boris Nemtsov and the persecution of others who dare to speak against Putin, he says .
 Ukraine and what it illustrates about Putin and his regime that are more consequent to today's hearing. But Ukraine and Russia are more likely to be at the center of the hearing .
 Since Putin took power in 2000, one Western administration has declined to confront him on human rights at home or over his increasing belligerence abroad . One Western administration after another declined to confrontation him on Human Rights at home .
 The timeline of Russian repression circulated today does an excellent job of listing many of the worst moments of Putin’s crackdown .
 Putin rebuilt a police state in Russia in full view of the outside world . Now he is confident enough of his power to attempt to export that police state abroad .
 Putin also provides a role model for the rest of the world’s dictators and thugs by defying superior forces of the free world .
 The United States and the rest of the free world are fighting whether it admits it or not . It is the front line of a war the U.S. is fighting .
 Sanctions are important, but it was obvious 6 months ago they were not enough to deter Putin, and he must be deterred. Sanctions were important, and they are not enough, but they are needed .
 Stop legitimizing his brutal re-me at the expense of the Russian people . Stop legitimization of his brutalRe-me. Stop legitimized his brutal Re-me .
 Ronald Reagan told those of us behind the Iron Curtain that he knew it was our leaders, not us, who were his enemies . Let the people of Russia know that they have allies abroad, the way Reagan told us .
 Putin does not enjoy broad public support in Russia, according to the widely circulated official polls .
 If you are truly popular you can allow a free media and free elections . Your critics are not gunned down in the street. If you're truly popular, you can let your critics be gunned down .
 They cannot be allowed to continue to live like Trump and rule like Stalin, they say . They can't continue to rule like Trump, they can't live like Putin or Stalin .
 The people of Russia want to be free, but defeating a globalized and energy-rich dictatorship that has the tacit support of the free world is too much to ask . Russia wants to be a free nation, but the people of the Russian people are not .
 Boris Nemtsov always dreamed it could be. He must be isolated and removed, for only when Putin is gone can Russia be free, strong, and independent country .
 He is an internationally known expert on Russia and the former Soviet Union . He is the author of over 1,000 publications .
 STATEMENT OF STEPHEN BLANK, PH.D., SENIOR FELLOW, AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY COUNCIL .
 Senator Johnson will testify before a subcommittee with this exceptionally distinguished group of witnesses . Johnson: It is a great honor to testify before your subcommittee .
In his oral remarks, he says he wants to talk about the broader strategic issues involved . The statement deals with purely military issues, in his written statement .
 Russia’s invasion and occupation of Ukraine represent the greatest threat to European security in a generation . It is the most naked case of aggression since Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990 .
 It is the fruit of a long-developed plan whose origins can be traced back to 2005 . The fruit of the long- developed plan is the result of a plan that has been developed since 2005 .
 A little short victorious war can buttress the regime at home around a program of Russian imperialism and state nationalism . Many have already noticed that in keeping with the rhythms of Russian history, there is a belief that a little short victories can buttressed the regime .
 It is an axiom of Russian foreign policy that none of the post-Soviet states, including those of Eastern Europe, really possess genuine sovereignty and territorial integrity. Further, it is anAxiom of Russia's foreign policy .
 treaties guaranteeing sovereignty and territorial integrity are merely scraps of paper. Therefore, treaties guarantee sovereignty and territory integrity .
 Ukraine can follow a different trajectory than does Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It is inconceivable to the Russian elite that Ukraine can following a different path than Russia .
 A Ukraine that looks westward is the greatest possible threat to the security of Putin’s regime . It will infect Russia with the democratic virus.
 The entire legitimacy of any Russian state is bound up with being the true heir of Kievan Rus .
 If Ukraine rebels against or rejects Russia’s trajectory, then the entire legitimacy of the Russian state is called into question .
 Putin and his team believe that empire is the only acceptable form of a Russian state . Russia must, therefore, be an empire if his autocracy and kleptocracy are to be preserved. This is especially the case because Putin believes empire is only acceptable.
 A democratic revolution in Ukraine is anathema to Moscow and a pretext for an invasion. For all these reasons, a democratic revolution is anat hema to the Russian capital .
 Moscow still intends to seize Mariupol, establish a land bridge to Crimea . If it could do so, it could establish as well as land bridge all the way to Moldova .
 Moscow intends to overthrow the entire post-coldwar settlement of 1989 to 1991 in Europe and globally, and to do so by systematically applying the synchronized instruments of pressure . Beyond destroying any possibility of an independent Ukraine, Moscow plans to overthrow all post-Coldwar settlement in Europe.
Too many European governments do not take what happens in Russia seriously enough. These policies predict 14 more to any competent analyst, but unfortunately this administration and too many European countries don't take it seriously enough .
 Neither do these governments think Eastern Europe and the post-Soviet states are sufficiently important for us to have a real strategy regarding them .
 Russia-first strategy lies at the root of the continuing and shameful Western failure to understand or grapple with Russia and its aggressions seriously enough or to provide assistance to Ukraine as needed . This Russia- first strategy lies in the continuing, shameful Western failures to understand and grapple with
 Ukraine is supposedly more important to Moscow than it is to us or to European governments . This inhibits us helping Ukraine as needed, says administration officials .
 The United States is slow rolling the provision of intelligence to Ukraine, according to the Wall Street Journal .
 Given the stakes involved for Ukraine, its neighbors, and partners, European and international security, this is an unacceptable policy, says the U.S.
 It undermines the credibility of NATO, of the United States, Europe, and beyond, and encourages aggression, and not only by Putin, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Putin's actions undermine NATO, U.S. and Europe's credibility .
 I welcome the opportunity to testify before the committee today . The importance of these hearings should be clear to everyone, says President Obama .
 Ukraine needs military help from abroad in terms of weapons, training, and finances to help sustain its government and economy in the face of Russian aggression .
Ukraine also needs UAVs or weapons to use against Russian drones . Ukraine also needs weapons to fight Russian drones, including drones .
 It also needs weapons to counter Russian artillery fire by the use of intelligence capabilities to determine the source and point of origin of those fires and then take them out .
 Ukraine needs an effective, democratic command and control structure that allows competent officers to rise to positions of responsible command . Ukraine also needs to devise an effective and democratic command, control structure .
In American terms it needs both an Edwin Stanton and a George Marshall . In American terms, both need both a Stanton and Marshall .
 It also needs to sustain patriotic morale to counter manifestations of draft dodging and to demonstrate to the world that it is reforming .
 Right now it needs weapons as outlined above urgently as well as financial assistance and a long-term plan of both energy and financial assistance . The government and economy need to reform its government and Economy .
 The White House and the NSC are holding up sending weapons to Ukraine at this point . At the same time, there is little doubt that the White House is holding up the move .
 There is little doubt that the Ukrainian Army will fight and with assistance can prevail over the rebels . Russia cannot operate freely in Ukraine as long as Russia cannot.
 The fighting to date shows that only with substantial Russian help and the takeover of the operation by the Russian Army can prevail in battle .
 There are also 29,400 Russian troops in Crimea and 55,800 massed along the border with eastern Ukraine . There is also 55,000 Russian troops on the Ukraine border .
 Russian EW teams have targeted the Schiebel Camcopter UAVs operated by the monitors . The monitors “melted the onboard electronics so that drones just fly around uncontrolled in circles before they crash to the ground,’ said one of the briefers at the conference .
 The war against Ukraine is not a “new strategy for Moscow,’s general staff has been preparing for Ukraine-type combat operations since 1999 . Russian EW, communications and other units central to their military operations are typically placed adjacent to kindergartens, hospitals, or apartment buildings
 The Ukrainian operation has been planned by Moscow at least since 2005 . It is incomprehensible why the administration could not, or would not, formulate an assessment of what was happening .
Russian tactics are rather crude, essentially being massive artillery and air shelling of enemy positions . Second, Russian tactics are more crude, basically being Massive artillery andAir shelling ofenemy positions .
 Such tactics mandate a traditional enormous output of ammunition and artillery . Such tactics require a traditional huge output of ammo and artillery.
 The numbers of shells being expended periodically forces Russia to accept truces in order to replenish its forces in Ukraine . Russia is in full command of this operation in Ukraine who are in full control of the operation .
 There is a substantial reinforcement of the naval, air, and missile forces in the Crimea, including nuclear-capable or so called dual use weapons .
 Putin cannot escalate the scale of conflict beyond present limits without antagonizing NATO further into a full-scale protracted war . He cannot afford that. First, Putin can't escalate the size of the conflict beyond current limits .
 He is reputedly very afraid of media reports of the true extent of what evidently are sizable numbers of Russian casualties . He is also afraid of press reports of what appears to be a large number of casualties .
 Ukrainian sources say 1,300 Ukrainians and 4,500 Russians were killed . For example, at Debaltseve, 1, 300 Ukrainians were killed, according to Ukrainian sources .
 NATO is trying to give Ukraine weapons and training as part of a comprehensive strategy . Ukraine's morale and capabilities would improve to the point of imposing much greater costs on Russia which is reaching the limit.
 Putin is already bringing troops form Central Asia and Siberia to Ukraine, indicating a manpower shortage and lack of desire inside Russia to fight Ukraine .
 There are also many reports of disaffection within the Russian military . There are many reports that there are also reports ofdisaffection .
 NATO has hardly engaged, but Russia is already feeling the pressure . In other words, whereas NATO has barely engaged, Russia has hardly been engaged .
 Russian tactics and strategy have aimed to keep fighting at a level under NATO’s ‘radar’ to avoid a too protracted war .
 Putin aims to present the EU with a fait accompli by mid-year to persuade a divided Europe to remove sanctions and escape the risk of a protracted war .
 Ukraine has 16 costs to impose on Putin but to regain the overall strategic initiative and take it away for him by helping Ukraine to defend itself . We have it within our power, if we can find the will to do so, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Putin's strategy is a comprehensive strategy that embraces military, economic and informational means to thwart this effort to sustain Putin at home, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says it would overturn the post cold war status quo in Europe, undermine European integration, and hasten the rupture of the trans
 Our continuing passivity allows this shameful conquest and the spread of state terrorism and criminality orchestrated by Moscow and its subalterns in Crimea and Ukraine to spread with impunity .
 We must realize that this is the most naked aggression since Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990 . We must respond accordingly to what is the greatest threat to European security and to international order .
We can see with China in the South China Sea, and with Iran in regard to state-sponsored terrorism and nuclear proliferation . For if we do not do so, others will be even more emboldened by our inaction and confusion .
 Continued passivity invites more escalation, and not only by Putin, according to Putin, but also our interests, both in Europe and across the globe . Putin's actions upholds our values, not only our values but even more importantly, our interests .
 Reuben F Johnson: ‘Hybrid War Is Working,’ is working .
 His areas of expertise include Central and Eastern Europe, NATO, and U.S. national security issues . He also has expertise in the United States.
 Mr Wilson served as special assistant to the President and senior director for European affairs at the National Security Council . He also served as senior director of European Affairs at the Council .
 DAMON WILSON, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT, ATLANTIC COUNCIL, WASHINGTON, DC. Wilson is a former vice president of the U.S. Department of Justice .
 Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Shaheen, and members of the committee. Chairman Johnson is the chairman .
 President Putin poses a direct threat to U.S. interests and values, says Putin .
 His war in Ukraine aims to tear up the post-cold-war order and undermine U.S. credibility . He also wants to undermine American credibility .
 If we fail to stop Putin in Ukraine, we will face a series of conflicts and crises in the months and years to come .
 Putin may consolidate his autocratic grip at home and subjugate 75 million in Europe’s East to a fate determined in Moscow .
 Putin may be tempted to challenge a NATO ally directly . At worst, he may be emboldened to challenge NATO ally .
 The choice we face is not between fighting Russia or doing nothing, but doing nothing . The choice is not to fight Russia or do nothing, however .
 Russia’s annexation of Crimea was the natural outcome of a clear, consistent policy dating back years . Russia's annexation was the result of a consistent policy, according to the Kremlin .
Only the U.S. can galvanize Europe and the international community around an effective strategy to deter Putin for the long term. Third, only the United States can galvanized Europe.
 A democratic Russia one day can find its peaceful place within a Europe whole and free, writes David Frum . And fifth, we should neither abandon the Russian people nor the vision that a democratic Russia can find a peaceful place .
 Putin’s strategy has been to use this crisis to consolidate his own hold at home through greater oppression of civil society and independent media even as he fuels nationalist fervor .
 He has created an environment of fear and intimidation fostering the circumstances that led to the assassination of Boris Nemtsov . He has been accused of creating a 'fear and intimidation'
 Putin is also seeking to dominate his neighbors, to drain them of resources to fuel his kleptocracy . Putin wants to restore a sense of Russia’s greatness in the only way a bully knows .
 He aims to prevent his neighbors from joining either NATO or the EU . He wants to prevent them from joining the EU or NATO when possible .
 Putin has sought to divide Europe, undermining the resolve for sustained sanctions . Putin knows that the best check on his power is a united transatlantic community, he says .
 A Russian move against an ally, such as a Baltic State, cannot be ruled out . A Baltic State is a Russian state .
 Putin has demonstrated time and again that if he senses an opportunity to act he will . Putin is convinced that the West lacks the will or the ability to take decisive action .
 Putin's objectives expand with success and contract with failure. We have seen repeatedly that Putin’s objectives expansion with success . Putin's objective is to succeed with success.
 There is a tendency to argue that the Europeans should take the lead on Ukraine . There is also a tendency, however, to say that the European Union should lead the country .
After all, we have our hands full with ISIS and other global responsibilities . After all, there are many more responsibilities than ISIS, including ISIS .
 The Ukraine crisis is a Russia crisis, and Russia is too big, too strong, and too scary for Europe to resolve this without us . But the Ukraine crisis has been a Russia Crisis, and Europe is too scared to resolve it without us.
Without U.S. leadership, Europe may feel forced to accommodate a revanchist Russia, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Europe may have to accommodate Russia, and we have seen this is a dangerous formula .
 The U.S. has the ability to rally its allies and international partners around a comprehensive strategy that not only deters Putin’s aggression, but avoids an unstable gray zone in Europe East .
 We should enacting sectorial sanctions and targeting Gazprom and Putin directly. We should more decisively increase the cost to Russia, says Peter Bergen .
 The most effective response is Ukraine succeeding and becoming a modern European state . Yet Western assistance to date is modest, says the author .
 The U.S. is uniquely positioned to assist Ukraine to defend itself and to raise the cost of further Russian military action against Ukraine . The United States is positioned to help Ukraine defend itself.
 Putin has lied to his own people about Russian forces fighting in Ukraine . Putin, after all, has lied about the situation in Ukraine, he says .
 Putin says we will either not provide or greatly constrain our military and intelligence assistance . But by reassuring Putin, we signal to the Kremlin what Russia can get away with .
 The U.S. decision could unlock lethal military assistance from many of our allies . Such a decision would unlock lethalMilitary assistance from our allies.
 The United States Congress could also endorse a more substantial military presence along NATO’s eastern flank . Congress could call for a halt to any further United States force withdrawals from Europe .
 Such a package could be designed to leverage U.S. commitment to European security to secure greater European commitments to defense investment .
 We should respond to aggression in Europe's East by consolidating Europe’s South. We should also consolidate Europe's South, according to experts .
 This would mean inviting Montenegro to join NATO and intensifying efforts to build U.S. strategic partnerships with Serbia and Cyprus . This would be the first time Montenegro has joined NATO .
 We should harness America’s energy prowess to increase global supply . We should support European efforts to create a European energy union that includes Ukraine .
 Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia should be explicit about our intention to negotiate a transatlantic trade and investment partnership that is open to Ukraine and Moldova .
 NATO and Russia remain trapped in an insecure gray zone, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "We will face continued challenges and conflict"
 President Putin poses a direct threat to American interests and values, according to the chairman of the committee . President Putin is a member of the House of Representatives .
 His war in Ukraine and his effort to sow division among our allies are aimed at tearing up the post-cold-war order and undermining U.S. credibility and influence .
 Putin may consolidate his autocratic grip at home and subjugate 75 million people in Europe’s East to a fate determined in Moscow .
 Putin may be tempted to challenge a NATO ally directly, hoping to deal a decisive blow to the alliance . At worst, an emboldened Putin may have been tempted to take action .
 The U.S. can take the lead in galvanizing the transatlantic community behind a comprehensive strategy, says John Sutter . Sutter: The United States can help ensure that a well-functioning and well-armed European Ukraine emerges from this crisis .
 Only the United States can galvanize Europe and the international community around an effective strategy to deter Putin for the long term . Only the U.S. can galvanized Europe and international community.
 Any strategy should urgently and decisively back Ukraine as well as other vulnerable states with significant economic and military assistance in the short term . Keep the door open to the European Union or NATO for Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova .
 We should neither abandon the Russian people nor the vision that a democratic Russia one day can find its peaceful place within a Europe whole and free. We should not abandon the Russia people or abandon its people, says the author .
As confrontation replaced cooperation with the West as a source of legitimacy for the Kremlin, Russia laid the groundwork for what we are witnessing today . Russia meticulously laid groundwork for today's events .
 Putin articulated the ‘compatriots policy’ in which Russia claimed the right to defend the interests of Russian speakers outside its borders . It began distributing passports to strengthen its claims .
 His creeping annexation of Georgia’s breakaway regions prompted the Russian-Georgian War, consolidating his occupations . Georgia's annexation of its breakaway areas prompted the war .
 Russia both developed contingency plans and exercised seizing its neighbors’ territory . Russia and Russia both develop contingency plans.
 Putin increasingly began wrapping all of his actions in a pseudo-ideology of Orthodox chauvinism .
 He countered EU outreach with his own Eurasian Economic Union premised on coercion rather than attraction . He countered the EU outreach.
 Putin's intimidation tactics led Armenia first to abandon its EU association bid . Former Ukrainian President Yanukovych’s about-face led Armenia to abandon the bid .
 Russia tried and failed to use economic coercion and energy threats to sway Moldova, Moldova . Russia tried to try and fail to use the threat of economic coercion .
 Putin first probed with little green men to determine his freedom of maneuver in Crimea . In the absence of resistance, Putin brazenly seized the territory .
 The Kremlin stoked the idea of a ‘Russian Spring’ across southern and eastern Ukraine, creating the myth of Novorossiya . The Kremlin then stoked the notion of a 'Russian Spring' using “political tourists’ from Russia .
 Russia introduced Special Forces and intelligence operatives in Slavyansk . It used the town as a base from which to seek to destabilize eastern Ukraine .
 Once Ukrainian forces gained their footing, Russia opted for full-scale invasion . Once Ukraine forces gained its footing, Russian forces gained control of Ukraine .
 Today, the so-called separatists command greater quantities of the most advanced heavy weaponry than most European NATO nations . The separatists are former miners and farmers according to Putin .
 Moscow attempted to sway Moldova’s recent elections with massive support for new pro-Kremlin parties . Moscow is poised to destabilize the nation, and is courting separatists .
 Despite Georgia's efforts to normalize relations with Moscow, Russia has continued its creeping annexation of Georgia’s breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Georgia has been trying to Normalize relations.
 Putin has used this crisis to consolidate his own hold on at home, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen says he has used it to further repression of civil society and independent media as he fuels a nationalist fervor .
 He has created an environment of fear and intimidation, at a minimum fostering the circumstances that led to the assassination of Boris Nemtsov . He has been accused of creating a 'fear and intimidation'
 The protests led by Nemtsov, much like the Maidan in Ukraine, pose a potentially existential threat to Putin’s regime .
 Putin is also seeking to dominate his neighbors, to drain them of resources to fuel his kleptocracy . Putin is trying to restore a sense of Russia’s greatness in the only way a bully knows .
He aims to prevent any of his neighbors from joining either NATO or the EU . He aims to achieve this through coercion and by dismemberment and occupation .
 Ultimately, Putin knows that the best check on his power is a united transatlantic community .
 He has sought to divide Europe, undermining the resolve for sustained sanctions, he has said . He has also sought to undermine the resolve of the European Union .
 Putin is to call into question the credibility of NATO's Article 5 mutual defense commitment, as doing so would effectively end both NATO and America's role as a great European power .
 Putin has demonstrated time and again that if he senses an opportunity to act, he will . He will be convinced that the West lacks the will or ability to take decisive action .
 Putin will not stop and this crisis will not end until he encounters serious pushback, says Putin . Putin will continue to push back until he is pushed back, he says .
 Putin's objectives expand with success and contract with failure, or even the increased chance of failure . We have seen repeatedly that Putin’s objectives expand.
 There’s a tendency to argue that the Europeans should take the lead on Ukraine . But there's a tendency, however, in Washington to argue the Europeans are taking the lead .
 U.S. can galvanize Europe and other members of the international community around a tough-minded strategy to deter Putin . This approach fails to understand that only the United States can galvanized Europe and others around a comprehensive strategy to Deter Putin .
 Russia is too big, too strong, and too scary for Europe to resolve this without us, says CNN . And Russia is 'too big' and 'too scary' for Europe.
 Putin knows Chancellor Merkel cannot enforce European diplomacy . Germany may be a political and economic powerhouse, but Putin knows Merkel can't enforce diplomacy .
 The Chancellor has done a remarkable job in holding Europe 20 together in this crisis . No European state can afford to get into a confrontation with Russia, he says .
 Without U.S. leadership in this crisis, Putin might succeed in creating a new dividing line in Europe . Without United States leadership, Putin may succeed in Creating a new divide in Europe, says CNN's John Sutter .
 As he creates facts on the ground, he shifts the goalposts of what becomes an acceptable outcome in European diplomacy focused on ending violence .
 Europe may feel forced to accommodate a revanchist Russia rather than check its power . Europe may have to accommodate the revanchists instead of checking its power.
Only U.S. leadership in this crisis provides the necessary condition to ensure the sustained resolve of our allies . Most of the allies are bearing a far greater economic cost to their own economies .
 Our strategy is basically to raise the costs on Russia by imposing sanctions, protect NATO, and count on the long-term fundamentals, which are on our side and are working against Russia .
 Putin likely sees the immediate future as his best window of opportunity . Putin sees his future as the future as a best window for opportunity .
 Russia may be tempted to push further into NATO territory in the short term . Russia may lose its sovereignty and Russia may push further in NATO territory .
 The United States has the ability to rally its allies and international partners around a comprehensive strategy that not only deters Putin's aggression, but also avoids an unstable grey zone in Europe’s east . The U.S. has the capability to rally allies and partners around an comprehensive strategy
 We should begin by articulating our vision — what we want to achieve. To do so, we should start by articulation our vision, which we want.
 I contend that should be a Europe whole, free, and at peace that embraces democratic nations in Europe’s east . Russia can find its peaceful place in Europe, I contend .
We should not treat Putin as normal interlocutors. We should more decisively increase the costs to Russia . We should also expand the economic sanctions to include Putin and his inner circle, including Gazprom .
 The most effective response is Ukraine succeeding in becoming a modern European state . Ukraine is the most successful state in the world .
 We very well may see a shift from the military battlefields of the Donbas to the financial markets .
 Putin after all is out to win all of Ukraine, not just consolidate his hold on a slice of territory in the east . Putin has been in Ukraine for more than a decade .
 There is no governmentwide concerted effort to assist Ukraine comparable to the White House-led effort to implement the reset with Russia .
 The amounts of assistance under consideration are too small to serve as the catalyst for reform in a nation of over 50 million people . The amounts under consideration is too small.
 We are far more generous helping Jordan weather the Syria crisis as we plan to provide $1 billion in assistance to a nation of over 6 million .
 We provided $1 billion to 4. million Georgians after Russia’s invasion of Russia .
 The IMF and EU can and will contribute more to Ukraine, the U.S. sets the tone . For now, the tone is ambivalent .
 The U.S. is uniquely positioned to assist Ukraine to defend itself and to raise the costs of further Russian military action against Ukraine . The United States is positioned to help Ukraine defend itself.
 No one wants Ukraine to suffer a full-scale war with Russia . There is no military solution in Ukraine and no one wants a military solution . No military solution is possible in Ukraine .
 Russia's current posture is escalatory as it gives Russia the confidence it needs to believe it can achieve particular means through military options at acceptable costs . Russia needs to be confident that its military options are acceptable .
 Any assistance package should also include substantial military assistance, including lethal military assistance such as antiarmor missiles, as well as intelligence support .
 U.S. decision could unlock lethal military assistance from Canada and several other European and Asian allies . Such a United States decision could unlocked lethal military help from Canada .
We should also support largescale training in civil resistance in Ukraine as part of creating a deterrent state . We should also be supporting largescales training.
 European Reassurance Initiative to underscore focus on well-armed, well-trained deterrent states . Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia and Georgia could be one vehicle for such assistance .
 NATO should also move away from “reassurance,’ which focuses on the insecurities of our allies, and embrace “deterrence,” which underscores the threat . The alliance should also embrace ‘deterrences, which underscores
 Congress could endorse a more substantial U.S. and NATO military presence along NATO’s Eastern flank until such time as Putin demonstrates that Russia is no longer a threat or potential threat to our allies . Call for a halt 21 to any further United States force withdrawals from Europe .
 Such a package could be designed to leverage such U.S. commitments to European security to secure greater European commitments to defense investment .
 Russia's aggressive new posture has translated into an intense diplomatic effort to buttress Russian influence elsewhere, especially in southeast Europe . Russia’s aggressive new stance has translated to an intense effort to curb Russian influence .
 Montenegro would be invited to join NATO, undertaking a renewed push to resolve the Macedonia name impasse . U.S. efforts to build strategic partnerships with Serbia and Cyprus would also be intensified .
 A comprehensive transatlantic strategy to deter Putin should expand the playing field to areas of strength for us — energy and trade . A comprehensive Transatlantic strategy should also be considered to deter the Russian leader .
 We should harness America’s energy prowess to increase global supply, while supporting European efforts to create a European energy union that includes Ukraine and Moldova from that start .
 The U.S. must work much more closely with its allies on how to mitigate Russian efforts to sow dissension within the alliance .
 Such efforts begin with more transparency and stronger financial disclosure laws . Such efforts are needed to expose potential Russian manipulation of institutions, media, or political parties .
 Western leaders must also assume responsibility for countering the Russian propaganda war by being willing to speak publicly and clearly about Russia’s actions .
 Putin poses to our interests or challenge the misperceptions that surround this conflict . Putin is unlikely to formulate an effective, sustainable strategy sufficient to deter him for the long term . The strategy is pursued not with confrontational rhetoric, but with resolve and determination .
 NATO and Russia remain trapped in an insecure grey zone, says former KGB veterans . As long as either KGB veterans retain their grip on the Kremlin, we will face continued challenges and conflict, he says .
 The Russian people, as we saw on the streets of Moscow Sunday, will some day have a say about their leaders .
 The U.S. and its allies, along with Ukrainians, Moldovans, and Georgians, have a say about the latter . But the United States, its allies — along with Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia — have a says about the other .
 Mr Pifer is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institute . He was a former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine from 1998 to 2000 .
 He is a retired Foreign Service officer with over 25 years at the State Department . He is focused on United States relations with the former Soviet Union and Europe .
 Pifer is director of the ARMS CONTROL and NONPROLIFERATION INITIATIVE . Pifer has been in Washington, DC, since 2007 .
 Senator Shaheen, Senator Gardner, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on Russia’s aggression against Ukraine .
With your permission I will submit a written statement for the record and summarize it now . With your permission, I will send it to CNN.com .
 Ukrainian political dispute became a conflict between Russia and Ukraine in early 2014 . The conflict began as an internal political dispute between the two countries .
 Moscow has used military force to seize Crimea, supported armed separatists, and sent regular Russian Army units into Eastern Ukraine . Moscow has also sent regular military units into eastern Ukraine .
 A second cease-fire agreement failed in September . Minsk II was agreed to in February . A second agreement was agreed in February.
 Russia’s aggression has been a mix of geopolitical and domestic political considerations . The Maidan demonstrations in Ukraine could provide a model that the Russian people might emulate .
 The Kremlin's goal appears to be to destabilize the Ukrainian Government and make it harder for Kiev to address its urgent economic reform agenda and draw closer to the EU .
 The sanctions have not yet achieved their political goal, to effect a change in the Kremlin’s policy toward Ukraine . The sanctions are having a major impact on the Russian economy .
 The U.S. and Europe face a broader Russia problem. Beyond Ukraine, the United States and Europe are facing a broader problem .
 Moscow has operated its military forces in a provocative manner . Moscow asserts a right to protect ethnic Russians and Russian speakers wherever they are located and whatever their citizenship .
 The U.S. and the West should pursue a multipronged strategy to deal with Russia's violations of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . Russia's generally more confrontational approach is needed, says Peter Bergen .
 NATO should bolster its ability to deter Russian threats to the alliance’s members, particularly in the Baltic region . First, NATO should strengthen its ability.
 This entails enhancing NATO conventional force capabilities, including capabilities to deal with the hybrid war techniques that Russia has used in Ukraine . This includes capabilities that Russia uses in Ukraine.
 The West should support Ukraine, including through provision of substantial financial assistance if Kiev proceeds with serious economic reforms . Second, the West should also support Ukraine through financial assistance .
 If the Minsk II cease-fire by some chance holds and other terms of the agreement are implemented, it will hardly represent a success for Western policy . If the Ukrainian economy collapses, that will not be a success.
 Third, the West should maintain sanctions on Russia until Moscow demonstrates a full commitment to a negotiated settlement in eastern Ukraine, says Peter Bergen . Bergen says the West must take demonstrable measures to implement that settlement .
 The U.S. and European Union should rapidly move to impose additional sanctions on Russia . Should Russia not do so, or should separatists and Russian forces resume military operations, the United States and EU should move to imposing additional sanctions .
 It is important to make clear to Russia that its egregious behavior will have significant costs . The Kremlin does not come to believe it can pursue hybrid warfare elsewhere at a tolerable price .
 Fourth, U.S. should make preparations to provide increased military assistance to Ukraine . The United States should provide defensive arms, particularly light antiarmor weapons .
 Provision of that assistance should proceed if the separatists or Russians violate the cease-fire, or if Moscow fails to implement the full terms of the Minsk 11 agreement .
 The assistance would fill gaps in the Ukrainian Army’s ability to defend Ukraine against attack .
 The rationale is to enable the Ukrainian Army to impose costs on the Russian military, to deter Moscow from further fighting, and to encourage it to pursue a peaceful settlement .
 The Russian Army would require more overt involvement by the Russian Army in eastern Ukraine . It would need more overt participation by the Army .
 The Kremlin has sought to hide the fact that Russian soldiers are fighting and dying in Ukraine . That would be more visible internationally, likely triggering additional sanctions, and to Russian public .
 Others worry that providing arms would split the U.S. -European unity .
 Chancellor Merkel did not give President a red light or threaten a breakdown in transatlantic solidarity . Merkel says Germany will not provide arms during her visit in Washington on February 9 .
 U.S. would likely provide Ukraine defensive weapons once the United States began to do so . Other allies would likely also provide Ukraine defense weapons .
 The U.S. should leave the door open for Russia to change course and help settle the conflict, says the Fifth . Expectations of such a change in Moscow’s policy should be and are modest at best .
 Ukraine has correctly deferred the issue of Crimea now, the West should continue to not recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of the peninsula . The West should not continue to recognize Russia's illegal annexation.
 Russia’s actions on Ukraine and its more confrontational approach represent a serious challenge to the U.S., Europe, and the West .
 Dealing with the Russian challenge requires a multipronged strategy based on firmness, patience, and solidarity with U.S. allies and friends in Europe .
 The West should be fully able to meet that challenge, says David Frum . But given the large differences in economic, military, and soft power between the West and Russia, the West should face that challenge .
Steven Pifer is the chairman of the subcommittee . He will testify on Russia's aggression against Ukraine and the U.S. policy response .
 Ukraine-Russia crisis began in early 2014. What began as an internal Ukrainian political dispute became a Ukraine-Russian crisis in 2014 .
 Moscow has used military force to seize Crimea, supported armed separatists and ultimately sent regular Russian army units into eastern Ukraine . Since then, Moscow has been using military force.
 A cease-fire agreement was reached in Minsk last September, but the separatists and Russians failed to implement its terms . The cease-fires were reached last September .
 The Minsk II cease-fire agreed on February 12 may now be taking effect but seems fragile at best . The cease- fire agreed on January 12 is taking effect .
 driving Russia’s aggression has been a mix of geopolitical and domestic political considerations . Driving Russia's aggression has also been aMix of geopolitical, domestic and geopolitical considerations .
 The Rremlin’s goal over the past year appears to have been to destabilize and distract the Ukrainian Government, in order to keep that government from addressing its pressing economic, financial, and other challenges .
 Moscow has operated its military forces in a more provocative manner near NATO members . Moscow has asserted a right to “protect” ethnic Russians and Russian speakers wherever they are located and whatever their citizenship .
 The U.S. and the West should pursue a multipronged strategy to deal with Russia’s violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . Russia's generally more confrontational approach is needed, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia has demonstrated hybrid warfare techniques in Ukraine . This means enhancing NATO conventional force capabilities there, including capabilities to deal with hybrid warfare . This also means enhancing conventional force capability .
 The West should support Ukraine, including through provision of financial assistance if Kiev proceeds with a serious reform agenda . Second, the West should also support Ukraine through financial assistance, says David Cameron .
 Avoiding a financial collapse of Ukraine will require that the European Union and U.S. supplement the International Monetary Fund’s extended fund facility program .
 The West should maintain economic and other sanctions on Russia until Moscow demonstrates a full commitment to a negotiated settlement in eastern Ukraine . Third, the West should keep economic and others sanctions on Russian until Moscow takes demonstrable and substantive measures to implement that settlement .
 U.S. and European Union should impose additional sanctions on Russia . Russia should not do so, or should separatist and Russian forces resume military operations .
 Fourth, U.S. should make preparations to provide increased military assistance to Ukraine, including defensive weapons .
 Provision of that assistance should proceed if the separatists or Russians violate the cease-fire, or if Moscow fails to implement the terms of the Minsk II agreement .
 Fifth, the West should leave the door open for Russia to change course and help end the conflict in eastern Ukraine . Expectations of such a change in Moscow’s course are modest at best .
 Ukraine has correctly deferred the issue of Crimea for now . The West should continue to not recognize Russia’s illegal annexation of the peninsula .
 U.S. and European Union should maintain some sanctions, including measures specifically targeted at Crimea, until the peninsula's status is resolved to Kiev’s satisfaction . If Russian actions regarding eastern Ukraine merit sanctions relief, the United States and the European Union still should maintain sanctions.
 Russia and other independent states that emerged from the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 agreed to respect the state borders as they existed at the time .
 The Kremlin has supported separatist efforts in Transnistria, a breakaway part of Moldova, and South Ossetia and Abkhazia . Russia recognized Georgia as independent states following the August 2008 Georgia-Russia conflict .
 Moscow has again violated the sovereignty and territorial integrity of another state, this time, Ukraine . Moscow has been accused of violating the sovereignty of Ukraine .
 Ukraine went through a wrenching internal political crisis from November 2013 to the end of February 2014, triggered by then-President Yanukovych’s surprise decision not to sign an association agreement with the European Union .
 Opposition leaders could not have persuaded demonstrators to accept the agreement .
 Mr Yanukovych abandoned his post and disappeared, later turning up in Russia .
 Ukraine-Russia conflict began in February 2014, when soldiers, in Russian combat fatigues, seized Crimea .
 Just weeks later, he publicly admitted that they were and awarded commendations to their commanders . He later admitted that he was and awarded the commendations .
In April, armed separatists began to seize buildings in Donetsk and Luhansk in eastern Ukraine . In April, they began seizing buildings.
 The self-proclaimed Prime Minister and Defense Minister of the so-called “Donetsk People's Republic’s Republic” came from Russia . For example, last April, he had apartments in Moscow .
 Further evidence that outsiders played a major role in the early days was the seizure of the opera house in Kharkiv .
 Russia provided the separatists with heavy arms, such as tanks, artillery, and surface-toair missile systems . Ukrainian forces conducted a counteroffensive in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 These apparently included the Buk surface-to-air missile that tragically shot down Malaysia Air flight 17 in July .
 Regular units of the Russia Army invaded Ukraine on August 23 . They attacked Ukrainian units in the Donbas .
 When a cease-fire agreement was worked out in Minsk on September 5, Ukrainian losses reportedly included 50 to 70 percent of the armor the Ukrainian Army had deployed in Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 The separatists and Russians did not implement key elements, such as the requirements for withdrawal of foreign forces and military equipment, or for securing the Ukraine-Russia border under observation .
 German Chancellor Merkel and French President Hollande met with Ukrainian President Poroshenko and Russian President Putin in Minsk .
 A new agreement provides for a cease-fire, withdrawal of heavy weapons away from the line of contact . A series of steps to regulate the political and economic status of eastern Ukraine .
 The terms of Minsk II are substantially worse for Kiev than the terms of the unfulfilled September 2014 agreement . The terms are significantly worse for Ukraine than the September 2014 deal .
 The Minsk II agreement will require good faith and flexibility on all sides that has not been shown previously during this conflict . Implementing the Minsk agreement will need good faith, flexibility and flexibility .
 Mr Poroshenko agreed to Minsk II in the face of a deteriorating military situation and an urgent need for breathing space . He could focus attention on a looming financial crisis and a very necessary economic reform agenda .
 Ukraine’s supporters have little choice but to support the agreement and its implementation, however difficult its terms may appear .
 separatist and Russian forces did not initially observe the cease-fire, which was supposed to begin on February 14 . The cease-fires were supposed to start at midnight on February 13 .
Ukrainian Army units withdrew from Debaltseve salient occupied by Ukrainian Army units on February 18 . They attacked the Debalteve salient occupy by Ukrainian troops .
 Ukrainians reported ominous signs of preparations for a separatist/Russian attack on the port city of Mariupol in southern Donetsk province . The Ukrainians then reported ominous sign of preparations.
 shelling has been markedly quieter than it was during the first week of the cease-fire . Some shelling continues, but the line of contact is markedly quieter .
 The sides have pulled some heavy weapons back from the line of contact . The two sides have not been able to contact each other again .
 The cease-fire, however, remains fragile and shaky, and Kiev remains concerned about possible preparations for an assault on Mariupol . Kiev remains worried about the possibility of a possible assault on the city .
 RUSSIAN MOTIVES Russia today is passing through a difficult and dark phase, as evidenced by the tragic February 27 murder of opposition leader Boris Nemtsov .
 Russia’s goal with regard to Ukraine over the past year has been to destabilize and distract Mr Poroshenko and his government . Russia's goal is to destabilise and distract his government, says the Russian president .
 Kiev's economic, financial, financial and reform agenda is difficult to address . Kiev's program with the International Monetary Fund is mandated by the IMF . That makes it far more difficult for Kiev to address the pressing economic and financial issues .
 Kiev signed an association agreement with the European Union last year . It also makes it more difficult for Kiev to pursue implementation of the agreement .
 Moscow seems to calculate that a new ‘frozen conflict’ in eastern Ukraine provides the mechanism to put pressure on Kiev . The conflict may be a “not so frozen conflict” in the east of Ukraine .
 This policy appears to be driven by a mix of geopolitical and domestic political considerations . This policy is driven by geopolitical and political considerations, says Peter Bergen .
 Mr Putin’s concept of Russia as a great power includes a sphere of influence in the post-Soviet space .
 He does not seek to recreate the Soviet Union; the Russian economy does not wish to subsidize those of other states . He doesn't want to recreate Soviet Union .
 Moscow does want its neighbors to take account of and defer to its concerns, particularly as regards relationships with Western institutions such as NATO and European Union .
 Mr Putin very much wanted Ukraine to join the Russian-led Eurasian Union, along with Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Armenia . He also wanted Armenia, Armenia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan to join.
 Kiev made clear its preference for the European Union under Yanukovych . Even under Mr Yanukovych, Kiev said it would prefer the EU .
 If Moscow cannot have Ukraine in the Eurasian Union, it is working to hinder Ukraine’s effort to draw closer to Europe . Ukraine is trying to draw close to Europe.
 The two countries have long historical and cultural ties, and pulling Crimea and Ukraine back toward Russia plays well with Mr Putin's conservative political base .
 Polls show that most Russians do not want the Russian Army fighting in Ukraine . The Kremlin has been trying to hide that fact from the Russian people for 8 months .
 The Maidan demonstrations that brought down Mr Yanukovych might inspire Russians to mount civil protests of their own .
 A weak Ukrainian Government incapable of meeting the challenges before it ensures that the Maidan model will have little attraction for the Russian populace .
 Mr Putin wants a failed Ukrainian state. This consideration could mean that he wants afailed Ukrainian state .
 The United States and Europe today face a broader Russia problem . The U.S. and Europe face a bigger problem than Ukraine .
 NATO observed a significant increase in provocative behavior by Russian military forces . The Ukraine-Russia crisis intensified from March 2014 onward, NATO observed .
 NATO military authorities reported a marked jump in the number of cases of Russian bombers conducting flights near the air space of NATO member states .
 NATO and Russian military forces are increasingly operating in close proximity at a time of significant West-Russia tensions . Such behavior is of concern, as NATO and Russia are increasingly working close proximity .
 That raises the prospect of accidents, miscalculation, or misunderstanding, or misunderstandings .
Air traffic controllers in Scandinavia have reported two instances in which Russian intelligence-gathering aircraft recklessly switched off their radar transponders when operating near commercial air lanes .
 Moscow has for some years asserted a right to “protect’s ethnic Russians or Russian speakers wherever they are located and whatever their citizenship .
 He made the claim even though there was no evidence of any threat to ethnic Russians on the peninsula . He made that claim despite no evidence that any threat was made to ethnic Russian on peninsula .
 One must question whether the Kremlin might seek to apply this self-proclaimed right elsewhere . One must ask if the Kremlin is seeking to apply it elsewhere .
 Kazakhstan in Central Asia and Estonia and Latvia in the Baltic region have populations that are about one quarter ethnic Russian . Kazakhstan and Estonia have populations of about onequarter ethnic Russian.
 The United States has an obligation to defend under Article 5 of the 1949 Washington Treaty . The two states are members of NATO, to whom the U.S. has a duty to defend .
 There may not be a significant likelihood of a Russian conventional attack on the Baltics or even of the appearance of “little green men’s in Estonia or Latvia .
 NATO assumes that the probability of those contingencies is not zero and take appropriate measures . But, given recent events and the Kremlin’s hostile rhetoric, it would be prudent for NATO to assume that it is notzero .
 Mr Putin has displayed a deep antipathy toward NATO, for instance, in his March 18, 2014, speech on Crimea’s annexation .
 4050 ‘little green men’ seized a government building in Estonia, citing ethnic Russian grievances, while Moscow denied any connection .
 Estonia asked NATO to treat that as an Article 5 contingency, and the alliance debated the issue for a week or two . It would be a major blow to confidence within NATO and a major victory for Mr Putin, he says .
 NATO is in NATO's interest to minimize the odds that the Kremlin might be tempted to try such a scenario .
 The U.S. should respond to Russia’s belligerence against Ukraine for three reasons, says CNN's John Sutter .
 First, over the past 24 years, Ukraine has been a responsive partner when asked by the U.S. First, the country has been responsive when asked about Ukraine's relationship with United States .
 In the early 1990s, Ukraine rid itself of the world's third-largest nuclear arsenal . Some 1,900 strategic nuclear warheads targeted or targetable on the American homeland .
 By 1996, Ukraine had transferred all the warheads to Russia for elimination . The warheads had been transferred from Ukraine to Russia .
By 2001, it had eliminated the missile silos, intercontinental ballistic missiles and heavy bombers on its territory . By 2001, the U.S. had eliminated silos and intercontinental Ballistic missiles .
 In 2003, Ukraine contributed three battalions to the Iraq stabilization force . The U.S. asked Ukraine to contribute to the force .
 Ukrainian contingent was the fourth-largest in Iraq after the forces deployed by the United States, Britain, and Poland . For a period, the Ukrainian contingent is the fourth largest in Iraq .
 Kiev's decision to give up nuclear weapons was a key element of the arrangement that led to Kiev’s decision . The decision was made by Kiev's president, Vladimir Putin .
 The United States should respond by supporting Ukraine and taking steps against Russia . The U.S. should support Ukraine and take steps against the Russia, the United States says .
 The West should push back against the Kremlin's hybrid warfare against Ukraine . The Kremlin has conducted a successful tactic that could be applied at tolerable cost .
 Russia's violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity will require a multipronged Western strategy . Dealing with Russia”s violation of its sovereignty and sovereignty and its generally more confrontational approach toward the West will require the West to be more confront
 The strategy should include measures to strengthen NATO, support Ukraine, and penalize Russia with the objective of getting the Kremlin to pursue and implement a negotiated settlement . That strategy should also include measures that strengthen NATO and support Ukraine .
 NATO should strengthen its ability to deter Russian threats to the alliance’s members, particularly by bolstering its defenses in the Baltic region and Central Europe .
 This entails prudent steps to enhance NATO conventional force capabilities . This includes capabilities to deal with Russian hybrid warfare techniques . This entails a number of steps to improve NATO conventional forces .
 The alliance in 1997 said there would be no “additional permanent stationing of substantial combat forces’ on the territory of new NATO members . In 1997, the alliance said that there would not be ‘additional stationing’ of combat forces .
 The alliance as a whole has not agreed to a change. Some allies have called for renouncing that policy in the aftermath of Russia’s seizure of Crimea .
 NATO has begun strengthening its military capabilities in the Baltic States and Central Europe . NATO has been strengthening its capabilities in Baltic states and Central European countries .
 Other allies have increased the size and frequency of their ground force exercises in the region .
 The alliance’s air presence for the Baltic air-policing mission has been increased substantially since last March . The alliance's air presence has increased substantially.
 NATO now deploys on average at least three times the number of aircraft in the Baltics as it did previously .
 The U.S. and NATO warships make far more entries into the Black Sea than before .
First, they aim to assure allies in the Baltic region and Central Europe of the firm alliance commitment to their defense . First, they want to assure them of their commitment to the alliance .
 NATO aims to make clear to Moscow that NATO will defend the territory of all allies . Second, they aim to make it clear that they will defend all allies' territory .
 NATO leaders agreed to take additional measures last September . Meeting in Wales last September, NATO leaders agree to take more measures .
5,000 troops could be deployed anywhere within the alliance on 48 hours notice . They decided to create a response force with the capability to deploy 5,000 soldiers . They will be able to deploy anywhere in the alliance.
 NATO Defense Ministers announced in February that headquarters elements would be established in the Baltic States, Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria . In February, NATO defense ministers announced that headquarters would be set up in the Baltics .
 This step plus measures to enhance the infrastructure to support incoming troops and equipment will strengthen those countries’ ability to receive reinforcements in a crisis . This step will strengthen the ability to get reinforcements in the crisis .
 Congress should support funds for these and other measures to strengthen the U.S. and NATO conventional force presence in the Baltic/Central European region . Congress should also support funds.
 The United States should consider increasing the size of its ground force presence in the region . The U.S. should also seek the commitment of units from European allies to deploy on a “persistent’ basis .
 NAtO should develop and exercise capabilities to deal rapidly with a “little green men’s scenario on allied territory. N atO should be able to deal quickly with the ‘little green man’ scenario.
 In overall conventional forces, the U.S. and NATO continue to enjoy qualitative and quantitative advantages over the Russian military .
 The Russian military is engaged in a major modernization and rearmament program . The military, however, is also engaged in an overhaul of the Russian military .
 NATO must make the investments needed to maintain its areas of advantage . NATO must also make the investment needed to keep the areas of advantages .
 The administration and Congress should urge allies to devote greater resources to the 28 territorial defense of the alliance . The alliance is based in 28 countries .
 Few allies currently meet NATO’s agreed standard of spending 2 percent of GDP on defense .
 The U.S. response should focus on strengthening conventional force capabilities . The United States response should be to strengthen conventional force.
 Some have suggested that the U.S. should deploy nuclear weapons on the territory of NATO members in Central Europe . NATO members have joined the alliance over the past 16 years .
 deploying nuclear weapons to new members in the Baltic States or Central Europe would make the weapons more vulnerable to a Russian preemptive attack .
 The Iskander ballistic missiles reportedly deployed in Russia’s Kaliningrad can carry conventional or nuclear weapons . For example, the Iskanders can carry a nuclear weapon .
 From Kaliningrad, Iskander missiles could cover and rapidly strike targets in two-thirds of Poland and virtually all of Lithuania and Latvia .
 U.S. nuclear assets are far less vulnerable at their current bases. United States nuclear weapons are far more vulnerable at current bases .
 Second, deploying nuclear weapons to the new members would violate NATO policy . Second, deploying nuclear weapons would violate the new member's policy .
 In 1997, the alliance stated that it had “no intention, no plan and no reason’ to deploy nuclear arms on the territory of new member states . The alliance said it had no plans to deploy the arms on new members states .
 NATO policy on no deployment of nuclear arms on the territory of new member states has not been changed . Some allies have sought to have NATO renounce or alter its policy .
 Third, placing U.S. nuclear weapons so close to Russia would be seen in Moscow as an extremely provocative act . It would be on par with the attempt by the Soviet Union in 1962 to place nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba .
 It does not make sense to respond to Russian actions with a deployment that would make U.S. nuclear weapons more vulnerable . The deployment would cause a major rift within NATO and provoke Russia .
 The U.S. and Europe should take substantial measures to support Ukraine with grants and low interest loans as it proceeds with difficult economic, rule of law and anticorruption reforms . The United States and Europe will support Ukraine.
 The International Monetary Fund has reached preliminary agreement with Ukraine on a 4-year extended fund facility that will provide $17. billion . The fund will provide a total of $17 billion to Ukraine .
 Ukraine could need an estimated $20-$25 billion more over the next 2 years in grants and low interest financing . Ukraine could be in need for $20-25 billion over 2 years, according to the government .
 Much of that will have to come from the European Union and U.S. Much of it will be from the EU and United States .
 EU officials and member states have shown no enthusiasm for providing assistance on that scale . EU officials, member states and members states have showed no enthusiasm.
 European Union may well do more, as it does not wish to have to deal with a large failed Ukrainian economy on its eastern border .
 The United States also should be ready to contribute more than the loan guarantees promised for this year . The U.S. should also be ready for more loan guarantees than this year.
 European Union and U.S. should provide financial assistance to Ukraine, says the EU . The EU and United States are serious about helping Ukraine, but they should provide assistance .
 The International Monetary Fund, European Union, and United States must, as a condition of their assistance, insist that Ukraine take necessary reform steps .
 The leadership in Kiev hopefully understands that, unless they put in place, the Ukrainian economy will remain mired in stagnation for years, if not decades . The leadership of Kiev should understand that, if they don't, the economy will continue to stagnate .
 The United States, European Union, and other Western countries have imposed increasingly severe sanctions on Russia . The sanctions are aimed at changing Moscow's policy on Ukraine .
 The sanctions began with visa bans and asset freezes on selected individuals . The sanctions begin with visa ban and asset freeze on selected people .
 sanctions targeting key Russian companies in finance, defense, and energy sectors . They include barring new financing or the export of Western technology . They expanded to major sanctions targeting 29 companies .
 Russian sanctions are having a significant impact on the Russian economy . The sanctions are multiplying by the effect of the fall in the price of oil, according to experts .
 Russia's capital flight from Russia totaled $150 billion in 2014, according to the Russian Central Bank . For example, capital flight in 2014 totaled $ 150 billion .
 Russian reserves fell from some $510 billion to $385 billion over the course of the year . The ruble nevertheless has lost half of its value against the dollar since last summer .
 The Russian economy is officially projected to contract by 3 percent in 2015, while some economists predict a much steeper contraction .
 Russian officials seek to cut most parts of the 2015 state budget by ten percent . Russian officials have responded by seeking to cut some of the budget by 10 percent .
 The sanctions have not yet achieved their political objective, which is to get Russia to make a genuine change in policy course regarding Ukraine . The sanctions, however, have yet to achieve their political objectives .
 If the cease-fire holds, that will be a positive step, but Moscow must also implement all of Minsk II’s terms . Moscow must use its significant influence with the separatists to achieve a durable settlement .
 U.S. and European Union should immediately apply new economic sanctions on Russia . Russia should not implement Minsk II, or should separatist or Russian forces resume military action .
 U.S. and EU officials should consult now so that they have a package of additional sanctions ready . The United States and EU should consult.
 Analysts question whether sanctions will prompt a different policy in Moscow . Some analysts question whether the sanctions will lead to a new policy .
 Putin will use the sanctions to blame the West for Russia’s economic woes and rally the Russian people to resist . They argue that he will use them to rally the Russians.
 If sanctions remain in place, Moscow’s financial reserves will drop precipitously, and the average Russian will see a decline in his or her purchasing power . If the sanctions remain, Moscow's financial reserves are expected to drop precipiteously .
 This could raise discontent among the Russian populace and affect Mr Putin’s approval ratings . This could affect his approval ratings, something he pays close attention .
 Putin almost certainly wishes to avoid exhausting Russia’s reserves .
 The West can impose a significant cost on Russia commensurate with the nature of Russia’s egregious actions in Ukraine .
 The West would have few penalties of any real consequence to levy. Absent sanctions, and having ruled out use of military force on Ukraine’s behalf, the West would not be able to levy .
 Mr Putin may be betting that Western resolve to maintain the sanctions will flag, or that he can win sanctions relief with cosmetic gestures .
 A key date will be July, when some of the major EU sanctions, imposed last July, come up for renewal for another year .
 Maintaining Western solidarity and persuading the Kremlin that the sanctions will remain in place, or possibly increase, could prove critical to affecting the Kremlin’s calculations .
 United States sanctions to date have been imposed by Executive order . Executive order allows the administration to increase or relax them, depending on Russian actions .
 A threat of congressionally mandated sanctions could have a useful effect on Moscow . The threat could have an impact on Moscow's economy .
Congressional sanctions could well prove counterproductive, but could well be counterproductive, according to experts .
 The Russian experience has been that Congress is slow to remove sanctions, even when they achieve the desired Russian policy change .
 Moscow met the requirements of the 1974 Jackson-Vanik amendment in the mid-1990s . Congress did not graduate Russia from the provisions of Jackson- vanik and grant Russia permanent normal trade relations status until more than 15 years later, in December 2012 .
 If Moscow believes that congressionally mandated sanctions will never be lifted, or if it believes that they will be lifted only years after Russia meets the sanctions’ requirements, those sanctions give the Kremlin no incentive to change its policy .
 The Ukrainian Army has had to face separatists equipped with large numbers of Russian heavy arms as well as regular Russian Army units .
 Ukrainian military has had some success, but is underfunded, undermanned and undertrained . It faces an opponent that has better weapons and superior intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance assets .
 The Ukrainian Army has significant gaps in capabilities that severely degrade its ability to defend Ukrainian territory against further attack by separatist and Russian forces .
 A number of us traveled to Brussels to meet NATO civilian and military leaders and to Ukraine . We met with senior government and military officials, both in Kiev and at the Ukrainian army’s field headquarters in Kramatorsk, in Donetsk province .
 The U.S. military assistance to Ukraine will increase to $1 billion per year for 3 years . The report advocates a significant increase in military assistance .
 That is serious money; it reflects a serious effort to support the Ukrainian Army . That isserious money, it reflects an effort to help the Ukrainian army .
 Most of the recommended assistance would go to nonlethal equipment . The report also recommends a change in the United States policy to allow provision of lethal defensive weapons .
 Report recommends providing counterbattery radars to pinpoint the origin of long-range artillery and rocket strikes . Ukrainians said 70 percent of their casualties were caused by long- range artillery, rocket strikes.
 The report proposes provision of unmanned aerial vehicles for surveillance and reconnaissance purposes, electronic countermeasures to jam enemy aerial vehicles, secure communications equipment, armored Humvees and medical support equipment . The report would also propose provision of unmanned aerial vehicles.
 The light antiarmor weapons in the Ukrainian Army’s inventory are more than 20 years old . A large number of them simply do not work, according to a report .
 The objective is not to give Ukraine the capability to defeat the Russian Army, it is to defeat them, says Ukraine .
 That is beyond what a U.S. military assistance effort could do. That's beyond what the United States could do .
 The goal is to give the Ukrainian military the capability to inflict greater costs on the Russian Army should the Russians resume or escalate the fighting . The goal instead is to encourage the Kremlin to work for a peaceful settlement .
 Several concerns have been expressed about the proposal to provide Ukraine with defensive arms . The proposal is being considered as a possible solution to Ukraine's problems .
 Ukrainians understand that risk and understand that they would bear the brunt of any escalation, yet they still request military assistance and defensive arms so that they can better defend their country . The Ukrainians know that they are at risk, but they still want military assistance .
 The Kremlin might choose to escalate, but that course carries risks for Moscow .
 Significant escalation would require more overt involvement by the Russian Army . The Russian Army would need to be more overt involved by the Army .
 That would likely trigger additional sanctions. That would be visible internationally and likely trigger more sanctions . The West has escalation dominance in the region .
 More overt escalation would be visible to the Russian public, from whom the Kremlin has done everything that it could to hide the fact that Russian soldiers are fighting and dying in Ukraine .
 Russia's troops would likely face the prospect of partisan warfare . Taking additional territory means occupying land that will likely be more hostile to Russia .
 The Kremlin has not been able to make an easy choice. Escalation thus would not necessarily be an easy decision for the Kremlin .
 Others worry providing Ukraine defensive weapons would put the U.S. on the path to a direct confrontation with Russia .
 The United States should not send combat troops to fight in Ukraine, nor should it provide advanced offensive weapons . The U.S. should not provide advanced weapons, according to the United States .
 It can build in significant firebreaks that would prevent a spiraling escalation . It can also build in major firebreaks. It can prevent a spiral of firebreaks .
 A U.S. decision to provide defensive arms will cause a rupture in trans-Atlantic solidarity toward Russia . Still others assert that a United States decision to give arms to Russia will cause rupture in solidarity .
 NATO told NATO that if the U.S. provided defensive arms, other allies might do so as well . Poland, Baltic States, Canada, and Britain may also do so, NATO says .
 Chancellor Merkel said Germany did not favor providing weapons but did not suggest that a U.S. decision to do so would cause a split with Europe .
 She did not give President Obama a green light on this question . She had every opportunity to give him a red light, but she did not .
 Our report and recommendations were issued before the Minsk II cease-fire agreement was concluded on February 12 .
 The President may have put off a decision regarding additional military assistance and defensive arms to see whether Ms. Ms. Obama would have made a decision .
 The cease-fire did not get off to a good 31 start but appears after February 25 to be taking better hold . The cease fire did not start to a bad 31 start .
 It would make sense for the administration and Congress to proceed with preparations for providing Ukraine greater military assistance and defensive arms .
Early preparations would facilitate earlier delivery of assistance to Ukraine . If cease-fire breaks down and major fighting resume, early preparations would help .
 U.S. preparations to provide assistance and defensive arms might even bolster the cease-fire . The prospect of fighting a more capable Ukrainian military could affect Moscow's calculation of the costs and benefits of resumed military action .
 A decision could always be taken later to suspend the actual delivery of defensive arms . If the cease-fire takes full hold, the separatists and Russians proceed in good faith to implement the other elements of the Minsk II agreement .
 The U.S. administration and other Western countries have talked of leaving Russia a “diplomatic off-ramp’ — a way out of the current crisis .
 Any settlement that provides for genuine peace and a degree of normalcy needs Moscow’s buy-in . Securing a settlement with Russian agreement is important, as any settlement with Russia needs Moscow's buy- in .
 Russia has many levers, including military and economic, to destabilize Ukraine . Russia has a long history of destabilizing the country .
It is not yet clear that the Kremlin is prepared to consent to such a settlement . Unfortunately, it is not clear that it is yet clear.
 Moscow’s assault on Ukraine has brought U.S. and WestRussian relations to their lowest point since the end of the cold war . Russia's assault has brought the United States and West Russian relations to a low point .
 Western policy toward Russia in the 1990s and early 2000s was based on an assumption that Moscow wanted to integrate into the West and was prepared to abide by a rules-based European security order .
 There remain issues on which U.S. and Russian interests converge, such as preventing Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon, supporting the Afghan Government .
 The downturn in relations, whose onset predates the Ukraine crisis, makes cooperation in other areas more difficult at present .
 The West should leave the door open for a better relationship with Moscow if the Kremlin changes the policies that have triggered and deepened the current crisis . The West's expectations of a change in Russian policy are modest at best, says David Cameron .
 Russia is ready to abide by rules that served European security well for almost four decades . The West should make clear that a restoration of a more positive general relationship is possible .
 Ukrainian Government has correctly focused its attention on resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine . The issue of Crimea should be addressed in the longer term.
 Kiev is trying to restore Crimea's status as part of Ukraine. That is a wise course, especially as it is difficult to see how Kiev can muster the leverage in the near term .
 Crimea is not now the priority issue, it is important that the U.S. and the West not forget or move to “normalize the question’s question . The United States and West should not forget and move to "normalize" the question.
Until such time as the status of the peninsula is resolved to Kiev’s satisfaction, the international community should sustain a policy of not recognizing Crimea's illegal incorporation into Russia .
 U.S. and European Union should maintain sanctions on Russia, pending a satisfactory settlement on Crimea’s status . If Russian actions regarding eastern Ukraine merit some sanctions relief, the United States and the European Union must maintain sanctions .
 sanctions would include sanctions that, among other things, prevent trade with, investment in and international air routes to Crimea . The sanctions would also include sanctions to stop trade with and investment in the region .
 Senator Shaheen: Russia’s actions in Ukraine and its more confrontational approach present a serious challenge to the United States, Europe, and the West .
 NATO aims to bolster NATO and support Ukraine while taking steps to constrain Moscow’s possibilities to threaten other parts of Europe . Dealing with that challenge requires a multipronged strategy that aims to support Ukraine .
 Getting this strategy right will require firmness, patience, and solidarity with U.S. allies and friends in Europe .
 Russia has 32 significant differences in economic, military, and soft power between the West and Russia . The West should be fully able to meet this challenge, says Russia's foreign minister .
 What happened in 2008 was that we were invaded by a full-blown Russian force, which involved more than 100,000 ground troops .
 President Sarkozy has mediation with Presidents Hollande and Merkel by Sarkozy . Sarkozy also had mediation with President Hollande, Merkel by Obama .
 Georgian Army withdrew its forces from the contested area, the invaded area, and Russia was supposed to withdraw.
 Russian after several days, Russian said the situation on the ground has changed . Instead, Russian says the situation has changed.
 They no longer would abide by the agreement and started to move toward the capital . The agreement was reached after a series of meetings with the government .
 The U.S. has moved the 6th Fleet first to the Georgian ports, and put planes in Romanian base . The airbase in Turkey is on high military alert, and basically starting to patrolling skies close to Georgia .
 The other day I was at the office of Senator Kirk, who told me that he was — back then I did not know this story. The other night I was in the office, who said he was .
 U.S. had to bring back Iraq, which was Iraq's first biggest contributor to operation contributors to Iraq and Afghanistan . The United States had to return to Iraq, based on its agreement, but at that moment it was Iraq .
 The agreement with President of the United States was that we could repatriate our troops . But the agreement we had had, the standby agreement with the President, was that the troops could be returned .
 Russia told the U.S. to remove the military cargo plane from the tarmac of Tbilisi International Airport . The plane was carrying military cargo .
 The United States refused to do that, and that was already a first signal . They were told they were going to bomb the Tbilisi International Airport, and they did not want to move American plane .
 American plane stayed on the tarmac, and that spared us at least that bombing . The plane was carrying passengers and passengers .
 Georgian skies were fully under control of Russian military jets, and they told me that they would not let through the United States plane . And second thing, they had to bring back Georgian brigades, and Georgian air force was under control .
 The Pentagon and Senator Kirk told me he called specifically the Russian Defense Minister and said we are coming anyway . And then the Pentagon told me that they were coming anyway, he said .
 The launch of military humanitarian operations was just a few miles away from our capital . It was the key moment when after the launch of the military humanitarian operation .
 Vladimir Putin’s clearly proclaimed goal to depose democratic elected Government of Georgia, just like they have, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Putin's goal is more or less to the post-government in Ukraine .
I believe there is no — they will try to depose government of Ukraine. And I have to say I believe there are no — there will be no depose the government .
 Georgia is not just Georgia, but Georgia's two regions . It is not their plan to just hold to those two regions like it was never planned to hold .
Georgians wanted to get rid of Georgian democracy because that was a dangerous precedent . They wanted to take control of the country's democracy .
 Ukraine's success would just be a very dangerous precedent for Russia . It would be like having Ukraine succeed, it would be a dangerous precedent .
 Americans protected West Berlin even from Stalin and Western allies, and they protected it through all the decades of the cold war .
 West Berlin was a showcase of what democracy looks like — should look like . And West Berlin is a showcase for what democracy is like .
 We did not need much of convincing. And that really convinced all of us, I mean, we didn't need much convincing . But that really convince all of them.
 The nations that revolt against the Communist system were convinced, overall, that they had to revolt against it . But they convinced overall, Overall, overall.
 Ukraine is much more protectable than West Berlin ever was, and even more protected than Georgia was, by the way . Georgia did not have that strategic depth .
 Mr Kasparov, we hear frequently that we are trying to offer off ramps to Vladimir Putin . We hear often that he is trying tooffer off ramps.
 He is very successful using them for his own purpose, but he has no interest in any settlement . Well, he is looking for any negotiation.
 I believe for long time that his interest was opposite to the interest of the U.S. and the free world because he always wanted to create conflicts . I believe that for a long time his interests were opposite to that of the United States .
 conflict was the Iranian nuclear problem because these conflicts helped to push oil prices up . That was actually crucial for his regime, he says .
 Russia's dictator needs conflicts to sell his dictatorship in Russia, he says . "Now, he needs conflicts because that is the only way for him to sell"
 The Russian propaganda machine is probably worse now than at any time of the time, you know, that I can remember . The Russian government is probably better now than ever before, I can recall .
 My mother tells me that — she is turning 78 — that it is probably worse than Stalin because it is more powerful than Stalin . My mother says that she is probably better than Stalin as she turns 78 .
We have 24/7 propaganda that is anti-American, anti-Ukrainian, and everybody . We have 24-7 propaganda. It's anti-U.S. and anti-Semitic .
 Russia's president wants to enlarge the country's borders . He also wants to take over the territory of neighboring countries .
 The system of international security has been created in Europe since 1945 and 1991 at the end of the cold war . But most importantly, to destroy the system of global security .
 Putin does not ask why he is in talks with the Russian president, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Putin is just trying to buy time and gain some more ground .
 Putin always asks why not, and if the free world vacates a space, Putin grabs it . He always asksWhy not, or why not.
 In a written testimony, I quote an article from Jane’s, which came out the other day, based on conferences between Ukrainian officers and American analysts . In my written testimony. I quote a quote from Jane's.
 A report in today’s paper said that NATO estimates or that the Pentagon estimated 12,000 .
 20,000 Russian troops are in Ukraine, thousands more on the border . I think we would be comfortable saying between 12 and 20,00 Russian troops in Ukraine .
 A large-scale naval and air buildup, including the deployment of nuclear capable missiles, is taking place in Crimea as we sit .
 Russian special forces are only given the weapons only given to special forces, Senator says .
 This is highly sophisticated Russian weapons, would never be given to any local rebels . It would never have been given to the local rebels. This is a highly sophisticated weapon .
 The new infantry fighting vehicles have an artillery launching system . They have a range of artillery weapons that can be used to launch artillery .
 The Russian Army was spotted in parades inside Russia just 1 year before the invasion . It is regular equipment of the Russian Army .
 This is the war as you rightly said. But besides, I mean, what we have to keep in mind here, first, is this war, he says .
Non-Caucasians were sent in to Russia with the hope that mainstream Russians would not really care if they died . So first, they were sending in non-C Caucasians .
 The EU is sending troops from beyond the Euros, mostly from the Far East . Many of the troops are from ethnic minority areas from there .
 The Russian government had to send them airborne in August of last year . It became known that a number of them died, and that really spread in Russia .
 There is a very thin layer of tolerance Russians have toward human casualties. So what this is telling you, that once you raise the cost for Putin’s invasion, there is no way he will pull up with the stakes.
 The structure of his troops indicate to you that he is in some way here has very little maneuver . That is the structure of the troops, clearly indicates to you. That is to you, clearly indicate that he has verylittle maneuver .
 The decision is expected to reverse many of the plans he has about that country. So that is so important to take this decision on the weapons, he says .
 Ambassador Pifer: "I understand that you and a number of your colleagues have recently released a report on the Ukrainian crisis" Pifer says .
 The Ukraine military is providing military assistance to Ukraine, the U.S. military report says . The report says the country needs to provide defensive lethal weapons and light antiarmor weapons .
 This was a report that was issued by the Atlantic Council, Brookings, and the Chicago Council on Global Affairs . Seven other former government officials and myself were involved .
 Five of us went to NATO and went to 35 Ukraine in January to get an understanding of the military situation in eastern Ukraine .
 The recommendations that we made were for serious assistance, we proposed a billion a year for 3 years . The recommendations were forserious assistance .
 The Ukrainians both in Kiev and in Kiev, but also in Kiev . We also went out to the field headquarters at Kramatorsk and met with the commander there .
Counterbattery radars could pinpoint the origin of rocket strikes and artillery 20 to 40 kilometers out . They wanted things like counterbatteryRadars that could be used to pinpoint the source of strikes .
 70 percent of Ukrainian casualties are from rocket and artillery strikes. We were told that 70 percent were from rocket or artillery strikes . We were also told that 80 percent of the casualties were from rockets and artillery .
 The one item that they requested in terms of lethal military assistance was light antiarmor weapons . They also requested light anti armor weapons .
About three-quarters of the weapons do not work, according to Kiev's weapons stockpile . We were told in Kiev that basically their stockpile of these weapons are at least 20-plus years old .
 The U.S. is looking to fill a significant gap that they have in the United States . It is the one item they thought there would be a very useful American contribution to filling the gap .
 The absence and the clarity of the fact that we will not provide them weapons actually undermines their hand at the negotiating table. Strategically, if we are trying to help support the Ukrainians in achieving a better political outcome for this crisis in the East.
 Ukrainian President Poroshenko is in a much better position in negotiating an outcome, some type of outcome . If you do believe in a political resolution to what is happening in the East, it puts him in a better position .
 Ukraine is a sovereign independent nation that is under attack from a neighbor . But there is also a moral argument that we should think about, and that Ukraine is independent nation .
 Ukraine has an essential right to be able to defend itself, and we stand back and not supporting it in that effort, he says . So I think there is a moral aspect to this as well, that Ukraine has a right to protect itself .
 Some of our European allies are concerned about potential for escalation. We have heard from some of our allies of concerns about potential escalation .
 President Putin is already arguing to the Russian people that the U.S. and other allies are sending weapons to Ukraine . It is hard for me to see how — President Putin has already argued to the Russians that the United States is sending weapons.
 He has shown his willingness to frontally invade Ukraine if he needs to . He has already demonstrated his willingness for frontally invading Ukraine .
It is hard for me to see how this measure actually is any more provocative than what he is doing in Ukraine today . It is hard to see why this measure is more provocative. It's hard for him to see what he's doing.
 The UK government is trying to get allies on board with us . It is important that we do this in a way that brings many allies onBoard with us. What is important is that we have many allies.
 Ambassador Pifer has said that there are at least six allies in Europe and Asia, Canada as well, that would likely join the United States decision .
 There is nervousness about a somewhat ambivalent U.S. decision to do this lightly, partially partially .
 Ukraine's decision to stand by Ukraine with support at the level that this report recommends would demonstrate to our allies that this was a serious strategy . But I think a serious strategic decision would show that this is a serious Strategy, and we would have some of them stand with us, and others
 I think the greatest likelihood is first United Kingdom, Denmark, Poland, Lithuania, Romania, Canada, Australia . I think it would stand with us first.
German military equipment is being used in the supply of lethal military equipment . German military equipment has been used in Germany in recent years . The U.S. military has been involved in some of the world's most lethal weapons .
 Chancellor Merkel and President Hollande did commit, as part of the NATO commitment, to intensify NATO's support for Ukrainian defense modernization .
 Ukraine is trying to stand by Ukraine’s building of its defense capacities . Ukraine's defense capacities are being used in a broader strategic effort .
 The U.S. military would likely not be coming around on the provision of lethal military assistance . But they would be partners, he says, in a broader effort. They likely would not be come around.
 Does anybody — I mean, you are about to tell me that you do not think so, I assume. Does anybody? I assume, I'm not sure . I assume that you don't .
 Chancellor Merkel has seen a remarkable evolution of Chancellor Merkel’s position on this issue .
 The incredible nature of what President Putin is doing has actually turned German public opinion against Russia, which was not something that you could have imagined .
 Chancellor Merkel has been the key to holding European unity together on the sanctions . She has been key to keeping the EU together on sanctions .
 I think this would be a big step for Ukraine to move to providing lethal military assistance to Ukraine . I think it would be quite a big move for them to move on to providing military assistance .
 Germans step forward this year in providing lethal military assistance to the peshmerga in Iraq . This is a significant development in German defense policy .
 France will vote to expand sanctions if Russia continues to break the agreement . The French Foreign Minister said the other day that if Russia breaks the agreement, France will expand sanctions .
 I think Russia will continue to violate the Minsk Accords . I expect France to follow what President Obama did today, which is to extend sanctions and perhaps even enlarge them .
 Russia can be persuaded 37 over time to support the provision of lethal weapons, says David Frum . He says if Russia does continue to move forward, it could be persuaded to support lethal weapons .
 Damon has given Germany a chance to win the title for the first time in his career . Germany is the only country to have won the title in the past .
 France protested to Russia in 2008 when they supplied the Mistral helicopter warships to Russia . France strongly protested to them because they were guarantors of the cease-fire .
 Some very high level French officials replied to us rather cynically that they would supply us with the missiles to sink Mistrals . No problem with that, we have no problem with it .
 She said she took the floor initially and told people she wanted to ease sanctions . She said some people at this table want to ease the sanctions . But she said she didn't take the floor.
 Germany has been good on supplying nonlethal equipment, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I do not see Germany, for a number of historic and psychologic reasons, ever supplying lethal equipment"
 The U.S. should not be an impediment to the United States doing that, he says . But he says, there is a moment when only the problem with not supplying weapon is of different sort .
 Washington, Czechs, Slovaks, Bulgarians, and others are refusing to provide spare parts for all Soviet equipment to Ukraine . They do not want to stand alone if Washington is not on board .
 Washington by not supplying the lethal weapons is also blocking the others from doing it . Washington has become this cornerstone right now, and we are at the crossroads, says the author .
 A sanctions-only policy can cause lots of risk. Putin might think, “I have very little time left, and I had better seize the rest of it, go for it. Now, sanctions are always helpful.
European sanctions will not be imposed on anyone for a long time, he says . And then, from the position of strength, he negotiates his way out of sanctions .
 There is a moment when if there are only sanctions, those sanctions might be not as helpful as before . But there is a time when you need something else.
 Mr Chairman. Thank you, Mr Chairman, and thank you to the witnesses who are here today .
 Russia is trying to rearrange the post-cold-war world international order . Now we see the complete rearrangement attempts by Russia .
 Ukrainian soldiers in Ukraine stand strong, fight valiantly, but obviously overwhelmed and over matched . We have seen a determined effort by brave soldiers in the Ukraine .
 President Saakashvili had a conversation about timing, promises made, and concern within the region, he says . He asks whether NATO could withstand a challenge, if that is indeed the question before us .
 The chairman of Georgia's governor says he talked to him a little bit about his experience in Georgia . He also talked to the chairman of the state's governor of Georgia .
 Mr Wilson talked a little bit about the commitment of the international community .
 The United States strongly insisted they follow up on their promise not only on nuclear warheads, but they also gave thousands of MANPADS, which they now need in that situation . They do not have even ManPADS .
 There are countries that are very much on board, but they are right now . They are standing by because they want Washington to lead .
 I still would imagine Poland might risk doing something on their own, but for the others, I would not bet on that . I would still imagine Poland may risk doing their own.
Once there is a signal coming from Washington, I am sure there will be strong coalition also on supplying weapons. But once there is an agreement, I'm sure there is also a strong coalition .
 There are a number of people from these countries, including my nation, that are fighting as volunteers on the side of Ukrainian army .
 ISAF: We are proud that we are part of the operations, ISAF and the others. You know, we are proud, we're proud, says ISAF .
 We had lots of people that died in Afghanistan and Iraq, fighting alongside of the Americans . We had many of them fighting alongside the Americans, but we also had many others .
 Many of the people who went to Afghanistan with Americans went to Iraq, they are fighting in Ukraine . But also now, many of those people have gone to Iraq with Americans .
 A couple of hundred Georgians from those operations also went through the training, now fighting there . I have seen — we have a couple of 100 Georgians. I have also seen — they have been in training.
 There is already coalition of citizens of the nations around Ukraine fighting for Ukraine . They understand that it is also their battle for Ukraine.
There is also lots of sympathy in those nations, but for that, you need to get together . There is also a need for those countries to get Together .
I'm sure there are countries that will be American allies on military front. And I am sure there will be countries that are U.S. allies.
 There will be other countries that will be a kind of second rank, like Germany, that might not be part of the large-scale military efforts . But also, there will be others that will have second rank .
 There is an overwhelming sympathy toward Ukraine, and I do not see this falling apart unless something dramatic comes from Washington . I think there is a overwhelming sympathy for Ukraine .
 Ambassador Pifer said sanctions had not yet achieved their political goal . Pifer: Sanctions have not yet reached their political goals .
 Russia needs to make it clear that its actions will have a cost. And you also need to follow it up with us, we need to be clear to Russia .
 The key point here is persuading Moscow that the sanctions will remain in place until the Russians change their policy course . Well, I believe that if the West can maintain unity on sanctions, the key point will be in place .
 Russia has seen $150 billion in capital flight from Russia in 2014 . Russia has already seen significant damage to the Russian economy .
 Russian reserves fell by about $140 billion over the course of the year, largely to support the ruble . The ruble was not very successful .
 The ruble is about 50 percent of the value against the dollar that it was last summer . It is about half the value of the dollar it was in the summer of 2013 .
 The Russian Finance Minister recommended cutting every aspect of the Russian state budget by 10 percent . He is now saying they have to cut defense, except for defense .
 Putin is making a bet that the West will not be able to sustain the sanctions. But I think Mr Putin is playing, and that bet is that he is making an bet, says Mr Putin .
 European Union imposed sanctions for a 1-year duration in July . July is the key date for the sanctions .
 EU practices are that if the goal of the sanctions is not achieved, the sanctions are rolled over . EU practices. If the goal is not reached, the penalties will be rolled over, says the EU .
 Putin is hoping that there will be enough opposition among EU countries that those sanctions will not be extended . He can basically escape the economic pain without having to do the desired course correction .
 The West can sustain sanctions until 2016 until there is a change in policy change . The average Russian is going to see his reserves probably run out within IV 2 years or so, he says .
19 percent is the current figure, and the possibility that their average purchasing power may decline 15 to 20 percent over the course of the year . I think 19 percent is current figure .
 "I do not think it is really going to take that long. Well, that would depend on the nature of the specific equipment, but I don't think it will take thatLong," he says .
 Everything we have seen says that the Ukrainians learn very quickly how to use the equipment . The Ukrainians learn to use equipment very quickly, according to the Ukrainians .
 If we send it over and we send over enough people who know how to use it and train, I think it would be a matter of days or weeks at the most . If we sent it over, we would have to send over more people who can use it.
 Putin is going to try to use the spring and summer to create a fait accompli in Ukraine and break up the sanctions regime . But I have to argue that we should have been doing this months ago .
 The Pentagon has been told to go slow on giving even the equipment that it has, sources say . Not much because, frankly, my sources have told me, my source says .
 There is no excuse for saying that we are still doing a review of Ukraine needs. There's no excuse. We are still reviewing the country's needs, it is said .
 The administration is deliberately undermining efforts to help Ukraine, he says . "They need to be stopped and the signal sent out that we will help Ukraine as needed"
 Senator has been telling administration officials why do not target this training, he says .
 Russia has done since then six or seven rounds of training of the so-called separatist troops . Now, Russia has been training the separatist troops since then .
 You put marines or some other troops on the ground, they can train full brigade within 4 or 4 weeks . You can train a full brigade in four or four weeks .
 U.S. troops may be used for all kind of bad means, like to move against legitimate government . The other point for United States training is that you do not have this kind of disorganized troops .
 When you have a U.S. element present, that also brings lots of stability to constitutional systems of democracies . The United States is a key part of a democracy .
 Ukraine also needs this kind of stability as badly as it needs help with defending itself . Ukraine needs stability, as well as help with protecting itself from Russian forces .
 And then send back disorganized troops to do some nasty things back in Kiev . Then send backdisorganized troops. And then sent back dis organized troops todo some nastyThings back in Ukraine .
 United States training will never work if U.S. training is already installed and in place . The training will not work if it is already in place.
 Ukrainian Government has submitted a list to the United States, which is really quite a need, and that list has been circulated quite a lot. I already have a list that Ukrainian government has submitted to the U.S.
 It has been done after a lot of consultation with unofficial ones, with people in Pentagon . It is done after lots of consultation.
 It includes some antitank TOW javelin missiles, but really the numbers are so modest . It includes also some antitanks TOW Javelins .
 Ukrainians have antiair, they have heavy artillery, and lots of other things . What is really expensive, Ukrainians haveAntiair. What isreally expensive, Ukraine has antiairs, they say .
 I am supportive of extending defensive weapons to the Ukrainian Army, but I want to express some reservations about that position, but then just open with a comment regarding my frustration on this conversation . I am supported of extending defense weapons to Ukrainian Army .
 We are obsessed with this question of providing arms to the Ukrainians, and it matters . We're obsessed with the question of giving arms to Ukrainians . It matters, and we want to know more about it .
 The U.S. is trying to blunt and combat Russian aggression in the region . But it is obsessive within the American context because it is one of the few tools that we have to use to combat Russia .
 I spent 2 hours sitting, talking to President Yanukovych and listening to him give a litany of perceived and real abuses against Ukraine .
We are not resourced as a nation, because we hamstring ourselves when it comes to the tools that we could use to try to create greater partnerships with countries that are at risk of falling into the growing Russian sphere . We know we have the ability to supply weapons.
We are not doing what is necessary in and around the region to try to stop these crises from happening in the first place . We are not do what is needed to stop the crises in the region, says the author .
 I think this is an incredibly important conversation, and I am glad that we are having this hearing. And so, I'm glad that this is a very important conversation. I think that we have this hearing .
 The Ukraine crisis is a hard one to unwind. But we had better adopt a strategy soon to stop the next Ukraine from happening, says David Cameron .
What we are talking about would be relatively unprecedented. First, let us admit that what we're talking about is relatively unprecedented .
 We are talking about the overt arming of a country that is under military threat and occupation and invasion from the Russians . We are also talking about a country under military threats and occupation from Russia .
During the cold war when the Soviets were a much bigger threat to the U.S. than the Russians are today, we did not do this . Let us just acknowledge that during the Cold War when the Russians were a bigger threat than the Soviets are today .
We did not make the choice to provide overt arms to the Afghans or the Hungarians . We did not at that time make the decision to provide Overt arms to those in Afghanistan .
 I think the circumstances are different today, and so I am supportive of defensive weapons . I think I am supporting defensive weapons, but I am not afraid to use them. I think it's a good idea to use defensive weapons.
 Mr Pifer will ask the first question to him. Here are his two reservations, and I will ask him the first .
 Your report and all of your recommendations are predicated on the belief that the cost will be so high to Putin that he will change behavior .
 Senator: "Let me break my answer down into two pieces. I think that is a very good question, and let me break it down."
 We are not talking about F-16s, advanced offensive weapons, and we are certainly not talk about American combat troops. First of all, we believe that providing these levels of weapons are actually on the low end of the military scale .
 Russians have done 42 over the last 8 months to hide from their people, it is really extraordinary. But the calculation here is that when you go and you look at what the Russians havedone, it's really extraordinary .
 Reports of Russian soldiers being buried at night are hidden, reports of Russian casualties hidden .
 A friend of his wife in Moscow said somebody lost their leg fighting in Donetsk in August . He has been told if you disclose that publicly, you will lose your pension forever .
 There is a real concern in Moscow that casualties could have an impact in Moscow, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says there is a 'real concern' in Moscow.
 Putin does care a lot about the impact of that on the Russian public’s attitude and their attitudes towards him, she says .
 Polls show majorities do not want to see the Russian Army fighting in Ukraine . This is against the background of 4 or 5 months of polls that show that while the Russian people may support trying to pull Ukraine back toward Russia .
Russian military escalation makes no more sense because we are going to have casualties, he says . He says there is a good chance that this could succeed in altering that cost benefit calculation .
 The Russian Army will require overt involvement by the Russian Army, and we want to pursue a peaceful settlement . It will need overt involvement, and therefore, it will need to be pursued by the army .
We do in our report — nobody who wrote the report — we are not recommending American combat troops. We do in the report, we do not recommend American combat forces . We do not write a report.
Ukrainian officials say equipment that would be provided by Ukrainians has to be operated by Ukrainians so you would not have American technicians there . We even said that the equipment would have to be provided to the Ukrainians .
I would say we are not in a position to provide advanced offensive arms. I would say that we're not in the position to offer advanced offensive weapons .
 IJkrainians need to make that limit clear to the IJKrainians privately so that they know what to expect . We are going to have some limit, and I would argue that you need to be clear to them .
 The U.S. and Russia are engaged in an ongoing military confrontation . But we can make a firebreak that prevents us from getting caught into an endless spiral of escalation with the Russians, he says .
 Some European allies would support us, some would not, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says some allies would not support us .
 He would be able to have half of Europe supporting defensive weapons, not half not .
 The Russian economy suffers under the tremendous weight of the sanctions such that it changes his position. As many have said, the ultimate win here is that the Russian economy suffer under the sanctions .
 I think many of our allies expect the U.S. to actually lead here. The United States is expected to lead here, I think .
 U.S. has key allies stand with it and some others stand behind it . It would not be unusual if you look at controversial decisions in the alliance .
 I don't think it is the kind of thing that would lead to an overt split within the alliance . I do not think it would be the sort of thing. I do NOT think it will lead to a overt split in the alliance.
 NATO component in which all the allies are playing a role in supporting Ukraine, not with arming, but with a defense reform and a defense package . U.S. move forward with some other allies in concert bilaterally, but there is actually a NATO component .
 Putin looks up and he realizes that we are far stronger across the board, says Putin . Second, the weapons are effective if we have a strategy, part of a broader strategy, he says .
 U.S. is working to deepen the partnership with Serbia, Montenegro and NATO . Serbia and Montenegro are working to fill out a more comprehensive strategy, weapons being an essential element of that, but not the only element .
 Senator Murphy mentioned Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, certain interventions in Eastern Europe . Senator Murphy also mentioned Czechs, Hungary and Poland .
 The Soviet Union, as much as I hate this kind of action, operated within a sphere of influence in Yalta in 1945, so the world was divided . But I do not think that we can compare the situation with Ukraine because the Soviet Union agreed to in 1945.
 Today it is totally different because we can look at the collapse of the Soviet Union or the collapse in Yugoslavia . All new states are different because of the collapse, all new states .
 They were formed within the territory of administrative borders created within the empire . They were all formed within a territory of the empire.
 There was an agreement. So all of them, whether they are right or wrong, you know, there were an agreement .
 Russia never expressed any concerns about Ukrainian territorial integrity, never raised an issue . Every Russian President, every Russian Parliament signed or ratified one or another form of treaty or agreement with Ukraine .
 Russia never raised this issue, so that is why it is absolutely unique . Russia never raises this issue.
 The attack is unprecedented because it violated not only agreements, but also the understanding of how the world would be split after the end of the cold war .
 Senator, first of all, I need to thank you for your intervention on Ukraine . Senator: "I need to thanks you foryour intervention"
 I was there together with group of European parliamentarians just before you came. I was in the same group of parliamentarians as I was with the European Parliamentarians .
 "I remem44 ber" is the name of the U.S. president's first visit to the United States . "We were proclaimed persona non grata," he says . "I remember44 ber, and then I was proclaimed personaNon grata"
 The Ukrainian revolution changed the whole idea of what the Ukrainian revolution was about . It made it very much value-oriented. And you being there, it really changed the entire idea of the revolution .
 U.S. involvement in Ukraine is not only just a weapons story in Ukraine, it is also a story about United States involvement in the Ukraine .
 Georgia is a country that Georgia is part of the Ukrainian Government . Georgia is also a country of Ukraine . Ukraine has to do something with its country because of Georgia .
 Ukrainian police will show how to work and operate without bribes . They are creating new Ukrainian police that will be able to work without bribery .
 That had never happened before in that part of the world, or at least in Ukraine . The Ukrainian government says it is investigating the situation .
 U.S. Congress funded NGOs that are doing tremendous job in the regulation, you know . We have our Deputy Minister of Justice from Georgia who is working also with your programs .
Bureaucracy like something unimaginable in terms of discretion of bureaucrats, you know, how they do this corruption thing . Their bureaucracies like something that is unimaginable, you can't imagine .
 Minister of Health had long conference with donors and U.S. Ambassadors involved on the spot .
 Ukraine is doing new transparent procedures, how to do these tenders and things which never also happened in Ukraine . And they are doing now absolute new transparent processes, how they are .
 Georgian, foreign deputy attorney general of Ukraine, is Georgian . We have deputy attorneygeneral for Ukraine, which is Georgian.
 U.S. experts are working high profile criminal cases. They will sit down together with them because they are working on high profile cases .
 The anticorruption bureau will be created where also there will be activity for U.S. expert participation . And, again, there will also be activity.
 Ukraine's survival strategy should be based on the idea that they have something else to offer besides military things. I think long term Ukraine’s survival and Ukraine's strategy is based on a long term strategy .
 The discussion about weapons is insufficient in the sense that weapons, to realize their maximum benefit for Ukraine, have to be sent urgently . It is part of a broader strategy to rebuild the Ukrainian Government and economy, which is also an urgent issue .
 I mentioned in my paper no one is talking about the number of casualties the Russians are taking, which are huge . I mentioned that no one has been talking about how many people are killed by the Russians .
 We are doing nothing informationally to counter the wave of propaganda. We are not doing anything informationally. We have no idea what to do to counter propaganda, they say .
 The U.S. leads the Atlantic alliance, not only will NATO members follow, but it will also change the balance of fear . Russia is not afraid of anything that Europe might do.
 President Saakashvili has pointed out that when Russians understand that if they go further they encounter the U.S. directly, they stop .
 Afghanistan where we gave very sophisticated weapons to people directly in the line of Soviet aggression, and it worked . Let me remind you about Afghanistan where it worked, he says .
 This is an army that cannot stand the protracted war or take that kind of risk, he says . providing weapons will help stabilize and perhaps even turn the situation around if it is backed up by a coherent strategy .
 Mr Chairman has been educational, and thank you, Mr Chairman, and thanks to all the witnesses . It has all been educational.
 Russia's sanctions and economic effect on Russia right now is the focus of today's takeaways . Europe needs to do with Europe to make sure the annual re-up of the sanctions are not re-imposed .
Low cost of oil is a perennial problem for the Russian economy. But I am particularly interested in the low cost of the oil .
 It is also a problem for the Iranian economy, which is a separate topic . Iran's economy is a different topic .
 LNG exports would be something we would contemplate into the region to help nations break their need to rely on energy . We have had a fairly contentious debate on this committee about things like LNG export .
 Russian economy is using low energy costs as a strategy to pressure the Russian economy, please .
 We can increase the export of oil and of LNG, which would require, of course, building infrastructure here, as well as amending legislation . We can also increase the exports of oil, LNG and LNG .
 It was reported last year that we could send 40 million barrels a day for 6 months without undermining the statute . The statute guarantees the strategic petroleum reserve .
 We can further encourage much more strongly the building of the southern corridor of gas across the Caspian Sea . We can also provide strong guarantees to countries like Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, that want to make that happen .
 The TTIP makes every European signatory of the treaty eligible to receive gas exports from the United States on an expedited basis without going through the very convoluted procedure . Third, to promote the building of interconnectors within Europe so that new terminals that are being built in Northern Europe and
 Once that law is in place, they can then get gas from the U.S., and we can supplant a fair amount of the Russian gas exports . Russia uses the gas exports for political purposes, which is what Russia uses for political reasons .
 The problem is that they can do so and use that for political purposes . The issue is that the politicians can use that to make political statements .
 "To the extent that they have politicized this, we need to take that weapon away from them," he says . But to the extent, he says, "we need to stop politicizing this"
 U.S. could export between $100 and $120 billion cubic meters of gas per year, says John Sutter . Sutter: By 2020, we could export $100 to $120billion cubic meters per year. Sutter says that would be a sizable increase.
 The Russian gas in the pipeline is cheaper than other gas pipelines . Russia has remained reliant on the Russians because the gas is cheaper .
 Europe has the capacity that if the Russians were ever to turn off the gas off, which I do not think is likely, and I will get back to that in a moment . But what we want to make sure is that Europe has a capacity, he says .
 LNG could continue receiving LNG, and it gets to Dr. Dr. John Sutter . But that they, in fact, could still receive LNG .
 Romania, Bulgaria, Greece, Greece are still vulnerable until they get more interconnectors that would allow gas to move from the West to the East .
 Gazprom has never turned off its gas. I think it is hard for me to see the Russians, Gazprom, ever turning that gas off . I think, though, at the end of the day, it's hard for the Russians to turn that off .
 If Gazprom turns that gas off, it is a huge hole in the Russian budget . Gazprom uses large amount of money that they make by exporting the gas to Europe .
 About 25 percent of Gazprom exports to Europe went to Europe, but that accounted for about 70 percent of its revenues . About 4 years out of date, about 4 years ago, when Gazprom was in Europe .
 Gazprom has a big incentive not to do this, but it still makes sense for Europe to have a plan B in case the Russians ever reach that point where they micht cut off gas flow .
 It was said numerous times about the importance of keeping sanctions or even, you know, increasing the sanctions . It was also said many times that it was important to keep sanctions.
 Putin has succeeded in convincing not only the Russian republic, but the Russian elite, that these sanctions will not stand . But sanctions, apart from economic effect, they have psychological effect, and have psychological effects .
 Czech Republic, President Zeman, has been financed by Lukoil openly . Let us not forget, Czech Republic has been funded by Luk oil .
 Putin could point out multinational corporations that are still operating, Putin says . Putin says it is a signal of confidence, but it is very important, he says .
 Just 2 days ago, Exxon-Mohil has announced about expansion of its operations in Russia . The company is expanding in Russia.
 Putin says Obama, Obama, Presidents, you know. I mean, that is a fundamental argument for Putin, he says . I mean that is the fundamental, he adds .
As long as we have this presence in Russia, it will be very difficult to win the psychological war, says Senator Kaine . Expectations could actually destroy the Russian economy even sooner than economic Senator Kaine.
 LNG would not get there for 2 years, and it would send a message, and similarly with energy sanctions . LNG has been banned from the country for two years. LNG is not allowed to be built in the U.S.
 Mr Kasparov: I wanted to switch to another topic, which is, you know, we tend to look at these things through the eyes of political people .
 Vladimir Putin will lose political support within his electorate, within Russian citizens, because of outside pressure . Most effective pressure is often the inside pressure when the population starts to pull their support from you .
 Unfortunately, I do not see sort of a positive outcome in the near future . I don't see kind of positive outcome, I say .
 Vladimir Putin is not going to lose his powers through the normal election process, so he is there . Putin is there. He is there, and he will be there .
 He is a dictator, and he made it very clear that he would not leave the office . He is not a dictator .
 Russia is so hyper-centralized that it does not have much political activities outside of the capital . The good thing is that, you know, a country sohyper- centralized as Russia does not.
 Moscow has an 80 percent plus support, which I do not believe, across the country . "We know that numbers in Moscow are very different. So basically even if he enjoys this 80 percentplus support, he does not believe," he says .
 Russia has a pretty sizable middle class in Russia that is used to a relatively comfortable life .
 The middle class will not accept long-term decline of standards that have been established . They travel abroad, and I do not think they will accept this .
 Eor quite a while — for many years actually — this middle class has been relatively silent . For many years, this middleclass has been silent .
 People did not like what has happened with the elections, but, again, it was not powerful enough. People didn't like what had happened, but they didn't think it was enough .
 The coalition was not there because the ruling elite believed that it was better to stay with Putin than to join the protests . The coalition wasn't there because it was not because it wanted to join protests .
 Russian middle class will change everything if people are in the ruling elite, some in the inner circle, and others in the middle class .
 You have to look for people who can end his rule with minimum bloodshed. You must look for those who can do so with minimum violence .
As long as Putin stays in office, we will see more political assassinations, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: As long as he stays in power, we'll see more attacks on neighboring countries because that is the only algorithm where he can survive .
 America has many ways of demonstrating it, and talking about European Union is exactly the opposite, you know . I think that America has a lot of ways to demonstrate it, but that's not the same .
 Putin gained so much influence in Europe because America walked away . Only American reappearance there will send a signal because everybody wants to see leadership .
 Angela Merkel is the head of the coalition government, and her Foreign Minister belongs to Gerhard Schroeder’s party . So basically ignore Germany, because Angela Merkel has been in charge of the government .
 So expecting from this fragile coalition government to lead Europe is wrong, it's wrong. So expecting this coalition government is wrong.
 America is back to business, and it will send signal to Ukraine, not only to Poles, but also to Russian people that, you know, U.S. will return to business .
 I do not have any other questions, but I would love to hear their responses . I would like to hear the answers from people who have been asked about their questions .
 Putin's domestic base of support is a long-term operation, says Putin . Putin's support for Putin is a 'long-term' operation, he says .
Russian President Vladimir Putin is leading the country's government, says Putin . Putin has been accused of being behind a series of violent attacks on Russia . Putin's government says it is trying to use the information to tell the truth .
 U.S. should stop showing fear and disengagement, says Kasparov . It is essential to lead in Europe, he says .
 Russian history is always the case that when the Russian Government enters into a protracted war which it cannot win, that creates domestic unrest at home. Third, we have to remember, if we look at Russian history, that it is always a case that the Russian government cannot win .
 The weapons and making sure that the Ukrainian economy and government survive is not only desirable as an urgent remedy right now to impose costs on the war, but it transforms not only the balance of fear in Europe and Ukraine, it transforms the strategic calculations inside Russia .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin says he will not have any po49 litical say, but in return, you will have economic security, rising living standards . I would go back to the logic of the sanctions.
 Sanctions make it more difficult for Mr Putin to deliver on his part of that bargain, says Mr Putin . Sanctions may have an impact on how the Russian people look at him, he says .
 The second point just briefly, I would give a little bit more charitable analysis of Germany . The third point is a little more charitableAnalysis of Germany.
 Chancellor Merkel has been remarkably successful in pulling together the European Union . 28 diverse states with very different views have different views .
 German diplomats say they have a principle for Germany's foreign policy .
 She really takes to heart the idea that borders are inviolable, and that countries should not use force to change those borders .
 The role is at some political risk because this is not easy either internally or also dealing with the Russians, she says .
 The U.S. has been working closely with Europe over the last year . But it makes a lot of sense for the United States to be working very closely with her in that role .
 The hearing is expected to take place in Russia next month . The hearing will be held in Moscow .
 Ukraine is not a real country, it is just a territory, and third, he always said that Baltic countries are not defendable . He always told me three things consistently, that he was menacing us with invasion, he said .
 Baltic countries, which do not have even strategic depth or manpower of Ukrainians, rely on United States Article 5 guarantees, which is important stuff .
 There are many vulnerabilities that Ukrainians have, even more than the Ukrainians ever had . But still, there are many weaknesses that they have, I mean, but still, they have .
Russian President Vladimir Putin says he will continue on as he sees how he can maintain power in Russia . Putin says that is the only way he sees he can keep power inside Russia .
When we talk about his 80 percent rating, we should realize that this is a fear rating . Now, when we talk to him, we need to realize this is the fear rating, he says .
 People tend to measure it with measurements of democracies, and that does not work this way in these kind of systems . People tend. to measure the country with measurements.
 Russians cannot stand just any sanctions, you know, that is the history of Russia. So what it means is that basically people have been saying, well, Russians can't stand just a sanctions.
 Russia has never had such a strong middle class. I think this is not true simply because Russia hasn't had such strong middle classes . I think that is not just because of Russia's lack of middle class .
 The oil price and redistributing it inside Russia was the decisive factor in the 1990s . This is combination first of the U.S. assistance, bailing out the Russian economy, and then, of course, the oil price .
 U.S. shale gas is the single most important factor in what has brought him into panic mode, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The U.S. system is more open to entrepreneurial enterprise, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "That makes the United States system so much open to this kind of entrepreneurial enterprise"
 Good guys have energy and bad guys have lower money for their energy. Suddenly, good guys have Energy and bad guy have energy . Good guys are more likely to have energy than bad guys .
 There is a physical fatigue. I think that it is not — it is a matter of not many years that a thing has emerged, he says .
 They have been changing the faces of their leaders, and they have a more flexible system here . They are changing the face of their leadership, and have been more flexible .
 The Russian people are well-traveled people, they are good-read people . The Russians are also well- traveled people .
 They certainly want to be respected internationally, although until now they had it both ways . They certainly wanted to berespected internationally, but now they have both ways.
 When I was in the Soviet Union, I remember what the combination of low oil prices and MANPADS did .
ManPADS reversed the logic on the ground. Until low prices, it would not have worked, but now you have lower prices suddenly, so budgetary income went down .
 We just need some Javelins, or whatever the Ukrainians will be requesting, to change the cost of that equation . We have lower oil and gas prices, and we just need to change that equation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The cost equation matters, maybe even not for Putin, but for the Russians or the Russian public, it will certainly make lots of difference. After all, cost equation Matters, maybe not for Vladimir Putin, maybeEven not for the Putin.
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act was passed in the Senate and the House . It authorized lethal defense weaponry for the courageous people of Ukraine . "I was heartened"
 The reason I think we did that is because so many of us went over there, he says . The reason is that so many people went over, he adds. The reason he thinks we did was because so much of us were there .
 I was with Senator Murphy with a bipartisan delegation, about eight United States Senators, and we walked the Maidan .
 The Ukrainian military had been hollowed out purposefully, but also the courage of the Ukrainian people defending themselves . Russia’s invasion with 14,000 to 20,000 troops and heavy weapons led to the rebellion .
 President Poroshenko said that blankets and night vision goggles are important, but one cannot win a war with blankets . He said he wants someone to answer the question .
 The hearing was rushed because there was potentially an offensive being planned within the next few weeks . The hearing is being held because of a potential offensive planned within a few weeks.
 The Russians have been behind the attempt to squelch the revolution from the beginning, even when it was just a demonstration on the Maidan .
 Russian advisors were telling Yanukovych’s government to repress them and use force if necessary . We know that Russian advisors are telling Yanukovych's government.
 Putin threatened Ukrainian with invasion then if they signed, he said . Putin threatened Ukraine with invasion if it signed an association agreement with the European Union . Putin's actions led to the revolution in Ukraine, which led to a revolution .
 Analysts in this town, myself among them, warned at that point that Putin was doing that. And there were analysts who warned that Putin is doing that .
 The Ukrainian people have sacrificed what the Declaration of Independence calls their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor . They wanted a better life, which meant that an association with Europe and European forms of government .
 Empire is the only recourse Moscow has to save it kleptocratic autocracy . Empire is only recourse to save the country's democracy, according to reports .
 It has become a criminalized regime, a state that exports terror, as well as uses it at home . There is no denying that, and there is no deny that.
 He has done it in Georgia, and he is doing it in Ukrainian . He has been doing it at home and in Ukraine, he has done the same in Georgia .
 The Russian President gave out medals to his troops from February 20, the day before the EU agreement with Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych fled that night anyway, but the Russians were already active . Yanukovych then fled that evening .
 Troops were supposed to lead operation in Crimea, which ended only February 23 . Only reason they did not go faster is because they were guarding the Olympics in Sochi .
 Ukrainian Government and Army caught the Ukrainian Government by complete surprise, and as a result they lost Crimea .
 The group started to use organizational tools they had previously set up in Donetsk and Luhansk Cabanas and provinces to agitate there . Then they started using the organizational tools. Then they began to use the organizational tool they had set up .
 The new government took advantage of some ill-considered decisions by the new government on language policy and created a pretext for an invasion in March .
 Putin thought he could get away with doing that simply by giving arms and some direction to local forces . That went forward, but Putin thought it could be done just by giving the arms and direction to locally organized forces .
 Russian forces shot down MH317 as we know, and they were in danger of losing in August . Putin then had to commit Russian regular forces .
 Putin has had to escalate his commitment and basically take over the entire military operation . Since then, Putin has been taking control of the military operation.
 Ukraine is an attempt to destroy Ukraine, create a land bridge from Russia all the way across Southern Ukraine and Crimea to Transnistria . In fact, it is a plan to project Russian power into the Balkans and Black Sea and beyond .
 Moscow has even sought military and naval bases in Greece, Montenegro, and Serbia . Moscow has also sought military bases in Montenegro and Greece .
 The amount of ammunition that the Russians have expended because their tactics are essentially basically artillery pounding, has been enormous . The Russian tactics have been enormous, says the author .
 Sources say they are surprised at how much they had to use in August and now again in January to achieve their objectives . They are surprised, according to sources, at how many had to used in August .
 Minsk is trying to get a truce so they can replenish. Therefore, they have to call a halt, and they have signed onto Minsk .
 Ukraine's Black Sea coast of Ukraine will make a move on in spring, says CNN's John Sutter . But he has no doubt that come springtime they will move on, if not earlier, he says .
 A survey of the entire military operation from start to finish. So, therefore, that is a kind of survey.
 The first attempt by Moscow to seize Ukraine failed in 2004 . The start is 2005 when the first attempt to seize the country failed .
 Nadia Savchenko, a pilot, was kidnapped and is being held in Ukraine . Savchenko was kidnapped. Savchenko is now being held.
 She is a military pilot, was active participant of the Maidan protests . She is also a former military pilot .
 She is in grave medical condition because she has been going through a hunger strike . She has been on the hunger strike for two weeks .
 There are many Ukrainians like that that sacrifice their lives. And, you know, there are many people who do that .
 The remarkable story of Ukraine is not just heroism on the battlefield, which was very obvious . The remarkable stories of Ukraine are very obvious, and the story of the Ukraine is very obvious.
 The troops that were technological, that for 10 years or so they were just plundering everything, giving up everything for legal means, but also illegal means .
 Russian forces were taken by surprise, unprepared, untrained, and still, against all the 53 odds, were holding out for a long time against Russian forces . They are continuing to do so.
 The fight will take place in London, London, on Saturday night at 8.30 p.m. ET . The fight is scheduled to take place on the same venue in London . It will be the first time the fight has been held in London since 2009 .
 Most of the efforts of the Ukrainian army have been done also by volunteers . There have been thousands and tens of thousands of thousands.
 It is not just war of Putin versus Poroshenko, it is against the Ukrainian Government . It is against Ukraine's government, you know, it's against Putin .
 Most of the troops fighting and protecting Ukraine are Russian speakers . The other thing people do not really know is that most of them are ethnic Russians .
 Ukraine is trying to defend its freedom, its values, and its ideals . This is the multiethnic, multicultural nation of Ukraine trying to defending its freedom and its values .
 The government was almost bankrupt, and you had people volunteering and basically supplying most of the things they are getting there . And the whole society’s part of it, because of the government, is part of the society, he says .
 A large part of the population has been engaged in an all-around national campaign for the nation’s survival .
Georgia volunteers are fighting in Georgia, says CNN's John Sutter . "That is something to be considered for all of us," he says . "I told you about Georgia volunteers fighting there," he said .
Ukrainians are not paid anything, but whatever they are supplied with, they are given by ordinary Ukrainians . They are not paying anything. They are given what they are provided with .
 She has a question, and then I will let everybody wrap up and give my final thoughts . She has been asked about her question, then she will let everyone wrap up . I will give her final thoughts.
 I wanted to go back to the economic concerns because one of you I think — I am not sure who — suggested that support for weapons may be moot if the economy fails in Ukraine before that happens. I want to focus on economic concerns.
 The IMF has pledged funding as has the EU and the United States, of course. And I know that the IMF has pledges funding as have the EU, the United states, ofcourse .
 Senator says there may be a rationale for the military fighting to die down . Senator: "I think that is exactly one of my key concerns"
 The strategy that I am most concerned about right now is which economy collapses first, and can he raise Ukraine, can he push Ukraine's off the cliff first .
 The IMF and the EU 54 will add more. This is why I have been, on the one hand, alarmed at how long and difficult it has been to get a significant international package together .
 Ukrainians are asking Ukrainians to do some difficult reforms, says CNN's John Sutter .
 President Poroshenko and Prime Minister Yatsenyuk understand that they have had predecessors that had an opportunity to huild a new Ukraine .
 Ukrainian people need to take some dramatic steps to communicate with each other, says U.S. ambassador .
 Rada passes ve^ significant legislation which will begin to raise overall energy prices and begin to address structural economic issues .
 Putin can let it sit for a while, allow his little project Sparta to build up its weapons, he says . But the gap there is a much more robust and much more decisive intervention on the part of the international community .
 It has also got to be doing the economic finance, which I think will be costly . It has got to do the economic Finance, which will also be costly, he says .
 In 2015 and 2016, Ukraine could need an additional $20 to $22 billion . Some economists suggest that in 2015 and beyond, above and beyond that Ukraine could needs $20 billion .
 If we provide all the weapons in the world, and they hold the Russians off, the West has lost its policy goal, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "If we provide the weapons, and the Russians hold the Russian off, we have lost our goal"
 If we make the economy work, if we get them through the reforms, that is a loss . If we get the reforms through, but then they have the military collapse, that's a loss.
 It will require probably an injection of serious resources both by Europe and the U.S. It will need more resources from both Europe and America .
 I would add to that, that while everything my colleagues have said I agree with, that what is critical here as well is the psychological dimension, I think . I would also add that, while everything his colleagues have agreed with, I would say, that the psychological aspect is critical .
 Ukrainians have not the sense that we stand behind them. We are asking Ukrainians to do something of an extraordinarily difficult nature, and they have not.
 If they were aware and understood that they had the full support of the U.S. and of Europe, that would provide an enormous psychological strength and reinforce other European states’ ability and willingness to help them .
 All these factors come together — the provision of weapons and training, the economic and political assistance, and the overwhelming psychological assurance that you are not alone. Therefore, all these factors came together, the author says .
 I do hope that this Congress can pass the reforms to the IMF, too, because that would allow us additional assistance to Ukraine . The IMF is looking where can we provide economic assistance to the Ukraine .
 The overall pledge is $40 billion for the reform package . $17 billion is the overall pledge for the package .
 The U.S. Congress pays greater attention to the committee . It is very important that this committee and generally overall the United States Congress pay greater attention .
 We need more CODELs coming, and specifically not only with a focus on military issue . It has become tantamount to the symbol of whether Ukraine is abandoned or not, but it is beyond that .
 What is really needed is real crackdown on corruption, real economic changes, says the Ukrainian government .
 U.S. standing by the idea of reform, says Georgia governor . Georgia governor: "We are steering in right direction, giving incentives"
 It is absolutely key for reforms inside Ukraine to know what has been there for decades, you know . It is potentially a very rich nation with very smart people and very talented people. It is very important for reforms in Ukraine.
 It is more clean of any previous legislatures, so it is very easy to work through these parliamentarians . It's more clean than previous legislatures so it's more easy to get through this way .
 Many of them are quite inexperienced, so they need to be introduced also to the United States system . Many of the young people in the U.S. are very inexperienced .
 We were like this in mid-1990s. And I think there is — that reminds of what — we were like in the 1990s, I think .
 I was parliamentarian back in 1996, fresh from GW law school. And I remember our first — I was a parliamentarian in 1996 .
 Parliamentarians have been meeting with young parliamentarians for six months . They have been together every 3, 4, 5, 6 months to learn how to learn and exchange ideas .
 Georgian democracy was the single strongest factor behind Georgian democracy . Georgian democracy is getting stronger and also communication with people .
 I think you are all here deciding — I think this hearing also has a key role to play for that. And I think it also has an important role to be played for that, I think .
 Well, thank you all very much for your compelling testimony and for your continued focus on Ukraine . Well, thanks you allvery much foryour compelling testimony .
 If there is something that you have not been able to get out, please say it. If you are not able to leave, please says it .
 I guess I would come back to one point about how far the Russians want to go . I would be back to how far Russia wants to go. I would also say how far they want to be.
 The Russians might try to go all the way to Crimea to create the land bridge, says Dr. John Sutter . He says he worries less about that than Dr. Sutter.
 In the last 5 or 6 months, I do not think Vladimir Putin has mentioned the term “Novorossiya’s’ once . It has been interesting 56 times in the last five or six months, he says .
 The more the West the Russians go, the more they are going to encounter a hostile population and the possibility of partisan warfare . And what I hope that means is he understands that the further West the Russian go, he says .
 The Russians have a lot of possibilities just fighting along the current line without a major offensive to distract and destabilize the government in Kiev . That may be their cheaper option, he says .
 My final point would be whether we are concerned more about the big option of going to Crimea or just having more of a not so frozen conflict along the line of conflict .
 Russia must find a way to finally take diplomatic off ramp, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Providing weapons in the context of sanctions and economic assistance to Ukraine is a way of challenging Moscow's calculation .
 Senator, I wanted to go back to your last statement because I think it was one of the most important things here about the Ukrainian people . I wanted the last statement to be made. I wanted it to be about Ukrainian people.
 I think that is one of the most important factors that outside actors actually under appreciate. I think it is a reason why outside actors are under appreciate .
 President Putin could not imagine that the Ukrainian people could rise up and determine their future .
 Ukrainians were skeptical that Ukrainians would even have a common national identity . They were skeptical of the fact that the Ukrainians would have a national identity.
 The irony of his invasion of Ukraine has more to consolidate and strengthen that sense of identity and purpose than any single thing .
 The West also has a tyranny of low expectations toward Ukraine, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 IMF officials are skeptical that Ukraine is a good investment. If you talk to our Treasury officials, IMF officials, they are skeptical .
 protestors were outside his office because he was willing to agree to a cease-fire . I was there when protestors wereoutside his office .
 The Ukrainian people now have a say in the future of what is going to happen. The Maidan was genuine, and it is what drove this from the beginning. The Ukrainians are now having a say on what will happen .
 Ukrainians were actually willing to die for this concept of Europe, for a Europe which is at best skeptical about even wanting Ukraine as part of the European Union .
 The entire chapter of integration in Europe has been driven by United States leadership, says U.S. leadership . European integration, driven by the United States, is a great European power, he says .
 If we stand back and think of ourselves as an observer of what Europe and Ukraine will do together, I think this will fail . I think it will fail, if we don't stand back, as we are an observer, as this unfolds, I say .
 If we see our57 selves as a driver of helping to support the European aspirations of Ukraine, I think we can get this right . But if they see our 57 selves as driver of supporting Ukraine, they can get it right .
 In addition to looking to Europe, the other aspiration really was a corruption free Ukraine .
 It is a combination of both of those elements that created that courage . It is the combination of the courage and courage that created the courage .
 President Truman stood in the Capitol and said that it was the policy of the United States to support free peoples . I just want to leave the committee with the thought that on March 12, 1947, President Truman standing in the Senate .
 He was responding to a Soviet challenge in the Black Sea, Greece and Turkey, in particular . He was also responding to the Soviet challenge.
 Damon has said that if we are to see a Europe that is whole and free, we must help lead the process . That mission has not changed, and as Damon said, as Damon has says, he has said, "We must helplead the process" The
 We cannot be disengaged or lead from behind because then we just open up Europe to the ancient horrors that we now see taking over . autocratic warlike criminal governments seizing territories at their whim .
 The people of Ukraine have shed their own blood in order to get their freedom . The people have been fighting for their freedom in Ukraine for years .
 As I mentioned, they have pledged their sacred honor, their fortunes, and their lives, and we can do no less . We can do nothing less, we can't do no more .
 I think we should pay attention to Putin’s propaganda machine, and it is a fact that we could see and hear in Europe and in the U.S. It's a fact we could hear and see in Europe, in the United States.
 Many people believe, as President Saakashvili mentioned, that it is an ethnic conflict . Many people think it is a conflict .
 There were over 23 years of existence of independent Ukraine, maybe with the exception of Crimea, when it was a rogue political group .
 Ukraine did not have any political movement for secession unlike Catalonia or Scotland . The country did not hold any political movements for secession .
 Russian Government wants to bring in Kosovo, Kosovo, and other countries .
 There was always a movement, even Ireland you had, you know, terrorist groups, but also the political wing . There was also a movement in Ireland, even though it was a political wing.
 The gangs supported by Putin have never created a core entity that specifically asked for independence . So that is why when I read in the Minsk agreement about the political settlement, I still do not understand who is going to settle on the opposite side, he says .
 Most of the people fighting in East Ukraine are Russians on both sides, ethnic Russians . Most of those fighting in the Ukraine are ethnic Russians.
 Putin realized that his grandiose plan of bringing eight Ukrainian regions all the way down from Luhansk from Odessa failed because ethnic Russians did not want to embrace Russian troops .
 He could experience resistance even in Donetsk and Luhansk, so not mentioning, you know, further south and west to Dnipropetrovsk or Harikov .
 A Ukrainian nation has been formed, and this is a multi-ethnic community . Ukraine is a nation that wants to be in Europe, and it is amulti- ethnic community .
 If I understand correctly, more channels in Ukraine are using Russian than Ukraine or major TV talk shows in Ukraine .
 Putin propaganda machine should be confronted with a strong message that we are not going to buy these arguments, which unfortunately are still being bought by Europeans. So this Putin propaganda Machine should be faced with astrong message, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We talked about the sanctions and about actions of Western governments vis-a-vis the commercial or economic interests of Putin’s Russia .
 Russian propaganda called Russian Roulette. But let us not forget about the damage made by Russia's propaganda .
 It spreads lies to millions and millions of homes around the world, and it is not a normal TV station . It is not the first time a TV station has been used to spread lies .
 Putin knows that he needs his propaganda machine, and we should confront him on this turf as well . He needs to be confronted by the military and interior forces, he says .
 We have unilateral desires when it comes to providing information and the truth . We have 'unilateral desires' when it come to providing info and truth .
 It is a country of more than 40 million people, and many of them will be watching what is being said in the U.S. Congress and this committee .
 In Georgia they have the Saakashvili presidential library, and actually after midnight . The library is in Georgia .
 People come and show up so late at night watching or trying to watch this together . What kind of impact these kind of events have in our part of the world?
 Putin never made secret that he is not after Poroshenko or after any of this. So the other part of it is that he never made it secret. Putin never said that he was not after theoshenko .
 Putin is striking at the U.S. interests, he says . Some elements in the United States would not want to be part of it, but from Putin's point of view they are .
 It is very important that with all the moral support the people have been getting, especially from this building and from your committee and from you personally .
 Senator: "It is very important to know that you are on the right side. I know it from our experience"
 Senator for being on the right side today together with other members of the committee . Senator, for being a member of the Senate committee.
 And thank you for all your support, and your impact, andYour contribution. And thanks you for your contribution, and for your contributions .
 Dr. John Sutter: "I want to thank all of the witnesses for your time, your thoughtful testimony, as Dr. Sutter says."
 The record will remain open until the close of business on March 11, one week from today, for questions for the record .