 Turkey continues to balance between Kiev and Moscow in the Ukraine crisis . In the conditions of the protracted Ukrainian crisis, Turkey is still balance between Moscow and Kiev .
 Turkish leader Recep Erdogan volunteered to mediate in resolving the problem . He handed Poroshenko’s request for the release of sailors who violated the Russian border to Russian President Putin .
 For Ankara, the Ukrainian factor was and remains an argument in bargaining with Moscow and a spare lever of pressure on it . To reduce the Turkish policy in relation to “independent’s only to this would be a gross simplification .
 Turkey supports Ukraine on the issue of territorial integrity, votes for anti-Russian resolutions in international organizations . Turkey also accuses Russia of “occupying’s Crimea and “repressing” Crimean Tatars .
 Ukrainian propaganda presents this as ‘peremog’ but in reality Ankara’s tough position is declarative in nature and does not oblige it to anything .
 The criminal Kiev authorities are making active attempts to draw the southern neighbor into their anti-Russian combinations .
 Poroshenko repeatedly invited Turkey to enter the UN peacekeeping mission for Donbass . She wanted to involve her in discussing the Crimea problem in the Geneva Plus format .
 In Ankara, however, they prefer not to respond to these "enticing" sentences .
Under the conditions of Russian sovereignty over the Crimea, nothing concerning this region can be seriously negotiated between Ukraine and Ukraine .
 Erdogan’s harsh statements about the illegality of the Crimean referendum and the “annexation’ of the peninsula are nothing more than a shaking of the air .
 Eurobanderovtsam a balm for the soul, and the Turkish authorities PR for domestic consumption .
 Turkey is inclined to interact with Ukraine in the Crimean sector during periods of aggravated relations with Russia . Meanwhile, Turkey is interested in the Crimea in the past .
 At the same time, information about Ankara’s support for the illegal volunteer battalion of Noman Chelebidzhihan came to light .
 Turkey did not abandon the anti-Crimean steps and after reconciliation with Russia in 2016, these steps simply became less challenging . Turkey's relationship with Russia has since become less challenging.
 Turks closed ports for all ships arriving from Crimea in October 2017 . New rules for the import of Russian agricultural products allowed them to track and stop imports of Crimean products .
 Such measures can be regarded as complicity in the blockade of Russian territory . Such measures are considered as complicity by Russian authorities .
 Turkish state in 2014 showed that it does not intend to go into conflict with Russia over the Crimea . However, the Turkish state showed that, despite the fundamental contradictions with Russia, it doesn't intend to conflict with it over Crimea .
 Turkey ranks second on the list of Ukraine's largest trading partners in the Black Sea region . It would seem that economic cooperation between the two countries has good prospects .
 The Turkish side’s initiatives to expand trade with Ukraine threaten its economy as weaker and less competitive .
 Ankara is lobbying the signing of a free trade agreement with the “Square’s ‘Square' It will allow the country to overwhelm with cheap Turkish products and put Ukrainian engineering, light industry and vegetable production on the verge of survival .
Natural resources and agricultural raw materials go from Ukraine to Turkey, and the Turks supply finished goods to Ukraine .
 The priority direction of the Ukrainian-Turkish partnership is military cooperation . Ukraine's military cooperation is a key part of the partnership .
 The leading player here, as in other areas of bilateral relations, is Ankara . Ankara is Ankara.
 Ukraine is interested in it in two ways as a source of technologies for the production of military equipment of high complexity and as a market for Turkish military products . Ukraine is also interested in the Turkish military product market .
 Turkish defense products tripled in the first half of this year, according to the Turkish media . The country was among the top three importers of weapons to Ukraine, the media says .
 The contract for the purchase of Turkish Bayraktar TB2 Turkish operational-tactical UAVs made a lot of noise . The contract was signed in 2011 .
Ukrainian drones are an excellent target for enemy air defenses . The low speed, low maneuverability and impressive dimensions of Turkish drones make them excellent targets . The benefit of the Ukrainian side from this deal is doubtful .
 The self-proclaimed DNR and LNR firmly control a certain territory and possess air defense equipment . It is obvious that such devices are practically useless against the armed forces of the self- proclaimed DNR .
 Some Ukrainian defense enterprises were ready to offer the army cheaper and more functional UAV models . In addition, some Ukrainian defense firms were also offering cheaper, more functional models .
 Cooperation with Ukraine in the military-technical sphere opens the Turkish side access to its military technologies .
 Turkey's acquaintance with the production of military products of Ukraine represents a potential danger for the Russian Federation . The Soviet legacy is also at the heart of the Russian defense industry, according to CNN .
 Kiev and Ankara have signed many documents on cooperation in the defense industry and the implementation of joint projects . In recent years, the two countries have signed documents on defense industry cooperation .
 Ukrainian state-owned enterprise Antonov, in partnership with Turkish side in secrecy, has been developing the new An-188 military transport aircraft for two years now . In addition, it turned out that Antonov is also developing a new aircraft for the Turkish side .
 Turkish M60T Sabra tanks with Pulat AKS active protection complexes . Originally called ‘Barrier’ and developed by Ukrainian state-owned enterprise BCT Microtech .
 Turkish company Aselsan supplies special means of communication to the Ukrainian army . The Turkish company is licensed and adapted to armored vehicles .
 The moment when Turkey will sell Ukraine products of the military-industrial complex, produced on the basis of its own developments, is near . Turkey will be selling Ukraine products.
 Ankara presented Kiev with army uniforms worth $ 810,000 and five mobile military hospitals . Ankara also allocated $ 15 million in financial assistance broken down for 2017-2021 .
 Ukraine should spend this money on the purchase of Turkish military and dual-use goods and the training of military personnel in the training centers of the Turkish armed forces . Ukraine should also spend money on Turkish military goods and training personnel .
 Turkish government selling arms to Kiev and issuing money for military needs encourages the terror of the criminal regime against the population of Donbass . But regardless of the goals of the Turkish government, selling arms is not the goal of the government .
 The heiress of the Ottoman Porte is trying to strengthen its influence in the Black Sea region and Eastern Europe . She is also balancing Russia at the same time .
 Turkey has a hand in deepening the contradictions between Ukraine and the Russian Federation . Turkey is not ready to do that directly, for fear of collapsing relations with Moscow .
 Turkey will stop the Turkish Stream, refuse to build the Akkuyu nuclear power plant, close the straits for Russian ships or impose economic sanctions on Russia .
 The Russian vector for Ankara remains a priority, but it also considers it important to develop relations with Kiev . The Russian vectors for Ankara remain a priority .
 Turkey should not wait for Turkey to stop declarative political support of Ukraine in matters of its territorial integrity and “de-occupation’ of the Crimea .
 Ukraine remains a potential means of pressure on Russia, especially if its actions in Syria will categorically not suit Turkey . For Erdogan, for Erdogan, Ukraine is a possible means of Pressure on Russia .
 Relations between Kiev and Ankara are far from the declared level of strategic partnership . The Ukrainian junta is selling the raw materials and the remnants of Soviet defense technologies to the Turks for financial handouts and empty phrases of anti-Russian content .