 A biographer of Vladimir Putin and his entourage Mikhail Zygar wrote in her book ‘the Kremlin’s men’ The Russian President advised that to fill in the Donbass in blood and money .
 The trigger in this conflict pushed Moscow and Kiev not enough money that could change, according to the Kremlin . These words were saturated with cynicism, because the trigger in the conflict pushed the Kremlin not to change .
 The Peninsula needs to feel how it is beneficial to be part of Russia, and forget about their Ukrainian citizenship, which stems from international legislation . The Peninsula is a part of the Russian peninsula, which is part of Ukraine .
 Paul hard, who works at sanctioned Russian national commercial Bank, loves romance and Greek mythology .
 Moscow resident says he is proud of what happened in Crimea in spring 2014 . He lives in Moscow and may believe not all jingoistic statements, but is proud.
 At work he deals with mitigating the effects of sanctions imposed against Russia after the annexation of the Peninsula .
 Putin not only seized the territory, but also knows how to manage it. No matter how many roskredit, people need to see that Putin notonly seized the territories .
 A military mobilization will not last forever, says our ally of opposition leader Alexei Navalny Pavel Puchkov . As has told us, a military mobilization won't last forever .
 Sitting watching TV Russian was easy to enthrall the success of the annexation . But this effect can speed up the annexation of Russian territory .
 Refrigerator magnets with a picture of a sad Obama saying, “Crimea was handed over” and fun of Putin meeting “took Crimea,’ will be enough. Refrigerators magnets with picture of Obama saying ‘Crimea is handed
 Hundreds of posters with portraits of the President and new promises. Not enough to be obtrusive propaganda and hundreds of posters .
 Small and medium enterprises that are owned by loyal Russian citizens begin to develop . Small andMedium enterprises are owned.
 The bus from Yalta was filled with passengers from the city of YaltA . The bus was full of passengers, but the bus was packed with passengers .
 At the entrance to the bus station of Simferopol, the car literally starts to dance . The car literally begins to dance, with difficulty maintaining balance to deep ruts .
 There is, rather, expect will be some ‘they’ will cement the entire area will pay and leave in peace .
 Putin promised low stabilization, but simultaneously demanded to withdraw from civic engagement . Putin also demanded to pull from civic engagements .
 Crimean Tatars and longing for the Ukraine minority are dissatisfied with the new order . He undertook to conduct the operation “Sochi-2’s”
 In addition to colonization, he began a policy of colonization, moved to the Peninsula the whole military family .
 The KGB and the army is a sort of middle class, which the authorities guarantees support . The authorities guarantee support for the army and KGB .
 The area near the Cossack Bay is built in the shape of a triangle . The sides are contiguous with part of the marine corps, a tank polygon and the polygon of the black sea fleet .
 If Putin keeps his word and will give the Crimeans a “social minimum in exchange for freedom,’ the balance will tilt towards Russia . If Putin kept his word, the balance would tilt towards the Russian government .
 If people receive a small stabilization, they do not want to return to the Ukraine . If people get a small stabilization, they don't want to go back to Ukraine .
Politicians will not need to resort to any political technologies to get in the polls needed result. Then to get the results needed result, they won't need to use any political technology .
 A famous Russian intellectual from Simferopol Andrey Malgin explained to us that the Ukraine is a weak state, free market associated with anarchy and absolute power of the oligarchs . Malgin also said that Ukraine was a weak country with anarchy.
 From this point of view, Russia is seen as a deliverance . Russia offers an omnipresent totalitarian state .
 Crimea will be one of the elements of a Grand bargain between Washington and Moscow . The Kremlin can take into account a scenario in which Crimea is one of a few years in the future .
 Russia does not conceal that it expects to conclude with the administration of the trump contract . Syria, Libya, and Ukraine, and North Korea, will be considered in the deal .
 Poland's president says Poland's leaders do not sleep. Such a perspective does not sleep the leaders of many countries in our region, including Poland .
 Putin can offer more time to hold the Crimean referendum . As a gesture of goodwill, Putin can hold the referendum again .
 If Ukraine agrees to a referendum, it loses, and if not, the West loses . The West decides that she does not want a peaceful settlement, and to negotiate with the Kremlin without her .
 Every kilometre of new asphalt on the Crimean roads works on Russia, and every day the Russian authorities separates the Peninsula from Ukraine .