 The USS Abraham Lincoln and USS John C Stennis are two of the ten nuclear-powered Nimitz-class aircraft supercarriers in service with the U.S. Navy . LCFI statements and articles from Socialist Fight Two supercarrier in 2012, the USS Abraham
 The U.S. has five battleship fleets, the Second Fleet in the Atlantic, the Third Fleet in Eastern Pacific, the Fifth Fleet in Arabian Gulf and the Sixth Fleet in Mediterranean . The Seventh Fleet in Western Pacific is the Seventh Fleet.
 USA 10, Italy 2, France 1, Russia 1, Spain 1, India 1, Brazil 1, China 1, Thailand 1 and Thailand 1 .
 It is the trading currency for oil and almost every other commodity in the world . It's the world's biggest trading currency .
 Wars against Iraq, Libya, and Ukraine today are primarily launched to protect this privileged position . The position enables it to rob every other nation .
 The decline is largely due to U.S. transnationals locating their HQs abroad for tax avoidance purposes .
 Ireland’s 19 companies apparently place it in the same league as Saudi Arabia, a ridiculous comparison .
 In reality up to half of those ‘Irish’ companies are not really Irish at all except in name .
 The U.S. dominates many other companies by virtue of its stock holdings . The United States has all these companies located abroad .
Statistics would reveal the true nature of U.S. imperialism’s domination of almost every aspect of the trade, commerce and lives of the majority of population of the planet .
 Those it does not fully dominate it demonises, organises coups and internal wars against for regime change and/or it bombs and invades them . And those it doesn't fully dominate.
 Finance capital is interlinked in a global web of dominance spreading out from Wall Street and the City of London . Wall Street is the world's most powerful financial capital .
 Swiss banking is not a secret that it has strong links with the City of London . The role of Swiss banking has been described as a 'strong link' with London .
 Also important are the so-called ‘tax havens’ and money laundering centres, Luxembourg, Jersey, Guernsey, the Cayman Islands, the British Virgin Islands, and the UK .
 Finance capital plays a major role in the Spanish banking sector . Basque and Catalan banks are not really Spanish and behind much of the separatist agitation .
 Finance capital of British origin plays a big role in maintaining Gibraltar as a tax haven . Gibraltar is a major tax haven for Gibraltar .
 The top ten stock exchanges in the world are worth $US billions .
 The two U.S. stock exchanges are as big as the next eight combined . With its allies it is absolutely dominant in the market .
 The ranking of countries by Gross Domestic Product. World $70,201,920 is the top 10 .
 Sarkozy shakes hands with Mahmoud Jibril and Ali Al-Esawi, representatives of the unelected ITNC in Benghazi . Sarkozy recognised them as the legitimate government of Libya .
 The NPA and the USFI demand recognition from all the Imperialist powers for these counter-revolutionaries . The U.S. and NPA demand recognition.
 Brand new military bases have been built since September 11, 2001 in seven countries .
 The biggest "host countries" are those that once lost a major war in which the U.S. was involved . The biggest “host countries’s” countries are the biggest ‘hosts’
Mike McNair’s Rethinking Imperialism is third campist and his long historical analogies are a-historical .
 He reports on in 2004. His task is to deny what is specific about modern imperialism as analysed by Lenin and to elevate secondary features to make bogus comparisons .
What is different today is the domination of finance capital and its alliance with trans-national corporations and their domination of the entire planet. What is different is the dominance of the finance capital, and the alliance of trans- national corporations .
There is no historical precedent for this which began with the Great Depression of 1873 and was completed by the early 20 th century . There is no history of this which begun with the great Depression.
 Lenin's description of Lenin’s position is wrong, he says, in order to allow him to equate it with its opposite, the Stalinist opportunist popular front alliances .
 Lenin insisted on the split between oppressed and oppressor nations . The oppressed nations were its victims, including the national bourgeoisie, he said .
 Lenin understood the concept of the Aristocracy of Labour, and of course it is true that more than just a narrow layer in Imperialist countries benefits from the booty of empire .
 The ideological domination of Imperialism over the whole working class gives to revolutionaries, says Bob Crow .
 Lenin and Lenin were very careful to draw a sharp distinction between the operation of both the Workers’ United Front and the Anti Imperialist United Front tactic and Menshevik-type class collaboration as practiced by Stalin and the degenerated Comintern .
 Trotsky did not supersede the AIUF by a generalisation of Permanent Revolution . He did not emphasise this in his analysis of why politically capitulating to Chiang Kai-shek led to the Shanghai massacre in 1927 .
Chinese workers' organizations must participate actively and in the front lines of the present war against Japan, he says .
 Spain's war in Spain and the SinoJapanese War are both imperialist wars .
 To speak of ‘revolutionary defeatism’ in general, is to make a miserable caricature of Bolshevism . To put that caricature at the service of the imperialists, he says .
 The French Popular Front of 1936 and the Spanish Popular Fronts of 1936-39 were the only ones claimed by their supporters as successes were disastrous and led to massive defeats for the working class .
 The dictatorship of the proletariat would inevitably place on the order of the day not only democratic but socialistic tasks as well . It would give a powerful impetus to the international socialist revolution .
 Many who have done so have failed to apply that theory in practice to actual wars by their own bourgeoisie . Many have failed. Unfortunately many who have tried to apply it in practice have failed .
 Stuart King, former leader of Workers Power and now of Permanent Revolution, has now repudiated his own contribution .
 Workers Power/the League for the Fifth International may be forced to ditch their identical Kinginspired if not written programme on this vital question .
 The RSO maintains an anti-imperialist line on Libya, and its document on the AIUF was also inspired by iTR Sii tionals .
 The COFI are themselves specifically opposed to the AIUF, rigidly counterposing it to the Trotskyist theory of Permanent Revolution . ‘We reject popular fronts between the working class and bourgeois parties.’
 The working class cannot share political power with even the shadow of the bourgeoisie . Government alliances with such elements mean subordination to bourgeois politics .
 Tarty members may not occupy positions in bourgeois governments, including those of Stalinist and post-Stalinist countries as well as in the imperialist powers .
 We reject so-called anti-imperialist united fronts as a version of the popular front . They stand in absolute contradiction to the permanent revolution, says the group .
 Lenin, in the Terms of Admission into Communist International, July, 1920. Lenin was the leader of the Communist Party .
 We will polemicise against the positions of both the Permanent Revolution Collective and the League for the Revolutionary party . The Communist Organization for the Fourth International will use the document of the former in their internal educaImperialism .
Bridgeton Parliamentary Division. In relation to those states that have a more backward, predominantly feudal, patriarchal or peasant patriarchal patriarchal patriarchal democratic elections . The election was held in 1918 .
 Tbo adopted Labour Candidate for Bridgeton Division in Parliament . He says people need freedom and comfort that has been absent from our lives .
 I have been an active worker in the cause of Education, and the interests of the children and of the teachers will always be of primary importance to the children . I submit now for your approval, will secure me your support at the forthcoming Parliamentary Election .
 An unconditional struggle must be carried out against the reactionary and medieval influence of the clergy, the Christian missions and similar elements . This obligation to offer active assistance affects the workers of those countries on which the backward countries are in a position of colonial or financial dependence .
 The United Front was the method of the Bolsheviks and of Comintern of the early 1920s . The Transitional Programme of Trotskyism defended and developed to win the revolutionary leadership of the working class .
 The AIUF is its logical extension in the semicolonies . It recognises the changed circumstances and hence consciousness of the working class and oppressed in the ‘third world’
 We seek to win their ears for the revolutionary Trotskyist programme, we say . By recognising the contradictions between oppressed and oppressor nations, we recognise the healthy impulse of these masses .
 Trotsky explains the AIUF, even if he does not use the term, in these three examples from the late 1930s . Look at how Trotsky explains how AIUF was created .
To these politicians it appears that this fact relieves the proletariat of the duty of making a choice between two dictators. To these politicians, it appears. It appears that these politicians have a duty to make a choice.
 Imperialism today's Page 7 A dictator can also play a very progressive role in history .
 Floyd George exercised a highly reactionary dictatorship during the war . On the other hand, right in the midst of the English democracy, he exercised ahighly reactionary dictatorship .
 If Mussolini triumphs, it means the reenforcement of fascism, the strengthening of imperialism and the discouragement of the colonial peoples in Africa and elsewhere . If he wins, it will be the re enforcement of fascism and the strengthening.
 The victory of the Negus would mean a mighty blow at Italian imperialism . The victory would lend a powerful impulsion to the rebellious forces of the oppressed peoples .
 The Eiffelites on China, 1937. ‘In my declaration to the bourgeois press, I said that the duty of all the workers' organisations of China was to participate actively and in the present war against Japan, without abandoning for a single moment, their own
 The only salvation of the workers and peasants of China is to struggle independently against the two armies, against the Chinese army in the same manner as against the Japanese army .
 In Brayil there now reigns a semi fascist regime that every revolutionay can only view with hatred . The regime is now a semi-fascist regime .
 I will be on the side of “fascist” Brayil against “democratic’s Great Britain . I will answer for myself personally, in this case I will. I will also answer for himself personally .
 In the conflict between them it will not be a question of democracy or fascism. Because in the conflict, it won't be the question of fascism or democracy, says the author .
 If England should be victorious, she will put another fascist in Rio de Janeiro . She will place double chains on Brazil .
 If Brazil on the contrary should be victorious, it will give a mighty impulse to national and democratic consciousness of the country . It will lead to the overthrow of the Vargas dictatorship, according to Brazil .
 The defeat of England will deliver a blow to British imperialism and will give an impulse to the revolutionary movement of the British proletariat .
 One must have an empty head to reduce world antagonisms and military conflicts to the struggle between fascism and democracy, says author .
 The Spart ‘Family’ equate the AIUF with popular frontism . The CoReP, ‘The Anti-Imperialist United Front in Practice is the Popular Front’ they say .
 It is for Stalinists and those centrists who have abandoned the transitional programme and method but not for genuImperialism today Page 8 ine communists .
 ‘orthodoxy’ far from inoculating these simon-pure doctrinaires against opportunism, is in fact the cover for capitulation to great nation chauvinism . The third world dictators are fighting capitulation.
 In Third World countries, the pseuclo-Trotskyists invoke the “anti-imperialist united front’ as a cover for supporting bourgeois regimes .
 This includes support to the reactionary “Islamic Revolution’ of Ayatollah Khomeini in Iran in 1979 . This also includes support for the ‘Islamic Revolution.’ in 1979.
 In the Arab world, both Stalinists and pseudoTrotskyists hailed the so-called ‘Arab Revolution’ in the 1950s by Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser in Egypt and in the 1970s by Qaddafiin Ubya .
 Support to Arab nationalism has led to the defeat of workers movements throughout the Near East . Nasser rewarded the Communists for their support by imprisoning and killing them .
 The bourgeoisnationalist regimes of Nasser and Qaddafi inevitably failed to address the felt needs of the masses . The bourgeois nationalist regimes have never been able to reach the masses.
 To the “anti-imperialist united front, we counterpose the Trotskyist programme of permanent revolution, which holds that in the neocolonial countries, the proletariat must lead all the oppressed masses in a struggle for socialist revolution against their “own’
 The Malvinas, when the asses’ ears poked through the orthodox Trotskyist hat The ‘Family’ all have the same reactionary chauvinist positions on the Malvina conflict .
 'The Falkland war was an armed conflict between capitalist Argentina and rotten British imperialism' 'They all refused to defend semi-colonial Argentina against imperialist Britain,' says the author .
 At no point in this war was the national sovereignty of Argentina put into question . The overthrow of their respective governments was in the interests of the British and also of the Argentinean working classes .
 communists put forward the position of revolutionary defeatism and fight for the defeat of their own bourgeoisie . This is only applicable to inter-imperialist wars, in a war against a semi-colony it amounts to great nation chauvinism .
 This is a shameful evasion of your proletarian internationalist duty to defend a semi-colony against an imperialist attack. Argentina's failure to admit U.S. support for “rotten imperialist Britain” and the transparent cowardly. “at no point in this war was the
 "The overthrow of their respective governments was in the interests of the British and also of the Argentinean working classes," says the author .
 Thatcher recovered from a disastrous opinion poll position due to her destruction of British jobs and manufacturing industry to sweep the next election because of it . Thatcher recovered after a disastrous poll position.
 Page 9 laws and privatisation of public assets are part of her anti-union Imperialism today . This ideological victory set her up for her assault on the miners in 1985 .
 imperialism’s apologists on the far left might have sought to obfuscate their treachery by trumpeting the secondary gain of the overthrow of Galtieri . We point out the dire political consequence of this for the British and world working class .
 The British working class were left ideologically leaderless by the national chauvinism of Michael Foot and the other leaders, Regan/Volker .
 The world working class suffered in the overthrow of the Soviet Union. All this prepared for imperialism's crowning achievement, the worldhistorical defeat .
 The sinking of the Belgrano on May 2 1982 was a victory for world imperialism . The Spart “Family’s’ ears of Shachtmanism poked through the orthodox Trotskyist hat .
 Reaction on Immigration Controls Imperialism causes poor third world workers and peasants to seek refuge in the rich imperialist countries .
 Spart family go soft on immigration controls to defend the privileges of the aristocracy of labour . This results in the whole Spart family going soft onimmigration controls . This means the whole family is going soft.
 Alan G, 'I agree with the Spart observation you quote as it is merely a statement of fact,' says Alan G .
 The US, Dutch or Belgian capitalist states do not support immigration controls by the U.S. or Belgian states . I can categorically state that this does not mean any support for immigration controls.
 The IBT never call for immigration controls they sail so close to the wind that it becomes similar to the AWL distinction between ‘supporting’ and ‘not opposing’ the bombing of Libya .
 It is a piece of reactionary hogwash designed to appeal to the backward national prejudices of the middle classes and the TU bureaucrats . It is also a part of a political ploy by the U.S. government.
 They would not cross the border unless they had good reason to suppose this gave them the chance of a better life . They wouldn't cross unless they were in good condition .
Fear about “well-financed American “colonists’ buying up Mexican enterprises and Imperialism today Page 10 real estate is also bogus, as if the Rio Grande/ Bravo ever stopped them doing that anyway .
It is that united front we seek to cultivate, not that of Stalinism and petty-bourgeois nationalists . It is that of the nationalists which capitulates to the conjunctional and feigned antiimperialism of the nationalist bourgeoisie .
 These may fight Imperialism today to preserve their own privileges by the use of anti-imperialist rhetoric . The opportunity arises to enhance their privileges by another alliance with Imperialism .
We have made that distinction very clear in the course of this document . We have made it very clear. We have also made it clear that we have made the distinction .
 The AIUF is simply the logical extension of the United Front with workers in struggle . The Comintern saw it in the early 1920s and as Trotsky defended up to his assassination in 1940 .
 The United Front in its two manifestations is not ‘only’ a tactic, which may or may not be applied depending on the circumstances . It involves opposition to current petty-bourgeois prejudices .
 The RSO document is vacillating, allowing every concrete instance of a war on a semicolony to be characterised as an exception . The mood of the petty bourgeois had altered in a major collapse since the 2003 mass mobilisation against the war on Iraq .
 The UF and AIUF are tactics that apply at all times except when the direct uprising takes place for the seizure of power and the masses are flocking to the revolutionary banner . It is wrong to characterise the UF as a tactic at all because it is the methodology of communism
 T he global economic crisis has increased the appetites of Imperialism to appropriate the planet's riches by exploiting the working class and recolonisation .
 Capitalist governments have moved enormous sums of money from state coffers to large private capitalist financial intuitions in the name of saving capitalism's crisis cause by speculation .
 The bourgeois governments are seeking to recapitalise their coffers . Now the bourgeois governments to stabilise the country and keep it.
 We do not force the working class to pay the price of consider these processes as Arab revolution or this financial orgy. We don't force the workers to pay price of these processes, we say . We don’t force them to consider this process as Arab Revolution or financial or
 These popular uprising fiscal adjustments, the attacks on wages, and vieare genuine expressions of the outrage at price tories over unionised labor, says author .
 In Europe, from Greece to Ireland, popular reAfiri ca and the Middle East. sistance was restrained by pro-imperialist party If Imperialism cannot take ownership peacefully leaders and trade unions .
 In Latin America, so far, the governments of the ""centre left" ul ent elections as happened in Ivory Coast . In Latin American, the government is by military force and impose their fraudnot for long .
All are delaying and dampening social conflict by the ThiSj with the support of the African Union and control they exert over mass organizathe ANC government .
 Obama ordered the start of the bombing in Libya, Syria and Iran . Imperialism seeks to on Libya when he was with the pro-imperialist. President Dilma Vana Rousseff, in Brazil, took advantage of the popular uprising .
 In Syria U.S. Imperialism and its Zionist Imperialism today strive to create the same scenario of civil war to justify another military intervention . In Syria United States Imperialism, the United States and its Zionist Imperialism try to justify a military intervention.
 The "rebellion" is a group of people who had also prepared beforehand . The group had been preparing for the event for years . They had also been prepared beforehand.
 It is the continuation of a series of attempts to restore the monarchy and tribal privileges in favour of U.S. and European Union . It began shortly after Gaddafi took power in 1969 and continued sporadically since then .
Rebel leaders in Libya were CIA agents from the beginning, as were the anti-Chavez coup leaders in Venezuela in 2002 .
 Imperialism, headed by the U.S. and France, seek to balkanised Libya, as it did in Yugoslavia or to dominate it together, as in Afghanistan and Iraq . Imperialism is similar to that of Yugoslavia and Iraq, but it also seeks to
 Evo Morales surrendered a larger share of the revenues from gas exploration to the pro-imperialist coup makers in the east of the country .
 20 Palestinians have been killed and 50 wounded in the worst Israeli offensive in Gaza for two years . Since the new escalation of Israeli attacks against Palestinians 20 Palestinians are killed .
 The attack is the bloodiest attack since the 2008 military operation that killed 1,400 Palestinians . It is theBloodiest attack on the Palestinians since that operation in 2008 .
 We are for the destruction of the Zionist state of Israel and for a multi-ethnic workers’ and peasants’ government a based on workers' and peasants' councils .
 Gaddafi sanctioned the bombing which will result in far more deaths than Gaddafi could have caused . As an ‘unintended consequence’ it will put the oil resources of Libya in the hands of western Imperialism .
 Murphy writes: “Our thoughts should be with all British Forces around the world, including the more than 10,000 Britons in Afghanistan .
 There is no concern about civilians and fighters blown to pieces ‘to save lives’ in Iraq, Afghanistan or now Libya only concern and praise for the killers .
 The native agents of Imperialism are merely open cat’s paws for multinational intervention in the country .
 They are racists and xenophobes, they are enemies of all black working class Saharans in Libya . They are racist and xenophobic, they say .
 "Gaddafi mercenaries" seek to demoralise the work force in the country, preparing it for the super exploitation in a new era of extreme Imperialist plunder .
 The Libyan "rebels" are a bunch of bourgeois turncoats from Gaddafi regime in favour of big business internationally . The Libyan ""rebels"" are a group of bourgeous turncoats.
 Political groupings claiming to be Marxists who portray the popular uprisings in the Arab world as diverted ""revolutions" are demagogues, who flatter and stupefy the masses . New proimperialist bourgeois puppet governments are being stabilised.
 The Libyan masses are supporting the Libyan masses in their struggle for democracy . But the worst is when these groups in the name of supporting them are combined with Imperialist war propaganda by the world media .
 Those who now refuse to establish a military front with Gaddafi externally and internally to defeat the interests of Imperialism, betray the struggle and the fight against global Imperialism and the genocidal state of Israel that massacres the Palestinians .
 FT . FLTI . L5I . It was the anti-working class, neoliberal policies of Gaddafi during the last decade .
 Gaddafi has established new agreements with Imperialism, destroying the gains of the process of nationalisation of the means of production and energy resources .
 Gaddafi banned trade unions and strikes and made racist anti-immigrant agreements with Berlusconi . He has sponsored Sarkozy and privatized and made auctions with the energy resources of Libya .
 The caudillo of Tripoli has lost popularity with the Libyan and African population . It fuelled the appetite of the native bourgeoisie to negotiate direcdy with Imperialism, freeing up Gaddafi clan .
Libyans demand the arming of the whole Libyan people against Imperialism and the reactionary opposition .
 We demand the unconditional defence of Libya against Imperialism and its agents . We demand unconditional defence. We also demand the protection of Libya.
 Kerensky's former general tried to carry out a coup in Russia in August 1917 . This was the revolutionary tactics of Lenin and Trotsky .
 The Bolsheviks called for a united front and military weapons to Kerensky . They demanded at the same time that Kerenky was blamed for paving the path for reaction . Kerentky was accused of preparing a social revolution .
 The reaction to the responsibility of Gaddafi for the coup will drive the masses to combine the anti-imperialist struggle with the democratic and socialist struggle . The panArabism of Gaddafi has stopped, says the writer .
 Victory would be huge boost for the proletariat Libyan who could settle accounts with the warlord of Tripoli . It would also give a huge impetus to the struggle of workers in Tunisia, Egypt, Bahrain, Ivory Coast, Palestine, Iraq and Afghanistan against Imperialism .
 The first step towards this is to fight in our own countries against the Imperialist bourgeoisie and semi-colonial Britain, Brazil, South Africa .
 We advocate defeat of our own governments, as allies against Imperialist recolonisation of the world proletariat . We advocate the defeat of their own governments as allies.
We support the right of the Libyan masses to seize the multinational British, Brazilian and South African companies . We support the full right to seize them without compensation.
 Public opinion did not buy the obvious lie that the ‘war on terror’ must defeat Al-Qaeda . But Assad had to go by arming Al- Qaeda .
 Islamist militias manipulated by Western intelligence have been the battering ram for Western Imperialist foreign policy increasingly since the 1980s .
 There would be no mass civil war in Syria without Islamists imported by Saudi, Qatar, Jordan, Turkey, and the US, UK, and France . There would also be no civil war without Islamist groups imported by the U.S. and UK .
 Syrian National Army demands victory over US-sponsored forces . Despite previous brutal pro-imperialist tyranny by Assad defending Syria’s national sovereignty .
 The LRC fights in the labour movement for the defeat of all Imperialist-sponsored forces .
 The defeat of this bogus ‘revolution’ will defend a relatively secular administration, strengthen the Syrian working class against Assad and dent chauvinism in the US, Britain and France .
 On horses who live on the wind and revolutions which are simultaneously counter-revolutions which are both counter-reservations . Gerry Downing W hen I was a child in rural West Cork.
All winter long he trained his horse in this technique until spring arrived . All winter long, he trained him in this method until spring arrives .
 The story is related to several of the left and selfproclaimed revolutionary left of the ‘revolution’ in Egypt . It was going so excellently well that it overthrew the dictator Morsi but then suddenly went so disastrously wrong .
 General Abdul Fattah al-Sisi ‘stole’ the “revolution’, the generals “hijacked’ it, it’s the ‘revolution” he says . The general says the revolution “stole the �
 Political idiots like the IMT's Alan Wood could hail a reactionary populist uprising of 17 million against Morsi in Egypt as a revolution .
 Wiltshire then gives up completely and adopts the ‘plague on both your houses’ Effelite position .
 Gerry Healy's manoeuvrings with Arab bourgeoisie via Vanessa Redgrave, Alex Mitchell and others . The answer to that lies in that lies with the Arab bourgeoisie, says Healy .
 Khomeini sanctioned mass executions of leftists and trade unionists . They sanctioned the mass executions. They were used to lionise Khomeine as above .
 The Ayatollah symbolizes uncompromising opposition to the Pahlavi Dynasty and its autocratic rule . Millions of Iranians today follow Khomeini not because they desire the reactionary Utopia of an Imperialism today .
 The anti-Pabloites of this ICFI tradition had become more Pabloite than the Pabloites themselves .
 Workers Power’s Marcus Halaby manages to equate the coup which overthrew Morsi and restored the army with the coup that overthrew Mubarak in 2011 .
 The army, of course, obliged because it had already won the mass movement to its side . The army had already ideologically won the movement to their side .
 This was a populist counterrevolution which set out to restore army rule and it succeeded in its aims . This was an anti-government counterrevolution. This was the first time the army had been in power for more than a decade .
 Morsi supporters in the beginning but now the whole of progressive Egypt. And it then immediately went on to attack its opponents, Morsi supporters .
 He was posed the question, “Military coups usually herald the defeat of the revolutionary process’s defeat, he said . ‘They are often the most extreme representation of the counterrevolution,’ he added .
 The military is in the streets and has overstepped the constitutional limits to its power . It will seek some means to quickly return power to a civilian authority, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Egyptian army and its United States allies won the race in Egypt . But there is another horse who is alive and well .
 But surely it must develop a better revolutionary leadership than these idiots above who cannot distinguish genuine revolution from populist reactionary counter-revolution, says author .
 Socialist Fight 28 August 2013 HEZBDLLah W e oppose unconditionally the proposed Imperialist attack on Syria . They are for its defeat .
 The fundamental task of the hour for all serious socialists and anti-imperialists is to defend the national sovereignty of Syria against this Imperialist attack .
 There are no revolutionary socialists or antiimperialists fighting Assad in Syria . Talk of what might have been is to support a phantom revolutionary army in the face of this Imperialist war of aggression .
 Sarin and mustard gas is the same as used by the U.S. in Vietnam . Hundreds of people were killed in the region by Imperialist terrorism .
 Obama and the Imperialist mass media are seeking to ascribe the blame to the Syrian government . They are using this to justify the attack on Syria .
 KLA fabricated a bogus tale of the Racak Massacre in Kosovo in 1999 (all the dead were KLA fighters) to justify the bombing of Yugoslavia . The same pro-imperialist forces used to justify invading Iraq in 2003 and the Gulf of Tonkin incident in 1964 used to
 It is also reminiscent of the Gleiwitz incident, a staged attack by Nazi forces posing as Poles on 31 August 1939 .
 This was used to justify the invasion of Poland in 1939 . It has always been thus; the spiral of Imperialist barbarism tries to hide a crime by committing another.
 The Imperialist terror attack used chemical weapons against hundreds of children and adults in Syria . The attack occurred immediately in the wake of a blatant coup in Egypt today Page 18 .
Since 2011 the United States has been supplying arms and other assistance to terrorist mercenaries in Syria . Now, to cover the second crime, Imperialism threatens to bomb Syria, accusing it of massacring their own people .
 The U.S. government has enlisted allies in the West and the Middle East and has transported huge killing machines by sea and air to commit genocide against the Arab peoples .
 They have used lies and media manipulation to accomplish this as in previous operations in Kosovo, Iraq, Afghanistan and more recently in Libya . They have been used in Kosovo and Iraq, Iraq and Libya .
 We offer the traditional Marxist position of unconditional but critical support to Syria in this assault and in the war against the Imperialist-sponsored rebels .
We must follow the tactic of Lenin and Trotsky to the threat of Kornilov in Russia in 1917. We must followLenin and Trotsky's tactic.
 We demand that Assad arms the working class and call for the enlisting of all the people in the army against the mercenaries and Imperialism .
 The LeninistTrotskyists have not supported in the past, do not support in the present nor in the future support any capitalist government .
 Some Bolsheviks fall into compromise and allow themselves to be carried away by the course of events . But this is not the same thing; there is a dividing line here, which is being stepped over by some Bolsheviks .
 Kerensky's troops are fighting against Kornilov, just as his troops do, but we do not support him . We shall fight, we are fighting, we will fight, and we will not support Kerenky .
 We reject the abject notion that Imperialism is sponsoring any type of a revolution in Syria . We also support the overthrow of Gaddafi in Libya and covertly supporting the army coup in Egypt .
 Those who point to the slaying of the American Ambassador in Libya a year ago forget Imperialism has no permanent friends or enemies, only economic and geo-political interests .
 Fundamentalists it supported in Afghanistan in the 1980s and 90s fought it later in Iraq and Afghanistan itself . Those it sponsored in Libya turned against it in Mali, those it is now sponsoring in Syria via its client states in the Gulf, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
 The CIA celebrated the fall of Kabul to the Taliban and the lynching of former President Mohammad Najibullah in Afghanistan in 1996 . That it will have facilitated the imposition of barbaric regimes who may confront Israel later is a secondary question for Imperialism .
 The United Nations is effectively a nursery talking shop whereby the Imperialists allow the assembled nations of the world to play with the toys of diplomacy on secondary questions while it gets on with its own business .
 Western Imperialism bombed Yugoslavia in 1999 Imperialism today Page 19 despite the fact that the UN Security Council did not sanction it .
 Pentagon is a back office of the Pentagon when it decides to act for world order under U.S. terms . It is nothing but a Back Office of the Defense Department .
 The split on the top table, the Security Council, is unavoidable and can no longer be postponed if Imperialism is not to relinquish its all-encompassing global predatory role economically, politically and militarily .
 Lenin described the League of Nations in 1920. The social consequences on every continent are nothing but collateral damage for this “alliance of robbers’s’
 We reject any characterisation of this attack or the war in Syria since 2011 as any type of an inter-imperialist proxy war . US-led Western Imperialism and Chinese-Russian Eastern Imperialism are at odds .
 capitalism’s falling rate of profit means this is the only way to restore a higher rate of Profit for trans-national corporations and finance houses . Wall Street, the City of London, Paris, Hamburg and Tokyo are among the world's top finance houses.
Saudi Arabia, Qatar and UAE are the major direct funders of the Syrian mercenaries . The U.S. and Britain are the main partners in the Middle East .
Brent crude oil for delivery in October reached a maximum of six months, rising 26% to $ 117.34 a barrel . Already in London, the price of Brent crude oil has risen 26% since October .
This war could well be the opening volleys of WWIII in what is essentially a global war for markets between the NATO bloc and the central opposition around Russia and China . This war could also be the beginning of WW3 in the world .
 The Chinese and Russian bourgeoisies are not strong enough to prevail in the fight for their own areas of influence . The Russian and Chinese bourgeoisies have not been strong enough in the battle for influence .
 We see this in the successive retreats forced on China in Africa, first in Libya, then in Mali, and more recently in the Central African Republic .
Compared to Western Imperialism the resources of Russia and China combined are puny indeed . Compared to Western imperialism, Russia's resources are more resources than China's .
 This is a Western Imperialistsponsored war and a counter-revolution which is currently engaged in ethnically cleansing the Kurds in northern Syria in order to declare an Islamic state based on Sharia law . All minorities who are not sufficiently of the Sunni Muslim faith.
 The sponsoring of Sunni Muslim terrorism has been the main strategic orientation for the United States via the CIA since the fall of Saddam made Shi’a Iran the main objective opponent in the region .
 The Special Activities Division of the CIA has carried out much Covert Action and ‘Special Activities’ such as bombings of Shi’a civilians in Iraqi marketplaces .
 Sunni Muslims want to defend at least the level of secular rights and freedoms they have under Assad . That is the reason for the growing popularity of the Assad government among the ethnic minority communities .
 Page 20 Shi’a conflict no more than the conflict in the north of Ireland was/is a religious Catholic/ Protestant sectarian conflict . We therefore reject absolutely that this is, or is degenerating into, a sectarian Sunni/ Imperialism .
 The main victims are the Shi’a and all other minorities, despite some instances of sectarian atrocities . The source and aggressive perpetrators are the Sunni-based A1 Nusra Front, assisted by Imperialist secret agents .
 The pro-imperialist Loyalists are the source of sectarian divisions and the main perpetrators of atrocities . This too parallels the course of the conflict in the north of Ireland .
 Religion is always an ideological cloak beneath which people fight out their real material economic, social and political interests . Religion is a cloak under which peoplefight out real economic and social interests .
 The dividing lines in both conflicts, as in the entire semi-colonial world, are between the forces of Imperialism and forces of anti-imperialism .
 Revolutionaries are always unequivocally anti-imperialist, just as Trotskyists were . They still are unyielding defenders of the deformed and degenerate workers states .
 Those who cannot seek the defeat of their own Imperialist war-mongers in this attack have fallen at the first hurdle . They are of no use to the working class whatsoever .
 The kindest thing that we can say about them is that they are confusing the concepts of unconditional and uncritical support . They are confused by the concept of unconditional support, they say .
 The socialimperialist layer is the main pillar of capitalism in the working class . The main motivation in defending the 'Syrian Revolution is to gain acceptance from the union bureaucracy .
 We salute the heroism of the brave soldiers of the Syrian National Army . They have suffered terrible casualties in defence of their country's right to self-determination .
 Imperialist Special Forces have been on the ground in Syria since 2011 . They have every right to get their arms and other assistance from Iran and Russia .
Anti-imperialist working class fighters may come from the ranks of the future revolutionary socialist party . The party will in its turn deal with Assad and his reactionary bourgeois nationalists .
 We are confident that the pro-imperialist rebels and their supporters will be consigned to the dustbin of history by these anti-im Imperialist forces . We are also confident that they will beconsigned to a dustbin.
Of course principled revolutionary socialists and anti-imperialists do not defend the record and practice of reactionary bourgeois nationalist governments like those of Iran, Ali Khamenei, Saddam Hussein, Muammar Gaddafi or Bashar al-Assad .
These were and are all brutal tyrants and as pro-imperialist as domestic political conditions allow them to be . These were and were all ruthless tyrants, as well as as Pro-im Imperialist as political conditions allowed.
 Hafez al-Assad did for the Zionists and Western Imperialism in procuring the massacre of the Palestinian in the Tel al-Zaatar refugee camp during the Lebanese Civil War on August 12, 1976 .
Workers have brutally oppressed their own working class, outlawing strikes and executing and imprisoning trade union leaders and imposing corporate state trade unions to oppress the workers .
 There are oppressed and oppressor nations; Imperialist nations and semi-colonial nations . But there are oppressed nations and oppressed nations .
 liberal social patriots who point to the terrible deeds of the semi-colonial tyrants deserve universal contempt, writes John Sutter . Sutter: They point to their crimes with those of Imperialism itself .
 This tendency now compromises the vast majority of self-proclaimed Trotskyist groups internationally . This tendency is now the most common among self-described Trotskyists .
 Few continue to look on the reactionary rebels as revolutionaries or see a revolution hiding in the tail of that particular comet .
 We cannot fight for socialism in our own Imperialist country and accept the booty of empire extracted from the brutal oppression of semi-colonial workers and peasants as its source . We can't fight for socialist socialism in its own Imperialists country, says author .
 If the bourgeois governments of Russia, China and Iran do not capitulate again before Imperialism, and Imperialism is consistent with their own interests, we may have a third world war .
In this conflict revolutionaries did not seek out an ideal and comfortable third camp, they cannot be mistaken as mere pacifists . In this conflict, revolutionaries didn't seek out a ideal and comfort third camp .
 Neither do we have illusions in the bourgeoisies of Russia, China, Iran or Syria. Neither do they have illusions.
 The outcome for humanity will be barbarism if we do not prevail in the stmggle to defeat the U.S. and its allies . The outcome will be barbaric if we don't defeat the United States.
We put our faith in the victory of the oppressed nations and the reconstruction of the Fourth International, the world party of socialist revolution . We put ourFaith in the victories of oppressed nations, we put their faith in their victory, we say .
 The past 50 years has seen the total degeneration of the organisation from Trotskyism to bourgeois nationalism and Castroism . It has become a voice for its own imperialist bourgeoisie .
 The SWP took a principled stand against the Shachtmanites in the 1930s . Two decades later they had degenerated two decades later .
 Cannon arrived at exacdy the point in methodology where stood Bumham-Shachtman in 1939-40. Via Castro and Pabloism.
 Instrumental in achieving this remarkable transformation was the same ‘radical milieu’ in the U.S. which had provided the steam for BumhamShachtman. Instrumental is the same 'radical Milieu' in the United States.
 The SWP today finds itself beyond the Shachtmanite position of sitting on the fence and like Burnham before has gone over completely to the side of U.S. imperialism .
 Unable to support the mobilisation of workers in the eastern Ukraine against the fascist squads . Unable to back the mobilising of workers against fascist squads.
 Revealing the SWP’s naive appreciation of the U.S. propaganda machine . The SWP's naive attitude to the United States is revealed .
Russiaphobia is reminiscent of the McCartherite witch hunt of the 1950s . It is therefore no coincidence that they should display such Russiaphophobia .
 No mention is made in its pages of the symbolic fascist style of this massacre in Odessa, Odessa .
 Donetsk Peoples’ Republic has announced this oligarch is to have his property nationalised . The Donetsk Peoples' Republic has now announced the move .
 The working class has actually rallied around the remnants of the October Revolution, and made progressive calls for expropriating the oligarchs .
 These symbols do not just represent relics of Stalinism they also recall to the working class the progressive nature of socialised property relations and planned economy .
 The SWP is of course blinded by Stalinophobia and is incapable of seeing this, says the SWP . It is also incapable of hearing this, according to the report .
 Imperialism is backing Ukrainian fascism, the small number of Russian fascists have the backing of no one . Imperialism backs Ukrainian fascism .
 US imperialism and its allies of the North Atlantic bloc are hell bent on exporting their finance capital to Ukraine . U.S. imperialism and allies are hellbent on exporting finance capital.
 Accusations of Russian ‘imperialism’ do not stand up to justification when the world economy is dominated by US finance capital .
 This is why the American ruling class will back fascists in the Ukraine . This is the reason why the U.S. ruling class is backing fascists in Ukraine .
 The SWP has crossed the class lines and joined cheerleaders of its own ruling class, for revolutionary socialists . We unequivocally oppose imperialism and fascism .
 C Slaughter, hi Defence of Marxism, New Park Publications, London, 1971 www.themilitant.com .
 revolutionary socialists should support neither in that war, says the writer . U.S.-dominated global Imperialism is a conflict between rival Imperialist powers .
 We should advocate revolutionary defeatism for ourselves and for the Russian/Chinese working class,e. They should seek the defeat of their own bourgeoisie in order to combat the imperialist chauvinism that sweeps the masses in wartime .
 Neither Russia nor China are Imperialist powers in the Marxist sense. We content that this is fundamentally wrong . In any conflict between Imperialism and these states it is necessary to form an Anti Imperialist United Front with them .
 The balance of forces internationally is nothing like in the periods before WWI or WWII when roughly equal Imperialist power blocs faced each other . Now the economic and military power is overwhelmingly on the side of the United States Imperialism and its NATO allies .
 Russia and China are Imperialist countries, and it amounts to a demand that the Russian and Chinese workers refuse to defend themselves against United States aggression . Now we say that in this conflict today in the Ukraine revolutionary dual defeatism is equal to national chauvinism in western imperialist countries .
 We caution newer comrades against bandying about the term ‘Imperialism’ as groups like the AWL do in imitation to how it is used in the bourgeois mass media . The AWL does in imitation.
 In Marxist terms ‘Imperialism’ has a precise meaning and this is the rule of finance capital . In Marxist term “Imperialist’s’ term ‘imperialism.’
 History has known the ‘imperialism’ of the Roman state based on slave labor . The imperialism of feudal land-ownership, the imperialism of commercial and industrial capital, the Imperialism of the Czarist monarchy, etc.
 The driving force behind the Moscow bureaucracy is indubitably the tendency to expand its power, its prestige, its revenues . Moscow's government has a tendency to expansion its power and prestige .
 This is the element of ‘imperialism’ in the widest sense of the word which was a property in the past of all monarchies, oligarchies, ruling castes, medieval estates and classes . This is an element of 'imperialistism' in the
 To employ the term “imperialism’ for the foreign policy of the Kremlin, the term means simply to identify the Bonapartist bureaucracy with the policy of monopolistic capitalism . Both one and the other utilize military force for expansion.
 Austrian-based RCIT has produced a big pamphlet to prove, on behalf of the whole third campist crew, how wrong we in Socialist Fight and the LCFI are .
Front cover cartoon of Uncle Sam facing a very angry Russian bear which is just about to rip his head off .
We would suggest that this is an illegitimate use of imperialist propaganda in a self-proclaimed Marxist magazine . We would suggest this is a use of imperialism in the magazine .
 Russia and China are the new rising Imperialist powers about to dominate the planet . The work is replete with extensive charts and tables to prove his point .
 The former deformed and degenerated workers’ states are now. Much of the work proves only that these are unequal societies, as were the former deforming and degenerate workers' states .
 The more relevant statistics and charts are one sided and very misleading as to the real economic relationships between Russia and China and global imperialism and who poses the military dangers .
 In less than two decades a number of Russian monopolies have been formed which exert a total grip on the country’s economy .
 Russia’s capitalism is probably more monopolized than most other imperialist economies . Russia's capitalism is likely more monopolizing than most imperialist economies.
 The monopolies are involved in all forms of businesses, starting with oil and gas extraction, metal mining and manufacturing, and up to finance . As we will see below in more detail, these monopolies can be found in all types of businesses .
 Lenin's definition of an imperialist power is obviously applicable when it comes to Russia’s monopoly capital .
 The energy giant Gazprom is just over 50% state owned but most of the rest of the shares are in the hands of foreign capital . Most of the other shares of Gazprom are in foreign capital.
 Most of the rest of the major “monopolies’ in Russia and China are listed as ‘state owned’ 25% are typical and as low as 13% in some cases . The rest are less than 50% state owned .
 Western imperialists complain bitterly that this is grossly unfair, that they should be allowed free access to all shares and not just to the “B’s” shares that are freely floated .
 Probsting can point to foreign direct investment inward and outward and the ‘round tripping’ of oligarch’s funds to Cyprus . He avoids the entire global picture in his eagerness to make his imperialist point .
 China and Japan are two largest holders of U.S. government stocks and bonds . They are obliged to buy to offload their dollar surpluses and keep open the US consumer market, by far the largest in the world .
 FDI of the U.S. in Russia and China yields over 20% interest . But these stocks and bonds only pay between 1% to 2% interest. The FDI in the United States and China only pays between 1%.
 The dollar is the trading currency for not only oil but most other commodities in the planet . Some would say it is the most important of all its holds over the global markets .
 The continued threat to this global monopoly can be reasonably designated as the prime cause for the war against Iraq in 2003, against Libya in 2011 and against Ukraine in 2014 . The global monopoly is a threat to the global monopoly, writes Peter Bergen .
 If the U.S. loses this immense advantage their empire’s days are numbered. If the United States loses this enormous advantage, their days are indeed numbered .
 Quantative Easing,e. devaluating the dollar reduces the value of the dollar holdings of these two countries . Japan, the Gulf States, Brazil and others also have been devaluated .
 The United States looted Libya’s gold reserves at the end of the war in 2011 . It has not returned to Germany its gold bullion as Merkel requested in 2012 . The U.S. has just looted the entire gold reserve of the Ukraine on 7 March 2014, some $
 The whole world is forced to subsidise the U.S. economy. By these mechanisms the whole world was forced to subsidies the United States economy .
 A large portion of that subsidy from unwilling foreign trading partners goes on the U.S. military . It is used to menace and/or invade any country that seriously threatens that monopoly .
 This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the U.S. experience, says author .
 The total influence — economic, political, even spiritual — is felt in every city, every State house, every office of the Federal government .
 Our toil, resources and livelihood are all involved in our society, says author . "Our society is very structure of our society," he says .
 In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, writes David Frum .
 The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist, says the author . The potential of the problem exists, he says .
Every U.S. Senator and almost all Representatives are in the pay of the MIC lobby, which needs constant wars to keep profits and shareholders’ dividends high and their employees in work .
 Foreign investors continue to have a decisive influence over the Russian stock market .
 According to Sberbank KIB analysts, they own about 70 percent of free floating Russian shares .
 Russian investors are still wary of the stock market after the 2008-2009 crash . But Russian investors still remain wary of stock market .
 One third of investors active in Russia are United States funds . Another third are funds from continental Europe; the remaining third are U.K. funds .
 Both Russia and China are no more than semi-colonial countries, albeit very large and advanced ones . This makes quite clear that far from being Imperialist powers both Russia and Chinese are not more than Semi-colonial .
 U.S. Imperialism is not linked to the global web of Imperialism in the same way as minor imperialisms like Holland and Belgium or allied to it in a more equal way . Japan, Germany, Italy, Spain and Canada are still subordinate to the U.
 No, they are in the upper level of semi-colonial countries and recognise themselves as such by allying as the BRICS . Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa and South Africa .
Workers now pit workers against one another from Bosnia to Venezuela and threaten a new world war . They are now pitted against each other from Bosnia.
 The threat of such a war is most evident in the build up of the U.S. military encirclement of China in the Pacific .
 The centre ground we have listed, some of whom had shifted sharply to the left over the Ukraine . Those more consistent Trotskyists who have taken a strong anti Imperialist line on Libya and Syria from the beginning .
 We have outlined our theoretical, economic and political rejection of the theories of internaImperialism . Page 28 tional class struggle being driven by the interimperialist conflicts between Western US-led Imperialism and Eastern Imperialism of Russia and China .
 The Liaison Committee of Communists ridiculously propose. This includes Venezuela where the conflict is the result of the incursions of China into the U.S. backyard . This includes even Venezuela.
 We have also proposed an Anti Imperialist United Front with the “devil and his grandmother’s” including Putin himself . Working class should make on Russia to defend it against the fascist onslaught.
 Lasdy is designed to build a new revolutionary socialist working class leadership as part of a reforged Fourth International . Lasdy's orientation is primarily designed to building new revolutionary working class leaders .
 Michael Calderbank attempted to give political and even revolutionary weight to his reactionary position on the current crisis in Ukraine .
 Trotsky was clear that independence must be bound up with preservation of planned economy and socialised property created by the OctoI The Cost of l Iving Crisis Time to end economic injustice .
 Public and Commercial Services Union ber Revolution would mean defence of the gains in the rest of soviet territory despite rule of the degenerate bureaucracy .
 The national independence of Soviet Ukraine would mean the plan could be tailored to the needs of the Ukrainian people . But they would still support the plan of the rest of the LISSR .
 Trotsky was clear that the bureaucracy's strangulation of the Ukraine had turned many of the masses away from socialism which they had previously supported .
 The official communist movement headed by the Kremlin had no answer to Ukrainian independence . It stifled national expression and implemented disastrous agricultural policies . The official Communist movement had no answers to Ukrainian Independence .
 Ukrainian clericals and National Socialists were not heard at all . The problem became aggravated early this year .
 The answer Trotsky stressed was for the revolutionary workers’ movement to lead the desire for national independence as part of continuing socialist revolution .
 Ukraine to demand independence from centralised bureaucratic rule while defending the gains of the revolution .
 To ignore the desire for independence meant sections of the masses would be driven to bourgeois nationalism and fascism . To ignore this, to ignore the need for independence, would be driving to fascism and bourgeois nationalism .
This is in complete opposition to the Ukraine envisaged by the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists led by Nazi Stepan Bandera . This is incomplete opposition to Ukraine envisaging by the Organisation of Ukraine Nationalists .
 This position must be seen in the context of its time, the 1930s on the eve of imperialist war and military threats to the USSR, the world’s first workers’ state .
 Calderbank's use or rather misuse of Trotsky's article today. Now we must examine Calderbank’s use and misuse of the article today .
 This has thrown back consciousness of many workers’ in Ukraine and Russia . The USSR no longer exists and, obviously, is no longer exist . This has been a problem for many workers in Ukraine, Russia.
 Ukraine is independent as a bourgeois republic, not a soviet republic . The borders of Ukraine have altered several times since Trotsky wrote his article . The country is independent.
 Calderbank chooses to take the article out of context as justification for adopting an antiworking class position . It is not Trotsky who is wrong though but Calderbank who takes the article from context .
 In the Ukraine now we have the corrupt but elected government of the oligarch Yanukovych deposed by an unelected coup-government .
 nationalists plan to give up even their bourgeois independence to the imperialists of the EU and U.S. Yet these nationalists will give up their independence to imperialists .
 It would then become a NATO member, strengthening U.S. imperialism’s military presence right up to the Russian border . It would of course then become an NATO member .
 The U.S. and EU means no true independence for Ukraine. Clearly the imperialism of the United States and EU mean no trueindependence for Ukraine . The Ukraine is not independent from the EU, it is not.
 Imperialism will mean the domination of Ukraine and Ukrainian workers by the IMF and World Bank as well as US corporations .
 The economic deals local oligarchs had with Russian capitalists were more beneficial to the population than would be imperialist domination . The deals were better than would have been imperialist domination.
 Russia is not an imperialist country, it is undoubtedly a capitalist one . But it has offered a better economic deal to Ukraine .
 The EU offers de-industrialisation, privatisation, wage cuts, social security cuts and debt . The EU is the world's largest economic body .
 Workers in Ukraine can look to Greece, Ireland and Portugal to see their future . The finance capital and military of the U.S. is ever too keen to enforce compliance using local fascist gangs .
 In the Donbass region, focused around Luhgansk and Donetsk, there has been a groundswell of opposition to the Maidan and its coup-government .
 Calderbank's lack of dialectical thinking means he cannot conclude that today’s officially ‘independent’ Ukraine is dominated by oligarchs . Calderbank has developed its own internal movement for regional independence in the face of this imperialist onslaught .
 Trotsky’s method applied today means support for Ukrainian independence from US/EU imperialism and the self-determination of those regions which are at the forefront of the opposition .
 This same proletariat has its very existence threatened and its own rights in particular to speak their first language . This same proletarian has its own right to speak its first language, the same proletariat is threatened .
 Many Russian speakers live in the east and have intermixed with Ukrainian speakers . As mentioned earlier, the borders of Ukraine have altered considerably since 1939 .
 The calls for Ukrainian independence and 'national unity' by Calderbank and the ‘Ukrainian Solidarity Campaign’ mean a centralised ultra-nationalist state which suppresses the rights of minorities .
 Calderbank and his ilk would rather preserve the state boundaries as they are at the expense of the working class . They have expressed their will for autonomy through a referendum on this issue .
 Calderbank, the United States and EU condemn the working class resistance as 'terrorist' and influenced by 'Russian agents' Yet nothing is mentioned of the fascist terror gangs, CIA agents and mercenaries operating in Ukraine .
 Many on the left have chosen to support imperialism in the way they did at the start of WWI a hundred years ago, exposing themselves now as they did then as liberals and not Marxists .
 Many leftists have been outraged at military methods and personnel being employed by the Donetsk and Luhgansk Peoples’ Republics . Some Kiev supporters have been kidnapped or tortured, according to the activists .
 The liberal prejudices of these middle class liberals and individuals such as Calderbank reveal their hostility toward the working class . In the course of such struggles, enemies real or suspected will be given a hard time .
 'moralizing philistine's favourite method is the lumping of reaction’s conduct with that of revolution’ Trotsky noted about such leftists .
 Ideologists of intermediary layers who have fallen, or are in fear of falling between the two fires .
 The working class continues to fight the fascists and imperialists in its quest for survival and self-determination .
 Michael Brown was shot by a police officer after being stopped for walking in the street . Brown was unarmed and unarmed.
80% of African Americans felt the shooting of Michael Brown raised important issues about race, but only 37% of whites did .
 Black people’s interaction with the police involves mostly disrespect, harassment and violence . Black people's interaction with police involve mostly disrespect and harassment .
 The persistence of negative stereotypes and images that perpetuates assumptions of Black inferiority reduces the chance for the majority of white people to empathize with the Black experience, says Dr. John Sutter .
 An unarmed Black person is killed every 28 hours by police, security guard, or self-appointed vigilante . E Bonilla Silva: "Racism without Racists"
 Michael Brown’s shooting is not an isolated event, according to CNN's John Sutter . 8.7% of the Black people killed in that period were under 21 years of age, compared to 8.8% of Whites .
 Immediately after the killing of MB, the police, the politicians and the Media attempted to smear the character of Michael Brown .
 Whenever there is a Black victim of police brutality the Media alivays tty to make out that it was their own fault, it's not their fault. Whenever there's a black victim of Police brutality, the MediaAlivay tty makes out that they are responsible .
 The Media was invested in making the police officer the victim instead of the dead teenager . Michael Brown was systematically dehumanized, the Media was investing in making him the victim .
 The chief of police attempted to sell the fiction that MB was stopped for strong arm robbery, when in fact he wasn’t . Until the video is released, then the story changes and continues to change .
 The shop owner said no robbery occurred and neither the owner nor an employee called the police . The owner and an employee did not call police .
 Ferguson police released the identity of the cop who killed Michael Brown . They released a video which was 'edited' by the police .
 The part of the video cut out of the version released by the cops showed Brown paying for the cigars . The video was released by police officers .
 Page 33 named in civil rights lawsuits alleging the use of excessive force . At least five other police officers and one former officer in the town’s 53-member department have been named in the lawsuits .
 Darren Wilson’s supporters have raised over half a million dollars for him on ‘gofundme’ and the Support Darren Wilson Facebook page got 42,000 ‘likes’ in a week . Historians estimate that during the late 19 th and early 20
 As late as the 1920s Lynched Black bodies would be left hanging on public display for days or weeks to terrorise Black people .
 Michael Brown's brains spilled onto the street, rotting in the baking sun for over four and a half hours . Brown's body was left uncovered, his brains spilled on the street for four hours .
 Michael Brown's execution was a flashpoint because of this historical memory that it evoked. At least one so called ‘socialist’ site in their first report on the killing did not bother to state that Brown was Black .
 Not to say how Brown was killed is an attempt to disconnect this from the historical narrative, the history of lynchings, Jim Crow, harassment and all kinds of terror unleashed on Black people since they were brought to America against their will .
 The brave people of Ferguson peacefully protested against the murder of Michael Brown . They were met with assault rifles, armoured tanks, rubber bullets and teargas .
 Americans refuse to accept the facts of their own long history of violence .
 Genocidegiving smallpox infected blankets to Native Americans and thus wiping out whole Nations . Genocide giving smallpox infection to Native American Americans .
 Slavery and Jim Crow up until the 1970s, the Tuskegee experiment 1932-1974 . Slavery, Jim Crow and the U.S. were the first African-American black men to take part in the "Tuskegee Experiment"
 America has been killing and stealing from every other nation on earth, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Americans to blame Black people for violence is a bit rich, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: It is a little rich for Americans to be blaming Black people.
 No American alive now is responsible for what was done to the Native people . But they have benefited from the outcome, witnessing the injustices and inequality .
 The violence in Ferguson has its roots in the lack of jobs and no way out of the poverty trap . More important the repression and violence that Native and Black people are being subjected to will happen to ordinary working Americans .
 Black unemployment has been twice that of whites for 50 years, this gap hasn't closed at all since 1963 . Black unemployment is twice the rate of white unemployment .
Back then, the unemployment rate was 5 percent for whites and 10 percent for blacks . Back then, it was 5% for whites, 10% for blacks and 5% in the past . Now, it's 10. percent for black people .
 In 2011, 27. percent of black households were in poverty — nearly triple the poverty rate for whites . 40 percent of Black children in America are growing up beneath the federal government's notoriously inadequate poverty level .
 The Department of Defense budget request for fiscal year 2012 was for $553 billion, an increase of $22 bilImperialism . The Pentagon's budget request is for $554 billion, a $22 billion increase over the 2010 appropriation .
 This money could have been better spent creating jobs and on job training and education for people throughout the U.S.
 Some Black people are also complicit in upholding the system of racism, having internalized the idea of Black criminality/ inferiority .
 Preachers/politicians/hustlers like A1 Sharpton have the nerve to lecture the people of Ferguson who are the victims of violence instead of confronting that violence .
 These misleaders of the Black community claim that Black people need to vote more . If they had voted then they could have had more Black policemen and police officers .
 There are many cities with Black Mayors and Black police where Black people are treated badly, it's not just about cops . This nonsense is beyond belief, according to CNN's John Sutter .
 Black elected officials and Black cops do NOT change the nature of the Capitalist/ imperialist state. Black elected officers and Black police do not change the state's nature .
Black working class experience under persistent U.S. racial apartheid and inequality . It changes nothing in Black working class experiences under persistent racial apartheid .
 It merely serves to legitimize the armed occupation of the Black communities, it says . It merely serve to legitimized the armed invasion of Black communities .
 Black people are waging a struggle against systematic and institutional Racist oppression and economic exploitation . Part of this is class war, says Black people .
 The state should provide free breakfast programs and free healthcare services, but doesn't, says the state .
 The state has given more military hardware to local Police departments, preparing for the war to come on the Civilian population . Now things are so much worse with each war since then .
 On October 9*2014 new protests have erupted in St Louis after an off-duty police officer working for a private security firm in St. Louis .
 These murders will only end when these police are charged with murder and all costs are taken from the police pension funds .
 The people of Ferguson by their determination to stand up for Justice exposed the United States police State and all its military apparatus to show the world America’s war of Terror on Black people .
 Notes Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping America and the world .
They were never told they had syphilis, nor were ever treated for it . They were never treated for the disease .
 Segregation and the Making of the Underclass 1998 Imperialism today Page 35 NGOs and their role in former colonial countries are often religious based entities .
 NGOs dependence on funding from governments and global corporations means that they perpetuate the cycle of underdevelopment and contributes to the peoples’ suffering, says author .
 The way that NGOs are structured and the bureaucracy and paperwork involved plus the expectations of the donors makes it almost impossible for them to work with poor working class people in these countries .
 NGOs tend to work with the educated elite who know what to say to please the donors and how to put things to get funding . Most NGOs ship in their own workers to the country they claim they are trying to ‘help’ instead of using workers already there .
 Tens of thousands of people are delivering ‘aid’ in developing countries performing functions which should be done by the native people themselves .
 The NGO view of “development is a series of projects for the poor, not a struggle for justice and rights, says the group .
 The fact that poverty is structural and is produced by unequal social relations in society and in relations between rich and poor countries is ignored, says the author .
 NGOs do not challenge the mining companies which displace peasants from their land in order to steal their land and destroy the environment .
Companies don't challenge companies hiring police to mete out repression to anyone who resists this theft. They don’t challenge the companies hiring cops to meteout out repression .
 Haiti seized Independence in 1804, in the only successful slave rebellion in history . Haiti had been severely oppressed and underdeveloped due to slavery colonialism and neo-colonialism .
 Schwartz shows that if you track food aid that’s dumped in some parts of Haiti and look at when it was given, it was mainly in times when Haiti's production was strong .
 There might have been a drought, a temporary drop in local production, but "aid" comes a year or so later when production has bounced back .
 Haiti could be completely self sufficient in food with collectivization of resources and national investment . Haiti could become self-sufficient in food. Haiti could also be self-sustainable in food .
 U.S. surplus rice subsidized at 40% of its value is dumped in Haiti . Haitian rice farmers are not allowed to protect their own crops . This has virtually destroyed the rural economy .
 The neo liberal policy has been to impoverish people in the countryside . The neo-liberal policy is to force them into the slums, where they will be desperate enough to work .
 In 1990 there was a massive political mobilisation in Haiti which formed a party with a clear agenda which was strong enough to win the presidency . The party was a threat not only to the establishment in Haiti but throughout the region .
 This Movement came into being without a clear political organisation, without a military wing, with no money and no international connections . This Movement was founded by former members of the United States House of Representatives . It was founded in the 1960s and is now based in London .
 The political problem was how to get some political unity in the parliamentary system so they could pass legislation they had a mandate to pass .
 The U.S. had reconstructed the army in 1915 when it occupied Haiti for 20 years . It has functioned as a power broker for the local elite ever since .
 In 1991 there was a political impasse which prepared the ground for a vote of no confidence in the government . In 1991 the government was forced to hold a vote in no confidence.
 Aristide was overthrown, over 5000 people were killed, and the political organisation became fragmented . Aristide's political organisation was fragmented and he was ousted .
 The Movement was still strong enough to be able to solve the military problem when Aristide decided there was no alternative to go back to Haiti with the support of U.S. soldiers . It was extremely ambiguous and has many pros and cons .
 There is no Haitian army to pacify the people directly . This has been the fundamental feature of Haitian politics since then, there has been no army .
 Right wing wants to re-invent the army or find an alternative army .
 In 1999 international donors officially withdrew all funds from the Haitian state as well as from the UN Mission and placed the funds with the NGOs . Donors such as the World Bank have promoted the Reverse Aid Agenda (Hoogvelt 2001 pl92) This redirects aid to private “civil
 NGOs are operating a parallel government which undermines the Haitian state . The NGOs are actually operating a Parallel Government which undermines Haitian state.
 The popular Movement solved the political problem by creating a new political organisation that had a national presence . The movement was created by the popular Movement .
 In 2000, Aristide won 75% of the vote at every level of government . There was a massive political international campaign to discredit the government, demonise the leader .
 All international aid was suspended to prepare the ground for foreign intervention . Starting in 2001 a low level military insurgency coupled with a concerted political and economic blockade of the country starved it of money, cut government revenue.
 In 2004 an international coup d’etat led by the US overthrew the democratically elected government of Jean Bertrand Aristide and forced him into exile and foreign troops occupied the country .
 The people are faced with a combination of foreign and local businesses buttressed by a massive international army of some tens of thousands of troops there for the long term .
 The majority of people are on one side and variations of the army are on the other . So the majority of the people are in the army.
 On 12 January 2010 the worst national disaster in the history of the western hemisphere, a seismic tremor of 7. magnitude shook Haiti . In 35 seconds over 230,000 people were dead and a million and a half were homeless .
 Earthquakes in Chile and Japan measured higher on the Richter scale but took far fewer lives because they had adequate shelter due to high standards of building regulation .
 The United States sent troops to Haiti unlike the Cubans and Venezuelans who sent doctors and health workers in an attempt to save as many lives as possible .
 The disaster merely laid the ground for international intervention, for foreign companies to exploit the situation for their own profit in collaboration with powerful local interests .
 US troops were sent to Haiti after the earthquake to secure the use of cheap Haitian labour for the multinational capitalist companies Imperialism .
 Ordinary people from all over the world donated to NGOs to help the Haitian people .
 The Red Cross raised $500 million in donations while CARE raised $50 million and other charities received considerable donations . The RedCross raised more than $500million .
 Very little of the money donated has been spent on needy Haitians . The money has been used to build 5 star luxury hotels in Haiti .
There has been a huge gap between the generous assistance promised by the international community and the pledges honoured up to now . There has been an enormous gap between pledges and pledges made by international community .
 The billions of dollars in aid further marginalised the state and social organisations . The billions in aid continued to marginalise the state.
 The Haitian people were not allowed to collectively determine the priorities for the next phase . Less than 3% of the money pledged is to go to agriculture .
 Most of the NGOs in Haiti have failed to oppose or expose institutions creating the conditions of impoverishment in the developing world . Most of them failed to expose or expose the conditions in Haiti .
 The West has failed to challenge pohtical decisions made in the west that are fuelling this poverty . They fail to challenge the decisions made by the west, they say .
 Representatives of this union group were brought to Europe where they met with Caribbean Labour Solidarity and other trade union groups . They were the most reactionary group we had ever met .
 At points in the meeting there was total silence because we were stunned by their pro imperiakst positions . At points there were total silence. At points, there was a total silence .
 He exposes BO relationship to the ‘democracy promotion’ programmes of the USA in Haiti that served as launching platform for the coup .
 Back page afds sporting the Miliband slogan “cuts too far too fast’ on their hi viz vests .
 The Socialist Tarty is about securing the patronage of left trade union bureaucrats and reformist politicians who will ‘oppose’ the cuts, denounce them viciously and passionately but nonetheless implement them in the end .
 Grass Roots Left will hold its founding conference precisely to fight for that perspective . On May 6th the Grass Roots left will hold the founding conference .
 'Revolutionary Trotskyists' are unable to oppose foreign wars in any consistent way . Some give them outright support .
 The soft left's foolish illusions in Benghazi’s rebels on page 20. Look at the sorry tale outlined in The softLeft's foolish illusion in Benghazi .
 AWL followed closely by the USFI/Socialist Resistance, the SWP, the SP, Socialist Appeal and Workers Power . No one can even approximate to a revolutionary approach to this Imperialist war .
Pro-imperialism would do just fine for now in the ‘Libyan Revolution’ for getting rid of Gaddafi . We could leave socialism to a later stage.
 Cameron will defeat the anti-cuts movement all the more easily with the patriotic support of the TU bureaucrats and half-hearted opposition to the war on Libya .
 Coalition of Resistance’s handout on March 26th demo .
 The degeneration of the left is apparent in its failure to fight the TU bureaucracy on the cuts and the attack on Libya . The left has not been able to fight TU's cuts and attacks on Libya.
 We need a new internationalist revolutionary party to fight this crisis. We need to fight the crisis, we say . We need an internationalist revolution.
 We have lost many friends and allies because this crisis has forced their politics into the open. We have also lost many allies and friends because of the crisis, we have lost them .
We are pleased to say that we have found new and better comrades in Britain, South Africa and Brazil . We are confident that we will not buckle under the current ideological assault of neo-liberal Imperialism .
Capital offers another warmed-up version of the 'trickle down' theory . William Blum, Killing Hope, says Capital is working its way through to the working class and poor .
Capital capitalist governments across the globe are following up cuts in wage and conditions with vicious attacks on the post-war welfare states .
 Iceland, Greece and Ireland with Portugal next for the chopping block . But bankers, still arrogantly paying themselves huge bonuses, have devastated smaller nations .
 Libya has gone to war with Libya to rob another relatively prosperous third world country like Iraq . This will draw the trade union bureaucrats even closer to them .
Fightback is nothing like what is needed to defeat this attack. And still the fightback is not enough to defeat the attack .
 Back in 1938 Leon Trotsky pointed to the problems and tasks facing the world working class and poor in fighting for its socialist future .
 The TU bureaucracy and parliamentary expression are key to building a revolutionary leadership for the class . The Labour party says it cannot solve the question of building revolutionary leadership .
 McCluskey had Unite’s stewards sporting the Miliband slogan “cuts too far too fast’ on their hi viz vests .
 Len McCluskey makes big bluster against the cuts while arranging behind the scenes to implement them . Unite General Secretary makes a 'big bluster' against cuts .
 Gail Cartmell told Councillors to set legal budgets by setting legal budgets while hypocritically protesting . At a meeting with about fifty of its councillors, he got them to carry out the cuts .
 One Labour Councillor, Kingsley Abrams, was intending to vote against the cuts . In Lambeth wild rumours began to circulate that one of the councillors was planning to vote .
 Regional Secretary Steve Hart attempted to get him to vote for the cuts . Such was the determination of Unite that no struggle against the cuts at all (other than puerile protests)
 Regional Secretary abstained, much to the displeasure of our 'left' Regional Secretary . In the end he abstained .
 Six ‘left’ Labour Councillors in Hackney, Barry Buitekant, Michelle Gregory, Linda Kelly, Deniz Oguzkanli, Ian Rathbone, and Patrick Vernon signed a statement against the cuts .
 They would, “support a campaign to defeat the policies of this government through public protest, opposition and defiance, they would say . They would support a campaign. to defeat a government policy by public protest and defiance .
 We would like to see local Councils across Condon leading the charge and refusing to adopt cuts budgets as a result of government enforced policies . We would also want to see councils across the country leading charge .