 Vladimir Putin’s assistant Yuri Ushakov said the situation in Ukraine would be one of the central themes of the meeting between Putin and Pope Francis on Wednesday .
 Putin also intends to discuss a number of other issues with the pope . The situation of Christians in the Middle East is a priority for the Vatican, Putin says .
 Putin is preparing to discuss the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church with the pope . Putin is also preparing to talk to the pope about the church .
 The destruction of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church after the Second World War was important proof that the Communists were returning to the old imperial doctrine .
 These were primarily repressions against civilization — Ukrainian and European . These were mainly repression against civilization, and against Ukraine and Europe .
 Ukrainian Catholic Church began its revival during the years of Perestroika . Its priests were told they did not belong here .
 Ukraine is the canonical territory of the Russian Orthodox Church, according to the Russian view . The Orthodox Church says Ukraine is its canonical territory .
 The "Uniates" associated with the Vatican would only sow doubts about the correctness of this thesis . The Vatican's "Uniate" is associated with Vatican .
 In Russia, life is not that simple for the Roman Catholics either, much less for the Greek Catholics . In Russia itself life is much less simple.
 Ukraine is also Russia, but there is no room for the “Uniates’ in the country coveted by the new emperor .
 Vladimir Putin will discuss all this with the Pope, so that the Pope has no more illusions . The Pope is expected to discuss this with Putin, but he has no illusions .
 The Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate have agreed to hold a meeting later this month to discuss unification .
 Moscow Patriarchate will do everything in its power to prevent the emergence of a single autocephalous Orthodox church in Ukraine . That move, agreed upon at a meeting in Kyiv, puts the two on the road to unification .
Independent national church is subordinate only to the Universal Patriarchate in Constantinople . The move would also boost Ukrainian national identity separate from Russia .
 More than half of the Moscow Patriarchate's parishes are in Ukraine . Many of the newly created bishops there are Moscow Patriarch Kirill’s base . Such a move represents a devastating blow to the Moscow church and its leader .
 It is entirely reasonable to assume that Kirill and Moscow will do everything they can to block this development . It is also reasonable to think they will use FSB-orchestrated provocations, blackmail, bribes .
 The Kyiv Patriarchate press service has made a modest announcement by its press service . These truly tectonic shifts follow from what may have struck many as a modest decision .
 The Ukrainian church in the US and the Universal Patriarchate formally expressed its gratitude . It asked that it be represented in all unity meetings .
 The UOC-Kyiv Patriarchate and the UAOC should decide on a date for the convening of a Unity Council “for the final union of the two churches’s two churches. This meeting proposed September 14 as an opportune date .
 The Moscow Patriarchate's looming loss of control over bishoprics and congregations in Ukraine to a new autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church will deprive Vladimir Putin’s ‘Russian world’ idea of any religious content, according to Boris Falikov .
 The Church has a vital interest in not doing anything that will lead to the loss of its control over bishoprics and parishes abroad, Falikov says .
 The third element usually present in other countries – a civil society – is absent in Russia . The reason for that is that the third element – acivil society - is absent.
 Many from Sergey Bulgakov on have called it a pseudo-religion of its own . Instead, it formed what many from Sergei Bulgakov have called a 'religion' of their own .
 Many hoped for the emergence of a civil society, of which religion could be a part . That harmed both the church and the state, and when that state fell, many hoped for a civil Society .
 In Russia, the entire situation is heading into “a dead end,’s Falikov says . He sees no prospects for emerging unscathed .
 The current Russian regime needs the power of the church “as one of the sources of its legitimation’s legitimation. The church is the source of the Russian regime's legitimation .
 The church in this sense is not even an independent player, says Patriarch Kirill . That is, it uses the power of the church, he says .
 In the current Russian government ideology, there is room for Orthodoxy to play a certain role, but by itself, it is not needed, and the state takes only what it requires .
 Just a year ago, Russian journalist Vladimir Yakovlev was one of Moscow's most influential media figures . He was a leading Russian journalist .
Today, he lives a quiet life in Tel Aviv and has swapped his Russian passport for an Israeli one .
 Yakovlev is the founder of the respected Kommersant publishing house and the Snob magazine . He belongs to a new wave of disillusioned Russian Jews deserting their country for the relative stability of Israel .
 Russians of Jewish descent have been fleeing in droves over the past 18 months . Spooked by Russia's actions in Ukraine and by increasingly stringent punishments for anyone deemed critical of the Kremlin .
 As many as 4,685 Russian citizens relocated to Israel in 2014 - more than double than in any of the previous 16 years .
 The nongovernmental Jewish Agency for Israel has released figures showing a 40-percent surge in immigration to the country between January and March of this year . The same period in 2014 was the same period, the agency says .
 The majority of immigrants still come from Western Europe, according to the study . Russians and Ukrainians are responsible for this increase .
 The number of Jews migrating from Western Europe has remained largely the same .
 The average Russian immigrant has changed dramatically since the last mass exodus of Jews from Russia ebbed in the late 1990s .
 Newborns from Russia are significantly younger, more educated, and as a rule, hail from Moscow or St.
 Mikhail Kaluzhsky was among the 4,685 Russians who moved to Israel last year . He was one of four Russians to move to Israel in 2013 .
 A journalist and playwright from Moscow, he is typical of the new wave of Russian immigrants described by Khanin .
 In January 2014, he traveled to Ukraine to witness the Maidan pro-democracy protests that toppled President Viktor Yanukovych . He traveled to the Ukraine in January 2014 .
 Russian antigovernment activists lag far behind their Ukrainian counterparts, he says . He says the unwavering determination of Maidan protesters left a deep impression on him .
 Kaluzhsky lost his job with the Sakharov human rights organization as a result of Russia's new "foreign agent" law .
 Sakharov Center was forced to scrap its theater projects in fall 2014 . Kaluzhsky had actively contributed to the theater projects .
 The couple's son attends a local Jewish pre-school and already speaks good Hebrew .
 They have sold all their belonging in Russia and do not plan to return . They have not planned to return to Russia .
 He and his wife have settled in downtown Tel Aviv, in a bright flat with a balcony full of flowers . The couple have been married for more than a decade .
 Most of their friends are other Russian intellectuals, and many of them date back from their life in Moscow . Many of these friendships date back to Moscow .
 Yakovlev says Israel offers the best of both worlds - a sunny, friendly climate and the same circle of liberal, educated Muscovites that surrounded him in Russia .
Ludvika Sarah Leah Schein, who survived the Holocaust, hadn't been to her hometown in 70 years . Schein had been to Ukraine for 70 years. Schein was born in Ukraine and moved to Ukraine .
Schein, whose parents and brothers were killed by the Nazis, attended a ceremony unveiling monuments to murdered Ukrainian Jews . Schein, who now lives in San Francisco, attended the ceremony .
 The first five monuments were opened in late June in the western part of the country . They were given official recognition to mass graves containing the remains of Ukrainian Jews murdered by German troops between 1941 and 1944 .
 The monuments sit atop mass graves containing the remains of 32,000 of the 1 million Ukrainian Jews murdered during the Holocaust . The monuments erected in Rava-Ruska, Kysylyn, Ostrozhets, Prokhid and Bakhiv .
 Nazis also murdered 3 million Ukrainian non-Jews as part of Germany’s Lebensraum plan to eradicate Eastern Europeans and repopulate their lands with Germans .
 Twenty-five years ago, Desbois visited Rava-Ruska’s concentration camp to see where his grandfather and other members of the French Resistance were held .
 The town also contained a mass grave for 15,000 Jews, but initially no one would take him to the gravesite . He had read that the town also had a mass gravesite.
 Desbois met Yaroslav Nadyak, then deputy mayor of Rava-Ruska, in 2004 . The local government changed in 2004 when he was deputy mayor .
 Nadyak encouraged locals to help Desbois document the town’s Jewish past . The project culminated in the new monuments .
 Desbois calls the Germans’ atrocities in Ukraine “a Holocaust of bullets,” since they simply shot Jews and ordered Ukrainian gentile peasants to bury them . The Germans shot Jews, ordered peasants to buried them – often alive .
Family members of victims of Rava-Ruska camp on June 29 are important for family members, he said . He said ceremonies like the one at the Rava Ruska camp were important for families of victims .
 Anatoly Podolsky, director of the Kiev-based Ukrainian Center for Holocaust Studies, hopes schools will integrate Ukraine's Jewish history into their curricula .
 Students in the five towns where the monuments were constructed used grant money to create pamphlets and permanent outdoor displays telling the stories of their Jewish histories .
 They, along with their teachers, also gave emotional speeches at the dedication ceremony .
 Many Ukrainians know that thousands of their countrymen risked their lives to hide Jews from the Germans . Many Ukrainians knew that thousands were hiding Jews in their homes .
 The idea that Ukrainians collaborated with the Germans is still not well-known, nor widely accepted . But the idea is not widely accepted, according to the author .
 The two bickered in Russian until rabbis from the U.S. and Ukraine interceded . The rabbis were from the United States and Ukraine .
 The generation gap can be closed through educational programs and a second phase of the monuments program, Berger says . Berger says she is confident that the program will be rolled out nationally in coming years .
 For survivor Ludvika Sarah Leah Schein, the monuments allowed her to finally pay her respects and attend Kaddish at the mass grave where her parents and two brothers are buried .
 The pope signed a decree recognizing that Metropolitan Sheptytsky heroically lived a life of Christian virtue . The decree was signed July 16 .
 The Vatican would have to recognize a miracle attributed to his intercession for a beatification ceremony to be scheduled . The recognition is an initial step in the sainthood process .
 Metropolitan Sheptytsky led the Eastern Catholic Church in Ukraine from 1901 until his death in 1944 . He was a member of the Ukrainian Catholic Church from 1901 to 1944 .
 Austrian, Russian, Ukrainian, Polish, Polish and Soviet, Soviet, Nazi, and finally, the Soviets again .
 Ukrainian Bishop Borys Gudziak of Paris told Catholic News Service that while the process for his sainthood opened five decades ago, it was only with the independence of Ukraine that church historians and theologians had access to all his archives .
 The study required for the sainthood process was not possible while Ukraine was still part of the Soviet Union .
 Roman Aleksander Maria Sheptytsky was born July 29, 1865, in Prylbychi, near Lviv . He took the name Andrey when he entered the Basilian Order .
 Ukrainian Catholics around the world are celebrating the 150th anniversary of his birth . Bishop Gudziak said the timing of the decree may explain the date .
Ukrainian Catholic Church. Elected major archbishop of the Ukrainian Catholic Church at the age of 36, he quickly became recognized as a social and cultural leader .
 He died Nov., 1944, just four months after the Soviets took definitive control of Lviv . He died four months later .
Five months after his death, they arrested all the bishops and moved toward declaring the Eastern Catholic church illegal . The metropolitan’s stature was such that they permitted a public funeral for him .
 Father Peter Galadza is the acting director of the Metropolitan Andrey Sheptytsky Institute of Eastern Christian Studies . He is also the director of a Christian studies institute in St. Petersburg .
 Some contemporary Ukrainian Jews will soon find themselves living in a “shtetl’s” called Anatevka .
 The new Jewish refugee community will incorporate a Jewish school, synagogue and almost 80 apartments when it is completed this fall . The Jewish community will house refugees displaced by fighting between government forces and pro-Russian separatists .
 Thousands of Ukrainian Jews have fled Ukraine’s eastern industrial regions . More than three-quarters of the more than 10,000 Jews who until recently lived in Donetsk .
 More than 7,000 have immigrated to Israel since early 2014, many have remained internally displaced within Ukraine . Many remain internally displaced in Ukraine .
 Azman purchased the land for the new shtetl around two-and-a-half months ago . Azman almost immediately began construction, using Jewish refugees as labor .
 Refugees from eastern Ukraine find it hard to obtain housing and employment . Western resentment against those viewed as holding rebel sympathies adding to the hardships of a stagnant economy .
 Both camps are converted summer camps and primarily serve as transit centers . Azman already runs a refugee camp in Shpola, and another is established by the International Fellowship of Christians and Jews in Zhitomir .
 The wooden shells of several buildings can already be seen on the Jewish community's Facebook page . The first of the two-story ‘townhouses’ is expected to be finished by the beginning of September .
 Seventy-six permanent apartments and 20 hotel-style rooms for transients will comprise the complex . Klimovitsky said.
 The community is currently under construction and will feature housing in small apartment blocks, a school, an orphanage, an old age home, a synagogue and community center . The community will also feature a school and orphanage .
 The first families will move in in September. We have made significant progress and the first families are set to move in .
 East Ukrainian Jewish refugees. Join us in building a future for East Ukrainian Jews, it added .
 In May, the Israeli government upped its aid to help resettle Ukrainian Jews displaced by their country’s civil war . NIS 2 million it already gave since late 2014, adding funds to the more than 2 million already given .
 President Petro Poroshenko met with representatives of Archbishop of Constantinople-New Rome, Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I . President Poroshenko was in Ukraine to celebrate the Day of Christianization of Kievan Rus' Ukraine .
 The Head of State noted that Ukraine is going through difficult and crucial times . Ukraine is in a difficult time, he said .
 Each day is an example of great service to the Motherland by the Ukrainian militaries in Donbas and the entire Ukrainian nation .
 "It is a dream that will help Ukraine become united and preserve principles and traditions," President says .
 Kyiv priest Roman Nikolayev died of gunshot wounds on Wednesday morning at the age of 40 .
 The priest was prior of the Church of Great Martyr Tatiana in Kyiv . He was attacked in a residential building on Heroyev Stalinhrada Avenue in Kyv .
 The attackers left after the attack and the priest was found on the staircase by his neighbor . The priest's neighbor called the police .
 Three prominent Crimean Tatars prevented from leaving Crimea to attend Crimean Tatar Congress . The event is politically embarrassing for Russia .
 The effective ban comes after weeks of FSB visitations, threats and attempts to use the small number of pro-regime Crimean Tatar organizations .
 Nariman Dzhelyal and Ilmi Umerov from the Mejlis, or Crimean Tatar representative assembly, have made a video address to the Congress . Zair Smedlyaev, Head of the Central Election Commission of the Qurultay, has made
 The ‘particularly important case’ in question is the prosecution and ongoing imprisonment without trial of Akhtem Chiygoz, Deputy Head of the Mejlis and two other Crimean Tatars on charges pertaining to a pre-annexation demonstration .
 Russia banned Mejlis Head Refat Chubarov and Crimean Tatar leader Mustafa Dzhemiliev from Crimea and imprisoned Chiygoz . Dzhelyal is now the First Deputy Head of the Mejlis and highest-ranking Melis leader
 Dzhelyal explained that the policy of intimidation has resulted in them fearing for the safety of their families and loved ones . In the address to participants in the Congress, he said that illegal armed paramilitaries have been used to intimidate people .
 Umerov points out that the occupation regime is trying to initiate new criminal proceedings . ‘talks’ being held with people trying to leave for the Congress and obstacles placed in their way .
 Some of the address was broadcast on TV ATR, the Crimean Tatar channel which Russia silenced at the end of March . It is now broadcast from mainland Ukraine .
 The Crimean Tatar People’s Mejlis and Qurultay have been prevented from carrying out their activities . Their assets have been confiscated .
 Crimean Tatar media has been closed down and education is banned, press release states . Abductions, arrests and illegal detention continue, the press release says .
 The Crimean Human Rights Field Mission has been noted with concern by European and international structures and western countries . Despite repressive measures against rights activists, the current attempts to outlaw the Crimean Human rights Field Mission are well-documented .
 The occupation regime has stepped up its threats, interrogations and arrests . Instead of addressing such concerns, the occupation regime is putting an end to repressive measures .
 At the same time it organized a congress of those few Crimean Tatars and their organizations that have been prepared to take a pro-Kremlin line .
 10 French politicians breached Ukrainian and international law by visiting Crimea last week . They were pulled out as trophies to meet the 10 politicians who chose to breach Ukrainian and International law .
 It's not just the irreverent punch line of a joke about the content of a Jewish telegram . It's just a joke.
 Ukraine is suffering from violent conflict, wide-ranging economic collapse, and a humanitarian crisis of untold proportions . It is also the only way I can describe the situation in Ukraine, a country suffering from violence, economic collapse and humanitarian crisis .
 Jewish leaders on behalf of Jewish Federations of North America. They met during a trip to the Eastern European nation .
 It was there that we got to understand better the realities that have beset Ukraine over the last year and a half . It was the first time we had to understand the realities of the country's crisis .
 The Euromaidan clashes, Crimean annexation, financial chaos, and protracted violence in eastern Ukraine have impacted a population of people who had faced major socio-economic challenges even before this crisis began . We saw firsthand how the Eurom Maidan clashes and Crimean annexation have impacted people .
 Many of the 1. million Ukrainians who have become displaced within the country’s borders have been displaced .
 Commonly referred to as Internally Displaced People or IDPs, they are attempting to forge new lives . They are attempting desperately to forge a new life in strange cities .
World refugee crisis reaches an unprecedented 60 million people this year . There has been scant news on their specific suffering, especially with the refugee crisis .
 Their desperate need for housing, medical care, food, and community connections is acute . But their desperate need is acute.
 American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee board members traveled to the region last summer . They hoped the IDPs would be able to resettle and find a more secure life, perhaps in Israel .
 At the time, we could not imagine their displaced status would continue, or that fighting and insecurity would escalate . At the times, we couldn't imagine that fighting would continue .
 When we returned this year, we would find even more displaced people, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Dnepropetrovsk’s Beit Baruch senior center and in temporary housing facilities in the city. But as we visited the displaced, we found pervasive sadness, vacant stares, and doubts for the future .
An educated young couple fled Lugansk last August with their two little boys . Hearing about the journey made by the young couple was surreal .
Parents had to forgo additional luggage to ensure their children's safe passage . Each parent could hold onto one of their son’s hands along the way .
 They currently reside in small, but meticulously kept apartment and survive on meager salaries from unreliable jobs . They currently live in small.
 To say they are in the middle of a perfect humanitarian storm would be an understatement . To say it would be a understatement, it's an understatement.
 Rampant inflation, devalued currency, and an inadequate or nonexistent social safety net have wreaked havoc on those who fled the separatist-controlled regions and those who remain throughout Ukraine .
 Many Jews are making use of the critically important aliyah services provided by the Jewish Agency’s Mayak Center .
 Chabad’s Rabbi Shmuel Kamenetsky works closely with all the major Jewish groups engaged in efforts to help the Jews of his city and throughout Ukraine .
 The air of positivity he has fostered has elevated not just Jews in need, but also the local professionals providing services to the needy and visitors, like us, like them .
 When the Soviet Union fell more than 20 years ago, JDC Hesed social welfare centers and Jewish Community Centers were established .
 These great institutions worked hard to infuse a sense of communal independence, philanthropic spirit, and local Jewish creativity .
 Hesed and JCC professionals and volunteers are demonstrating bravery, dedication, and contribute positively to their respective communities . Hesed, JCC volunteers and the volunteers are showing bravery and dedication .
 Jewish professionals work ceaselessly around the clock to ensure that each and every Jew, be displaced or remaining in the conflict zone, are cared for .
 They treat every person with compassion and dignity, even when they themselves are stretched, weary, and worried for their own family members and friends . They treat everyone with compassion, dignity, and treat each other with compassion .
Volunteers resoundingly active inside and out of separatist-controlled zones . And then there are those volunteers who are still active .
 Victor from Slavyansk delivered food packages on his bike to the elderly who could not leave home . The elderly were not allowed to leave home, and Victor delivered the food packages .
In his late 70s, and not Jewish, he did what he could in the most trying circumstances . In his late 60s, he was not Jewish. He was in his early 70s and was in the middle of his career .
 volunteerism has become a mainstay of Jewish communities throughout Ukraine . There is evidence of a home-grown sense of ‘arevut’—mutual responsibility among Jews .
 JDC’s Metsudah Leadership Program builds cohorts of volunteer Jewish leaders addressing social challenges .
 Jews of Zaporozhe have been instrumental in caring for displaced Jews . They are ensuring that they have a Jewish community to turn to at their time of need .
 During a visit to Ukraine, I met a severely ill child who was living with her grandmother and mother .
 The tiny, beleaguered family of women are lacking a permanent home, miss their lives back in the east . They now rely on support from strangers .
Since the crisis began, the response to the humanitarian plight has coalesced around a stalwart group of aid groups, concerned Jews advocates and activists .
 The Jewish Federations, Rabbi Yechiel Eckstein and the International Fellowship of Christians and Jews have been at the forefront of these efforts . The Conference on Jewish Materials Claims Against Germany, World Jewish Relief, Chabad, Jewish foundations, and individual supporters have been on the
 It is difficult to find hope amid these scenes of terrible struggle, and one fears that brighter tomorrows are ever more allusive .
 The Jewish spirit in the face of adversity reminds you of the indomitable nature of the Jewish spirit . But sometimes fate takes a hand and reminds you.
 Ukraine's Jewish leader says he was reminded that we can accomplish anything if we put our minds to it . In that poignant moment, despite his worries for the future of Ukraine’s Jews, he says .
 Russian feelings about religion have changed a lot since the collapse of the Soviet system .
 In Soviet times, the state expected and encouraged citizens to be atheists . In Soviet time, people were expected to be Atheists .
 A plurality of Russians tell pollsters they are Russian Orthodox, while significant minorities identify with Islam, Buddhism or Judaism . A majority of Russians say they're Russian Orthodox .
 VTSIOM survey shows something unexpected in its comparison of present-day attitudes in Russia with those of 1990 .
 The general effect of religion on human welfare is viewed in much bleaker terms than before . There is a jump in the share of people who say they are sometimes "helped" by religion in their own lives .
 In 1990, many Russians saw religion in the same rosy glow in which they saw everything non-Soviet, from rock music to fast food to monarchism .
 If the Soviet Union had been against it, they were for it, or thought it at least worth a try . If the Soviets were against it.
 The Soviet system did tolerate religious structures, including the Russian Orthodox hierarchy, as long as they were loyal to the state, but they were pretty weak .
 Since then the visible strength and privilege of officially-blessed faiths has grown enormously . Since then, the visibility of official-blessnessed faiths is growing enormously .
 Religion is viewed as a partner in power, and not in any sense counter-cultural . Religion is seen as a partners in power and not as counter-culture .
Around 1990, religion had for a time become a "widespread social fashion" after the limits on its practice were lifted .
 Many still view religion as an institution, which many view critically . Since then, people have learned to distinguish faith as such, which they still find personally meaningful .
 Radical Islamist movements, barely on Russians' radar in 1990, have since become a major security threat . The fact that radical Islamist movements may also play a role.
Official religious life in today's Russia is not all that different from Soviet times, apart from being vastly more prominent . In certain ways, official religious life is not really all that much different fromSoviet times .
 Established religious leaders are still expected to put their prestige at the service of the state . They are expected to get along with one another to preserve social peace and burnish the country's image abroad .
 The state encourages set-piece religious diplomacy involving officially favoured leaders . While repressing certain forms of Islam, the state also encourages Western-connected religious minorities .
 In June, prominent Russian Orthodox clerics and Muslim religious leaders from as far afield as Syria and Indonesia attended a grand meeting in Moscow on Russia's "strategic partnership" with the Islamic world .
 Foreign minister Sergei Lavrov delivered a message of encouragement from President Vladimir Putin .
 The meeting was chaired by the acting leader of Tatarstan, a historically Muslim territory in central Russia . The skyline is dotted with minarets as well as church domes .
 prominent Muslims from around the world, as well as Orthodox Christians, Jews and Buddhists, will be invited to the opening of a large new mosque in Moscow in September . It was reported Friday that prominent Muslims, including Orthodox Christians and Jews, would be invited .
 None of this careful choreography convinces religious-liberty campaigners in the West that Russia has fully accepted freedom of conscience .
 The law is so broadly worded that just about any faith could be charged with 'inciting religious discord' It is only for asserting the truth of its own beliefs, it is said .
 The European Court of Human Rights is currently considering an appeal against the law lodged by Jehovah's Witnesses .
 In Russia's current mood, Western appeals for a change in the official treatment of religion are likely to receive a grumpy response .
 New opinion polls suggest that the Russian public may be less enamoured with religious leaders than with their secular ones .
 The state's effort to tame and co-opt the power of religion has not been entirely beneficial to the state, or to religion . Or that the state's attempt to tame the state is not entirely beneficial, he says .
 The Congress of National Communities of Ukraine's latest reports on xenophobia in Ukraine have struck another blow to Moscow's persistent attempts to present the country as a hotbed of anti-Semitism .
 Reports do identify some problems, but they also portray disturbing attempts to exaggerate, invent, or orchestrate others . They do identify problems but also portray some problems .
 The most acute problem so far this year is the position of Crimean Tatars in Russian-occupied Crimea . Reports point to "a high level of anti-Semitism in public discourse" not in Kyiv, but from the Kremlin-backed militants of the so-called Donetsk and Luh
 The Congress's Monitoring Group on the Rights of National Minorities is headed by Viacheslav Likhachev . The group has been monitoring anti-Semitism and xenophobia in Ukraine for the past ten years .
 Likhachev shows that statistics do not support any suggestion of "mounting anti-Semitism" in Ukraine .
 The figures for 2014-15 show fewer incidents than the worst years of 2007-08 . In addition, the figures for 2013-15 are less incidents.
 So far this year, seven racially motivated attacks occurred in areas under Ukrainian government control . So far, seven of the attacks have occurred in Ukraine .
 There were twenty-four in 2014 and twenty-six in 2013, down from eighty-eight in 2007 . There were 20-24 in 2014. In 2007, there were 80-8 in 2007.
 Some recent street attacks are alarming, as is the ongoing police reluctance to acknowledge racial motives . The attacks have not led to fatalities, but some have been racially motivated .
 Ukraine has experienced eleven such cases this year, seven of them anti-Semitic . In 2013, there were twenty cases of racially motivated vandalism, nine of themAnti-Semitic. So far, Ukraine has had seven such cases .
 Likhachev says recent developments in Ukraine could account for the 2014 jump . But the reason given contrasts starkly with Moscow's narrative .
 Jews have become strongly associated with the pro-Ukraine movement since the Euromaidan, he says .
 Anti-Semites directed their hate speech against Ihor Kolomoyskyi, the oligarch who took a pronounced pro-Ukrainian, anti-separatist position as governor of Dnipropetrovsk . The oligarch has been accused of being anti-
 The authors suspect that agents working for the Kremlin not only exaggerate Ukraine's problems or report fictitious incidents, but actually stage them for propaganda purposes .
 Russian forces seized control in Simferopol the day after Russian forces took control . They have grounds for believing that at least two anti-Semitic attacks in Kyiv and the desecration of a synagogue were orchestrated .
 Ukrainian journalists who were fully aware of the participants' venal motives nevertheless reported on an "anti-Semitic picket" in Lviv. For example, Ukrainian journalists.
 Video footage would inconveniently show reporters asking the young kids and inebriated down-and-outs how much they'd been paid to show up . But photos can and surely will be pulled out as "proof" of Ukraine's anti-Semitism .
After a few months of silence, reports of anti-Semitism in Ukraine again made headlines . They were based on a fake letter from Rabbi Menachem Margolin to Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission .
 Moscow's own proxies in the Donbas refute the Kremlin's anti-Jewish narrative . The Donbas say they are not anti-Semitic .
 Earlier this year the leaders of the so-called ""republics" in an extraordinary show of anti-Semitism broadcast on Russian TV . Theycondemned the ""pathetic Jews" governing Ukraine .
 Such disturbing evidence of xenophobia and anti-Semitism has been around ever since the militants seized control . But lately it has become part of their vicious power struggle .
 Ukraine's leaders have laid themselves open to criticism over the role of the Azov volunteer battalion . The Azov battalion has its neo-Nazi leaders and probably members, as well as the more extreme elements in Right Sector .
 A few individuals such as Andriy Biletsky and Ihor Mosiychuk have won seats in Parliament . Others have received questionable appointments on the basis of their bravery .
 There are legitimate concerns about their role beyond the battlefield, as well as doubts about their motives . The recent conflict in Mukacheve has demonstrated, says CNN's John Sutter .
All this is a gift for Kremlin propaganda, but it still does not justify broad claims about Ukrainian society . All this is not a gift to Kremlin propaganda.
 Ukraine's two far-right parties did very badly in last year's presidential and parliamentary elections . No evidence exists that voters support anti-Semitic or xenophobic views, and no evidence exists .
 Biletsky reportedly claims that stories about his neo-Nazi and white supremacist views are all Russian slander . Now in Parliament, he reportedly says stories about him are all slander .
 The denial is unconvincing, but it is telling that he sees the need to make it, says the author . He says he is not convinced by the denial .
 I am impressed by the courage of our soldiers and volunteers who leave their families to serve on the frontlines at such a young age . I'm impressed by our soldiers, volunteers who left their families for the front lines .
Ukrainian army is better equipped and combat readiness is growing, officials say . They say that the Ukrainian army is more equipped than ever .
 I would like to point out that it is extremely important to have our chaplains in the field, a fact that was corroborated by the commanders .
 Eparch Borys Gudziak, Eparch of the Diocese of St. St. Mary's, shared his thoughts with the church's bishop .
 Father Bohdan Vykhor left his parish, his wife and five children to be at the forefront . Father Taras Kotsiuba is serving his fourth rotation as chaplain .
 The bishop believes that Ukraine has become the epicenter of a global geopolitical issue and the war in the East is its nucleus . The bishop says that Ukraine is the " nucleus" of the conflict .
 It is worth considering how pastors can participate and be useful in such special missions, he said .
 The bishop added that Ukrainian soldiers asked him to tell their country and the world that they are grateful for the moral and financial assistance provided by parishes, pastors, monks and the faithful who generously donate .
 Father Liubomyr Yaworsky accompanied Bishop Boris to the ATO zone . He specified that they visited five chaplains .
 Lviv’s Golden Rose synagogue, like those of the Jewish community in this beautiful Ukrainian city, lie far in the past . The glory days of Lviv's GoldenRose synagogue lie far from the past.
 Jews settled in Lviv soon after it was founded in the 13th century . By the late 1500s two synagogues formed the heart of the city centre .
 The Golden Rose was designed by an Italian architect in the renaissance style . Over the centuries it traded places with the neighbouring Great City synagogue as the main Jewish place of worship in Lviv .
 The fortunes of Lviv’s Jews fluctuated with its rulers from the 14th century until 1772 . Poland retook the city after the first World War – and as anti-Semitism waxed and waned .
 Before the second World War, about one-third of Lviv’s 320,000 people were Jewish . The community doubled in size as Jews fled from the Nazi occupation of western Poland .
 The Nazis captured Lviv and the surrounding Galicia region from Soviet forces in 1941 . They forced Jews into a ghetto before sending them to labour and extermination camps .
 When the Red Army re-took Lviv in 1944, only a few hundred Jews remained in the city .
 The Golden Rose synagogue is located in the Great City, New York . The synagogue has been closed for more than a decade . A makeshift fence hides the sole remaining wall of the synagogue .
 This square on Staroyevreiska Street will soon look very different, however, as a bright thread of Lviv history is finally brought back to light . The square on the street will soon be very different.
 The area will be repaved with stone of different textures to evoke the layout of the Great City synagogue . grass and trees will be planted where a Jewish study house stood, beside the Golden Rose .
 An installation will present quotes in several languages about Jewish life in Lviv .
 German architects will transform Synagogue Square . They will create memorial parks at the former sites of a Jewish cemetery and a Nazi concentration camp .
 The projects chime with Ukraine's determination to improve ties with Israel and the global Jewish community . Russia foments unrest in the country and accuses its pro-western leaders of pandering to fascist elements .
 Israeli specialists are caring for Ukrainian soldiers wounded in fighting with Russian-backed separatists . They are advising Ukrainian colleagues on how to treat post-traumatic stress problems .
 Ukraine's president, Petro Poroshenko, and Israeli premier Binyamin Netanyahu are expected to visit each other soon . Kiev keen to buy weapons and Israel perhaps more inclined to agree given its anger over Russia’s planned sale of advanced S-300 missile systems to Iran .
 The symbolic value of Israel's friendship is also crucial for Ukraine, given Russia’s allegations of rampant anti-Semitism . Some Ukrainian militia did collaborate with the Nazis; the small but prominent presence of ultra-nationalists among Kiev's current forces . A lingering lack of
 A Jewish “theme’s use of crude stereotypes extends to customers being asked to haggle over the price of their meal . The Golden Rose, for example, has a Jewish theme .
 A few dozen people briefly brandished anti-Semitic placards at a Lviv rally . A recent rally in Lviv also stirred anxiety .
 Lviv officials dismissed it as a stunt by pro-Moscow groups to discredit Ukraine . It was quickly filmed by Russian media before dispersing, and Lviv authorities dismissed it .
 Sofia Dyak, director of Lviv’s Centre for Urban History of East Central Europe, said she hoped Ukraine's conflict would not feed aggressive nationalism . Dyak said she hopes Ukraine would foster broader and more inclusive views of the country's diverse history . She