 February 21 marks the sixth anniversary of the end of Ukraine’s Maidan Revolution .
Three months of largely peaceful protests concluded in a spasm of deadly violence . Three months of mostly peaceful protests ended in a deadly violence.
 President Victor Yanukovych fled Kyiv and later Ukraine, prompting the Rada to appoint acting leaders . The Rada appoints acting leaders pending early elections .
 The country finds itself entangled in an ongoing low-intensity war with Russia, with uncertain prospects for settlement . Unfortunately, the country faces an uncertain prospect of settlement .
 The Maidan Revolution Ukraine in November 2013 sat primed to sign an association agreement with the European Union . A document to establish a deep and comprehensive free trade arrangement will bring Ukraine closer to Europe .
 Ukrainian government announced it would “suspend’s preparations to sign the agreement on November 21 . On November 21, however, the Ukrainian government said it would "suspend" preparations .
 The Maidan Revolution, also called the “Revolution of Dignity, had begun . Within hours, thousands took to the streets of Kyiv to protest .
 The protests have morphed into a broader expression of popular discontent with Mr Yanukovych’s growing authoritarianism .
 European diplomats rushed to the Ukrainian capital and brokered overnight a settlement between Mr Yanukovych and opposition leaders . European diplomats rush to the Ukraine capital and breakred overnight .
 The latter could not have sold the settlement to protestors in the streets, but they had little chance to try . The latter probably could not.
 Mr Yanukovych signed the agreement and disappeared, turning up days later in Russia . He signed the deal and disappeared.
 On February 22, the Rada appointed an acting president and acting prime minister .
 They made clear their desire to get on with domestic reform and set integration with Europe . Signing the association agreement with the European Union is their top foreign policy priority .
 Russian soldiers, with insignias removed from their combat fatigues, seized Crimea . Russia seized Crimea in Crimea .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin at first claimed they belonged to a local defense militia . But weeks later admitted they were Russian soldiers and awarded their commanders commendations .
 Russia annexed Crimea, an illegal action rejected by most of the world . Russia almost immediately annexed Crimea .
 In April 2014, little green men began occupying administrative buildings in key cities and territory in the eastern Ukrainian region of Donbas .
 Russia fueled things by providing leadership, funding, heavy weapons, ammunition, other supplies . The Russian army is now about to enter its seventh year .
 conflict has claimed some 14,000 lives as well as causing between 1. and 2 million people to abandon their homes . The conflict has also claimed between 1,000 and 1.2 million lives .
 Ukrainian/Russian proxy forces in Donbas have largely stabilized since then . The conflict continues to simmer .
 In most cases, blame for ceasefire violations and for failure to withdraw heavy weapons away from the line of contact lies with the Russians and their proxies .
 Domestic Change Petro Poroshenko emerged as victor in a special presidential election in May 2014 .
 He and his government made early progress in tackling the country’s reform needs .
 The government has stabilized the economy, cleaned up the government’s precarious financial situation . They also consolidated the banking sector, and introduced a more transparent system for government procurement .
 Ukrainians questioned the lack of progress in fighting corruption . They questioned the failures to rein in the country's oligarchs and to bring to account those responsible for the Maidan shootings .
 He lost by a landslide in an April 2019 run-off to Volodymyr Zelensky . He promised dramatic progress on the corruption front, reforms to boost economic growth and a dedicated effort to end the conflict .
 Mr Zelensky’s political party won an absolute majority in the October 2019 parliamentary election .
 Ukrainian economy grows faster and living standards can begin to catch up with those of Ukraine's neighbors in Central Europe and the Baltics . First, they need to complete the critical mass of reforms and reduce corruption .
 Mr Zelensky and his inner circle see ending the Donbas conflict as the most urgent priority . Ukrainians die nearly every week along the line of contact .
 The Ukrainian president held his own in a December 9, 2019 meeting with Mr Putin . But a major gulf separates Kyiv and Moscow on key issues, such as when Ukraine will regain sovereignty over all of Donbas and the ultimate status of that region .
 The Kremlin appears content to continue the simmering conflict as a means to pressure, destabilize and distract Kyiv and make it harder for the Ukrainian leadership to get on with its goal of building a successful and prosperous state .
 Ukraine may adopt a Plan B that could include building a virtual wall along the line of contact and pushing the entire economic burden of occupied Donbas on to Russia .
 The Kremlin will look for a different course of action. They can only hope that, as the costs of occupation mount for Russia, the costs will mount .
 Mr Zelensky and his government can, however, effect domestic reform by themselves and take other key steps .
 The government has secured a number of reform laws over the past six months . It has set ambitious plans for domestic and future growth .
 Ukraine will develop as a stronger and more resilient state. If they can deliver on those plans, Ukraine will become a stronger, more resilient country .
 That will be a state better able to withstand Russian pressure and a state reflective of the aspirations that triggered the Maidan Revolution . The Maidan revolution was triggered by Russia's desire for a state to be stronger .