 During Zelensky’s presidency, Ukraine has enacted difficult economic and European Affairs governance reforms, albeit with some resistance and delays .
 Ukraine also has confronted Russia’s ongoing occupation of Crimea region and parts of eastern Ukraine . Under President Zelensky, Ukraine has also confronted Russia's ongoing occupation.
 Zelensky has attempted to reinvigorate the conflict resolution process . He has drawn greater international attention to the situation in Ukraine’s occupied Crimea region .
 Russia appears no closer to implementing a permanent ceasefire or to withdrawing its military forces from Ukraine . Russia appears to be no more likely to withdraw its forces from the country .
 From FY2015 to FY2020, State Department and U.S. Agency for International Development bilateral aid allocations to Ukraine were about $418 million a year on average . More than $350 million in humanitarian aid since 2014 .
 For FY2021, State Department and USAID allocations to Ukraine totaled about $464 million . For FY 2021, the State Department, USAID and State Department allocated about $460 million .
 The U.S. has provided more than $2. billion in security assistance to Ukraine since 2014 . The Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative and Foreign Military Financing is part of the United States' security assistance program .
 An amendment to the FY2022 National Defense Authorization Act would require the President to impose sanctions related to the Nord Stream 2 pipeline .
 A resolution introduced in the Senate would celebrate the 30th anniversary of Ukraine's independence . It would affirm the United States’ “unwavering commitment’ to support the Ukrainian government’s efforts.
 CRS Report R45415, United States Sanctions on Russia . CRS In Focus IF11138, Russia’s Nord Stream 2 Natural Gas Pipeline to Germany . C RS In FocusIF11862, Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 Ukraine has developed a military capable of territorial defense . Ukraine has reversed a decline in economic growth, implemented reforms and gained formal independence for the Orthodox Church of Ukraine .
 Ukraine has enacted Capital: Kyiv difficult economic and governance reforms, Ethnicity: 78% Ukrainian, 17% Russian, 0.5% Crimean . Tatar grappled with the social and economic Languages: Ukrainian, Russian (regional consequences of the Coronavirus Disease status)
 State Statistics Service of Ukraine appears no closer to implementing a World Bank . The Ukrainian military is no longer able to withdraw its military forces from Ukraine .
 The U.S. has long supported Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty, democratic trajectory, and governance reforms .
 Members of Congress have condemned Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, promoted sanctions against Russia for its actions . Since 2014, many members have supported increased economic and security aid to Ukraine .
 In 2019, the House of Representatives agreed to articles of impeachment related to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine . The Senate acquitted President Trump of the charges in 2020 .
 In 2019, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople recognized the Orthodox Church of Ukraine as an independent church, officially separate from the Russian Orthodox Church . Ukraine is one of the largest successors to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 1 .
 The Orange Revolution thwarted the efforts of then-President Leonid Kuchma’s team to fraudulently elect then-Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych . In 2004, a popular movement known as the Orange Revolution thwarted the efforts.
 Yanukovych agreed to a deal with the opposition that was to lead to an early presidential election . But instead he departed for eastern Ukraine amid government defections .
 Ukraine’s parliament voted to remove Yanukovych from office, and he left Ukraine for Russia .
 Andrew Wilson, Ukraine Crisis: What It Means for the West, and RFE/RL, “Ukraine Sentences Ex-President Yanukovych in Absentia to 13 Years in Prison,’ January 24, 2019 .
 Ukraine has a mixed presidential-parliamentary system, the Verkhovna Rada . President shares power with a prime minister appointed by the legislature .
Freedom House, Freedom in the World 2021, Freedom House, Nations in Transit 2021 and Freedom House. Freedom House is the first Freedom House in the world .
 Ukraine's president is Volodymyr Zelensky, previously a popular actor-comedian and producer . U.S. Policy Ukraine’s president is also a popular comedian and producer.
 In April 2019, Zelensky defeated Petro Poroshenko, 73% to 24% in a second-round presidential election . Zelenski defeated incumbent Poroshenko in April 2019 .
 Zelensky's victory appeared to reflect widespread disillusionment with Ukraine’s political establishment . Zelenski's victory appears to reflect disillusionment.
 Many Ukrainians believed Poroshenko had failed to combat corruption . Many believed he had not done enough to restore the country's economic health after five years of conflict with Russia .
 Zelensky’s appeal stemmed in part from his starring role in a popular television show, Servant of the People .
 Zelensky is a bilingual Russian and Ukrainian speaker, of Jewish descent . He supports closer relations with the West .
Another four parties received enough party-list votes to enter the legislature . Another four parties got enough votes for the legislature to enter .
 These are the eastern Ukrainian-based Opposition Platform–For Life . Former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko’s Fatherland and ex-President Poroshenko's European Solidarity . Voice is a new reform party .
 Poroshenko won 55% of the popular vote in May 2014 election to succeed Viktor Yanukovych . Poroshenko, a wealthy businessman and member of parliament, supported the Euromaidan protests .
 Shmyhal previously served as head of administration in the western Ukrainian region of Ivano-Frankivsk . He was then deputy prime minister and minister for community and territorial development .
 Shmyhal had worked since 2017 for DTEK, a major energy conglomerate owned by Rinat Akhmetov, who is widely considered to be Ukraine’s wealthiest individual .
 Shmyhal succeeded Zelensky’s first prime minister, Oleksiy Honcharuk . His government was in power for six months .
 Honcharuk submitted his resignation in March 2020 after Zelensky expressed dissatisfaction with the cabinet . In March 2020, HonCharuk submitted the resignation .
 Zelensky praised the outgoing government for being uncorrupt and hardworking . He expressed a lack of confidence in its ability to address mounting challenges, including budgetary shortfalls and high utility prices .
 Some observers expressed concern about Zelensky’s decision to reshuffle his first government . He had gained the support of international lenders and donors .
 Some believed that the Honcharuk government was not given sufficient time to achieve results . Some believed the government had not been given enough time.
 A related concern was that the reshuffle could strengthen oligarchic influences . The reshuffle was a result of a shake-up of the board of directors .
 The centrist and non-ideological platform of Zelensky and Servant of the People may have helped them achieve victory in 2019 . The centrist platform may have been successful in 2019.
 Two years of partially implemented or delayed reforms, a perceived resurgence of oligarchic influence, alleged mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic, and related economic woes all appear to have contributed to a decline in the government's popularity .
 Will ‘New Brains And New Hearts’ Revive the Same Old Problems in Ukraine?’ RFE/RL, March 6, 2020 .
 Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy 70% or higher . Background, conflict with Russia and U.S. Policy 70%.
 Ihor Kolomoysky, with whom President Zelensky has had ties, and Rinat Akhmetov, has ties . President Zelenky has also had ties with RinatAkhmetova .
 divisions have led to the party's inability to secure passage of legislation or approval of cabinet appointments . These divisions reportedly have led on occasion to the lack of legislation .
 In several regions and cities, other parties and political figures, often influential politicians, dominate . In several cities and regions, other political figures and politicians dominate .
 In October 2020 local elections, Servant of the People placed first in few regional councils and did not win mayoral elections in any of Ukraine's major cities .
 During Poroshenko’s presidency, the International Monetary Fund praised key reforms . The IMF praised a reduction of the fiscal deficit, increase in gas prices, and reform of the banking system .
 Observers noted progress in public procurement transparency, decentralization, and health care reform . Observer also noted progress.
 Oleg Sukhov, “Investigative Show Exposes Influence of Kolomoysky, Akhmetov on Lawmakers,’ Kyiv Post, January 14, 2021 .
 A Reality Check for Decentralization and Electoral Reforms, will be held January 12, 2021 . The Kennan Institute will hold a reality check on the issue .
Kennan Institute, Kennan Institute and Melinda Haring, “Finally Some Good News from Ukraine,” Atlantic Council, June 26, 2018 .
 The IMF eventually issued two more disbursements under a four-year loan package . But the IMF did not release any more funds from that package after April 2017 .
After taking power in 2019, Zelensky and the Servant of the People government unveiled an ambitious reform program .
 In its first several months, the new parliament passed or considered legislation to, among other aims, advance anti-corruption and judicial reforms . The new parliament will also introduce fiscal, trade, and pro-business reforms .
 Observers expressed concerns about various aspects of the Zelensky government’s initial reform efforts .
 Some maintain the rapid pace of lawmaking led to substantive and procedural deficiencies in the legislation . Some maintained the rapid speed of law making led to procedural deficiencies .
 Others raised concerns about implementation of new laws, especially with regard to reforms facing resistance by wealthy businesspeople .
 Some observers expressed disapproval of what they considered the government’s pursuit of politically motivated cases against ex-President Poroshenko .
 The March 2020 government reshuffle raised concerns about the government’s commitment to reform . Some IMF-backed reform measures soon followed as the COVID-19 pandemic began to impact Ukraine .
 Two newly appointed ministers of health and finance were dismissed by the parliament . They were regarded as obstacles to reform .
 Observers expressed concerns about potential backsliding in anti-corruption and judicial reforms . The government's seeming lack of will or ability to overcome resistance to reforms by oligarchic and other corrupt actors, including within the judiciary .
 In 2020, observers noted what appeared to be increasingly overt resistance to anti-corruption reforms by members of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine and High Council of Justice .
National Bank of Ukraine has been praised for its independence . Observers also expressed concern about the summer 2020 resignation of the head of the National Bank.
 Near the end of 2020, President Zelensky signaled the start of a new reform drive .
 Cabinet reshuffles led to the replacement of three ministers of economy, infrastructure, and health . Arsen Avakov resigned in July 2021 after seven years in office of Ukraine’s powerful but unpopular minister of internal affairs .
 Hromadske International, “Ukrainian Parliament Passes Land Market Law,’s March 31, 2020, and “Ukraine Allows Farmland Sales for First T ime Since Independence,” July 2, 2021 .
 Biden can help Ukraine’s leader is ‘being Broken by the System He Vowed to Crush,’ Bloomberg News says .
 It's a Scandal that T hreatens the Country’s Economic Health, Washington Post says . Washington Post, July 11, 2020.
 Ukraine is among the world's top 20 countries with the highest number of COVID-19 cases and attributed deaths . Ukraine is one of the world’s top 20 nations with the lowest number ofCOVID- 19 cases .
 The Ukrainian government began to ease restrictions in summer 2020 but imposed new restrictive measures in December 2020 during an initial surge in cases .
 Ukraine's vaccination drive has lagged behind that of most other European countries . Ukraine’s vaccination drive is lagging behind most other countries .
 As of the start of October 2021, about 13% of the population was fully vaccinated .
 Ukrainian government made combating corruption a central focus of its reform agenda . After the 2014 Revolution of Dignity, the government made fighting corruption a priority .
 High levels of corruption reportedly persisted during Poroshenko’s presidency . Many officials resisted anti-corruption measures, however, and many officials resisted measures .
 The United States and other international stakeholders strongly support Ukraine’s anti-corruption reforms . The U.S. and others support Ukraine's anti- corruption reforms .
 Various obstacles have impeded the functioning of these anti-corruption institutions . Many obstacles have been impeded by these obstacles .
 As discussed in the sections below, they have met resistance from within the judiciary and from oligarchic forces . Some government officials may seek to retain political control over these potentially powerful institutions .
 The National Anti-Corruption Bureau of Ukraine has encountered repeated resistance from within Ukraine's government . The agency's investigative mandate and independence are reportedly due to the agency’s mandate .
 In 2019, Ukraine’s Constitutional Court ruled that the underlying legal basis for many NABU investigations, related to the crime of illicit enrichment, was unconstitutional .
 A new law on illicit enrichment enacted later in 2019 allowed new cases to proceed . The law was enacted after a new law was passed in 2015 .
 John Lough and Vladimir Dubrovskiy are Ukraine's Anti-Corruption Reforms working . They are working on Ukraine’s anti-corruption reform .
 The CCU ruled that former President Poroshenko lacked the constitutional authority to establish NABU or appoint its director . In 2020, the CCU rules that former president Poroshenko had lacked theconstitutional authority to appoint a director .
 The parliament is considering legislation to strengthen NABU’s constitutional grounding and preserve its independence . It is also considering the participation of international experts in hiring NABu's director .
 National Agency on Corruption Prevention was established . asset and income verifications of public officials moved slowly and eventually stalled . After the agency was established, asset and Income verifications moved slowly .
Under Zelensky, the government restructured NAPC and appointed a new director with the aim of boosting its integrity and independence . The new director has been appointed by the government to boost the N APC’s integrity.
 In 2020, the CCU issued a controversial ruling striking down legislation allowing the NACP to mandate and enforce asset declarations . The ruling was struck down in 2020, but was overturned in 2020 .
 Some CCU members and opposition MPs who initiated the case reportedly were under, or faced, the prospect of NACP-related investigations .
 The government and parliament restored NACP authority to collect and publish asset declarations but reduced penalties for improper disclosures . The NACP has been restored authority tocollect and publish assets .
In June 2021, the parliament passed legislation strengthening criminal liability for false declarations . In June 2021.
 Poroshenko agreed in 2018 to establish the High Anti-Corruption Court . The United States, the EU, the IMF, and the World Bank called on the government to do so in line with international recommendations .
 Observers generally view HACC positively, although it too has faced challenges . HACC has been in the midst of a difficult period .
 The High Council of Justice has disciplined a HACC judge for what some observers consider to be politically motivated purposes . The office of the prosecutor general has removed cases from HACC's jurisdiction .
 Observers have questioned the professionalism and integrity of some HACC judges . Some judges have been criticised for their professionalism .
 The Atlantic Council, Ukrinform, and UkrinForm, “World Bank Welcomes Signing of Law on Illicit Enrichment in Ukraine’s Ukraine,’
 Zelenskyy Can Save the Anti-corruption Policy of Ukraine, January 11, 2021 .
 Many observers believed the Specialized Anti-Corruption Prosecutor’s Office head lacked sufficient political independence . Concerns emerged that he was hindering the progress of investigations .
 The SAPO head resigned in August 2020, three months before his term in office was to expire . SAPO is the world's most powerful body of the SAPO .
 As of the start of October 2021, the selection process for a new SAPO head was ongoing . The selection process was ongoing.
 Some contend the government has been seeking to manipulate the selection process . Some say the government is trying to ensure the appointment of politically loyal candidate .
 Justice Sector Reforms Ukraine’s anti-corruption reforms are part of broader reforms to the justice sector .
 Some observers and political opponents have criticized the current prosecutor general for allegedly limiting the progress of further prosecutorial reforms and sheltering some government-linked figures from justice .
 The High Council of Justice/High Qualifications Commission of Judges is a commission that hires and fires judges . In July 2021, the parliament passed long-awaited legislation to reform the HCJ .
 Both Oleg Sukhov and Olena Goncharova are accused of having blocked cases against powerful suspects . The two have been named as Ukraine's main Anti-Corruption Prosecutor .
 The ethics council and HQCJ hiring committee are to include international experts . Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy the ethics council is to include .
Under Zelensky, an initial judicial reform law had been enacted in 2019 . HCJ and CCU decisions prevented the law from taking effect .
 The CCU issued the above-mentioned rulings against anticorruption institutions in 2020 . Zelensky called on parliament to disband the court, reform it, and repopulate it with new judges .
 Yanukovych suspended the CCU chairman and, in March 2021, cancelled the 2013 decrees by which then-President Yanukovych appointed the chairman and another judge . He then suspended theCCU chairman. In March 2021.
 Ukraine's Supreme Court overruled Zelensky’s order in July 2021 . The government has appealed the decision .
 Kyiv District Administrative Court Zelensky also has said he is seeking to restructure the court . The court is especially plagued by corruption .
 In April 2021, the government introduced a bill to eliminate KDAC and replace it with a new court composed of new judges . The bill will be introduced in April 2021 .
 The KDAC chairman and other judges have been charged twice for crimes including obstruction of justice, bribery, and abuse of power . The chairman and others have also been charged for crimes such as bribery, obstruction and bribery .
 Efforts to arrest or prosecute them have been unsuccessful for unclear reasons . Efforts have not been successful for unknown reasons .
 The Atlantic Council, October 24, 2019, and Oleg Sukhov, “Constitutional Court Cancels Most of Zelensky’s Judicial Reform,” Kyiv Post, March 12, 2020 .
 Government officials will have to report all interactions with them . In addition, government officials will also be required to report interactions with each other .
 The parliament passed the law a day after one of Zelensky's closest aides survived a shooting attack . Some officials and observers speculated could be linked to the government’s efforts to reduce oligarchs’ influence .
Owned companies seized by Russian proxies in Russia-occupied eastern Ukraine . Medvedchuk is a Russian mogul .
 Former for allegedly financing terrorism. Former governor of Dnipropetrovsk region . Former for alleged financing terrorism .
 Controls television station Medvedchuk and others said to that used to air Zelensky’s media programs .
 Under U.S. benefit from energy trade with the investigation and subject to United States visa sanctions . The investigation is also subject to visa sanctions.
 Connected separatist regimes of eastern Ukraine companies and colleagues under Ukrainian investigation . Connected separatists of east Ukraine companies under investigation .
 Friend of Russian include three television networks President Vladimir Putin . President Putin is a friend of Russian .
 Ukrainian and United States sanctions many considered to be sources of and under Ukrainian indictment . Subject to Ukrainian and U.S. sanctions.
 Former officially owned by one of president and head of opposition European Solidarity party . Former official owned by former president of the party .
 Ukrainian investigations that supporters consider to be politically motivated are politically motivated . Ukrainian investigations are considered politically motivated.
 Seven Ukrainians were billionaires at the start of 2021, according to Forbes . These include (in addition to Akhmetov, charges in May 2021, charges for billionaires .
 Ihor Kolomoysky, with whom President Zelensky has had ties, also has been targeted, although not directly . President Zelenky has also had ties with Kolomoyssky, but not directly.
In 2020, legislation was enacted to prevent the possible return of PrivatBank, Ukraine’s largest commercial bank, to Kolomoysky .
 The National Bank of Ukraine nationalized PrivatBank 52 Oleksiy Sorokin, “Security Council Says Ukraine has 13 Oligarchs,” Kyiv Post, ‘Rada Passes at First Reading Bill on De-Oligarchization,’ July 1
 Ukraine’s President Faces a Political T rip Wire, May 14, 2021 . Ukraine's President faces a political T Rip Wire,’.
 Authorities indicted three former PrivatBank executives on embezzlement charges . Authorities indicted the three formerprivat bank executives on charges .
 Authorities also launched an investigation against a state-owned electricity company in which Kolomoysky previously exerted influence . The company was also investigated by the same authorities .
 Servant of the People expelled from its parliamentary faction a leading supporter of Kolomoysky . Oleksandr Dubinsky also expelled from his parliamentary faction .
 A third target has been Dmytro Firtash, who reportedly has controlled much of Ukraine’s domestic gas distribution network, as well as chemical and metal companies . The Ukrainian government has also been targeted by a number of companies .
 Firtash currently resides in Austria, where he is fighting extradition to the U.S. In June 2021, the NSDC imposed sanctions on him . He currently lives in Austria and is fighting extraditing to the United States .
 The Ukrainian government’s actions in part align with U.S. actions, including sanctions, against these individuals . The Ukraine government's actions align with United States actions.
 In 2014, the Obama Administration imposed sanctions on Medvedchuk for his role in Russia’s invasion of Ukraine . Firtash was indicted on bribery-related charges .
 In January 2021, the Trump Administration imposed sanctions on the Kolomoysky-linked Dubinsky in connection with ‘a Russia-linked foreign influence network’ that allegedly sought to interfere in the 2020 U.S. presidential election .
 Some observers have raised concerns about the Ukrainian government’s “de-oligarchization” policy .
 Ukrainian politicians say it is too personalized and selective . They say it does not address core causes of corruption or oligarchic influence in Ukrainian politics .
 Many observers believe that of all the post-Soviet states, Ukraine's independence has been the most difficult for Russians to accept .
 Many Russians traditionally considered much of Ukraine to be a historical province of Russia and Ukrainians to be close ethnic brethren . Many Russians considered Ukraine to have a history of Russian and Ukrainians .
 Atlantic Council, July 10, 2021, and Olena Removska, ‘Zelenskiy’s ‘De-Oligarchization’ Goal Important, Path to Success ‘Difficult,’ United States Official Says .
 Yanukovych appeared to make a decisive move toward Russia . He agreed to substantial financial assistance from Moscow . The U.S. and the EU appear to have agreed to an association agreement .
 Russia's invasion of Ukraine occurred soon after Yanukovych fled to Russia in February 2014 . Russia’s invasion occurred after Yanukovych flee to Russia .
 Militants forcibly took power in several cities and towns, announced the establishment of two separatist entities . The Donetsk People's Republic, or DPR, and Luhansk People’s Republic, have gradually expanded their control .
 Ukrainian government and volunteer forces fought back, restoring state control over a portion of each region . Russian forces reportedly participated in some battles, including in which regular Russian forces participated .
 In 2019, one study estimated that about half the pre-conflict population of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions were living under the control of Russian proxies .
 Many observers believe Moscow sought to complicate Ukraine’s domestic development and foreign policy and increase Russian leverage in potential negotiations over Ukraine's future trajectory .
 To date, the conflict has led to more than 10,000 combatant deaths and almost 3,400 civilian fatalities . The conflict has also led to nearly 3,000 civilian fatalities, according to reports .
Ukraine has registered more than 1. million people as internally displaced persons . Ukraine has registered over 1.1 million people.
 The conflict's intensity has declined since 2015, but sporadic fighting has continued . The conflict’s intensity has dropped since 2015 .
A July 2020 cease-fire led to a reduced number of cease-fires and casualties for several months . A July 2020 ceasefire led to fewer violations and casualties .
 Russia amassed troops along its border with Ukraine and in occupied Crimea . A new round of hostilities occurred in March 2021, as Russia amassed forces along the border .
 The size and sustained nature of Russian troop deployments greatly concerned Ukrainian and Western governments . The size of the Russian troop deployment greatly concerned Ukraine and West governments .
 Crimea since 2014, Russia has significantly increased its military presence in Crimea . Russia has suppressed local dissent in Crimea and suppressed local Dissent .
 Russia's military forces in Crimea include ground, artillery, coastal defense, air defense, and fighter units . Russia’s military forces are in Crimea .
 Russia has increased the size and capability of its Black Sea Fleet, headquartered in Sevastopol . Russia has also increased the capability and size of itsBlack Sea Fleet .
 The Ukrainian government and state-owned companies have pursued claims in international arbitration courts concerning the violation of their rights in Crimea and in nearby maritime waters .
 Much of the international community does not recognize Russia’s purported annexation of Crimea .
 Many have condemned Russia’s occupation as a violation of international law and of Russia's own international commitments .
 “Already 31,500 Russian T roops Deployed in Occupied Crimea,’ says Patrick T ucker . The U.S. Intelligence Officials and Satellite Photos Detail Russian Military Buildup on Crimea .
 Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy against Ukraine .
 Since 2014, the United Nations General Assembly has voted several times to affirm Ukraine’s territorial integrity . Most recently in 2020, the U.N. General Assembly voted to condemn the “temporary occupation’ of Crimea, and reaffirm nonrecognition of
 Moscow officially recognizes the areas it controls in eastern Ukraine as Ukrainian territory . Eastern Ukraine is a part of Russia's policy toward Crimea .
 Authorities in Russia-controlled areas imposed new restrictions after crossing points began to reopen . The new restrictions limit crossings to under 100,000 per month . The crossing points are now open in Russia .
 The agreements are 80 T hese assurances were provided in connection with Ukraine’s assent to removal of nuclear weapons from its territory .
 Normandy Four (or Normandy Format): France, Germany, Russia, and Ukraine . The Normandy Four is a broader international grouping known as the Normandy Four . The U.S. policy is supported by the Normandy four .
 Minsk Agreements were signed in September 2014 and February 2015 . The Minsk agreements were signed by Minsk.
 The 2014 agreements included the 12point Minsk Protocol, signed days after Russia-led forces defeated Ukrainian government and volunteer forces in a major battle . A follow-up memorandum outlining measures for a cease-fire and international monitoring mission .
 The Minsk Protocol failed to end fighting or prompt a political resolution to the conflict . It failed to stop fighting and prompt apolitical resolution .
 Leaders from Ukraine and Russia met again in February 2015, amid another major battle to develop a more detailed ‘package of measures’ known as Minsk-2 .
 Minsk-2 established a specific timeline and/or sequencing for several of its measures . The sequencing of some key measures was ambiguous .
 U.N. Security Council Resolution 2202 endorses and calls on all parties to fully implement package of measures .
Ukrainian President Zelensky initially sought to reinvigorate what had been a relatively dormant conflict resolution process . The U.S. has been involved in the conflict with Russia, and the Ukrainian government in the past .
 The July 2020 cease-fire was more successful than previous ones, according to reports . But the July 2020 ceasefire was not the first time armed hostilities have continued .
 The withdrawal of Russian forces and the legal status of Russia-controlled areas have not been successful . In addition, efforts to settle thornier issues, including withdrawal of Russia's forces, haven't been successful.
 President Zelensky called for a reconsideration of the Minsk process and the expansion of the Normandy Format to include the United States and others .
 Ukrainian officials have underlined the need for a permanent cease-fire and withdrawal of Russian official and unofficial forces . The need is both on principle and as a necessary condition for a secure environment to hold free and fair local elections in eastern Ukraine .
 The Russian government continues to deny a substantial military presence in eastern Ukraine . It disavows responsibility for cease-fire violations and the failure to withdraw heavy weapons .
 Russia has called on Ukraine to fulfill certain political measures, including a grant of special status to the nongovernment-controlled areas and related constitutional reforms . Russia calls on Ukraine, irrespective of the security environment and the presence of Russian forces.
 In eastern Ukraine, an international monitoring mission monitors cease-fire violations and the presence of heavy weaponry within defined security zones .
 SMM issues daily and spot monitoring reports on the security situation and facilitates the delivery of humanitarian aid . The SMM has been in charge of providing humanitarian aid to the region .
 The OSCE also operated an Observer Mission at the Russian Checkpoints Gukovo and Donetsk to monitor border crossings to and from Ukraine .
 Russian authorities announced in September 2021 that Russia would not support a renewal of this second mission’s mandate .
 In 2018, Russian President Putin opened a 12-mile-long bridge over the Kerch Strait linking Russia to occupied Crimea . The bridge was opened by Putin in 2018 .
 New limits on the size of ships that transit the Sea of Azov . Russia can prevent passage to and from the sea from the Sea.
 Russia interferes with commercial traffic traveling to and from Ukrainian ports on the Sea of Azov in Mariupol and Berdyansk . The ports export steel, grain, and coal .
 In 2018, Russian forces forcibly prevented Ukrainian naval vessels from passing through the Kerch Strait to reach Ukrainian shores . Russian forces detained 24 crew members for 10 months, and returned their heavily damaged ships after two more months .
 Ukraine and its international partners considered the incident to be a major violation of international law . It was considered an escalation in Russia's efforts to control maritime access to eastern Ukraine . Russia is trying to control the region's maritime access .
 In 2019, the U.N.-established International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea issued an order requiring Russia to release the sailors and ships .
Russia's Strategy in the Sea of Azov: T he Kerch Bridge, Artificial Shipping Delays and Continued Harm to Ukraine,” Jamestown Foundation, January 14, 2021 .
 The Ukrainian Envoy says Russian Helicopter fired on Navy Vessel in Black Sea in 2018 .
 The Soviet Union’s collapse led to a severe economic contraction in Ukraine and other post-Soviet states .
 Ukraine’s economy recovered for much of the 2000s but was hit hard by the 2008-2009 global financial crisis .
After returning to growth, the economy stagnated in 2012-2013 and declined again after Russia’s 2014 invasion . GDP fell by 7% in 2014 and 10% in 2015, with GDP falling by 7%, in 2014.
 In recent years, Ukraine’s economy has improved, due in part to international assistance . IMF loan disbursements worth more than $16 billion have been made in Ukraine .
 During these years, observers noted several positive trends, including declining inflation, rising incomes, growing retail trade, increased agricultural exports, and growing international reserves and a strengthening currency .
 In 2020, Ukraine’s GDP declined by an estimated 4% due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic .
 The World Bank stated that the economic impact of the pandemic “appears to be less 95 Ukraine’s gross domestic product. Ukraine's gross domestic Product reportedly dropped by over 60% from 1989 to 1999 .
Ukraine’s Underrated Economy is Poised for a Strong 2020, says Atlantic Council . The Atlantic Council, January 6, 2020, will hold a conference on Ukraine .
 Ukraine's international reserves reached their highest level since 2012 . In August 2021, Ukraine’s international reserves reach their highest levels since 2012. In August 2011, Ukraine's reserves reached the highest level in history .
 Poland was the largest source of Ukrainian remittances, followed by the United States, the United Kingdom, Russia, and the Czech Republic . Ukraine’s largest merchandise trading partner was the EU, which accounted for 39% of total trade .
 Ukraine’s main exports include cereals, iron and steel, sunflower oil, sun flower oil, iron ores, electrical equipment and parts .
 Ukraine is one of the world's leading grain exporters and the world’s largest exporter of sunflower oil . Ukraine is also the biggest exporter in the world of grain.
 According to the National Bank of Ukraine, total FDI was $49. billion at the end of 2020 .
 FDI inflows in 2019 were mainly in industry, wholesale and retail trade, financial and insurance services, and real estate . FDI inflation in 2019 was mainly in retail and wholesale trade.
 Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy Netherlands, and Switzerland .
 FDI inflows declined heavily in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic . Energy Ukraine has significant energy resources, but historically has performed below its potential .
 Ukraine’s primary energy mix consists of about 32% natural gas, 30% coal, and 21% nuclear . Ukraine's main energy mix is 32%natural gas.
 Ukraine depended on Russian imports for more than half its total consumption of natural gas . Ukraine produces about two-thirds of its total energy supply, including about twothirds of its natural gas and 55% of its coal .
 Observers contend that traditionally Russia used gas price hikes, debt repayments, and cutoffs as leverage in disputes with various Ukrainian governments .
 Ukraine’s gas usage and dependence on Russian gas declined, due to lower industrial production, and higher tariffs . Russia's invasion of Ukraine led to the halting of gas supplies to Russia-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine .
 Ongoing priorities include strengthening the energy regulator, increasing competition and transparency in the electricity sector, and facilitating private investment in oil and natural gas development .
 Ihor Orel, “Ukraine’s Plans to Get Off Energy Dependence Needle,” UNIAN Information Agency, January 22, 2020 .
Ukraine’s Naftogaz Announces Completion of Gas System Unbundling .
 Naftogaz is one of Ukraine's largest taxpayers . The government wanted to install a more politically compliant official to run it .
 Members of Naftogaz’s supervisory board announced their resignations in protest . They subsequently agreed to remain in their positions for at least one year .
 Ukraine's National Agency on Corruption Prevention ruled that Vitrenko's appointment was not in compliance with Ukrainian law . Naftogaz announced it would challenge the decision .
 The United States, the European Union, and other international stakeholders expressed concerns about Kobolev’s dismissal . The U.S. and European Union have expressed concerns .
Naftogaz Supervisory Board Head Supports New CEO’s Suspension, June 16, 2021 . U.S. Secretary of State Antony J Blinken and ICTV's Olena Frolyak are among those to be suspended .
 Gas Transit to Europe and the Nord Stream 2 Pipeline Ukraine is a transit state for Russian natural gas exports to Europe . The Ukraine is the country's largest gas transit state .
 Most of Russia’s natural gas exports to Europe transited Ukraine . Before the 2011 opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea, most of Russia's natural gas exported to Europe .
 Gazprom, Naftogaz, and a new Gas Transmission System Operator of Ukraine renewed a contract for the transit of Russian natural gas to Europe from 2020 to 2024 . Since the opening of the first Nord Stream pipeline, about 40%-50% of these exports have transited Ukraine .
 Gazprom agreed to accept the ruling of an international arbitration court concerning several trade disputes with Naftogaz . Gazprom also paid the latter $2. billion in damages and interest .
 Construction resumed at the end of 2020 and reportedly was completed in September 2021 . Construction resumed in 2020, according to reports .
 The Ukrainian government opposes the construction and operation of Nord Stream 2.6 . Additional steps, including certification by German authorities, are required before the pipeline is able to transport gas .
 Background, Conflict with Russia, and U.S. Policy routes that transit Ukraine .
 Ukraine stopped importing natural gas directly from Russia in 2016 . This will not necessarily increase Ukraine’s vulnerability to energy supply cutoffs .
 Ukraine's strategic vulnerability could lead to declines in transit revenues, but it could increase Ukraine’s strategic vulnerability . If reduced dependence on transit leads Moscow to act more aggressively in Ukraine .
 The EU has imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine . It supported Ukraine against Russia’s maritime aggression .
 EU member states provided an additional €1. billion in bilateral assistance . In addition, EU members states provided a further €1 billion in assistance .
 In 2020, the EU will provide more than €190 million in emergency support to Ukraine to address the COVID-19 pandemic .
 Under ex-President Yanukovych, Ukraine adopted a nonbloc status, rejecting aspirations of NATO membership . Under former President Yanukovych, Yanukovych rejected aspirations of membership .
 Ukraine's parliament rejected this non-bloc status after Russia’s 2014 invasion . After Russia's 2014 invasion, the parliament rejected the non-Bloc status .
 Ukraine contributed to the International Security Assistance Force and follow-on Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan . Ukraine also contributed to Operation Ocean Shield, the counterterrorism Operation Active Endeavour maritime mission .
 Ukraine also participates in the NATO Response Force, a rapid reaction force . Ukraine is a member of the NATO response force .
 In 2017, Ukraine's parliament voted to make cooperation with NATO a foreign policy priority . The 2020 National Security Strategy includes the development of a special partnership with NATO and the pursuit of NATO membership .
8.8 Closer integration with the EU and NATO does not appear to have enabled Ukraine to improve its near-term prospects for membership . In 2021, President Zelensky and other Ukrainian officials called on NATO to grant Ukraine a Membership Action Plan .
 Kyiv Post, December 26, 2014; and RFE/RL, “Ukrainian Parliament Makes NAT O Integration a Priority,’ June 8, 2017 .
 Ukraine also faces a challenge to NATO membership . Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy Ukraine also face a challenge .
 NATO members formally agreed that Ukraine and Georgia would become members of NATO in 2008 . Neither state has been granted a clear path to or timeline for membership .
 Many observers believe NATO will not move forward with membership as long as Russia occupies Ukrainian territory . The conflict remains unresolved and the conflict is unresolved .
 Since 2014, about 40%-50% of opinion poll respondents support membership in NATO . These polls do not include occupied Crimea and Russia-controlled areas of eastern Ukraine . Support for NATO membership likely would be lower even in the absence of conflict .
 In September 2019, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced that the House would begin an impeachment inquiry related in part to alleged presidential actions regarding Ukraine .
The Biden Administration has sought to renew close relations with Ukraine . The Biden Administration is seeking to renew ties with Ukraine.
 Secretary of State Antony Blinken visited Ukraine in May 2021 . Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm represented the administration at the August 2021 Crimea Platform Summit in Kyiv .
 The extension of a U.S.-Ukraine Science and Technology Agreement and the establishment of a new secure communication line through the National and Nuclear Risk Reduction Center are also announced .
 The White House will hold a press call with President Zelenskyy of Ukraine in 2021 .
 U.S. officials have called attention to Russia’s human rights abuses in occupied Crimea .
 U.S. Department of State: “SeventyFifth Anniversary of the Welles Declaration,’ July 22, 2015 . Also see United States Dept. of State, ‘SeventlyFifth anniversary of the welles Declaration’
 Ambassador Kurt Volker resigned from this position in September 2019 prior to the start of the presidential impeachment inquiry in the House of Representatives .
 U.S. Policy criticizes Russia for failing to fulfill its commitments under the Minsk agreements . Russia's aggressive actions in and around Ukraine have been criticized by the United States .
 The Trump Administration imposed sanctions on a Russian-related entity and a pipelaying vessel for participating the construction of Nord Stream 2 .
 The Biden Administration imposed a second round of sanctions on that entity and vessel, as well as on 21 other entities and vessels . The Biden administration imposed the sanctions on both entities and vessel .
 The Biden Administration appears to have shifted its focus away from working to prevent the completion of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline to mitigating the potential negative impacts of an operational pipeline .
 U.S.-Germany joint statement in July 2021 pledges to bolster Ukraine’s energy security and to support sanctions in response to further acts of Russian aggression toward Ukraine .
 Motor Sich is a Ukrainian company that is a major producer of airplane and helicopter engines . U.S. officials reportedly have sought to deter Ukraine from approving the sale to Chinese companies of the company .
 A Chinese state-linked company had acquired majority ownership of Motor Sich in 2017 .
 A Ukrainian court froze a percentage of the Chinese-owned shares after the Security Service of Ukraine said the company was intending to move Motor Sich’s assets abroad .
 U.S. officials warned Ukraine that the sale could lead China to displace Ukraine as a leading aircraft engine exporter .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky has taken further steps to prevent China’s takeover of Motor Sich .
 In 2020, Ukraine’s Anti-Monopoly Committee rejected proposals to formally establish joint Chinese-Ukrainian control over Motor Sich .
 Ukrainian government imposed sanctions on Chinese companies and their owners in February 2021 . U.S. did not appoint a successor, and neither has the Biden Administration .
 In March 2021, Ukrainian authorities said the government intended to take control of Motor Sich .
 Commerce Adds China National Offshore Oil Corporation to the Entity List and Skyrizon to the Military End-User List . Wall Street Journal: "Keeping China Out in a Nod to U.S."
 During the Obama Administration, U.S. officials criticized the Yanukovych government for suppressing the Euromaidan protests .
 U.S. officials supported a negotiated resolution to Ukraine’s domestic crisis . Yanukovych fled to Russia in 2014 .
 In 2015, then-Vice President Biden reportedly told Ukrainian officials the U.S. would withhold a $1 billion loan guarantee if Ukraine's thenprosecutor general did not resign .
 In 2017, then-Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said, “It serves no purpose for Ukraine to fight for its body in Donbas if it loses its soul to corruption.’
 The Biden Administration has stated the United States is a ‘full partner’ in Ukraine’s domestic reform efforts . The United States has said the U.S. is a "full partner" in Ukraine's domestic reform effort .
 Amounts include development and security assistance provided via regular bilateral programming accounts . Amounts included development andSecurity assistance provided by regular bilateral programs .
 For FY 2016, State/USAID amount includes a loan guarantee subsidy cost of $290 million . For FY2016, the State/ USAID amount is $290m .
 United States assistance to Ukraine extends beyond State Department and USAID funding . U.S. assistance is also extended beyond the State Department.
 The United States has allocated more than $2.5 billion in security assistance to Ukraine since Russia’s 2014 invasion . The U.S. government has also provided $351 million in humanitarian assistance to assist internally displaced persons .
 USAID announces $1 Billion Loan Guarantee to the Government of Ukraine .
 According to media reports, these missiles were to be stored away from the frontline .
 The United States Department of State, “United States Security Cooperation with Ukraine,’s” July 2, 2021 . Also see U.S. Department of state, ‘ United States Security cooperation with Ukraine’
 The United States and Ukraine host regular joint military exercises in Ukraine with the participation of NATO allies and partners . Since 2015, the U.S. Army and National Guard have provided training and mentoring to members of the Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 The U.S. and Ukraine are planning to hold a fourth Bilateral Cybersecurity Dialogue in Kyiv in October 2021 . The United States and Ukraine plan to hold the Dialogue in October 2019 .
 "Exercise Rapid T rident 20 to be Held in September,’ September 14, 2020 .
8 Bilateral Trade The United States granted Ukraine permanent normal trade relations status in 2006 . Background, Conflict with Russia, and United States Policy interagency teams visited Ukraine in 2016 .
The value of U.S. merchandise exports to Ukraine was $1. billion in 2020 . The value of United States merchandise exported to Ukraine, mostly motor vehicles, coal, and industrial machinery.
 The value of U.S. merchandise imports from Ukraine was $1. billion in 2020, according to the United States . The United States imports of iron and steel were $1 billion.
 In 2020, U.S. coal accounted for about 28% of Ukraine’s total coal imports .
 Stalin’s War on Ukraine, 1932-1933, April 22, 1988, and Askold Krushelnycky, “How Washington Holodomor Monument Won the Race Against T ime,” Kyiv Post, February 23, 2020 .
 During Ukraine’s 2014 Revolution of Dignity, Congress supported a peaceful resolution to the political turmoil . The U.S. has been involved in the conflict with Russia, and the United States policy on Ukraine .
 The act required or authorized a variety of expanded sanctions; authorized increased aid to Ukraine . The act also authorized an expansion of RFE/RL and VOA broadcasting throughout the post-Soviet states .
 For Senate resolutions, see S.Res. and S. Resolutions in 2014 and 2015 . In 2015, see Senate resolutions for Senate resolutions in 2014 .
 Members of the 115th Congress agreed to resolutions condemning Russia’s attack on Ukrainian naval vessels . They also called for the cancellation of Nord Stream 2 and the imposition of sanctions on entities for investing in or supporting the project .
 This act would authorize $300 million a year for FMF assistance and $50 million for other aid from FY2022 through FY2026 . The act would appoint a Special Envoy for Ukraine .
 The act would seek to deny U.S. visas to Russian officials if they committed severe violations of religious freedom in occupied Ukrainian territory . This act would, among other measures, seek to denied U. States visas to Russia if they commit severe violations.
 Rep. Khanna Leads Bipartisan Members in Condemning Anti-Semitism in Europe .
 The E.O.s also establish sanctions on Russian government officials and persons who operate in the Russian arms sector, or occupied Crimea .
 Among those designated are former government officials and Russian proxy authorities in occupied Crimea and Russia-controlled areas in eastern Ukraine .
 SSIDES and UFSA contain additional provisions the executive branch could use, including potentially wide-reaching secondary sanctions against foreign individuals and entities that facilitate significant transactions .
Russian energy export pipelines, including Nord Stream 2, are being built in Russia . U.S. policy construction of Russian energy export pipeline is a conflict with Russia .
 The Trump Administration imposed sanctions on the Russian vessel Fortuna on January 19, 2021 . Gazprom was using to complete construction of Nord Stream 2, and its corporate owner .
 PEESA establishes sanctions on foreign persons whom the President determines have sold, leased, provided, or facilitated the provision of vessels for the purpose of subsea pipelaying activities related to the construction of Nord Stream 2 and TurkStream .
 PEESA also targets those who provide underwriting services or insurance, or who provide certain upgrades or installation services .
 Sanctions do not apply to nonbusiness entities of the EU, member states, or some other non-EU governments . Sanctions are not applied to non-European governments .
 In May 2021, the Administration designated 13 more vessels and 4 entities under PEESA . In August 2021, it designated another four entities and vessels .
 Some members of Congress have urged the Administration to impose additional sanctions to prevent the pipeline from becoming operational .
 Ukraine and other countries have imposed sanctions on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine . Australia, Canada, Japan, Norway, Switzerland, and Switzerland also imposed sanctions .
 Ukraine continues to grapple with a number of internal and external challenges . More than seven years after Ukraine’s Euromaidan protests and Russia's invasion, Ukraine is still grappling with internal challenges .
 CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress . CRS is a nonpartisan shared team of staff to Congress .
 It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress . It operates only at the request of Congress, it operates only under Congress .
 CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information provided by CRS to Members of Congress . CRS’s institutional role has been in connection with CRS's institutional role .
 A CRS Report may include copyrighted images or material from a third party . You may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material .