 Ukraine's decision to restrict the use of minority languages in schools benefits the Kremlin immensely . The decision was made by Ukraine's government .
 The law envisages a near-full Ukrainisation of tuition in what is a de-facto multilingual country .
 Hungary has pledged to veto every pro-Ukranian initiative it can . It has caused outrage in Ukraine's EU neighbours, particularly Hungary .
 The elephant in the room is, of course, the Russian language, which is the main target of the legislation . The Russian language is the most popular language .
 Ukraine's aggressor seized Crimea in 2014 and instigated a conflict in the Donbas region . Spoken as either the first or second language by the vast majority of Ukrainians .
 Ukrainian nationalists have long dreamed of turning Ukraine into a monolingual country like Poland . Now Russia has provided them with a perfect pretext by invading their country .
 The absence of any clear and coherent reaction from Russian-speaking Ukrainians clearly shows that the timing couldn't be better . The virtual absence of a clear and incoherent reaction from Russians clearly shows the timing can be better.
 The break-up with Russia prompts people to embrace their long-lost or freshly acquired Ukrainianness . The break up with Russia is a sign that people are embracing their Ukrainianness.
 Many families who became Russian-speaking only a generation or two ago would be happy to see their children speak the tongue of their grandmothers as their first language .
 Russian-speakers are ready to completely change their ethnic and linguistic identity . For others, speaking Ukrainian is a political choice . Many are dismayed by Russian aggression .
Every Ukrainian is bilingual and switching from one language to another poses few problems . Virtually all Ukrainian are bilingual .
 Language issues are extremely low on Ukrainian people's priority list compared with economic woes and the war in the east, as polls repeatedly show .
 Those who do care about the future of Russian language in Ukraine are in disarray . They should blame themselves for their predicament, says one Russian official .
 It was their inability to organise politically and defend their rights in a civilised European manner . Their nostalgia for authoritarianism and their acceptance of Putin's dictatorship left them in a political vacuum .
 Millions of Russian speakers have lost their link with Ukraine's Russian-speaking intelligentsia and middle class . They were overwhelmingly pro-Maidan and constituted a significant part of the revolutionary movement .
 Some Russian-speakers still expect Russia to raise its voice and use the pretext to increase its pressure politically and militarily .
 Yanukovych-era law on minority languages was canceled in March 2014 . It immensely helped the Kremlin propaganda to consolidate pro-Russian forces in Crimea and justify the invasion .
 The new Ukrainian legislation caught the Kremlin amid controversy over minority languages within Russia itself .
 Vladimir Putin voiced his opposition to compulsory teaching in the languages of Russian autonomies in August . In August, he voiced his support for compulsory teaching.
 The expected reduction of language classes has sparked protests in Tatarstan and Bashkortostan . The reduction has caused protests in both countries .
 Ukraine has been accused of destroying Ukrainian-language education in Crimea . It is also easy for Ukraine to rebuff Moscow's accusations by pointing at the destruction of Ukrainian- language education .
 Russia is more exciting to watch Ukraine harm itself than to make any efforts in that direction . The main reason for Russia not to make too much noise is that it is definitely more exciting for the Kremlin.
 The new legislation has already pitted Ukraine against its western neighbours . The Hungarian threats to Ukraine are music to the Kremlin's ears .
 The language issue will be used by the Russia-friendly opposition to Ukraine's post-revolutionary government . In the long term, the language issue is likely to be used in the longterm .
 The main source of dissatisfaction stems from extremely low standards of living in what is now officially the poorest country in Europe . The language issue is, of course, only the cherry on the cake .
 The language law is a neatly laid time bomb, which the Kremlin will not be detonating until the time is right . With the pendulum of political sympathies swinging away from the revolutionary camp, the law is not a time bomb .
 The Kremlin is happy that Ukraine is moving away from the idea of a democratic multicultural society towards the obsolete idea of an ethnic nation-state .
 Putin has long chosen for his own country, so Ukraine is certainly welcome on board . It is the course Putin has been chosen for himself, so it is likely to be welcomed by Ukraine .
Russophobic forces in Eastern Europe are much easier to tame and turn to its side than their annoying liberals with their principles and values .
 Viktor Orban is a great example of former right-wing Russophobe's complete and logical transformation into a friend of the Kremlin . The Hungarian prime minister is a good example of a former right wing leader .
Ukrainian nationalists are much more likely to drift back into the Kremlin's fold than staunch liberals . Ukrainian nationalists are likely to return to the Kremlin.
Putin's regime and Ukrainian nationalists owe a lot to each other for their mutual success . Putin's regime, Ukraine's nationalists owe each other a lot for success .
 In Ukraine, many call Putin the father of the modern nation, because his invasion consolidated Ukrainians in the way nation-state builders could only dream of .