 This virtual issue of Communist and Post-Communist Studies presents a range of articles published during the last decade that highlight the drivers of Russia’s foreign policy towards Ukraine and the West .
 At the core of the current crisis is the future of Ukraine as an independent state. Russia and Ukraine are at the heart of the crisis .
 Russia annexed the Crimean peninsula and attempted to stimulate a wave of unrest in the country by stimulating a ‘Russian Spring’ in the name of the Tsarist-era Russophone territories of Novorossiia .
 The aggressive media depiction of a “decadent West and a fascistic Ukraine’ in Russian media served to weaken rather than enhance its influence in Ukraine .
 Russia continues to support separatists in eastern Ukraine and to conduct cyberattacks on Ukrainian infrastructure . Since 2014, Russia has conducted cyber attacks on Ukraine's infrastructure .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has claimed repeatedly that Ukraine is not a legitimate state . He has also insisted that Ukrainians and Russians are one people .
 The current escalation has no clear trigger in Ukraine’s domestic politics. Yet unlike the 2014 events, the current escalation is not a trigger .
 Putin demands that Ukraine will never become a member of NATO and that NATO force deployments will revert to their 1997 posture . Rather, Putin demands guarantees that Ukraine won't become a NATO member .
 Russia has placed Ukraine's fate at the heart of its security concerns about NATO and the West's perceived encroachment upon Russia's sphere of influence . understanding the current crisis requires a broader view of Russia's relations with the West .
 Russia and the West have a mismatch of perceptions concerning international status, motives, and legitimacy . Russia and West Scholarly analyses of Russia’s relations with NATO and West show a mismatch .
 Relations with the West are deeply entwined with Russia's concerns about Western recognition of Russia’s international status . Russia is concerned about the West's recognition of its international status.
 Complicating matters are diverging appraisals among Russian and Western leaders over whether Russia has gained or lost in its international status .
Russia’s stance toward the U.S. has been influenced by the degree of external validation of its self-image as a great power, says Deborah Welch Larson and Alexei Shevchenko .
 Allen C Lynch presents a similar identity-based explanation in linking Russia's domestic regime and foreign policy toward the West since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 Russia's identity as a ‘state-nation’ with powerful imperial legacies shapes the way that Russian leaders link international status to foreign policy .
 Russia will be reduced to marginal status in world affairs, he says . He warns that a Russia that allows its neighbors the ‘freedom to choose’ is a Russian that will be reducing its status .
 Russia's relations with NATO in the post-Cold War era are marked by the historical association of NATO as a threat, Andrei P Tsygankov says . Russia's ties with NATO are linked to the encroachment of Western civilization on Russia’s borders .
 Russia's goal is to negotiate a new security order in Europe to replace the one that emerged after the Cold War . Russia was perceived as too weak to secure its interests in Europe .
 Russia's leadership views the war with Georgia in 2008 and the annexation of Crimea in 2014 as strategic successes . Such a perspective suggests that Russia’s leadership views it as a strategic success .
 Russia has promoted its security concerns above these legitimating narratives, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: Any sudden escalation of claims about a humanitarian catastrophe in the Donbas are likely to interpreted outside of Russia as pretext for invasion .
 Legitimation and Framing of Russia's Wars In Russia and the West may be used as much to advance legitimating claims as to promote confrontation .
 The U.S. media also contributes to conflict dynamics through its negative framing of Russia, writes Oksan Bayulgen and Ekim Arbatli .
 Media coverage should not diminish acts of international aggression, it is unfortunately clear that crises may also be fanned by media speculation, sensationalism, and disinformation .
 Another important vector for legitimation as well as disinformation is social media . Social media is a key source of legitimation and disinformation .
 Ivan Kozachenko examines how the "anti-Maidan" group on Russia's social media platform VKontakte forged symbolically meaningful connections between the unfolding confrontation over Crimea and Donbas and the Soviet past .
 "memory war" on social media helped drive the domestic appeal of Putin’s real war while squelching dissent. In this fashion, the ‘memory war’ on social Media helped to drive the national appeal of the real war .
 Elena Kravchenko and Tatiana Valiulina find enduring online impacts of Crimea’s annexation in the deepening of social divisions among bloggers .
 Recent surveys show that most Russians are uninterested in war . While these studies do not identify a clear link between social media activity and public opinion .
 Putin may not be able to count on the same kind of online boost in popularity as in 2014 .
 This article discusses two inter-related issues. RUSSIA and UKRAINE Russian stereotypes and myths of Ukraine .
 Russia's Novorossiya project aims to bring back eight oblasts of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kharkiv, Dnipro, Zaporizhhya, Odesa, Mykolayiv, and Kherson in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Ukrainian national identity was different than these Russian stereotypes and myths and how this led to the failure of the Novorossiya project . The project was supposed to create a new national identity .
 The article compares Russian stereotypes and myths of Ukraine and Ukrainians with how Ukrainians see themselves to explain the roots of the 2014 crisis . It also compares the failure of Russian President Vladimir Putin's Novorossiya project .
Soft power can be examined from bottom-up, discursively-focused perspectives. I outline the applicability of this approach to empirical studies into soft power . I outline this approach.
 Ukrainians’ cultural, historical and linguistic ties with Russia often lack necessary emotional force to generate meaningful soft power . The relationship between soft power and affect, says author . Ukraine’s cultural and historical ties with Russian often lack emotional force, he says .
 Russian national identity is far more fragmented and weak than most expected, says Paul Goble . Ukrainian national identity both ethnic and civil is far stronger than almost anyone thought, he says .
 The discovery has been that the Kremlin has had to take Ukrainian identity more seriously . The discovery was a result of the discovery of Ukrainian identity .
 If status conflicts refer to merely a symbolic recognition, then they should arguably be easier to solve than conflicts stemming from competition for power .
 Status conflicts can be difficult to solve even when they were not conceived as zero-sum games .
 The article argues that status conflicts cannot be understood without the interplay of perceptions and emotions . The article is published in the New York Times .
 There seems to be a gap how Russia and the West perceive status in general. First, what really matters is not objective status but perceptions thereof . There is a gap between the two countries' perceptions of status and that of the West .
 perceptions of when status is gained or lost seem to be emotionally loaded . The perceptions of how status is gain or lost appear to be emotional loaded .
 Russia is more likely to interpret Western action as violating its status as violating it . It is morelikely to interpret its own action as enhancing its status when it is defending such values differently from the West .
 Since 2003, Russian foreign behavior has become more assertive and volatile toward the West, often rejecting United States diplomatic initiatives and overreacting to perceived slights .
 This essay explains Russia’s new assertiveness using social psychological hypotheses on the relationship between power, status, and emotions . The essay was published in the New Year's Day 2014 .
 When a state loses status, the emotions experienced depend on the perceived cause of this loss . The emotions of a state's loss depend on how it is perceived to be a loss .
 When a state perceives that others are responsible for its loss, it shows anger . The state is angry when it sees others responsible for it's loss .
 The belief that others have unjustly used their power to deny the state its appropriate position arouses vengefulness . The belief is that others are unjustly using their power.
 If a state believes that its loss of status is due to its own failure to live up to expectations, the elites will express shame . If the state believes it has lost its status, it will be ashamed .
 Russia has displayed anger at the United States unwillingness to grant it the status to which it believes it is entitled . Since the end of the Cold War, Russia has shown anger at U.S. refusal to grant the status . Russia's takeover of Crimea and the 2014 Ukrainian Crisis have been
 Russia's reaction to recognition of Kosovo, U.S. missile defense plans, Magnitsky act, and Snowden affair are examples of Russia's vengefulness, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says Russia's response to the Snowden affair also shows a "vengefulness
 Russia’s foreign policy does not follow directly from the nature of its internal political system . The influence of regime type on Russian foreign policy toward “the West,” 1992–2015 Allen C Lynch says .
 Russian policy toward the Western world is best understood in terms of the capacity of Russia's post-Soviet rulers to achieve two goals that are in implicit tension .
 The Yeltsin and Putin administrations have different policy objectives, but have differing expectations of being able to reconcile them .
 Putin has consolidated an arbitrary personalist regime at home and waged war along the Russian periphery, even at the cost of relations with the Western world .
 Putin's regime may usefully be seen as a ‘state-nation’ with a strong imperial imprint . In this respect, Putin’s regime may be seen by some as a state-nation .
 The removal of Putin from power will not change that regime type or key challenges in Russian-Western relations . The removal will not be a major change in Russia's relations with the West .
 The paper analyzes Russia’s perception of NATO since the beginning of its eastern enlargement . The paper also analyzes the country's view of NATO in the past .
 Russia’s reaction to the enlargement evolved from attempts to diffuse its potential damage through a limited cooperation to passive and then active policies of containment . Russia's reaction to enlargement has evolved from trying to diffuse the potential damage by passive and active policies.
 Russian military concentration on the Western border has resulted in a risky behavior with respect to the alliance and a concentration of Russian military on the West border .
 Russia's evolving perception of NATO from a potential partner to a renewed military threat . The historical experience of viewing the alliance, and the West in general, as potentially threatening . The post-Cold war interaction with NATO served to strengthen the historically developed perception .
 Russia has learned from its interaction with the alliance that NATO remains a principle threat to Russia’s national security . The West seeks to exercise its cultural, economic, and political domination in Eurasia .
 The 2008 Georgia war represented a turning point in Russian foreign policy . Russia’s legitimization discourse from Georgia war to the annexation of Crimea was a turningpoint in Russia's policy .
 It was for the first time since the dissolution of the Soviet Union when Moscow invaded an independent country . The Council of Europe members fought against each other for first time .
 A premiere for Russian post-Soviet foreign policy was registered in 2014 too . A premiere was registered for Russian foreign policy in 2014 .
 The two events generated the West's protest and blatantly contradict Russia’s proclaimed foreign policy discourse . These two events have sparked the West‘s protest and contradicted Russia's proclaimed foreign Policy discourse .
 The present paper will compare Russia’s legitimization arguments for the 2008 war and the 2014 annexation of Crimea . The paper will assess how Moscow answers Western criticism and whether there is a continuity in Russian official legitimization narratives .
 This paper examines the Cold War rhetoric in US–Russia relations by looking at the 2008 Russia–Georgia war as a major breaking point . The effects of U.S. media framing and public opinion of the 2008 Russian-Georgia war are shown .
 We investigate the links between media, public opinion and foreign policy . We also investigate the link between media and public opinion .
 The framing of the conflict was anti-Russia, especially in the initial stages of the war . In our content analysis of the coverage of two major U.S. newspapers.
 Survey results show increase in media exposure of U.S. respondents increased likelihood of blaming Russia exclusively in the conflict .
 This case study helps us understand how media can be powerful in constructing a certain narrative of an international conflict, which can then affect public perceptions of other countries .
 We believe that the negative framing of Russia in the U.S. media has had important implications for the already-tenuous relations between the United States and Russia . The Cold War mentality for the public as well as for foreign policymakers, they say .
 The study is based on qualitative content analysis of online discussions, visual materials, and entries by group administrators and commentators .
 It also applies link-analysis in order to see how groups on social media are interrelated and positioned online .
Online groups are driven primarily by neo-Soviet myths and hopes for a new version of the USSR to emerge .
 Over time, the main memory work in these groups shifted from Soviet nostalgia and ‘pragmatic’ discourse to the use of re-constructed World War II memories in order to justify Russian aggression .
 This powerful swirl of re-created Soviet memories allowed effective mobilization on the ground and further escalation of the conflict from street protests to armed struggle .
 Russian Blogosphere Debates Crimea’s IncorporationElena Kravchenko and Tatiana Valiulina . This article focuses on the debate over Crimea's accession .
 The content analysis relies on data collected during the first and most turbulent year of Crimea’s incorporation . Crimea's independence was declared in March 2014 .
 The sample consists of 50 entries published on LiveJournal . The sample includes both posts and commentaries .
 We have discovered and problematized severe disagreements in bloggers’ worldview that give rise to the antinomies of bloggers' linguistic consciousness . We have also discovered and problems with the views of other bloggers .
 The use of words with opposite connotations relating to the same event within the same blog and an inconsistency between bloggers’ perception of the event and the affective meanings of lexical items attached to it .
 Crimea’s accession prompts bloggers to reduce this dissonance by “rolling up the semantic rainbow,’ that is, by destroying meanings with rigid binary semantic opposition . This exacerbates deep-rooted divisions within Russian society where patriots and liberals increasingly keep apart .
 Communist and Post-Communist Studies is an international, peer-reviewed scholarly journal . It features comparative research on current and historical developments in the communist and post-communist world .
 Post-communist states and societies encompass Central and Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union, Asia, Africa, and Latin America . The term remains analytically useful as a temporal or geographical frame .