Russia and Ukraine have been embroiled in conflict for the past eight years . In 2014, Russia took advantage of political turmoil in the neighbouring country to seize and establish military control over Ukraine’s southern Crimean peninsula .
 A full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine is currently underway, following a huge build-up of troops along the Ukrainian border . An estimated 14,000 people have been killed and an estimated 1. million displaced .
 Russia’s president Putin denied planning an invasion during that troop build-up .
 Russia’s Deputy Foreign Minister, Sergei Ryabkov, compared the situation to the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . In January, Russian officials issued an ultimatum to the west demanding written guarantees against Nato's further eastern expansion .
 Norsemen called themselves Rus established control over the East Slavic communities in what is now Northwest Russia . The Norsemen moved down the Dnieper River to make Kyiv, Ukraine, their capital .
The Norse elite soon assimilated into the local Slavic population, which began to refer to itself as Rusyns . The Norse elite became known as the people of Rus, orRusyns, in the Norse language .
 The heart of the Rus state was present-day central Ukraine . Moscow was established in the 12th century in what was then a far-flung northeastern frontier .
 In 988, Grand Prince Volodimer, who died in 1015, accepted Christianity from Byzantium . He died in 988 .
 Few Rusyns read or spoke the literary language of the church and state, Old Church Slavonic . FewRusyns speak or speak the language.
 Ukraine is located in eastern Europe between Russia and the EU/Nato member states . Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania are among the countries in Ukraine .
 Ukraine also has a borders with Belarus in the north and Moldova to the south . Ukraine has a border with Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine with Belarus .
 Ukraine and Russia are two independent countries, which emerged with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 As a former Soviet republic, Ukraine has deep social, cultural, and economic ties with Russia . But as a ex-Soviet republic, the country has deep cultural, economic, and social ties.
Until recently most urban centres and industrial areas were predominantly Russophone, except for the solidly Ukrainian-speaking westernmost regions . Nevertheless, until recently, most urban centre and industrial area were predominantly Russian .
 The Ukrainian school system began changing in the 2000s, with new generations going through the school system . This began changing as new generations went through the system .
 Russian aggression and the introduction of Ukrainian language legislation have accelerated the switch to Ukrainian in all spheres of life . Russian aggression has accelerated the change to Ukrainian.
 The overwhelming majority of the world considers Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 an unlawful occupation . The majority of world considers the Crimea annexation an unlawful invasion .
 Russia’s seizure of Crimea was the first time since the Second World War that a European state annexed the territory of another state .
 Treaty of Pereiaslav Exploiting the late 14th-century decline of Mongol power, the Grand Principality of Moscow and Grand Duchy of Lithuania divided the former Rus lands .
 A new social group of Ukrainian Cossacks developed on the southern frontier of Poland, guarding it against Crimean Tatar raids .
 By the early 17th century, the Orthodox Christian population of the Ukrainian lands had become antagonised by Catholic Poland’s religious policies and the spread of serfdom . peasants were bound to the land and sold with it.
 A 1648 Cossack rebellion led by Hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky became a mass social and religious war against Polish rule . Khmelnnytsky accepted the protection of the Orthodox Russian tsar in the 1654 Treaty of Pereiaslav .
Portrait of the Cossack Hetman of Ukraine Bohdan Khmelnytsky was found in the Collection of State Museum of Architecture, History and Art, Vladimir .
 Catherine II abolished the Hetmanate to erase the last remnants of Ukrainian autonomy . The Russian army destroyed the Cossack stronghold on the Dnieper .
During partitions of Poland in the late 18th century, Catherine acquired a large stretch of Ukrainian lands that Poland had retained after 1654 . Cossack officers could make claims to noble status - but Ukrainian peasants eventually became enserfed .
 As the institutional legacy of the Hetmanate was being dismantled, new interest in Ukrainian history and folklore developed among intellectuals under the influence of pan-European Romanticism .
 Taras Shevchenko co-founded a secret political society that discussed a free Slavic federation and the abolition of serfdom . The Ukrainian national revival was also underway in the westernmost Rus lands, which passed from Poland to Austria .
 Worried Russian authorities responded in 1863 by banning the publication of educational literature written in the Ukrainian language .
 In 1876, Tsar Alexander II signed the Ems Act, which banned all publishing in the Ukrainian language . The Act was signed in 1876 at the bathing resort of Bad Ems in Germany .
 Ukrainian patriots now use ‘Ukrainians’ as an ethnic designation to signify their distinctness from Russians . Portrait of Empress Catherine II in the 1780s was found in the collection of State Hermitage, St. Shemitage .
 The Central Rada was formed after the collapse of the Russian monarchy in 1917 . It soon developed into a revolutionary parliament . Ukrainian independence was the first Ukrainian independence .
 The Russian Provisional Government granted Ukraine autonomy under the name of the Ukrainian People's Republic . The Bolsheviks subsequently refused to recognise it and invaded Ukraine . The UNR declared full independence in January 1918 and signed a peace treaty with the Central Powers in Brest .
 The UNR could not survive the titanic clash between the Russian Reds and Whites during the Russian civil war . Neither power recognised Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Some 4 million Ukrainian peasants perished in the state-engineered famine of 1932–33, which in Ukraine is known as the Holodomor . The famine was considered a genocide – an interpretation increasingly accepted worldwide but which Russia rejects .
 The last Russian tsar and his family met a violent end in 1918 . Helen Rappaport considers whether Britain could have saved the Romanovs from their fate .
 Churchill and Roosevelt allowed Stalin to keep these territories . At the Yalta Conference in 1945, Churchill and FDR let Stalin keep them .
 Khrushchev achieved a longstanding aim of Ukrainian patriots to create a united Ukraine . But he pursued a course of cultural assimilation into Russia rather than promoting Ukrainian autonomy .
 Crimea became an autonomous republic within Russia in 1921, partly because of peninsula's strategic significance .
In the 1920s the Soviets cultivated the culture of the Crimean Tatars, who had lived on the peninsula since the 13th century . The Soviets cultivated them to impress the Western colonies and newly independent states in Asia with their seemingly benevolent policies . When the Red Army retook Crimea from Nazi
 As a result of this deportation, ethnic Russians became a numerical majority virtually overnight . The deportation of ethnic Russians has led to an ethnic majority in Russia .
 Keith Lowe explains the ways in which today's conflict between Russia and Ukraine can be traced back to the Second World War . The collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in the mass rejection of Soviet communism .
 Russian President Boris Yeltsin's administration did not try to preserve the Soviet federation .
The Ukrainian referendum in December 1991 spelled the end of the union, and Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus initiated its formal dissolution . This made Yeltsin a natural ally of President Leonid Kravchuk of Ukraine, but only as long as both rejected the Soviet legacy .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation was created on the signing by 12 founder members of the document known as the Washington Treaty on 4 April 1949 .
Local Russian majority would support the peninsula's incorporation into Russia . They calculated that the peninsula would be attracted by higher salaries and better career options without the need to study Ukrainian .
 Russian authorities in Crimea began to repress local Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar activists . But the sham referendum on joining Russia produced implausible results . The world community decisively condemned the annexation .
 Russia also fomented rebellions in other southeastern Ukrainian provinces, where the dominant regional parties have long cultivated pro-Russian attitudes .
 Donbas is a depressed industrial region with a Russian-speaking majority . But this strategy only worked in the Donbas.
 Heavily armed soldiers displaying no identifying insignia maintain watch in a street in Simferopol, Ukraine .
 That month, Russian troops took control of Ukraine’s Crimean region before formally annexing the peninsula . The peninsula was taken into control by Russian troops.
 The current charter affirms the U.S. commitment to enhancing Ukraine’s security in “countering Russian aggression” The specific measures listed in it focus on United States assistance in reforming the Ukrainian army and data-sharing .
 No existing treaties require the U.S. to defend Ukraine in case of war .
 Several hundred US, Canadian, British, and other European military instructors are training Ukrainian army personnel . The Yavoriv training field near the Polish border is the opposite end of the country.
 Nobody wants to give Russia a pretext for hostilities against the west. Almost certainly not, because nobody wants to make a pretext .
 Even during the Cold War, opposing nuclear powers were careful not to fight each other directly, but always through proxies, such as pro-communist Vietnamese .
 Ukraine has a relatively large and battle-hardened army . There is also no need for western troops’ involvement because Ukraine has an army of relatively large .
 The Yavoriv Training Field is only 20km away from the Polish border . The field was selected as the base of the US, British, and other western instructors .
 It is expected that the western instructors would be evacuated to Poland in case of war . But they might come back once the front line stabilised .
 The aim of joining Nato is now enshrined in the Ukrainian Constitution . In 2008, Nato members discussed the idea of Ukraine’s accession, Germany and France blocked it .
Low-intensity fire is a daily reality, and casualties are reported every week . The build-up of Russian troops and an ultimatum to the West never formally ended .
 Western and Ukrainian intelligence agencies released information about a massive build-up of Russian troops along the Ukrainian border . The information was released in 2021 .
 You are agreeing to our terms and conditions and privacy policy . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 BBC History Magazine and BBC History Revealed published by Immediate Media Company Limited under licence from BBC Studios Distribution .
 This article contains affiliate links and we may receive a commission for purchases made . This article is a written version of this article . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.