One of the most challenging tasks faced by journalists writing on international affairs is to compare and contrast language used by neo-Soviet authoritarians and western diplomats .
 Foremost is the Orwellian doublespeak habitually used by neo-Soviet leaders such as Russia’s Vladimir Putin and Ukraine's ex-President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Secretary of State John Kerry said Russian officials had repeatedly lied to him and other western leaders over their country’s intervention in Ukraine .
This is at a time when the numbers of dead and wounded soldiers returning to Russia are rising . This is at the time when a number of soldiers are returning to the country .
 Major offensives by separatists require large numbers of Russian troops brought from as far away as the Mongolian border . A wounded Buryat tank driver revealed to Russian independent newspaper Novaya Gazeta .
 Diplomatic obfuscation is a language that only those operating in the Byzantine diplomatic profession can fathom . Such doublespeak is augmented by what could be described as diplomatic obfuscation .
 Diplomatic obfuscation describes a world at odds with the reality on the round witnessed by journalists .
 Victoria Nuland was asked if Russia’s intervention was tantamount to an invasion, to which she replied in the affirmative . She was speaking before the House Committee on Foreign Affairs .
 Kerry and Nuland did not themselves mention Russian deception or use the word ‘invasion’ in their prepared testimonies .
 Minsk II ceasefire played up despite 10 reasons to see it as a failure . The following 10 reasons include diplomatic obfuscation .
 There are 12,000 Russian troops in Eastern Ukraine according to U.S. Army Europe Commander Ben Hodges . There are no signs of a withdrawal from Ukraine, he says .
 Russia sent its eighteenth “humanitarian convoy, often used to smuggle troops and arms, into Ukraine last week . Russia sent the convoy into Ukraine on Monday .
 Russia refuses to allow Ukraine to regain control over its border with Ukraine . It is facilitating the continued flow of Russian nationalist volunteers .
In authoritarian Russia, where FSB secret police are omnipresent, nationalist volunteers are permitted to openly recruit, raise funds, train and travel to eastern Ukraine . In authoritarian Russia.
 Separatist leaders have openly stated their intentions of capturing the entire Donbas region . The goal is to advance on the port of Mariupol and Kharkiv . Separatists have openly said they want to capture the region .
 Kharkiv was always the primary objective in spring of last year, according to a leaked Russian presidential document . The city faced fierce running battles between pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian forces .
 Large numbers of drones illegally fly over Mariupol operated by Russian forces . Large number of drones fly over Russian forces operated by Russia's forces .
 Russia continues to train terrorists who have carried out deadly attacks in Kharkiv . Russia has been training terrorists to carry out attacks in the city .
 Ukrainian nationalists continue to undertake attacks behind separatist lines . One over the weekend was against Luhansk separatist officer Aleksei Mozgovoi .
 Russia continues to illegally imprison Ukrainian pilot Nadiya Savchenko . Savchenko has been jailed for more than two years .
 Proposals for Ukraine to drop its goals of NATO and EU membership by copying Austrian neutrality after World War II are another example of diplomatic obfuscation that clouds major differences .
 Neutral Austria had a democratic political system whose elections were not directed by the Soviet Union . Austria's sovereignty was never questioned .
 Putin seeks regime change and overthrow of Ukraine’s democracy. In contrast, Putin seeks the overthrow of a pro-Russian leader and authoritarian system .
 Russia is planning to build a large military base that will reportedly host nuclear weapons . Russia continues to illegally occupy Crimea and is planning a large base that is reportedly to be built .
 Western diplomats are not as confident in private as they are in public at the success of the Minsk II ceasefire .
 Canada has begun to quietly discuss the “Kosovo option’s’. That is, undertaking air strikes against eastern Ukrainian separatist targets .
 Russian deception continues to spar with western diplomatic obfuscation . Others will continue to try and fathom what each side is really saying .