 Professor Mark Galeotti is one of the foremost Russia-watchers today . He travels to Russia regularly to teach, lecture, talk to his contacts, and generally watch the unfolding story of the Putin era .
 A prolific author on Russia and security affairs, he frequently acts as consultant to various government, commercial and law-enforcement agencies . He is a prolific author.
 Fourth presidential term Cast of Characters Andropov, Yuri — The formidable KGB chief and then Soviet leader . Putin appears to idolise but not understand.
 The Federal Protection Service is the small army of bodyguards, Kremlin riflemen, food tasters and phone tappers . Its job is to keep Putin and the rest of the government safe.
 Gorbachev, Mikhail — The last Soviet leader, who reformed the USSR out of existence, appears to embody precisely what Putin is not .
 GRU — The Main Intelligence Directorate, the military intelligence agency. GRU is the military's main intelligence agency .
 Ivanov, Sergei — The urbane KGB veteran was Putin’s chief of staff . He was regarded as a potential successor, but took semi-retirement in 2016 .
 The Olympic gold medal-winning rhythmic gymnast is rumoured to be Putin's current lover .
 Kadyrov is an unpredictable and violent man who professes loyalty to Putin while running the Chechen Republic as a virtually independent fiefdom . Ramzan is a violent and unpredictable man who has a history of violence .
 The Committee of State Security, the all-encompassing Soviet domestic security and foreign intelligence service, is the most powerful body of the KGB .
 Kudrin, Alexei is a long-term associate of Putin's, once a friend and economic liberal in his government . He is now somewhat estranged .
 Medvedev, Putin’s long-suffering prime minister, is less his colleague and more his gopher . Medvedeva, Dmitry, is Putin's long- suffering prime minister .
 Navalny, Alexei is an anti-corruption campaigner who uses the Internet to bypass the Kremlin’s efforts to keep him off television .
 Patrushev, Nikolai — Secretary of the Security Council, former head of the FSB, and a man who makes Putin look like a moderate . Putin's former secretary of the security council is also a former FSB head .
 Presidential Administration is the most powerful institution in Putin's Russia, in effect his government-above-the-government .
 Prigozhin, Yevgeny, is a man who has done well by doing whatever Putin needs doing .
 He is known as 'Putin's chef' because he came to know him when he ran a restaurant in St Petersburg . His companies still provide food for the Kremlin and many government agencies .
 Roldugin, Sergei is a cellist and childhood friend of Putin’s . He is now thought to be worth hundreds of millions of pounds .
 Rotenberg, Arkady and Boris are friends and judo sparring partners of Putin’s . They have done very well in business under his rule .
 The Western media calls him ‘Russia’s Darth Vader’ but no one there would dare . Sechin, Igor — Head of the oil firm Rosneft and Putin's former deputy — is the former deputy .
 Shoigu, Sergei — Defence minister since 2012, and perhaps the most powerful and influential figure within the government . He didn't get to that position by being a friend of Putin's .
 Sobchak, Putin’s old professor at law school, is the first democratically elected mayor of St Petersburg . He was appointed as his deputy.
 Surkov, Putin’s former political technologist and the impresario behind his fake political system, is now unofficial boss of south-eastern Ukraine .
 Zolotov, Putin’s former chief bodyguard, now head of the National Guard, is a thuggish loyalist through and through . He was Putin's former bodyguard.
 Putin White Rabbit in Moscow is a quintessentially ‘new Russian’ restaurant .
Special little chairs are placed next to female diners for their handbags . The idea of a fusion of traditional Russian and international cuisine runs to pineflavoured ice cream .
 I’m too miserly and too plain in my tastes to be a fan, but it’s flamboyant and prestigious, a place at which to be seen .
 A former official of the Presidential Administration was invited to choose a place for lunch . The most powerful institution in Russia is Vladimir Putin's chancery .
 He waved an almost-empty glass and frowned at me as if I were a representative of the entire Western journalistic, political and pundit class . He frowned at him as if he was a representative. He waved a glass.
 The president’s every word and his last fart. So long as you read whatever you want into the president's every word, you can read what you want .
 "It didn't matter what we said, what we put into the boss’s speeches, everyone just assumed they knew what we really meant, whatever we actually said," says the author .
 He is one of the most important people on the planet, and not just because he is, but because of the impact of the geopolitical struggle he is waging with the West, with bluster and bluff, memes and money .
 It is because he has become a global symbol, which everyone defines in their own way . It is also because he is also a worldwide symbol .
For all that he has been a fixture of global politics for almost 20 years now, for all that there are biographies of his life and calendars of his bare-chested antics . We still don't really know who he is.
 He’s a bit of each of them, but none of these labels truly sum him up . That's partly the point, he says . He's a little bit of every one of them.
 Putin is ferociously private, but also on behalf of his family, both out of preference and political calculation . His aloofness allows everyone to construct their own personal Putin .
 The main drivers for this process of estrangement with Russia may be elsewhere, but it is also depressingly clear how often Western diplomacy has failed .
 Putin left a potential pragmatic ally in the early 2000s. By 2007 Putin was squaring up for a confrontation. It left a possible pragmatic ally.
 Russia's response to Russia’s 2008 invasion of Georgia was used as evidence in Moscow in 2014 that moving into Ukraine would lead to only brief and token protest . Russia's toothless response to Georgia's 2008 invasion was used in Moscow.
 The West was once too weak to fear and yet too dangerous to ignore. It even managed to convince not just Putin but also many within his political establishment that the West was at once too strong to fear .
 It failed to persuade them that we do not hate them, their country and their culture . Above all, it failed to convince them that they are not a hate group .
 All this happened in no way only or even mainly because of our poor handling of Putin and Russia . But we have managed to handle both badly, and to a large extent because of a lack of understanding .
 Vladimir Putin has spent decades in Russia, talking to everyone from provincial cops to Moscow officials, getting drunk and paying the odd bribe . In this book, I seek to present a picture of the complexities of Vladimir Putin, and through him of today's Russia .
 I don’t for a minute think that I have got everything right, nor that everyone else has got everything wrong . I don't think I have gotten everything right. I'm not sure what I've done, but I'm sure I've got it right, he says .
 This is not primarily a book for my academic colleagues, and I will beg their indulgence for its tone, brevity and distinct absence of footnotes . The book is not only for academic colleagues but for the author's colleagues .
 It is for anyone who is curious about who this enigmatic figure may be, and why there is so much hype and hysteria around him . Rather, it is for people who are curious about the enigmatic figure .
 Putin is the leader of Russia's second largest state in the world . Putin has been in power since 2008 . He has been accused of being the most powerful leader in Russia . Putin is believed to be in power in Russia to win the election .
Every policymaker, scholar or pundit believes all or even most of these arguments . Of course, I am, in part, taking on straw man arguments and oversimplifications .
 The recent impoverishment of much public discourse about Putin and Russia has been depressing. That said, the recent impoverish of muchpublic discourse about Russia and Putin has been depressed .
 As the world gets more complex, the ways we frame and explain it too often seem to be getting simpler and less nuanced .
 Putin is the world's most powerful leader, according to CNN's John Sutter . He says Putin is a powerful figure in Russia, but it's not the only one we need to talk about .
 The book does not pretend to be the last word on Putin, and nor does it claim that no one else gets it right .
 Inside Russia’s Power Cult looks at how far their dreams and fears actually shaped Putin and his regime .
 Inside the Court of Vladimir Putin is a brilliant study less of Putin himself and more of the key figures around him .
Money, Power and the Myths of the New Cold War do this especially well . Money, Power, Power is a good example of the new Cold War .
 Putin is a Judoka, not a Chess Player, and then there's chess, one of the irritatingly durable clichés for Russia and Russians .
 The prevailing tendency of seeing Putin as a Machiavellian grandmastermind plays to a Western fear that he is behind everything that goes wrong . Each setback is part of some complex Russian strategy, says CNN's John Sutter .
Donald Trump’s election, Brexit, the rise of populism in Europe, the migrant crisis and even football hooliganism have all been blamed on Moscow . As a result, we run the risk of giving him too much power.
 Much of Putin's international adventurism is bluff, a little like the way an animal may puff itself up or bristle its fur to look as big and formidable as possible .
 There is no denying that Moscow is often trying to manipulate elections and widen social division in the West . But as we will see later, it will be rarely with anything like the kind of impact that we sometimes fear .
 Putin, the archetypal Bond villain, only without a lair in an extinct volcano, wants it to go . But this all implies some fiendishly subtle long-term plan to take the world step by step .
 There is no evidence that Putin plays chess, and in any case, it is not his sort of game . In fact, there is no proof that he plays chess .
 Chess is a contest of inflexible rules, transparency and of an intellectual competition where the options are strictly constrained . Chess is the contest ofinflexiblerules, transparency, and of a competition where options are limited .
 Everyone starts with the same pieces, and everyone knows what a pawn can do and when it’s their turn to move . The pawns have to be able to move their own pieces.
 A black belt, he has been honing his skills since starting as a teenager . His approach to statecraft seems to reflect this, he says .
 A judoka may well have prepared for a rival’s usual moves and worked out countermoves in advance . But much of the art is in using the opponent's strength to seize the moment when it appears .
 He has a sense of what constitutes a win, but no predetermined path towards it . He has no idea what it is, but has a feel of what it means .
 He relies on quickly seizing any advantage he sees, rather than on a careful strategy . He uses a quick approach to take advantage, instead of taking a careful approach .
 Both he and the Russian state he has shaped are often unpredictable, sometimes even acting in contradictory ways .
 Many apparent short-term ‘successes’ prove to be long-term liabilities, having been neither thought through or followed through .
 Putin doesn't know what he'll do next, he himself doesn’t know. This helps explain why we are so often unable to predict Putin’s moves in advance .
 The West is so much more powerful than Russia, he says . Russia has 20 times its gross domestic product, six times the population, and more than three times as many troops .
 But he's waiting for us to make a mistake and give him what looks like a good chance to strike . But he’s waiting for we to make an error.
 For the moment, it is enough to say that he wants power and stability at home, and recognition abroad . He wants power, stability and recognition.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin needs the country to be quiet, but also for the economy to work, he says . The country needs to work after a fashion.
 West provides irreplaceable markets for oil and gas, as well as the investment and technology its modernisation will require . That means business with the West, which provides irreplacedable markets, will require.
We are also the main obstacle preventing him from achieving his geopolitical goals, we say . But we are also preventing him of achieving his goals, refusing to give Russia the status he demands, and interfering .
 The West, when united, is more powerful than Russia on almost any terms, but at the same time believes that our weakness is that we are a constellation of often-fractious democracies . He realises that the West is morepowerful than Russia.
 He wants us to be divided, demoralised and distracted to the point where we are willing to do a deal with him or more likely, not in a fit state to challenge him . He wants to be disgruntled to be divided and demoralised .
 He has stumbled on a way to capitalise on the ambitions and imaginations of all kinds of individuals, institutions and organisations, from journalists to spies and businesspeople .
 Putin's predecessor and patron Boris Yeltsin shelled his own parliament to resolve a constitutional crisis . Putin has gone even further, creating a system that, at least at the top, functions in a similar way to a royal court .
 Agencies overlap and compete, formal chains of command are less important than personal relationships . Status and power are defined more by service to the needs of the Kremlin than by any formal institutional or social identity .
 In this ‘adhocracy’, your job title or even whether you are officially an employee of the state doesn’t necessarily matter .
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky was almost overnight reduced from the richest man in Russia to a convict . Even the so-called oligarchs know that their wealth is subject to the power of the state .
 The adhocrats are defined by their loyalty, their relationship with the boss and what they can do for him . Instead, they're defined by what they do for the boss .
 Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has largely been sidelined since 2014 . He was not even invited to attend the meeting at which the decision to annex Crimea was made .
 He still sits in his office in the foreign ministry, but even his loyal underlings recognise that he is no longer in Putin’s unofficial ‘kitchen cabinet’
 Lavrov is no longer riding the elephant in the parade, let alone helping to direct it, but is rather following behind it, shoveling in hand, cleaning up the mess it leaves . I interpret that as an admission that Lavrov is not riding the elephants .
 Vladislav Surkov was once the choreographer of Russia's pantomime politics . Now, in effect, Putin’s proconsul in south-eastern Ukraine .
 In the 2000s, he essentially set up the current Russian political system, with the avowedly pro-Putin United Russia . The Communists and the Liberal Democrats stage protests and grumble in the media but back the government in important votes .
 The idea was to create a theatrical-but-fake democracy that would keep the people satisfied, without challenging the Kremlin’s grip on power .
 In 2008, Dmitry Medvedev succeeded Putin as president, as the constitution barred him from standing for a third consecutive four-year term . Medvedeva succeeded Putin in 2008.
 Putin became Medvedev’s prime minister, although it was clear that this was largely a formality, and he was still in charge .
 Putin’s predictable return to the presidency was met with mass protests . The kind of thing Surkov's ‘managed democracy’ was supposed to prevent.
 Surkov appears to have been made Putin’s man there, even though it is officially run by the unrecognised Donetsk and Lugansk People’'s Republics . In 2014, Moscow encouraged a proxy civil war in the Donbas region of south-eastern Ukraine .
 Surkov has, at various times, been the architect of Russia's constitutional politics and virtual governor of an occupied region . This was never reflected in his official job title .
Until 2011, he was Putin’s deputy chief of staff, then Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Modernisation until 2013 . Since then he was simply a presidential aide, he has been Putin's deputy chief.
 Surkov has more muscle in determining foreign policy than the foreign minister himself . Because of the trust Putin places in him, Surkov is more likely to decide foreign policy .
 A dependence on personal relationships and unspoken understandings has become central to Putin's style of rule . The term ponyatiye is also much used in the criminal underworld .
 He defines broad objectives and hints as to what he might like to happen . He rarely gives direct instructions, but often gives broad objectives .
 The adhocrats become policy entrepreneurs, seeking and seizing opportunities to develop and implement ideas they think will please the boss .
 If you get it right you are rewarded, but if you fail the Kremlin can disown you . If you fail you can be disowned by the Kremlin .
 Putin's Russia has become a key figure in his country's political power . The Russian president is expected to be in charge of the country's most powerful government .
 Putin the judoka-tsar lords it over an army of smaller judokas, all of whom are looking for a chance to get on .
 RT, the infamous foreign-language television network, is known for its foreign language broadcasts . The network is also known as RT, which has been dubbed the "foreign-language network"
 The Kremlin sometimes steps in and dictates the official line, often in the wake of major embarrassment . More often it is a much less direct process.
 Dmitry Peskov sits down with the editors of the main government media platforms to lay out the lines and talking points he would like to see covered in the week ahead .
 He doesn’t dictate copy or set headlines, he expects them to use their initiative . He expects the same of their people, and they expect the same.
 Producers and presenters at RT may well have different ideas how best to frame it .
 These different ideas may then be played out in various programmes, with everyone hoping that theirs get noticed and approved .
 Effort, imagination, enthusiasm and ambition are all harnessed, without the tedious need to micromanage everything from the top .
 Russia's 'troll farms' pump out social media posts pretending to be Rob from Ramsgate or Sarah from Swindon . RT, its news agency counterpart Sputnik and a number of Russian commentators and diplomats certainly did .
 It is hard to say whether or not Putin or the Kremlin specifically backed the campaign . But setting aside the question of how far they really affected the result of the referendum, it is difficult to say .
 It can often be hard to know where a specific initiative originated. They certainly did nothing to stop it, but a consequence of this bottom-up system is that it can't know where it originated .
 If we think of Putin as the subtle mastermind of the geopolitical chessboard, we will all too often give him more credit than he deserves .
 The Russians held a major military exercise called Zapad, or ‘West’ in conjunction with their ally, Belarus . The Czech journalist had a deeply frustrating conversation with a Czech journalist .
 At the time, a massive wave of hysteria was washing over the Western analytic community . It was partly generated by its own paranoia and also by some alarmist pundits looking for some media attention .
At the height of the frenzy, this Czech journalist asked Putin what price he would accept for a peace treaty .
 First of all, I pointed out, as far as I knew we were not officially at war . First, I point out, that we weren't at war, but we were actually not .
 Putin would not believe his luck if any of those massive and unjustifiable concessions were offered, especially on the basis of a long-scheduled and essentially defensive military exercise .
 In Chapter 6 I will go into more detail as to how wrong this is, but every time we portray Putin as the evil genius behind everything that goes wrong, we play to this tendency . In Chapter 5, I will discuss how wrong Putin is and how wrong it is.
 The French poet and essayist Charles Baudelaire once wrote that ‘the cleverest ruse of the devil is to persuade you he does not exist’ Perhaps Putin’s cleveest ruse is to convince you that he is behind everything.
 If we persist with the idea that Putin is a strategic mastermind we will be looking for a grand design in the chaos that simply isn't there .
 If it seems that Russia is moving in all kinds of different directions at once, it’s not a result of misdirection or because we haven’t seen the pattern, it's because that's exactly what Russia is doing .
 We're looking for a great white shark, a single, murderous killing machine, but while we're doing that, a shoal of piranhas, individually much less formidable, yet much harder to predict and repel.
We should not try to predict Russian strategy based purely on Putin's tells and tics, his habits and his hobby horses . We should not be trying to predict Putin's strategy based on his tics and habits .
 Russia's political entrepreneurs are of every sort, from businesspeople to storytellers, computer hackers to gangsters . In fact, political entrepreneurs in his Russia are ofEvery sort, according to Russian president .
 Bulgarian intelligence says first initiative came from a Russian not-quite-oligarch . Konstantin Malofeyev is called a minigarch.
 A Russian Orthodox zealot and ultranationalist, Malofeyev came up with the idea and pitched it in Moscow until the government gave it the green light .
Trying to predict what ideas will come out of this process based on Putin’s character is a completely futile task .
 Russia created none of these opportunities, but has demonstrably tried to exploit them . Russia created no opportunities for Russia, but it has tried to exploited them .
 Putin is simply taking advantage of the failures, broken promises and stress points in our systems . In effect, we in the West define what Putin’s state does to us, while we define what it does to them .
 Putin is looking for innovative forms of disruption, instead of Silicon Valley’s goal of ‘disruptive innovation’
 He encourages agents and adhocrats to seize opportunities, fully aware that some, and maybe most, will fail . He encourages his agents andAdhocrats. He encourages them to seize opportunity .
 The act of launching these attacks brings chaos and uncertainty, and when they do succeed, the judoka can make his move . But that doesn’t matter, because that doesn't matter, says CNN's John Sutter .
 At the end of 1999, Putin was prime minister, and would soon be elected president . Putin was KGB, but not KGB .
 He was attending a party held at the Lubyanka. The building had been designed for an insurance company but gained infamy as the headquarters of successive Soviet secret police agencies .
 The Lubyanka was being held to celebrate the founding of the Cheka, the very first Bolshevik political police .
 Putin had not only been in the KGB, he had been a fan of the agency from an early age .
 He had wanted to join while still at school, and went to the KGB’s regional headquarters in the so-called Bolshoi Dom . It is close to the Neva River in Leningrad's central neighbourhood .
 The slab-sided building had previously been the offices of Stalin’s secret police . The building had an infamous reputation, with a steady flow of victims passing to Gulag labour camps .
 KGB officer who spoke to Putin was told to go away and either do his military service or graduate .
 He would remain in the service for 17 years, and these were the years that many feel shaped him . He would have been in service for seventeen years .
 Many of his closest allies are veterans of the KGB and its successors . He retains close connections with the security agencies .
 He did not coin the phrase ‘There is no such thing as a former KGB officer,’ but he certainly lives it .
 The experience played a role in the development of his world view, but it does not explain it entirely . There are other seminal experiences to examine, says author .
 Leningrad's childhood lived in a cramped and crowded communal apartment with neither a bath nor hot water . There was his hard-knocks childhood in a single room in the communal apartment .
 Vladimir got into judo and sambo, the Soviet military martial art, perhaps as a way of protecting himself or of finding a community .
 His early lessons in the streets and the ring seem to have left a mark, impressing on him . He believes confidence and determination can make up for strength and wealth .
 Rotenberg brothers and cellist Sergei Roldugin are still important to him today . Rotenberg was a childhood friend of the cellist and billionaire Rotenberg .
 The marginal and insecure nature of his childhood contributed to his later commitment to ensuring that he was safe and comfortable, and that no one had power over him .
After his time in the KGB, there were the anarchic 1990s, when the new Russia appeared to be spiralling into chaos . Nobody knew if tomorrow’s pay cheque would come.
 All the old values seemed lost and devalued, and the only new ones seemed to be to seize opportunities and make a fast buck when you could .
 Putin started working at the mayor’s office in St Petersburg when he was mayor . He rose to become deputy mayor, before moving to Moscow .
 Putin was the rootless outsider youngster looking for the right gang to join, after it . He was part of a group of insiders who were taking full advantage of every opportunity those unsettled times threw up .
After his service he has been chasing and idolising a fantasy image of the spooks rather than the reality . However, it is interesting to wonder how far before and after his service.
 In his autobiography, First Person, he admits that before he joined the KGB, his picture of the agency came from spy stories and films .
 The appeal was less the tradecraft or the nature of the missions as much as the sense that a spy really mattered . The appeal is less theTradecraft or nature of a mission than the kind of spy that matters .
 'I was most amazed by how a small force, a single person, really, can accomplish something an entire army cannot. As he put it, he said, ‘I wasMost amazed byHow a small Force, a one person, can accomplished something an whole army cannot,'
 A single intelligence officer could rule over the fates of thousands of people .
 A scrappy kid from the wrong side of Leningrad had an idea of how to get power .
 The irony is that while he has become the lord of the spies, his actual career in the KGB was perhaps less distinguished than he might have liked .
 Putin was never some Soviet James Bond . For all the artfully crafted mythology built around him, Putin was not some Soviet Bond .
 He was sent to Dresden, in Communist East Germany, in 1985 . He was at first posted in counter-intelligence, but in part as a result of his good command of German .
 He transferred to the KGB’s First Chief Directorate, its foreign espionage division . He never left the German Democratic Republic and seems largely to have been collating records .
 He filed reports for others to read, got plump on German beer, saved money to buy a car and generally lived a comfortable life . He put on 25 pounds and saved money for a car, but generally lived an comfortable life.
 Viktor Kryuchkov had been head of the First Chief Directorate at the time . He was later asked about Putin, he had never heard of him .
 Putin missed the reformist excitement of the Soviet Union in the 1980s, when Mikhail Gorbachev began to peel away decades of repression .
 Moscow essentially allowed the Germans to go their own way, he says . Instead, his experience was of the once-disciplined German Democratic Republic falling apart around him .
 For Putin, the lesson seems not to have been that all empires fall, and the bloodier ones tend to fall harder . The lesson seems to be that all Empires fall.
 As president, he would demonstrate that the state retains both power and the will to use it .
 He has some of the tradecraft of the trained security service officer, especially when it comes to identifying and exploiting people’s vulnerabilities . But his experiences were from the late KGB, one driven not by dreams of Marxist-Leninist glory but corrupt selfinterest .
 He did not witness the positive side of Gorbachev’s perestroika reform programme, just the cataclysmic outcomes, which he is clearly keen are not repeated .
 There is also an element of ‘wannabe-ness’ about this relationship . He was also pretty mediocre at the job, so he might look to the KGB’s successors .
 In 1999, Putin put flowers on Andropov’s grave to mark the eighty-fifth anniversary of his birth . A year later he placed a plaque commemorating him on the building where he had lived .
 In 2004, he even saw that a statue to the man was erected in St Petersburg . He even saw a statue of the man in 2004 .
 Andropov has encouraged an explosion in the number of articles and books about his life and times . He periodically invokes his memory as a brilliant intellect and a ruthless patriot .
 He was a complex figure and certainly no bleeding heart . He sent dissidents to mental hospitals and presided over the crushing of both Hungary's 1956 uprising and Czechoslovakia’s ‘Prague Spring’ in 1968 .
 Putin likes to pretend to be tough on corruption, but in practice it has become central to his whole style of rule . In Chapter 4 he will discuss in Chapter 4 .
 He also lives a life of opulent comfort, with palaces outside Moscow and on the Black Sea . He even exercises in a £2,500 tracksuit .
 He oversaw a bloody anti-corruption campaign that saw fifteen ministers sacked and embezzlers and profiteers tried and shot . He also oversaw the campaign that also saw 15 ministers sacked .
 He was a dyed-in-the-wool Marxist-Leninist, time and again . He demonstrated an unwillingness to swallow propaganda unquestioningly and be satisfied with the comforting lies subordinates would feed their bosses . But he was also known as a dyed in-the
 His experience meant that he knew how his people would attempt to doctor what they told him, even when they thought they were doing it in his own best interests . He never let himself be house-trained .
 Russia has a number of intelligence and security services, four of which are the most significant . The most significant are Russia's security services .
 The FSB is infamous for its virtual freedom from the law . It is one of Russia's most notorious officialdom .
 Putin ran the FSB in 1998-9 and still treats it with the greatest indulgence . He still treats the F SB with the most indulgence.
 The Foreign Intelligence Service is essentially the KGB's First Chief Directorate . It has a different acronym but the same role and even the same headquarters at Yasenevo in southern Moscow .
 The SVR specialises in human intelligence, planting deep-cover moles abroad and recruiting foreign agents . The agency is also known as the SVR.
 The GRU, or Main Intelligence Directorate, has been known as the 'Gru' since 2010 . Putin has suggested restoring the old name, but everyone in Moscow still calls it the 'gru'
 Russia's Spetsnaz is a much more gung-ho agency, doing everything from running spies and hacking computers to controlling Russia’s Spetnaz .
 The Federal Protection Service, the FSO, is Putin's Praetorian Guard . The FSO includes not just the sunglasses-and-dark-suit-wearing “bullet-catchers’ of the presidential security detail .
 As with every aspect of the adhocracy, whatever their official roles, in practice, these agencies overlap .
 The political policemen of the FSB also run missions abroad . The SVR sets up commando teams and the GRU does political intelligence . The FSO snoops on them all .
 The result, at least in theory, is that they have an incentive to be aggressive and imaginative, as they compete for Putin’s favour .
 It should also help him control them by playing them off against each other, and double-check the information from one with that from the others .
 Putin has over time become less and less willing to listen to alternative perspectives . Like so many authoritarian leaders, Putin has become less than willing toListen to alternative views .
Politics around intelligence is competitive to the point of cannibalism, says Putin . As with everything under Putin, politics is competitive.
 Putin wants to flatter his prejudices and reassure him that everything is going well . So they all compete to tell Putin what they think he wants to hear .
 Putin turns to FSB assessments of what's happening abroad before their own . This would be like the British prime minister asking MI5 about the latest news from Germany .
 His first and main introduction to each day comes from his spooks . In other words, his first andmain introduction to every day is from spooks.
 There is a vicious cycle of escalating claims and conspiracy theories, as the various services compete for the boss’s attention with ever-more-lurid allegations .
 Putin is still a spook fanboy, without much fieldwork under his belt and with limited managerial experience in the services .
 King Lear is King Lear to his ambitious daughters, apportioning his kingdom based on how well they flatter him . At the same time, without meaning to, he is king to his daughters .
 Putin’s Not Looking to Revive the USSR, or Tsarism for That Matter Back in 2007, he was having a drink with a retired Russian spy .
After a few years in what he always vaguely described as ‘corporate intelligence’ He retired to read books about the Second World War, dote on his grandchildren and periodically predict the war to end all wars .
 Putin had recently given a speech in Munich that had the colonel glowing with apocalyptic glee .
 That speech was the start of a new and rather more dangerous chapter in global politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin spoke the language of tough nationalism but was in practice strikingly pragmatic . When Putin had first come to power in 2000, he spoke thelanguage of tough nationalism .
 Russia’s best future depended on developing some kind of positive working relationship with the West . He was no fan of Western democracy, but did believe that Russia's best future depends on developing a positive relationship with West .
Seven Central European nations, including the three Baltic states, were allowed to join NATO in 2004 . Putin regarded this as a breach of prior understandings and an eastward expansion of an anti-Russian military alliance .
 The irritants and misunderstandings accumulated, and they burst forth in his speech in Munich .
 This was strong stuff, a genuine cry of anger, frustration and embittered disillusion . This was music to the ears of my friend, the KGB colonel, who was a KGB colonel .
 It is too easy for us to focus on the undoubted aggression of Putin’s Russia without considering the deep insecurities in which it is rooted. It is all too easy to focus.
 If you're the undisputed master of a nation, you should be wary of making offhand statements . If you’re the undisputable master of the nation, it's time to be careful .
 As a schoolboy he studied the heavily politicised versions of history prescribed by the government . A jealous and implacably hostile West was portrayed as a perpetual threat .
 This issue of respect is clearly central to his vision for his country’s future . This issue is central to the country's future.
 Putin has committed himself to restoring both the central authority of the state and also Russia’s status as a great power . This is not simply an exercise in geopolitical archaeology, rediscovering and restoring ancient glories .
Recreating the old USSR would not only mean a war with NATO over forcing the recalcitrant Baltic states back into the fold . It would also mean taking on responsibility for five unstable, corrupt Central Asian countries .
 There is no evidence that Putin — let alone the Russian people as a whole — has any interest in that . There's no evidence Putin is interested in Putin, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Ukraine's president wanted to annex the ethnically Russian Donbas region in 2014 . He could have done that in 2014 if he had wanted to do that in Ukraine .
 Putin made it clear that this was not going to happen, he disappointed and angered many Russian nationalists who had seen him as their champion .
 “Russia — My History’ exhibition at Moscow’s VDNKh, the Exhibition of Achievements of the National Economy. For a clue, look at the glitzy ‘Russia — my History' exhibition .
 VDNKh was built in Soviet times as a bombastic theme park dedicated to Stalinism . Huge pavilions showcase the largely mythic successes of the five-year plan .
 After 1991, it fell into the same shabby decline as the rest of Russia . Russia's economy has been in a decline since 1991 .
 Under Putin it has gone through a renaissance. Water once again flows from the Friendship of Nations fountain . The Cosmos Pavilion now includes the Soviet Buran space shuttle .
The exhibit is modern, fun, and free of pesky nuance and killjoy balance . The exhibit is a fun, fun and fun exhibit that is free of nuance and killingjoy balance.
 It is theme-park history, a roller-coaster ride with soaring ascents and terrifying descents . Russia is strong and safe when it is united and ruled by a firm hand .
 Marshal Zhukov, the man who broke Berlin in 1945 or Prince Mikhail Kutuzov, who turned back Napoleon’s invasion of Russia in 1812, is all about strong men taking tough decisions and shaping the world .
 He wants to cherry-pick the bits of history that fit his narrative of a Russia that has been battered and belittled by foreigners . The Soviet victory in 1945 is included, but Communism isn't, for example .
 Russian history is strewn with the bodies of defunct empires and heroes of the day . Putin wants to create something new from the bits and pieces gathered from those corpses .
Many fear, the Chinese in the twenty-first, as a nation at the crossroads of Europe and Asia . It has always been prey to the rising imperialist power of the age .
 British rifles could often outrange Russian cannon in the 1853-6 Crimean War . It has also been the victim of other nations’ greater economic or technological strength .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union was the culmination of a period of slow and painful economic decay . The Soviets tried to keep up with the West, as the Soviets tried and kept up with West .
 It was not simply a matter of too much money going to defence, it affected the whole of the centrally planned economy . It affected the entire economy .
 The single greatest cause of household fires in the early 1980s was exploding television sets . The defence firms got to pick the best cathode-ray tube displays for their use .
 The Soviet Union lost a war, a political, economic and social one . In effect, the Soviet Union was losing a war.
Public anger grew as the economic situation worsened, and nationalist movements sought to break countries out of a 'union' that had always looked more like an empire .
 Moscow went from being the capital of an empire to the centre of one country out of fifteen . On Christmas Day in 1991, Gorbachev resigned as Soviet president .
 The ruble tumbled, pensions and salaries often seemed not able to buy anything . Pensioners would stand outside metro stations trying desperately to sell whatever possessions they had to get through another week . Mercedes and BMWs of the new rich drove past .
 Privatisation schemes simply transferred public assets into the hands of a few corrupt insiders and wheeler-dealers . Moscow no longer seemed in charge .
 It is perhaps understandable that bewilderment at what had happened shifted to a desire to find someone to blame . It's perhaps understandable. It's not clear who had done it to them .
 The most extreme point of view is that the West had not only deliberately forced the Soviet Union into an arms race that it could not afford, but that its economists and IMF advisers had knowingly encouraged the plunder of the country .
 Russia was not taken seriously in that decade, when it was treated as a problem rather than a player . Even more moderate figures note the degree to which Russia was taken seriously .
 Putin's foreign ambitions are psychological, about the ideas of power and forms of respect . It is striking how far Putin’s foreign ambitions have been psychological .
 He seems to believe that the West is trying to keep Russia under its thumb . He certainly seems to think that the U.S. is attempting to keep it under its hand .
 The trouble is that, when viewed from the Kremlin’s narrow windows, the world can seem very hostile .
 CIA plots to bring down Moscow-friendly regimes. Clearly not protests against corrupt, inefficient and unresponsive rulers, but CIA plots .
 Russia’s distinctive cultural values and civilisational uniqueness also affects its place in the world, says Putin . ‘without history, without culture,Without culture, without mentality, nothing works.’
 This sense of military, political, economic and cultural vulnerability is widely held, and there are those who see it in even starker terms than Putin .
 The claims of my colonel friend that the West is just waiting for the chance to invade Russia are not just the whinnies of an old warhorse, they reflect a genuine concern . But much we may think it is perverse and paranoid, continues to inform Moscow's military planning.
 Britain and France haven't really come to terms with this, fifty-plus years on . Losing an empire, and with it great-power status, is hard .
 Putin doesn't simply want to turn the clock back to past glory days, whether tsarist or Soviet .
 Spain's economy is largely dependent on oil and gas . The country has a shrinking population .
 Despite having innovative and creative programmers and designers, it is having trouble adapting to the information age .
 A third of the federal budget is being spent on security, broadly defined . It has nuclear weapons and a large army, but it can barely afford either .
 It also has strikingly little ‘soft power’ There are wannabe strongmen who dream of being like Putin, but not many countries want to be like Russia .
 Putin is determined that Russia matters more than this recitation of moderate strengths and less moderate weaknesses would suggest . But Putin's decision would suggest that he is determined to focus on Russia .
 He sees a great power as having a voice in all global issues of consequence, not because it necessarily has interests at stake, but rather because this symbolises its status . He says he sees the power as has a voice.
 He thinks a great power should get to waive the rules and should not have to consider itself bound by international laws and norms . He says the power should be allowed to waive rules and not be bound by the rules .
 Putin is of below average height, but with his over-the-top tough-guy persona, he tries to project a more formidable image .
 The author's foreign policy is a piece of purposeful theatricality, he says . He says the same is true of much of his foreign policy .
 He is trying to get us to show respect, to treat Russia as if it still matters in the world, he says . Russia is more than 1.m. tall than it would be if it were 1.1m tall .
 The Russian president is trying to deny history, to pretend the age of Russian superpower is not over . In the name of this defensive policy, he is undoubtedly deploying aggressive tactics, but this is not the start of a Soviet revival .
 Putin Sees Money as a Means, Not an End According to Bill Browder, an American-born entrepreneur who made a lot of money in Russia before falling foul of the wrong people . Putin’s total net worth is around $200 billion, which makes him as rich as
 The people who will know are not the kind of people who'll talk to me, but this is a question I have asked all sorts, from Western intelligence analysts to Russian journalists .
 Former tax policeman who was then working in a pretty senior role at Rosfinmonitoring, Russia's Federal Financial Monitoring Service .
He issued a statement of his assets ahead of the 2018 elections . It said he had earned 38. million rubles over the previous six years . He had some £190,000 in the bank .
 He owns a 75-square-metre flat in St Petersburg, two Soviet-era vintage GAZ cars and a little Lada Niva 4x4 . He also owns two vintage vintage cars and two vintage cars .
Collection of high-end watches has together been valued at half a million pounds .
 It is hard to believe that this applies to Vladimir, any more than to the rest of the Russian elite . It's hard to think that this is the same as the other Russian elite.
 Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu's £14 million pagoda-themed estate and presidential spokesman Dmitry Peskov’s £5. million home .
 Chechen strongman Ramzan Kadyrov also has a private zoo with a tiger and an £840,000 Lamborghini Reventon .
 Putin stashed away as much as £1. billion in various opaque offshore companies and in the accounts of his cronies, including at least £80 million in the name of his close childhood friend, the cellist Sergei Roldugin .
 It would be tempting to see this as proof that Putin is hiding money away for a rainy day or a lavish retirement .
 Once, during the 1990s when he was trying to maximise a shrinking salary in a time of massive opportunity and risk, this may have been his main motivation .
 St Petersburg councillor Marina Salye says almost £100 million was spent on holiday villas for Putin and his friends . Former police investigator Andrey Zykov said £30 million spent on Spanish holiday villa for Putin .
 There seems to have been a collective and almost coincidental nature to much of the off-the-books enrichment that was going on . Even then, there seems to be a collective.
 Putin was just one of a bunch of friends who were making money, lots of money, thanks to their political connections and the business opportunities they opened up . It wasn’t only Putin involved — he was just a lot of friends.
 Dachas, or country houses, are on the eastern shore of Lake Komsomolskoye, north of St Petersburg . They built dachas on the shore of the lake .
 The so-called Ozero Dacha Cooperative is based in the southern part of the country . The Cooperative's members are known for their social networking skills . They are also known as the OzeroDacha Cooperative .
 Vladimir Yakunin became head of Russian Railways in 2005, on a £10 million salary .
 The luxury mansion outside Moscow famously has an Olympic-sized swimming pool and a garage with space for 15 cars . It also has a special room solely for fur coats .
 Sergei Fursenko became director general of one of the subsidiaries of the state gas corporation Gazprom in 2003 . He was also director of the Gazprom-owned Zenit St Petersburg Football Club .
 The list continues, but the common denominator is that all these men, who are at least multi-millionaires, rose to high-power, high-paying positions under Putin .
 The cooperative’s common bank account is held in Bank Rossiya, which is proof to some that it is Putin's personal slush fund .
 Putin, should he want to, is simply one of those who can dip into it . However, the truth is more likely that it is a collective account into which many people can put money .
 Russian organised crime gangs used to fund new operations, to look after members who got sent to prison, and to keep them happy and busy .
 Putin was horse-trading with St Petersburg's gangsters on Mayor Sobchak’s behalf in the early 1990s .
 He was operating in an environment where corruption was the norm rather than the exception . He was certainly operating in a environment wherecorruption was thenorm .
 I once asked a policeman what would have happened had he not taken bribes, he explained that it wasn't just that his family would have suffered . No one could live on a policeman’s salary in the 1990s, he said .
 If you ‘don’t take bribes and you stand out from the rest, you become a problem for them, he said . As he said, if you don't take bribes, you becoming a problem.
 Nothing suggests Putin had any intention of standing out from the rest in this respect . Nothing suggests that Putin had anything to do with Putin .
 The real problem for Russia is the industrial-scale profiteering at the top of the system that sucks the blood from the country’s veins and the marrow from its bones .
 Russia’s own political and business elite have cost the country up to six times as much as Western sanctions since 2014 . To put it another way, whatever the cost of Western sanctions has cost Russia six times more than the country .
 The way this corruption works is through favours, access, lucrative contracts and the authorities turning a blind eye to flat-out embezzlement . The corruption works through favour, access and lucrative contracts .
 The Kremlin doesn't pay people — it simply grants them opportunities that they can milk . The Kremlin does not pay people .
 In return, rather than handing over suitcases of cash, they invest in projects, donate to charities, grant stakes in businesses and look after friends . They also donate to businesses, look after their friends .
 Officials are encouraged to take advantage of their positions, which back in tsarist times was called kormleniye, or ‘feeding’ Both to ensure their loyalty and also to guarantee that if the government has an excuse if it ever wants to get rid of them.
 If you're the person who gets to decide in whose closet to rummage, it is useful if everyone’s is hiding a skeleton .
 The same exchange of loyalty for opportunities to get rich even applies to the underworld . The same swap of loyalty is the same as loyalty for opportunity to be rich .
 Putin's job was to cut deals with whomever he had to, to keep the city running and the local bigwigs happy . Back when he was deputy mayor in St Petersburg, Putin was a 'liaison'
 Tambovskaya group was so formidable that its leader, Vladimir Kumarin, became known as the ‘night governor’
 Putin's continued high-profile status had become too embarrassing for Putin . He managed to stay ahead of the law until 2007, when he was arrested and sentenced on a range of charges .
 Companies run by the Tambovskaya gang were granted a range of contracts and perks in return for their cooperation . The same model was applied throughout Russia when Putin became president .
 Putin offered wealth in exchange for loyalty. In politics, business and crime, three worlds do overlap to a depressing degree in Russia .
 The corrupt entrepreneurs in business shower the boss with gifts, in the hope of winning and keeping his favour .
 Putin wanted to build a lavish palace for himself at Cape Idokopas in the over-the-top, blinged-out style . He didn’t pay for it himself .
 He demanded that a number of the wealthiest businessmen make ‘voluntary donations’ to fund health care improvements . Instead, he demanded that some of the richest businessmen make 'vol voluntary donations' to fund improvements .
About a third of millions collected was diverted into offshore slush funds . Much of the money was used to build the palace .
 The government denies that it is even an official residence . It is garrisoned by Kremlin Guards from the Federal Protection Service, and maintained by the Presidential Property Management Directorate .
 Those making fortunes of their own know that they are rich only while they have political power and Putin’s goodwill, which also keeps them suitably anxious .
 The corollary for Putin’s Russia is that money will not necessarily get you power, power will always get you money .
 Putin has least need for money, people are most eager to give it to him . The irony is that these days, when he has least needs for money.
 Putin was looking for ways to make the most of his salary in the 1990s . He forged connections with city officials, gangsters, and fellow vacationers in the Ozero Dacha Cooperative .
 Russia's wealth is more a by-product of the corruption and kleptocracy that is at the heart of his system. Now that he has whatever he wants, all Russia as his piggy bank, it is clear that it is power, not money .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been in charge of Russia for more than 20 years . He has a long history of governing Russia and building his historical legacy . He is known for his role in Russia's civil rights struggle .
 He understands how the promise of wealth motivates those around him . But it isn't his drug of choice, he says .
 Putin has presided over the transformation of Russia into a hybrid state that is half old-style crony oligarchy and half caricature of the most rapacious form of capitalism .
 The richest 10% of Russians own almost 90 per cent of the country . More than in any other developed nation, more than in other developed nations .
 Much of their profits and assets flow out of Russia, much of their assets are out of the country . But they gleefully take advantage of the financial opportunities of globalisation .
 This may drive them, but it is probably not, or at least no longer, what motivates the boss . This may not drive them. But it is likely not, and at least not, what drives the boss.
 We shouldn’t assume that targeting Putin’s money, or his obshchak, is some sort of magic weapon . Let us do everything we can to cleanse London and the other financial centres of the West of the dodgy Russian money .
 If he loses access to his funds abroad, he will have all the more reason to stay in power at home . If the oligarchs, minigarchs and corrupt officials are faced with the choice of either bringing their money home, or leaving it abroad, they will probably do the former
 If it's too late, they will simply become more dependent on the Kremlin for another juicy contract to help replenish their bank accounts .
 If we want to influence Putin we need to pay attention to what really drives him rather than money, which is what we'll turn to next .
 I'd been answering questions for almost an hour from a collection of intelligence analysts, in a European country with a fairly pressing interest in Russia . I’d been answering Questions for nearly an hour.
 Putin's vision for Russia and his approach to power was clearly not what the questioner had in mind . I started to talk about Putin’s vision for Russian and his approaches to power .
 I had been so close to getting out of the hotel, but it seemed that I was going to be stuck for a while longer . I'd been in the hotel for a few weeks, but I was stuck for more than a month .
 People are often looking for the magic answer with Putin, the key that will somehow unlock his plans and secrets .
 Analysts seek to identify philosophers, dead or alive, whom they can present as explaining his world view . Then there are those who want to try and understand how Putin thinks .
 Russia should be the heart of an empire spanning Europe and Asia, he says . He espouses ‘Eurasianism’ and the liberal values it represents .
 Putin was toying with either creating a puppet pseudo-state of “Novorossiya’ in south-eastern Ukraine, or annexing that land, too .
 Putin had backed away from this idea, and Dugin was suddenly no longer useful . But by summer of that year, Putin had back away from the idea .
 Alexander Prokhanov was an old-school propagandist from Soviet times . He was called ‘the nightingale of the General Staff’ for his sentimental odes to the bravery and decency of the Red Army .
 He is an ageing ultranationalist, churning out articles and books calling for a new Russian empire . Now he is making trips to the Donbas to pose with a Kalashnikov in his hand .
 In 2012 he founded the Izborsk Club, a nationalist think tank that some see as a sinister engine powering Russian policy abroad . He founded the club in 2012 .
 Ukraine could be divided between Russia, Poland, Hungary, Hungary and Romania . The idea is absent from Kremlin calculations .
 Ivan Ilyin was a White, or anti-Bolshevik, émigré who died in 1954 . He was also a White and anti-bolsheviks . He died at the age of 54 .
 There is no evidence that Putin reads, let alone follows, Ilyin — or any of his other supposed inspirations . But regardless of such philosophical debates, the real issue is whether there is any evidence .
 Ilyin’s writings were among a batch he suggested that regional governors read, back in 2014, and they certainly usefully justify his belief in Russia's unique place in history, the importance of a strong ruler and the role of the Orthodox Church in defending Russia.
 It is impossible to know if these are his or his speechwriters’ words, or his words .
When some figures’ ideas are politically convenient they are hyped, and when they become liabilities they fade from view . Instead of shaping policy, this is all about managing the public narrative, says David Cameron .
 Putin is enough of a politician to put pragmatism first. Even when the ideas seem to chime with Putin's own instincts, he is enough to put pragmaticism first .
 Putin has in the past described it as a CIA plot . Dugin has called for the Internet to be banned, and Putin has described the Internet as a spy plot .
 More than threequarters of all Russians now use the Internet . Putin has shot it back down when it was raised .
 There is always another grand thesis or eccentric philosophy on which to draw, and a whole gallery of pundits, scholars, authors, authors and knowit-alls are trying to influence Putin .
 In many ways, we can consider them as philosophical entrepreneurs akin to the political and economic varieties . They pitch their ideas to the Kremlin, locked in a rhetorical arms race.
 There is no one figure who is the power behind Putin’s throne, nor is there any one philosophy or philosopher that shapes his thinking .
 The answer to this particular lock was at once simpler and more complex. So, I had to disappoint that eager analyst and tell him that there was no key to this specific lock .
 There is no single detailed strategy behind his attempts to elevate Russia internationally, nor is there is an explicit, coherent ideology in his domestic policy .
 There is a mix of human motivations that generate his policies and responses, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He is a gut-level patriot who believes Russia should be considered a great power not because of its military strength, its economy or for any other specific index, but because it’s Russia .
 Russia's nationalism is hardly unique to him, or to Russia, but it bites especially sharply given that he and his generation still remember being a superpower . This kind of primordial nationalism is not unique to Russia.
 Russia must protect itself in a scary and unpredictable world, but it is also about respect and honour . To an extent, this is about security, but also about honour and respect .
 Outsiders ought to treat Russia right, treat it better than they have previously . Russia should be treated better than it was previously, says one expert .
 To Putin, security and respect are based on strength, and a strong country needs strong state power, says Putin . "To Putin, Security and respect is based onstrength," says Putin.
 Russia's leader fears about Russia being weak and resentment at it being disrespected is rooted in post-Soviet chaos of 1990s .
Russia's leader wants to stop Russia sliding further into collapse and assert the “power vertical’, a system of top-down personal control . Russia's leader also wants to end Russia's 'power vertical'
 He grew up and lived in a state socialist economy . He had practical complaints about day-to-day inefficiencies and shortages . He didn't object to it philosophically .
 He shows no signs of wanting fundamental systemic reform. Now he runs a capitalist state, albeit one warped out of shape by corruption and oligarchic monopolies .
 Ilyin is happy to read writers like Ilyin and enjoy the sense that his innate bias towards a strong, powerful and centrifugal state has a rich cultural pedigree .
 As long as he can get what he wants from the existing system, he’s content .
 He is increasingly presented as a leader who is committed to overturning the existing world order and its liberal democratic norms . He is also increasingly present as an opponent of the current world order .
 He will certainly criticise what is, after all, an order largely created by the West, in the West’s image, and for the West's advantage .
 He plays with the role as champion of traditional social values, of a bygone age where men were men, women knew their place, and no one had even heard of transgenderism .
 He believes that the West is essentially hypocritical and that a mark of a great power — like the USA — is its exceptionalism . He wants Russia to ignore the pesky rules when it wants to .
 He is happy to exploit the current fractures within the West, presenting the EU as prey to degenerate ultra-liberalism . If you watch Russian television coverage about Europe, or ‘Gayropa’, you’d believe that children there are being forcibly ripped from their
 Putin can persuade Russians that they don’t want to be more like us, while also dividing, distracting and demoralising us. Ultimately, this is because these are ways in which Putin can convince them they don't want to being more like them .
 Russia is trying to assert Russia’s great power status de facto and to get us to accept that vision . Above all, though, he's trying toassert Russia's great power Status de facto .
 Russia is a great power get-out-of-jail-free card for non-traditional marriages in Europe and gender-neutral bathrooms in the U.S. Midwest .
 The West sees Putin as their ideal patriarch, but he is nothing of the sort . Putin is not the ideal patriarch for the alt-right fanboys .
 In social terms, he is hardly the champion of conservatism they think, but in social terms he is a tough leader . Yes, he's a tough, even ruthless leader.
 He upholds gun control and abortion rights, and went along with small-minded laws against so-called ‘gay propaganda’ It was not an initiative that came from the Kremlin .
 He is a confirmed Russian Orthodox Christian, but has demonstrated no hint of antiSemitism . He is notable in a country with a dark history of its relations with its Jews .
 He is again unusual by the standards of many Russians of his generation in listening to, and sometimes even empowering, women .
 Elvira Nabiullina has been chair of the Central Bank since 2013 . For example, she has been head of the bank since 2013.
 She has been carrying out a ruthless campaign to try and clean out toxic and criminal banks . She is also trying to clean out a number of banks.
 Putin has backed her time and again against men who might have been useful new cronies for him . In the process she often comes up against powerful vested interests .
 Russia is near enough an earthly Mordor, North Korea with balalaikas, says some foreign commentators .
Walk the streets of Moscow, and you'd find yourself in a modern, dynamic and frankly fun European city . However, walk the streets.
 Even out in the provinces, where money is tighter, there is ample evidence of change .
Marks & Spencer branches in Russia are among the most popular stores in the world . They include coffee houses, Wi-Fi and branches of Marks & Spencer .
 Putin has no ideological commitment to anything, really, and so has no reason to try to impose totalitarianism . He has no intention of imposing totalitarianism, he says .
 Ideologists are, after all, the scariest kinds of rulers, because they want to dictate what goes on inside their people's heads .
 Putin is willing to use propaganda and media control to mobilise support and squeeze out alternative perspectives . But he doesn’t really care what people think, so long as they do what they are told .
 Chapter 9: This creates interesting spaces for unexpected freedoms and even a ‘resistance that dare not speak its name’ inside his Russia . As I'll consider in Chapter 9, this creates interesting places for unexpected freedom .
 Putin is not a philosopher, and that is something for which we, and Russians, should be thankful . Putin is a good person, and we should be grateful for him .
 Putin Is Risk-Averse, Not a Macho Adventurer. Being one of Putin’s bodyguards can make your career .
 Viktor Zolotov was appointed in 2016 to lead the newly formed National Guard . He has also amassed a property portfolio worth millions of pounds on an annual salary of just over £70,000 .
 Yevgeny Zinichev became first governor of the Kaliningrad Region and then Minister of Emergency Situations . Another of Putin’s security team, Yev Geny Zinicv, became first Governor of theKaliningrad region .
 Putin's circle has shrunk, increasingly the only people Putin knows are his guards, drivers, aides and umbrella-carriers . This is in part because his circle is shrinking, as his circle has grown, he says .
 The Body is known in his inner circle as 'The Body' as he is known for his macho theatrics . The body is used to dive for archaeological remains off the coast of Greece .
 In many ways, this paradox is a metaphor for Putin, the man of many masks . In some ways, it is a sign of Putin's power in the mask.
 At home he poses as the tough-love, details-oriented chief executive . He leaves much of the minutiae of government to others and is increasingly less actively involved in managing the country .
 Abroad, he poses as the devil-may-care adventurer, a bad boy not worth tangling with because he is so unpredictable and resolute .
 He is only happy to play the maverick when he thinks he can predict the outcomes . He is also happy to be able to predict the outcome of a game .
 Russian jets routinely “buzzing’s, or flying intimidatingly close to, American planes and warships. We previously saw more brazen pressure on the U.S.
 Moscow considered it politically safe, because they trusted the professionalism of American soldiers and maturity of the U.S. government not to get spooked and turn a piece of geopolitical gamesmanship into a shooting war . This was technically risky.
 When Donald Trump was elected, the scale and tempo of such challenges diminished dramatically . Donald Trump's success in the United States has been questioned .
 In April 2017, the US launched cruise missile strikes on Syria, in response to a chemical weapons attack by government forces . Trump was affected by Fox News coverage he saw on Fox News .
 The following day I happened to meet with one of those Russian officials . He was at his wits' end, caught between an unpredictable American president and higher-ups who were demanding firm predictions .
 Boris Nemtsov was a former deputy prime minister and regional governor . He was at the time the highest-profile democratic opposition leader in Russia .
 The murderers were security officers working for Ramzan Kadyrov, the head of the Chechen Republic .
 Kadyrov had helped Putin win the bloody Second Chechen War between 1999 and 2002 . The Russian leader helped Putin to win the war between 1999-2002 .
 Putin allowed Kadyrov to establish himself as a virtually autonomous local warlord, paying off the local elite and bankrolling vanity projects in the Chechen capital Grozny at Moscow's expense .
 Kadyrov has repeatedly faced allegations of murdering his enemies with impunity . There was a great deal of bad blood between him and Nemtsov .
 He wanted the case to go away, for a few scapegoats to be found and punished . He wanted a line to be drawn under the incident .
 Kadyrov’s enemies were angry at how he had locked them out of Chechnya and replaced their people with his own henchmen .
 A Russian journalist with good contacts in the FSB told me that ‘they had been waiting for something like this, for Kadyrov to do something stupid and shit on Putin's doorstep’
 If he exonerated Kadyrov, he would look weak and effectively be admitting that he couldn’t control Moscow . If he was exonerated, he could look weak.
 If he took on Kadyrov, he feared that the Chechen leader’s personal security forces would avenge him, plunging Russia into third vicious war in the region .
 Chechen strongman posted odes to his loyalty to Putin on Instagram . He would not even take Kadyrov’s calls, and the Chechenstrongman surreally took to posting odes .
 What eventually emerged was not a decisive result but rather a mutually unsatisfying compromise worthy of any democratic deal-maker .
 Kadyrov received a tacit slap on the wrist, and was warned not to do it again . The Russian president has been told not to repeat the slap .
 The investigation was limited to the actual trigger-pullers, and no attempt was made to follow their chain of command . The hawks who wanted him brought down were told to cool it .
 Putin either backs away from a tough decision, ducks out while he agonises, or hopes that with time, the need to make a decision will disappear . Time and again, Putin either back away from the tough decision.
 Khabarovsk Zoo's daring acts of daring include tranquilising a supposed wild tiger that turned out to be a sedated animal . He thinks the tiger is actually safe .
 Putin sent in his notorious ‘little green men’ to seize Crimea. In 2014, after Ukraine’s corrupt President Yanukovych had been toppled in the ‘Maidan Revolution’
 Russian special forces, their uniforms stripped of identifying badges, took the peninsula in a few days .
 Crimea was hailed as an act of swashbuckling piracy, but the truth is that Crimea fell into his lap .
 The Ukrainian government had all but collapsed, its military high command was full of Moscow’s agents and sympathisers . The Russian Black Sea Fleet was already based in Crimea because of an old treaty so the soldiers were already there . Many Crimeans, resentful of their own government�
 Crimea had been part of Russia until 1954 when Nikita Khrushchev gifted it to Ukraine . Crimea was part of the country until 1954 .
 The overwhelming majority of Russians, even those who were critics of Putin’s rule, felt it was rightfully theirs . The overwhelming most of Russians feel it was theirs .
 He had taken a chance, not knowing how the West would respond, but it was as safe an adventure as one could imagine . So while he had taken the chance, he had a chance.
 After Crimea, Putin stirred up a proxy war in Ukraine’s south-eastern Donbas region that, four years on, is stalemated . It has cost Russia dearly in terms of international credibility, economic sanctions and the need secretly to bankroll two pseudo-states there
 The war began in March 2014, when it began in Moscow, Russia . It was a short and limited intervention, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Ukraine would have been destabilised if it tried to break away from Moscow. Within six months, it would have got the message, I was told . The country would have realised it would be destabilised.
 The Russian troops, spooks and saboteurs in the Donbas would be home, and the West would have forgotten all about it . The West would not have forgotten about it.
 This was not too ridiculous an assumption, as it is what essentially happened after Russia’s invasion of Georgia in 2008 . The point is that there seems to have been a consensus that it would be another easy win .
 Putin had presumably believed what everyone told him. It didn’t work out that way, but Putin had probably believed what he believed .
 He is willing to take chances when he must, but he will do everything he can to minimise the risks . He is, of course, willing to taking chances when they must. He will doeverything he can, but will be careful to avoid risks, he says .
 Russia’s intervention in Syria in September 2015 risked conflict with the Americans or their proxy forces or else embarrassing losses .
 A relatively small number of aircraft was deployed, every effort was made to avoid hitting Western forces on the ground .
 The Kremlin could reassure ordinary Russians that their boys would not be coming home from the Middle East in body bags . Moscow could pretend it had nothing to do with them .
 In March 2016, he announced that Russian troops would be withdrawn from Syria . Many of them had served as junior officers in the Soviet Union’s bitter war in Afghanistan in 1979-88 .
 Putin seems to have changed his mind, disconcerted by different opinions about the likely outcome . He shouldn’t have tempted fate, because Putin then seems to be disconcerting by different views on the outcome .
 Two and a half years later, Russia is still in Syria, and the longer you stay in a war, the more chance there is of painful surprises .
 A Russian Su-24M attack aircraft cut briefly into Turkish airspace during a bombing mission in northern Syria . One such struck in November 2016, when a Russian Su 24M attack plane cut into the Turkish airspace .
 Turkish F-16 fighters popped up from low altitude and shot it down . One of the crew was rescued but the other was shot and killed by rebels while still in the air .
 Putin was visibly furious, calling it a ‘stab in the back’ and placing sanctions on Turkey and threatening more serious retaliation . Putin also threatened to retaliate against Turkey for its actions .
 Turkey’s President Erdogan snarled back and it was eventually the Russians who backed down, after the Turks had provided a face-saving statement of regret .
 Putin often shows a similar unwillingness to face direct challenges in domestic politics . Putin often faces direct challenges to face domestic politics.
 This excuse would not wash, and he eventually offered a watereddown version of the reforms that, like so many compromises, pleased no one . This excuse wouldn't wash, but he eventually offer a watered down version.
 Putin's macho antics reflect not an alpha male in his prime, but a leader using them to mask a lack of confidence . One can legitimately ask how far Putin’s machos reflect not a alpha male, but an alpha man .
 None of this is to say that he is a coward, but rather that he's a rational actor, and even a cautious one .
 He can, of course, get things wrong, but his antics and bombastic bluster tend to be carefully judged and calibrated .
 He has concluded, not without grounds, that Western countries are deeply uncomfortable with confrontation . He says Western countries, and especially most European ones, are deeply discomforted with confrontation.
 West will find it easier to make a deal with him than take a stand against him. By playing the role of the unpredictable troublemaker, he hopes that they West will be able to make an easy deal .
 But that does not mean that his policy comes from below the waist and that we should take his postures and rhetoric at face value .
 Putin Is Popular, and Not The odds of popping into a British bookshop and coming out with a framed portrait of the prime minister are pretty slim .
 Moscow's Moskovsky Dom Knigi is on New Arbat Street, Moscow's biggest street . There will be a Medvedev, probably a Shoigu, but above all, there will be Putins .
 Putin T-shirt is a play on the Russian term for the ‘little green men’ who took Crimea .
 Some of this is for tourists, and some of it is for those who feel they need ostentatiously to demonstrate their loyalty . Some of these are for tourists who want to show their loyalty.
 Putin’s very real — but also paradoxical — popularity in his country . Yet it also reflects Putin's very real and paradoxical - popularity in Russia .
 As of late 2018, his personal approval ratings have plummeted to a mere 66 per cent . His lacklustre handling of pension reform has led to a drop in his approval ratings .
 Putin’s personal popularity ratings are only part of the story, as Putin's personal ratings are just part of his popularity .
 Putin is not being benchmarked against any rival. Even setting aside the problems of polling in a fairly authoritarian state, he is not benchmarking against any rivals .
 Ksenia Sobchak, daughter of Anatoly Sobchack, is Putin's patron from the St Petersburg days . Other candidates who stood no chance of getting onto the second ballot.
 Best known as a socialite and reality television host, she was standing on an 'against everyone' platform .
 Zhirinovsky’s Liberal Democrats receive a lot of Kremlin money for advertising . Communists still have the remnants of their old organisation and a near-inexhaustible army of Stalinist grannies .
 leadership of both parties seem to have effectively accepted their role as the fake opposition . But the leadership of each party seems to have accepted its role as a fake opposition.
 The only figure who might have had the will and ability to give Putin a run for his money, if not beat him, was anti-corruption campaigner Alexei Navalny .
 Navalny’s boyish charm, quick wit and detailed accounts of the dodgy deals and luxurious homes of the elite have made his Internet-distributed videos popular .
 Dmitry Medvedev's 2017 video ‘Don’t Call Him Dimon’ blew away his image as a relatively clean member of the government . He claimed that he had embezzled almost a billion pounds through fake charities .
 The idea that this is a regime that disposes of enemies without a second thought is actually very wrong. It is a mark of the concern that the Kremlin has about Navalny .
 Navalny is essentially banned from television, where even mentioning his name is taboo . He is a savvy and effective political operator on the Internet, which remains his main method of mobilising support .
 The Kremlin is keenly aware that his message is potentially dangerous . Every Russian from a neurologist to a street-cleaner in Stavropol has their own experiences of corruption .
 Despite trying to muzzle Navalny, the government still rigged the 2018 elections . The government tried to muzzle the Navalny. Despite having ensured that the alternatives to Putin were unelectable and unappetising, the elections were rigged .
 Putin and his political technologists say it is not enough just to be in charge . But it is important to be able to claim an overwhelming popular mandate .
 The Kremlin does not feel wholly confident and comfortable, despite seemingly strong approval figures . It is clear that the Kremlin is not wholly confident, despite the approval figures.
 Putin and his political managers in the Presidential Administration may not have had a direct role in the rigging of the 2018 poll . They certainly bombarded the country with propaganda beforehand .
 The ultra-leftist firebrand Sergei Udaltsov has spent most of the time since 2012 either in prison or under house arrest . It says something that they kept not just Navalny but other politically awkward figures, such as the ultra- leftist firebrilliant
 The government says it continues to explore ways in which it could control the Internet . It says something that the government continues to maintain its grip on television .
 Beijing’s draconian ‘Great Firewall of China’ is able to create a climate in which people don’t dare to share such views .
 Putin created the National Guard in 2016, and put his loyal henchman Zolotov in charge . The National Guard is an independent force dedicated to domestic security, with 180,000 armed troops .
 The Kremlin is trying to squeeze non-government organisations that tackle issues such as corruption, police brutality and electoral fraud, says the Kremlin .
 The Kremlin is concerned about just how firm its grip on the hearts and minds of the Russian people may be .
 Putin's sons are not necessarily saying that they like the idea of their sons dying in Syria, or of Putin's cronies enriching themselves through their taxes .
 People show a much more nuanced understanding of the political situation in Russia, says CNN's John Sutter . People are more confident in the direction the country is going, he says .
 The Levada Center is the best remaining independent polling agency in Russia . Only a small majority of people are still willing to believe their country is on the right track .
 Putin is to a large extent being rated not as a man, not even as a politician, but as an icon of Russia .
 To vote for him is not to endorse a programme, but to express patriotism . To vote in the UK is to vote for a programme that aims to encourage patriotism .
On the one hand, it grants him a special, almost mystical status, which separates him from any rival . On the onehand, it gives him aspecial, almost mystic status, that separates him.
 At the same time, it means that we should not assume that those approval ratings, whether they are in the sixties or the eighties, mean anything like that much support for his regime, his policies or even Putin-the-man .
 The Russian people are as much Putin’s first victims as his devoted supporters . The Russians are the Russian people as much as his first victims .
 His election in 2000 was won as a result of not just massive state pressure and the absence of a viable alternative, but also of real public relief .
 Boris Yeltsin's increasingly erratic antics were plain for all to see . His increasingly erratic behavior turned him into a caricature and a punchline .
 Many believe Putin’s supporters were arranged to terrify the public into backing a ‘security first’ candidate .
 In 2002, a girl band sang that they wanted ‘A Man Like Putin’ (‘I want a man like Putin, who’s full of strength.’’
 The man is intensely private. Aside from the carefully constructed action-man photo opportunities, he is very private .
 Alina Kabaeva's alleged relationship with Olympic gold medal-winning gymnast is still very much off-limits . For a long time, there was not even confirmation of the identities of his two children, Katerina and Mariya .
 With the West distracted by the ‘Global War on Terror’ and oil and gas prices high, he had free rein at home .
 He had enough money to ensure that ordinary Russians could enjoy a better quality of life than ever before . He had to turn a blind eye to their own self-enrichment .
 Life got better, the streets became safer and the fear of collapse and fragmentation receded . The fear of fragmentation and collapse receded. Life became better and the streets got safer .
 The irony is that he could probably have held free and fair elections and still won. Of course, at the same time he set up his sock-puppet opposition parties, he reasserted state control of television .
 Boris Yeltsin is not being the terrible 1990s for so long. Besides, you can only campaign on not being Boris YelTSin, this not being a terrible 1990's for so far .
Over time, international hydrocarbon prices would wobble and the corruption at the heart of the system ensured that it was the masses rather than the masters who paid the price . Over time, over time, the prices of hydrocarbon will wobble.
 Putin has increasingly had to rely on propaganda and coercion to retain his grip on Crimea . Despite the temporary patriotic boost provided by the annexation of Crimea, Putin has been forced to use propaganda to keep control .
 Many Russians still revere Putin for making them feel that their country matters in the world again . Many still believe Putin is the man who made them feel their country mattered again .
 A diminishing number of others still feel grateful to him for the good times of the 2000s . A diminishing numbers of other people still feel gratitude to him .
 The feelings of many others seem to represent a country-wide case of Stockholm syndrome . The Stockholm syndrome is the perverse sympathy that kidnap victims feel for their captors .
 This does not mean they will always back him, especially if they come to believe that he cannot offer them and their children the kind of lives they expect . This doesn't mean they'll always be back him.
 Winston Churchill was widely regarded as the architect of survival and victory through the harrowing years of the Second World War .
 The prospect of Putin leaving office because he loses an election is so minuscule as to be nearinvisible . But we must still remember that the Russian people are no less capable of political nuance .
 In 2017, the Levada Center polled Russians about reform in their country . The center asked Russians about their country's reform .
 The Kremlin is able to capitalise on this lack of any consensus. There were massive differences in opinion about what kind they wanted, how quickly it should come and how far it should go .
 42% wanted dramatic reform and 41% wanted incremental change . Only 11% wanted to retain the status quo . 42% want dramatic reform, 41% want incremental change and 11% want to retain status quo.
 60-80 per cent approve Putin-the-man, but even most of his supporters want to see Putinism- the-system reformed or done away with altogether .
 Putin's office can't endorse all or even most of his policies. They can want to see statues raised in his name, but someone else in his office . They can respect Putin, but they can't support him all or all policies .
 The Kremlin is less easily fooled by his sky-high approval ratings. We may still be beguiled by his high approval ratings .
 Alexei Ulyukayev was visiting Igor Sechin, head of the massive Rosneft oil company, in November 2016 .
 Ulyukayev had publicly opposed Rosneft’s takeover of Bashneft . But the dispute appeared to have been ironed out, and the meeting was an opportunity to bury the hatchet .
 Ulyukaev didn’t know where Sechin was planning to bury it . He didn't know where he was planning on burying it .
 Sechin gave him a bag after an amicable chat, according to his own account . Sechin's account says he was given a bag by Sechin .
 Ulyukayev was arrested as he left the Rosneft offices . He was confronted by FSB officers who arrested him . It turned out that the bag contained cash .
 Sechin claimed that the minister had demanded $2 million to approve the Bashneft takeover . Ulyukayev claimed that he had been framed, and that he thought the bag contained a relatively trivial thank-you gift .
 Russian business culture does extend to gifting, which can often mean cash, too . Ministers and other high-status officials certainly live lifestyles that are vastly more lavish than their relatively moderate salaries .
 Sechin is one of the most fearsome beasts in Moscow, aman whose thuggish looks accurately reflect his raw-knuckled business tactics .
 He also has a formidable Arysha — ‘roof’ — the worryingly common Russian term for protection . He has been Putin’s former aide, bagman and general strong right hand, back in his days at the St Petersburg mayor’
 The prosecution never bothered to make a strong case. He is hardly the kind of person you'd think a bespectacled economic liberal would try to shake down .
 Sechin had worn a wire, but his conversation with Ulyukayev was ambiguous . He also repeatedly failed to show up to be cross-examined in court .
 Oleg Feoktistov, a former FSB officer and old friend of Sechin’s, was hired to be his security chief . He had just hired the security chief, whom he had just been hired .
 Many people, seemingly including Ulyukayev, thought Putin would step in to save him . Many people thought Ulykayev would be saved by Putin .
 Sechin seemed to be using his connections in the security apparatus to prosecute a personal feud . Ulyukayev had been doing nothing that any of the rest hadn’t .
 The business elite were worried that Sechin was getting too powerful, too dangerous . The administrative elite were alarmed that they could be targets of such vendettas . Investors were spooked .
Common sense would suggest that Putin step in to signal a reprieve for Ulyukayev and a reproof for Sechin .
 The sixty-one-year-old was sentenced to eight years in a toughregime prison colony for bribery . He was the first minister sent to prison for over sixty years .
 The case was flimsy, the political and economic calculus definitely in Ulyukayev’s favour . When it came down to it, he was just a minister, with no backstory with Putin .
 Putin’s aide back in St Petersburg, the man who carried his bags and prepared his briefings . The man who sharpened his pencils and kept tabs on who owed what and who was asking which favours .
With his own underlings, the ruthless, workaholic Sechin is a notorious terror . With the boss, he is the model of discretion and loyalty .
 The real currency in Russia at the top level is not the ruble, nor even the dollar or the euro, but access to, and a relationship with, the boss . Putin has a very personal approach to politics, and the real currency is not ruble.
 Putin is considered ruthless, and he certainly is to those he does not know . Putin is known for being ruthless, but he is not known to many .
 The Chechens were subjugated by a vicious military campaign during Putin’s first term in office . Up to a quarter of a million people may have died during the campaign .
 Ukrainians are suffering now because of his refusal to accept that their country has the right to determine its own fate, or even that it is a proper country at all . The Ukrainians are now suffering.
 ordinary Russians are seeing their pensions raided and their quality of life eroded to pay for his adventures abroad .
 Putin, a man who doesn’t seem to make close friends easily, is actually very loyal to his own . But the paradox is that on an individual level, Putin is very loyal.
When he has to sack or discipline those in his ‘gang’ he tends to make sure they get a soft landing . This does not just mean turning a blind eye to their corruption, but he certainly does this to buy loyalty .
 When he first came to power, he sat down with eighteen of the country's oligarchs . He would not accept any more interference in politics .
 Boris Berezovsky and Vladimir Gusinsky are two of the most politically active and least willing to toe the new line . The pair ended up in exile in London after they jumped or were pushed .
 A third, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, seemed not to get the memo, and continued funding liberal and anti-government causes . A third appeared not to receive the memo .
 In 2003, even though he was the richest man in Russia, he was arrested and charged with tax fraud . He was charged with fraud in 2003 .
 He was unlikely to have been completely clean — no one who made their money in 1990s Russia was . But he did nothing in business that his peers didn’t .
 This made him an inconvenience, an embarrassment, an enemy, and a suitable example . This makes him an inconvenient, an embarrassing, anenemy, and an enemy .
 His oil company, Yukos, was broken up and he was sentenced to nine years in prison in 2005 . He was eventually pardoned in 2013 and was released in 2013 .
 There are some who were never part of Putin's inner clique of friends and confidants . But they nonetheless kept their noses clean and did Putin's bidding .
 He was hated by the generals, who called him the ‘furniture salesman’ because he had once run a furniture company .
 Many of them were sacked or nudged into early retirement. Above all, they despised him because he presided over a long-overdue programme of military reform .
 Putin wanted Putin's attention, but it didn’t matter what the top brass thought, it was what Putin wanted of him .
 Yevgeniya Vasilyeva was accused of using his position to enrich himself and his friends . He was also accused of conspiring to sell off military property at bargain prices in return for bribes .
Army engineers built road to holiday resort owned by his brother-in-law . He was said to have arranged for army engineers to build road to resort .
 Vasilyeva had also become Serdyukov’s mistress. What did matter was the fact that Vasilyva had also been Serdykov's mistress .
 Viktor Zubkov's father-in-law was one of Putin’s inner circle . He relied on to intimidate his enemies through financial investigations . Zubkov was also a former prime minister of Russia .
 Vasilyeva was convicted and sent to a penal colony for five years . Zubkov reached out to Putin when an incensed Zubkov contacted Putin .
 Serdyukov had to go, because crony trumps servant, but as tends to be the case with those Putin regards as having been loyal, he didn't do badly in the end .
 Serdyukov was sacked, but his conviction was for a lesser change of negligence . His sentence was commuted by presidential pardon .
After a necessary period in the wilderness, he was appointed to a comfortable sinecure as industrial director of the Rostec state arms corporation .
 Putin will move heaven and earth to look after his trusted inner circle . For those in his trusted circle, Putin will look after them .
 Sergei Chemezov, CEO of Rostec, was a fellow KGB officer in Dresden in the 1980s . He is now a trustee of Innopraktika, a technology incubation project run by Putin's younger daughter Katerina .
 Putin's government has done tremendously well out of contracts from Putin’s government, including much of the overpriced construction for the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympics . They have also print the majority of school textbooks .
 In 2015, a new truck toll system called Platon was introduced on Russia’s roads . It proved massively controversial. In 2015.
 Drivers organised protests, blocked roads and petitioned the president, to no avail . It transpired that the Rotenbergs have a 50% stake in the system .
 The Rotenbergs were put under international sanctions because of how they jumped into redeveloping the peninsula . They were keen to help make good on Putin’s promises .
 Arkady Rotenberg’s Stroygazmontazh corporation was awarded the contract worth nearly £3 billion to build the 18-kilometre bridge .
 It is impossible to know for sure how far this is a result of favouritism, but that is certainly the assumption of many within Moscow, whether liberal critics or loyal businesspeople .
 The president is willing to thaw, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The few people for whom the icy president thaw are people who he can thaw . The people with whom he can, if only for an evening, again be a person rather than an icon
 These are the people with whom he can fish, ski or watch and sometimes play his beloved ice hockey .
Medvedev has his own team, packed out with his bodyguards, who typically take on one from Medvedev’s protection officers .
 Putin is expected to play a rarest role as an ordinary guy . Putin's role could be a chance for Putin to play perhaps his rarestrole, that of an ordinary man .
 Even when friends stray from the party line, Putin remains loyal to them . Putin is still loyal to his friends, even when they stray.
 Former finance minister Alexei Kudrin was once very close to him . He has become increasingly critical of the direction of his policy and the economic implications of his new, assertive foreign policy .
 He is no longer in the president’s unofficial kitchen cabinet, but at the same time the freedom he has to criticise is striking . As a result, he is no more in the President's unofficial cabinet .
 Putin is keeping Kudrin around in case he needs to bring him back to work on the economy, but it is more than that . In part, this can be seen as a result of pragmatism, that Putin is kept around .
 Not everyone fits so neatly into the category of either friend or flunky . But not everyone fits in with either friend and flunky.
 Putin relied on his long-time chief of staff Sergei Ivanov, but they were never truly friends . For instance, Putin used to rely on Ivanov's long-term chief of Staff, but he was never really friends .
 Defence minister Sergei Shoigu has forged a personal bond with Putin by taking him hunting . But he remains a trusted associate and adviser, rather than a mate .
 Dmitry Medvedev is another in this grey zone — or maybe it is more that he is the flunky-in-chief .
Whatever goes wrong is the fault of Medvedev’s government, and also the manager of the cabinet . Before and after this, medvedev also acts as the loyal scapegoat .
 Putin is still doing well enough for himself, according to Navalny’s video exposé .
 This is an adhocracy in which everyone is constantly trying to second-guess and please the boss . As discussed in Chapter 1, this is an Adhocracy .
 In part that is because of a fear of what would happen if they don’t, or an immediate payoff if they get it right. In part, that is simply because of the fear.
 At the top of the system, it reflects a primal loyalty between Putin and his guys . But at the top, it also reflects a Primal loyalty between the two men .
 Ulyukayev seemed uncomfortable with how things turned out, but he let Sechin have his revenge, because he is one of Putin’s guys. He had nothing against him, but Sechin had his revenge .
 torpedo propellant exploded inside the K-141 Kursk nuclear submarine while it was on exercises in the icy waters of the Barents Sea .
 Most of the crew were killed instantly, but twenty-three were still alive as the boat sank to the seabed . The boat was carrying a crew of 20 people .
 The Russians lacked the necessary rescue submarines, but when the British and Norwegian navies offered to help, Putin let the sailors die . Putin let them die, rather than run the risk of allowing foreigners to take a peek at his most advanced vessel .
 Chechen rebel president-in-exile Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev was driving home from his mosque in Doha, Qatar, when a massive bomb tore through his 4x4 .
 Yandarbiyev died in hospital, and several GRU officers were later convicted of the killing . The GRU officer was later convicted.
 Former FSB officer and then whistle-blower and defector Alexander Litvinenko fell ill in London in 2006 .
Over the next twenty-two days highly radioactive polonium-210 ate him to death . The next two days he was killed by the radioactive material .
 Boris Nemtsov was gunned down in Moscow by Chechen security officers in February 2015 .
 The Kremlin recently adopted the toxic language the Kremlin had recently adopted, calling the opposition ‘a fifth column’ and even a ‘bunch of national traitors’ The tolerance shown to Chechen leader Kadyrov when he had had people killed or beaten in the past
 Sergei Skripal, a GRU officer turned MI6 agent who was then living in Salisbury, fell ill from exposure to what turned out to be a nerve agent . Two Russian agents dispensed by two Russian agents .
 An innocent woman who found the perfume bottle in which the Novichok had been hidden later died . He and his daughter survived .
 Chechen civilians were blasted with fireballs from thermobaric rockets during the Second Chechen War . Journalists and critics who knew or said too much falling mysteriously ill.
Officials and oligarchs feel they can get away with murder. Through direct action or indirect encouragement, they feel they have to kill themselves .
 For all this, Putin is not an indiscriminately murderous tyrant, but his regime's tool of choice, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: "Personal or wholesale murder is certainly not his regime’s tool ofchoice"
 The trouble is that these days it is all too easy to see the Kremlin’s bloody hand in the death of every prominent Russian .
 Russians are more likely to be killed as a result of business and criminal rivalries than anything to do with the regime . Sometimes, it might be the Kremlin, but more likely it is the result of some private feud .
 Putin doesn't care enough to stop Nemtsov's murder, and many others die not because Putin wants them dead, but because some other powerful figure does, he says .
Putin does not see everyone who is not for him as being actively against him . Putin does not sees everyone who are not for the him as actively against.
 The flip side of his very personal approach to his friends and his henchmen is visible in how he treats those who fall foul of him .
 He expects foreign journalists and liberal ones at home to write nasty things about him . But on the whole the Kremlin simply treats it as par for the course .
 Putin’s particular venom is directed towards those he considers traitors, those who were once insiders but who changed sides .
 Mikhail Khodorkovsky was offered the chance to retain his position, but chose to challenge the Kremlin . He had become vastly wealthy within the system and was offered a chance to stay .
 The Chechens were Russian citizens who were trying to break free, so they had to be crushed . They were crushed .
 Ukrainians are, to Putin, essentially Russian subjects, so cannot be allowed to turn their backs on Moscow . The Ukrainians are to Putin. They are to the Russian president.
 The unspoken agreement is that if you are pardoned, your slate is wiped clean, but in return, you’re out of the spying game . As far as the Russians are concerned, the unspoken deal is that.
 You will, of course, be debriefed, and you may give the odd lecture about how things were in your day, but that’s it . You will. You will .
 Skripal was travelling around Europe to advise security services and maybe even identifying former colleagues for surveillance or recruitment . It has become clear that he was rather more active than that .
 Putin doesn’t want to be a tyrant if he can avoid it, and there is a surprising amount of room in his Russia for a sort of limited freedom .
 Television, with the exception of the plucky Dozhd Internet channel, is either state-controlled or state-dominated . There is a great deal of intelligent questioning and even genuinely investigative journalism .
 Russia is a dangerous place to be in the media — being a local journalist there is as risky as being a war correspondent elsewhere . But still people are willing to poke into the dark corners and shine a light on them .
 There is still real journalism, but there is still a lot of real politics, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia is full of parents’ and residents’ associations, pressure groups, environmental lobbies and other expressions of grassroots civil society .
 Sometimes they are ignored, sometimes they are squashed, but they often bring about real change . Sometimes they can be ignored, but sometimes they bring about change .
 The secret seems to be to focus on specific outcomes and always, always use every opportunity to make it clear that they are not political or complaining about the government as such .
 In late 2015 and early 2016, I lived for a while in Kotelniki, an outer suburb of south-east Moscow, at the very end of the metro system .
 metro station had only opened a few months earlier, and there wasn’t even yet an asphalt path to it . Almost everyone else there seemed to be couples in their late twenties with young children .
 Typically, they were not well-heeled yuppies, but rather shop and office workers who had needed more space when their first baby came along, yet weren’t able to afford anywhere more central .
 Many of their mortgages had been negotiated in euros, rather than rubles, when the exchange rate was favourable . They found themselves after 2014 squeezed between their mortgages and falling real wages .
 The mayor's office was backsliding on promised new amenities for Kotelniki . The mayor’s office has been criticized for its lack of amenities .
 Child benefit was too low and the nearest kindergarten wasn’t ready yet. Child benefit is too low.
 Thugs from the North Caucasus were hanging around communal garages and the police weren’t doing anything about it .
 Someone from the next block had had a heart attack last week, and an ambulance had taken almost an hour to get there .
When I cautiously broached this, the response was an indifferent shrug . When I broached it, the reaction was an indifference shrug .
 This is pretty sharply at odds with the usual Western image of Putin as the unchallenged and all-powerful master of his country . This is very different to the usual western image of the Putin .
 Putin is a figurehead for an often-varied collection of people and institutions . He is a synecdoche, as much as anything else a symbol .
In his autobiography, he wrote that in comparison to his previous jobs, ‘In the Kremlin I have a different position.’
 There is a big difference between being the man in charge and exerting that power . However, there is a huge difference between the man and the woman in charge .
 Putin had a meeting with the general director of the company that owned the Raspadskaya coal mine after two methane explosions had killed sixty-six people in 2010 . Putin flew off the handle, slapped him with a folder of documents, and lay into him in such obscene language that even
 The circumstances were almost exactly the same as at a blast in Novokuznetsk in 2007 that killed 106 . One at Vorkuta in 2016 that would kill thirty-five would kill 30-five .
In 2018, he was demanding that all ministries take seriously the problem of wage arrears . The problem had reached a nationwide total of £40 million, he said .
 Putin keeps complaining about so many of the same issues, promising solutions, and losing face when they repeat themselves . Putin's hyperpresidential power should not be taken at face value, he says .
 In the early years, he would frequently travel and drop in, often unannounced, on a factory here and a city there . He would often drop in on factories and cities in his early years .
 The stern tsar defended his subjects from the corrupt or clumsy boyars, the aristocrats . This was a terror for many local officials, as he would generally appear .
 He would give factory owner, governor or minister a stern, finger-wagging dressing down on television . Money would suddenly be available to address the immediate crisis .
 The president would answer calls from members of the public or selected guests . Then there were also the marathon annual 'Direct Line' television sessions .
 The shepherd of the nation with his flock. Of course, these were all stagemanaged and pre-prepared, so he could avoid nasty surprises .
 Putin only goes to Kremlin when he has to, preferring to stay at his palace at Odintsovo outside Moscow .
 He spends mornings swimming and working out, and gets round to paperwork in the afternoon . He spends his mornings swimming, and works out in the morning .
 Yelena’s husband Boris has a dog, whether Putin should be cloned or whether it is illegal for Russian farmers to put Chinese-made GPS trackers on cows .
 There are also whole areas of policy about which he doesn't really care any more, instead largely leaving them to be handled by others, if they get handled at all .
 This may have been the case with the recent pensions issue that aroused such public anger . This may be the case of the recent pension issue that arouses such anger .
 Putin has been dutiful in his first two terms. He would take meetings, have read his briefing materials and ask good questions . Putin had clearly never been that engaged in health care .
 The minister himself wants a one-to-one meeting with the president, it can take months to schedule . These days, he is simply not interested .
 Russia has been rated as having the least efficient health care system of any developed country . Russia's budget has actually fallen, and its health care budget has also fallen .
 To the West, he looks active, assertive, aggressive, a warrior-tsar at the top of his game . We may see many of his gambits and adventures as failing, but we very much feel on the defensive .
 If one steps back slightly, it is much harder to see any real endgame . But if one step back, it will be much harder.
 One could almost see this as a science-fiction scenario in which the robots continue the war long after their builders are gone. One could see this in which they continue the battle long after they are gone .
 Moscow is facing neither victory nor defeat, but a long and miserable geopolitical winter . The current mood in Moscow is that everyone is glumly digging in for the long haul .
 This sense of gloomy hopelessness applies as much to domestic as foreign policy, says John Sutter .
 Russia has long mastered the theatre of fake politics, with Kremlin loyalists jostling with a Kremlin-run opposition in empty ritual . So too is there increasingly a feel of fake government.
 Ministers advise, advisers advise, spin doctors spin, decrees are decreed and memos are minuted . Ministers minister, adviser advise,spin doctors spin and decrees.
 There has been real progress in some areas, from the measures applied to minimise the impact of Western sanctions to reconstruction of Moscow into a glittering hipster capital .
 In most spheres of policy, there is much more bark than bite, form not substance . However, in most spheres, there are much more Bark than bite .
 Russia is in the midst of a major crisis in the country's political crisis . The Russian government has been criticized for not taking action for its own sake .
 The Russians have a strong tradition of subversive political humour that dates back to Soviet times . The Russians are known for their political humour, which dates to Soviet time .
 A more modern one of these anekdoty has Stalin appearing to Putin in a dream and asking him whether there is anything he can do to help .
 Putin cannot ‘execute the government’ or, in less dramatic terms, do without the oppos, officials and oligarchs with whom he has surrounded himself .
 If he is remembered at all these days, it is of how he was in his final years when, almost senile, he slurred scarcely understood speeches that had been written .
 The irony is that he had originally risen to power as a tough, effective manager . The first half of his reign was full of significant achievement, from matching America's nuclear might to seeing the economy grow .
 His only answer seems to have been adventurism abroad, including embroiling the USSR in a ten-year war in Afghanistan . Over time, things got harder and his only answer was to distract from stagnation.
 The real question is whether he still wants the job — and that deserves a chapter all of its own . The real issue is whether the job is still worth the job .
 Putin has already manipulated the constitutional order to get around term limits once . He is planning on being president for life, and that when his fourth term ends in 2024, he'll find some way of staying on .
 If that happens, it will reflect failure rather than triumph. If that happened, it would reflect failure instead of triumph, rather than success .
 One in eight Russians still lives below the poverty line . Too many of the best and the brightest try to emigrate .
 His forces are stuck in both Ukraine and Syria, with no clear exit strategy . His forces have been in both countries for years .
There were almost a third more protests in 2018 than in 2017, for example . There were almost three more protests than in 2018 .
 The Communists are now showing signs of life, and organised more than a third of them . The Communists, so long content to be a zombie opposition, are now show signs ofLife .
 Putin seems to have been looking for a successor for some time, which implies that he is at least contemplating handing over his power .
 The insider consensus in Moscow is that he wants to find a new-generation mini-me who he will be able to trust to protect both himself and his legacy . He wants to construct a constitutional position to allow him semi-retirement and to interfere in politics without any responsibilities .
 If he can arrange those, he will likely not even serve his current six-year term . He will probably not even be able to serve that term .
 Putin will not be the kind of ex-president likely to be hankering after a Caribbean villa, games of golf with other former heads of state and the international speaking circuit .
 Power is active, ephemeral, it must constantly be refreshed and reasserted . It must be constantly refreshed and re-energetic .
Back in the Soviet era, leaders knew that they would become vulnerable as soon as they retired .
 Everything they had — the cars, the mansions, the summer dachas — could be taken away from them by their successor .
 Putin may never feel secure enough to put his future in anyone else’s hands .
 St Petersburg Mayor Sobchak is accused of embezzlement . He arranged for a private plane that took him out of the country .
 He worked at the Presidential Property Management Directorate, one of the more infamously corrupt agencies . He kept his new boss out of the crosshairs, even while corruption investigations sprung up .
President Yeltsin signed a decree guaranteeing his predecessor lifelong immunity from prosecution . As director of the FSB and then prime minister, he looked after Yeltsins' interests .
 I don't mean that there are sinister stringpullers behind him, as much as that he has to work, find out about the world and issue his orders through others . I don’t mean that he is behind him.
 The amount of power the machine has over its purported operator should not be underestimated . The machine has more power than the machine's purported operator .
 Mikhail Zygar tells of how Putin was persuaded to bid for the 2014 Winter Olympics . Zygar has a nose for a great story, and always has a good story .
 Vladimir Potanin had become involved with a project to develop a resort near his dacha at Krasnaya Polyana .
 Putin was dismissive when the idea was broached in 2005. He was keen to make it part of an Olympic bid in order that the government would foot the bill . He was also keen to be part of the Olympic bid.
 Potanin turned to Dmitry Peskov, then the deputy press secretary, who explained how to change the boss’s mind . Peskov was then the Deputy Press Secretary of Russia .
 Billboards went up advertising the Sochi bid, but only along roads that the presidential motorcade would be taking . The Sochi bid is expected to take place in Sochi .
 Radio adverts were bought, but only on the stations and at times when Putin might be listening .
 Peskov arranged for someone in a ‘Direct Line’ to ask Putin when Russia would finally host an Olympics . Peskov asked someone in the 'Direct Line' to ask him if Russia would host the Olympics .
 The idea was to make him believe that the country was crying out for it, and that he could profit from that mood . He said that he would profit from the mood .
 The Winter Olympics will take place in a subtropical region, a city with no airport and minimal infrastructure . It is the most expensive Games to date, making it the most costly to date .
 Peskov was able to tell Potanin how to manage the boss . And all because Peskov told him how to do it .
 Putin wanted to appoint one of his ex-bodyguard favourites Alexei Dyumin as a replacement . At the end of 2015, military intelligence chief General Igor Sergun died of a heart attack .
 The GRU wasn’t keen on the idea — as far as they were concerned, Dyumin was a heavy rather than a spymaster .
 Defence minister Shoigu and Chief of the General Staff Gerasimov concurred . Defence minister shoigu, chief of the general staff Gerasov concurred.
 Shoigu can’t just say no to the boss, or at least not without taking quite a chance . But the problem was that even Shoigus can't just sayno.
 Dyumin played for time, while leaking stories to the press that Dyumin wasn’t up to the job . Dyumin also leaked stories that he wasn't up to job .
 FSB are muttering against the idea that a totally unqualified favourite could be parachuted into running a security service . Even the FSB, usually if anything a rival of the GRU, didn't want to see a precedent established .
Sergun’s deputy Igor Korobov was appointed, and Dyumin got the consolation prize of the governorship of Tula instead . Eventually, Sergun's deputy Igor Kokobov, was appointed .
 Dyumin decided it was not worth the political cost of asserting his authority . It is not that, had Putin flatly demanded it, Dyumin would not have been given the job .
 Those closest to him are unlikely to want to see him go, because he is their protection . Those who are benefiting most greatly from his rule are likely to want him gone .
 Leonid Brezhnev stayed in office even after several heart attacks and strokes . He feared the rise of the dangerous and puritanical Yuri Andropov .
 Brezhnev finally succumbed to a heart attack in 1982 . It was probably a release for him but a terror for them .
There are many who will do their utmost to stave off a succession, which would likely mean the new president’s favourites would take their places .
 Most within the Russian elite, however, are not in this charmed circle . Most in the elite, though, are in a different group of people .
 Putin increasingly focuses on building his historical legacy and his own geopolitical agenda . He seems to be getting out of step with many of them .
 The majority, after all, are pragmatic kleptocrats. They are happy to proclaim their devoted commitment to Mother Russia . But they want to be able to keep robbing her blind at the same time, and sending their families, and their mistresses to safety .
 The more sanctions bite, as Russian money becomes toxic and visas become harder to get, the less they can enjoy the fruits of their embezzlement .
 Crimea is back in the fold, but they would prefer to holiday in the Cap d'Antibes . They are happy to see Crimea back.
 Putin continues to make sure his closest friends do well, that inevitably comes at the expense of everyone else . Times are getting harder.
 He will undoubtedly be ruthlessly willing to keep in his grip, he said . That said, they cannot risk challenging him, because one thing he does understand is power. That said.
Security forces can punish whoever steps out of line . The true loyalists control the security forces .
 The tsar can't, or won't, be there for ever, and then they will have a chance to salvage something from the situation . They know the tsar cannot’t, orwon’s, be There for ever. They know that they
 It is hard to see any substantive improvement in relations with Russia, so long as Putin is in the Kremlin . It is difficult to see a substantive improvement.
 Any attempt actively to topple him would be tremendously dangerous . We risk appearing to vindicate his claims about Western aggression .
 The apparent American enthusiasm for Medvedev was meant to encourage a shift to a slightly more liberal politics, but actually contributed to Putin’s decision to return to the presidency .
 Any more aggressive meddling would likely trigger an active and aggressive backlash and empower the ultranationalists whom Putin has actually contained . Any more active andaggressive meddling would probably trigger an aggressive backlash .
 He is neither a fanatic nor a lunatic, and a stable Russia is less dangerous than one in chaos . He is not a fanatic or lunatic .
 Containing the harm Russia can do to us and minimising his opportunities for mischief is probably the best we can hope for . However depressing and unambitious that may sound, it may sound .
 ordinary Russians should not all be considered Putin’s ardent followers, but rather his victims, even if they may not think of themselves as such . But what we can do, to restate an earlier point, is remember that ordinary Russians shouldn't all be thought of
 We need to make sure they realise that we are not their enemy, and not least for the post-Putin future . We must make sure that we're not their enemies, and we need to be more careful .
 Russia is driven by emotions, by a sense of threat and abandonment and disrespect that might be hard to justify in objective terms, but felt no less strongly for that . We need to appreciate the extent to which Russia is driving by emotions.
 Russia is slowly moving towards Europe and European values, as it works its way through the traumas resulting from the end of empire . Personally, I am still an optimist and believe that Russia is moving towards European values .
 This is likely to happen over a matter of generations rather than years. But this is likely not to happen for years, rather than generations .
 Much of this will still hold true when Putin is gone, even when he's gone. So we need to talk about Putin also because much of this is still true, says CNN's John Sutter .
Russian President Vladimir Putin has nurtured a political generation of miniPutins . He embodies and channels feelings shared by a majority of Russians, he says .
 Even critics such as Alexei Navalny support the annexation of Crimea, writes John Sutter . It is worth mentioning that even critics like Navalny back the annexation, he says .
 Not everyone who supports Putin is our enemy, not everyone who opposes him is necessarily our friend . Just as not everyone supports Putin are our friends, not all who oppose him is our friends .
Presidential Administration staffer spoke between bites of expensive boar cutlets at White Rabbit restaurant .
 Putin would tell about his childhood in ruined Leningrad, when he and his friends would hunt the rats that plagued their block of flats . He recalled a story Putin himself would tell.
 One day, he chased an especially large one up the stairs and down the hall and into a corner . One day he chased it down the stairs.
 Putin said, ‘Actually, that’s Putin — the big rat, the one willing to turn. He paused, and then added: ‘ actually, that's Putin – the bigRat, theone willing toturn.’ He then added,
 Putin's reign as Russia's leader gives us another reason to talk about Putin . The Russian president is expected to be in power in the coming years .
 There could be another Putin, an even bigger one, waiting in the stairwell .
 Any unauthorized distribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the author's and publisher’s rights . Those responsible may be liable in law accordingly .