Russian army vehicle outside Ukrainian border guard post in Crimean town of Balaclava .
 Ukraine accused Russia of sending thousands of extra troops to Crimea on Saturday . Ukraine placed its military in the area on high alert as the Black Sea peninsula appeared to slip beyond Kiev's control .
 Ukraine is a unique case study of Russia's hybrid warfare . Russia is a target of Russia’s hybrid warfare, says the author .
 It is also arguably one of the most vulnerable victims. Not only does it offer valuable data for analysis and lessons learned, but it also offers valuable data .
 The Kremlin has trained the full force of its hybrid warfare machinery on Ukraine . Its geographical and historical proximity to Russia, as well as Russian ambitions to take control of Ukraine as a part of its own heritage, likely mean that the Kremlin is training its hybrid Warfare machinery on the Ukraine .
 Ukraine has demonstrated its resilience since independence, and especially after 2014, is remarkable and worthy of detailed analysis . With this in mind, the resilience Ukraine has shown since independence .
 In particular, assaults on Ukraine’s politics, military, economy, social fabric, and information space have to be considered .
 This chapter offers an explanation of Ukraine’s successes, address its challenges, and concludes with lessons learned from its experience . This chapter also offers a look at Ukraine's successes and challenges .
 Russia has used conventional military means against Ukraine . But it has added a few twists to further frustrate and exhaust its victim .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin acknowledged that his country’s troops had occupied Crimea only after the special operation was over .
 Russian leadership has never acknowledged the presence of Russian troops in eastern Ukraine . Russia has sent modern arms and troops to the fight, despite evidence .
 The Kremlin has played word games to whitewash its violations of international law . Russian soldiers ‘got lost’ and found themselves in the war zone, the Kremlin says .
 In another example of hybridity, mercenaries from the so-called Wagner Group have turned up in Ukraine . The group has fought in Syria and probably in Sudan and the Central African Republic .
 Russia denies that its troops shot down a Malaysia Airlines passenger plane over Ukraine in July 2014 .
 Ukraine was obliged to close the airspace in the war zone, Russia says . Russia says it was obliged.
 Russia has blocked efforts to set up an international tribunal and ignored major requests from investigators in the Netherlands . Russia has also blocked attempts to setup an international Tribunal and ignored requests for investigators in Netherlands .
 Russia is trying to shift responsibility from itself to Ukraine, even when the evidence unequivocally proves Russia’s guilt .
 The primary goal of Russia's military operations at this stage is to keep Ukrainians demoralized and stressed from the ever-present threat of ramped-up aggression .
 Russia feeds the frustration and resentment that it hopes Ukrainians will gradually direct at their own politicians . By keeping the war on a steady simmer, it feeds the frustrations and resentment.
 Ukrainian politicians are not interested in ending the war, possibly profit from it, or are using it to antagonize pro-Russia voters . That anger gives rise to suspicions that, for example, they are not trying to end the war .
 The prolonged conflict sows chaos in Ukraine’s politics and gives a boost to movements that seemed marginal or even hostile to Ukraine five years ago .
Political tactics are among the most significant weapons in the hybrid warfare arsenal . Political tactics are one of the most important weapons in hybrid warfare .
 Russia’s most obvious use of them in Ukraine is its support for the Opposition Platform . For Life party call for closer relations between Ukraine and Russia .
Medvedchuk headed the presidential office of then-Ukrainian President Leonid Kuchma in the early 2000s . Ukraine's relations with the West were strained over persecution of the political opposition and independent media .
 Medvedchuk held no position in governments of Presidents Viktor Yushchenko, Viktor Yanukovych or Petro Poroshenko . He was still considered a prime mover behind the scenes and nicknamed the Gray Cardinal .
 Medvedchuk took on the role of negotiator with representatives of Russia-controlled members of militarized groups in the Donbas . Russia began its incursions into Ukraine in early 2014, Medveduk says .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel reportedly appealed to Poroshenko to involve Medvedchuk in talks . Putin reportedly asked Putin to participate in the talks .
 Medvedchuk turned out to be a key player in negotiations for the release of Ukrainian hostages held captive in Russia or in prisons in Russia-controlled Crimea and eastern Ukraine .
 Political tools currently play a key role in influencing the situation in Ukraine . Political tools are currently playing an important role in Ukraine's political situation .
 The presidential and parliamentary elections in 2019 showed considerable public support for politicians who could find peaceful solutions with Russia . The presidential election in 2019 was held in Russia's capital, Moscow .
 Ukrainians are still not ready to massively support politicians who are extremely pro-Russia . However, Ukrainians were still not prepared to support those politicians .
 Medvedchuk enjoys little popularity in Ukraine, and his party’s support is purely regional . His party's support is solely regional .
 Pro-Russia forces would have had much more opportunity to influence the political agenda had Russia not occupied territories most loyal to such politicians . Russia would have been more likely to influence political agenda.
 The economic dimension of hybrid warfare is equally relevant to this discussion . The economic aspect of hybrid Warfare is also relevant to the discussion .
 Ukraine suffered economic blows on several fronts, including lost industries in Crimea and the east . Russia-imposed punitive measures from import bans to economic sanctions against individuals .
After 2014 trade between Russia and Ukraine dropped by 75% and fell back to its early-2000s level . As a result, trade between the two countries has fallen back to their early- 2000s level.
 Ukraine's GDP dropped from $183 billion in 2013 to $91 billion in 2015, reaching $153 billion in 2019 . 12 Energy trade is a major component of economic warfare .
 Russia has worked to undermine Ukraine’s reliability as an energy transit country . Russia shut off the flow of gas to Central and Eastern Europe in the winter of 2009 over a pricing dispute with Ukraine .
 It has also pushed forward with work on the Nord Stream 2 undersea pipeline to Germany . It would bypass Ukraine and weaken the country’s leverage as an energy transit partner in dealings with Russia .
 attacks on Ukraine’s social fabric and information space are closely linked . Attacks on Ukraine's social fabric, information space and social media are closely connected .
 In Ukraine, information warfare in traditional media is waged less through Russian networks, which reach only 9% of the population,15 than through local channels .
 The Kremlin makes liberal use of trolls and bots on social media in Ukraine, as it does around the globe .
 The aim of Russia’s information strategy is not so much to make Ukrainians look kindly on Russia . The aim is to sow distrust and instability within the country .
 There are several examples of Russia’s hybrid warfare in Ukraine, such as support for attacks on minorities to instigate violence .
 Some Ukrainians fear that if civil unrest were to break out, Russia would use it as a pretext for military intervention as a “peacekeeper’s” Russia would eventually lose sovereignty, they say .
Fears have been voiced for years since Russian aggression against Ukraine started in 2014 . But sometimes Russia’s strategy is self-defeating, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Russia had been split on the question of accession to either organization . Russia's seizure of Crimea and military actions in eastern Ukraine had split the country .
19 Russia has unwittingly helped clarify some thinking in Ukraine and eased a long-standing source of disagreement . Almost half of Ukrainians now almost half support membership in NATO, a record high .
Pro-European integration protesters are holding a rally in central Kiev, December 12, 2013 . Demonstrators gather near Independence Square.
 Ukrainian protesters stand their ground after riot police sweep by riot police . Ukrainian leaders dismiss offer of talks from president they say must quit for favoring ties with Russia .
 Russia’s view of its neighbor as an extension of itself that was never meant to be independent .
 Russia's top leadership has sincerely regretted the collapse of the Soviet Union . There have long been politicians in Moscow who speak of Ukraine as a territory of Moscow’s “privileged interest,”
 Russian elite make great efforts to thwart Ukraine’s development as a full-fledged state . Ukraine is not yet a state but a state .
 Russia ratified the ‘Big Treaty’ in December 1998, nearly a year after Ukraine had done so . The treaty provides for the inviolability of Ukraine’s borders .
 Russian diplomats repeatedly delayed negotiations on delimiting the countries’ shared borders . An agreement was not signed until 2010, almost 20 years after Ukraine gained independence .
 The two countries still have not been able to agree on the division of the maritime space . Russian occupation of Crimea ensures that they will not do so any time soon .
 Looking over the past three decades, we can discern at least four stages of Russia’s political influence on Ukraine . Russia's political influence has been seen in Ukraine for decades .
 First came the preparatory phase, which covers the period from the collapse of the Soviet Union to the beginning of the military operation against Ukraine . Russia launched the operation in February 2014 .
 The second stage was the failed blitzkrieg, when Russia moved to take control of Ukraine’s south and east, including Crimea . The third stage was when Russia took control of Crimea, including the Crimea .
 This stage was a turning point because it saw the most intensive involvement of Russian armed forces . This stage, which lasted until early 2015, was the turning point for Russian forces .
 Russia stepped up its use of political, economic, social, and information campaigns as it dialed back military operations . The third stage began in February 2015, after the signing of the so-called Minsk II agreements .
 The hybrid war began in the spring of 2019 and is waged primarily through agents of influence in Ukraine . We are now witnessing the fourth phase of this hybrid war .
This period has seen growing support for political forces that promote concessions to Russia . This period has been seen as a growing support to political forces.
 The Kremlin has never accepted the notion of an independent Ukraine, free to join the EU or NATO . It is convinced it would undermine its traditional influence in this part of the world .
 Russia's hybrid war has evolved into a hybrid war . It is important to consider the preparatory period before the use of military force against Ukraine .
 Moscow was aware of the Ukrainian army and security services’ weaknesses, especially in Crimea . 90% of members of the Security Service of Ukraine switched to the Russian side after the occupation .
 Russian television spread stories about a coup d’état in Kyiv by right-wing radicals . Russian television was especially popular in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 The Russian government worked in advance to tamp down resistance among a frightened population to its coming incursions . In this way, the Russian government tried to tampdown resistance among the frightened population .
 Russia already had experience conducting special operations in Crimea . Russia tried to connect the Ukrainian island with its Taman Peninsula in 2003 . Russia also had a dispute over tiny Tuzla island in the Kerch Strait .
 The Tuzla operation set the precedent for some special operations tactics in the framework of a hybrid war . The operation was the first of its kind in the world.
 The Russian government dissociated itself from the construction of a dam to Tuzla that had precipitated the dispute .
Despite diplomatic notes and harsh public statements, Russia remained silent . Despite diplomatic notes, Russia remains silent .
 Ukraine's coordinated position forced Russia to stop the dam construction right at the Soviet-era administrative border . Only Ukraine’s coordinated position made Russia stop the construction .
 Meshkov’s increasingly bold pro-Russia agitation, which ended with special forces invading his residence, and the Tuzla crisis are two of the better-known conflicts between Ukraine and Russia before the 2014 hybrid war . There were many others, including “gas wars’
 Special operations are best launched when the central government is particularly weak and vulnerable . Special operations best launched in central government when it is particularly vulnerable .
 The hybrid war in 2014 had early success as a power vacuum had formed in Kyiv after Yanukovych, who was president at the time, fled the capital .
 Local leaders can be disorganized and disruptive, for a special operation plays a secondary role . Support among local leaders is a key part in local leaders' success .
 The Russian government must play a crucial, albeit covert, role in special operations . Russian government has a crucial role in the special operations.
 Trust between Ukrainian authorities and its Western allies must be undermined, says the U.S. State Department .
 Ukraine successfully appealed to international partners during the Tuzla crisis in 2003 . For instance, Ukraine successfully appeal to international partner during the crisis .
 Statements by Western governments likely influenced the actions of Russia, which at the time seemed to value cooperation with international institutions .
 The issue of ownership of Crimea was even discussed in the U.N. Security Council in 1993 . Russian diplomats were allied with then-Russian President Boris Yeltsin against a revanchist parliament .
Do not accept responsibility for a hybrid, unconventional attack. Crucially, do not accept responsible for a hybrids attack .
 Moscow declares its non-involvement in the action and thus avoids responsibility under international law . Moscow says it is not involved in any of the incidents .
 The hybrid war just after Russia’s annexation of Crimea in March of 2014 included clear and coordinated Russian actions inside Ukraine, along with efforts to discredit new government abroad .
 Russia aimed to carry out a kind of blitzkrieg, so things moved fast in Crimea and southern and eastern Ukraine . Russia is known to have been involved in a series of attacks on Ukraine .
 Crimea was captured without a single shot fired . The rest of Ukraine began to resist the ‘Russkaya Vesna’ which aimed at secession of Ukraine’s regions .
 Russia likely had envisioned a bloodless operation in which part of Ukraine would be taken over by pro-Russia or Russian representatives .
 Russia pivoted to a low-intensity military conflict in the east combined with hybrid attacks on the rest of Ukraine . After the Minsk agreements in February 2015, Russia pivoting to low- intensity military conflict .
 Its moves served primarily to destabilize Ukraine and discredit Ukraine’s leaders in the eyes of their people and their Western partners .
 Russia’s policy changed due to the introduction of EU and U.S. sanctions as well as the signing of the Minsk agreements . The Minsk agreement was signed by Russia and the United States .
 Russia was interested in Ukraine's federalization and legitimization of Russia’s ‘stooges’ among the local elite . Russia was also interested in their implementation, as they would effectively allow Ukraine”s federalization .
Maintaining a low-intensity hybrid conflict is militarily cheaper than a full-scale one . Maintaining low- intensity hybrid conflict in the U.S. is cheaper than full-sized conflict .
 These include attacks on critical infrastructure and armament depots, and assassinations of members of Ukraine’s security services, soldiers, and dissidents who had fled to Ukraine .
 There have been more subtle information attacks, such as a phone call between the Ukrainian and Russian presidents Petro Poroshenko and Vladimir Putin . The Russians leaked in order to stir up distrust of the Ukrainian head of state .
 Russian spy Stanislav Yezhov served as an interpreter to the Ukrainian prime minister . He was an interpreter for the Ukrainian PM .
 Ukrainian security service has said Russian agents were behind attacks on ethnic minorities in Ukraine . Roma, Jews, Hungarians, and Rusyns were among those targeted . Russian agents are accused of instigating tensions and violence .
 Some Ukrainian officials counted as many as one cyberattack every 40 minutes against certain Ukrainian institutions . The election took place without major disruptions .
30 Fakes and disinformation have also become integral to Russia's hybrid warfare . NATO specialists trained their Ukrainian partners to counter cyberattacks ahead of the country's local elections in 2020 .
An analysis by Internews Ukraine of the Ukrainian segment of the Russian social network VKontakte found a largely negative portrayal of both the presidential candidates and Ukraine as a dysfunctional state .
 Ukrainians have lived under the constant threat of further military aggression . All the while, Ukrainians have been under the threat of more military aggression.
 From 2015 to 2019, Russia violated the cease-fire negotiated by the Minsk Trilateral Contact Group more than 20 times . 32 times, including in the first hours after it was proclaimed, were violated .
 Russia regularly holds military exercises close to Ukrainian territory and isasses its military units along the Ukrainian border and in occupied Crimea . Russia also regularly holds exercises near the Ukraine border and Crimea .
 The Kremlin has repeatedly drawn from its warfare against Ukraine is to avoid open aggression . It does not allow it to deny responsibility for the armed conflict and mobilizes Ukrainian public opinion against Russia .
 The EU has opened a field office of its advisory mission in Mariupol . EU countries had strongly opposed earlier as too sensitive for EU policy regarding the conflict in the east .
 Ukraine’s leadership in 2019 might have presented Russia an opportunity to change its approach to its neighbor .
 Ukraine's new president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, adopted some different policies toward Russia . Instead, the Kremlin kept to relatively the same tactics .
 Conditions in Ukraine have provided more opportunities for hybrid influence. The only noteworthy difference is that conditions in Ukraine are more open to hybrid influence than in Ukraine .
 pro-Russia political forces have gained ground in Ukraine . Over time ties to Russia have become less disqualifying in the country’s politics .
 Opposition Platform – For Life party won 43 seats in parliament in 2019, up from 29 seats in 2014 . Two of its members, Medvedchuk and Boyko, met with then-Russian Prime Minister Dmitriy Medvedev four months earlier .
 Medvedchuk made a comeback in Ukraine's national politics in 2019 . He ran on the Opposition Platform party list and became a member of parliament .
 Since the election, the initial trust that Ukrainians had placed in Zelenskyy’s victorious Servant of the People party has dwindled . The Opposition Platform has gained support, while the Opposition Platform is gaining support .
 A recent opinion poll found that if parliamentary elections were held in November 2020, the Opposition Platform and European Solidarity parties would have shared second place . Even notorious pro-separatist politicians in eastern Ukraine fared decently in the 2020 local elections, coming third with 16.6% of
 The Kremlin's tactics aim not so much to install a pro-Russia government in Kyiv as to destabilize Ukraine until it becomes a failed state .
 The most recent example of such an approach appeared in October 2020 when the Constitutional Court ruled e-declarations by public officials to be unconstitutional . The Constitutional Court acted on the Opposition Platform’s appeal, acting on the opposition Platform's appeal .
 The court’s ruling threw Ukraine in a constitutional crisis. Not only was the introduction of e-declarations for public officials considered to be the key post-Maidan anti-corruption measures .
 Any action against the ruling or the court itself could undermine the separation of powers and start a spiral of illegality, not to mention jeopardize Ukraine's relations with its Western partners .
 The appeal was submitted by the chief pro-Russia party. One can only hypothesize whether the idea was concocted in the Kremlin .
 Dmitriy Kozak is stage manager of Russia's involvement in Ukraine . He replaces Vladislav Surkov, a former aide to Putin and the Kremlin’s informal chief of propaganda .
 Kozak is best known as the champion of a failed Russian plan for Moldova in 2003 . The change of personalities in Moscow has not translated into a change in policy as yet . Kozak would have reunited both sides in a federation .
 The Kremlin has so far manipulated the conflict-settlement process to its own advantage, winning back some crucial figures captured by Ukrainian security services in prisoner exchanges . Vladimir Tsemakh suspected of downing the Malaysia Airlines plane in 2014 .
 Some Ukrainian journalists have alleged Zelenskyy’s office and the SBU sabotaged some special operations, including capture of Russian mercenaries from the Wagner Group .
 The allegations have not been proven, but they feed suspicion and distrust toward the authorities .
 Some analysts predict that the Kremlin will try to destabilize Ukraine through regional referendums . Some analysts say the Kremlin is trying to destabilise Ukraine.
 Zelenskyy is trying to change Ukrainian law to permit such referendums . He wants to change the law to allow such referentums .
 Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskiy and servicemen walk near the frontline with Russian-backed separatists in Krasnohorivka .
 Ukraine's success in countering Russia’s hybrid war is difficult to assess . Ukraine’'s success is hard to assess, says CNN.com.com .
 The Kremlin continues efforts to shape Ukraine’s domestic and foreign policy agendas . The conflict is intended to exhaust Ukrainian resources and cause enough economic or societal havoc that Kyiv will be forced to make concessions .
 It is impossible to know how the conflict would have developed had the West not supported Ukraine, or how Russia would have acted . Ukraine's government in Kyiv not sent the army to meet Russian aggression in 2014 .
 Reforms are key to Ukraine's ability to withstand Russia’s hybrid warfare . Russia's hybrid warfare is a key part of Ukraine's military strategy .
 Ukraine's desire to join the EU and NATO adds fuel to country's efforts to root out corruption and strengthen the rule of law . hybrid wars are more effective in countries where institutions are weak and elite corrupt .
 It has faced an extraordinary challenge due to a shortage of honest politicians and funds . It is the first time the government has been forced to make changes to its funding system .
 Independent assessments have credited Ukraine with making significant improvements in its defense capabilities . Ukraine has been praised for improving its defense capability .
 The Ukrainian army has gained valuable experience in its conflict with Russia . The army has come a long way toward reaching interoperability with NATO countries .
 Ukrainian and Western officials have played an important role in deterring further Russian aggression . Contacts between Ukrainian and West officials have been key to deterring Russian aggression.
 Keeping Western partners involved in mediation and holding Russia accountable has been one of Ukraine’s biggest achievements in dealing with the conflict . Keeping its Western partners in mediation has been a major achievement for Ukraine .
Germany and France have led negotiations with Russia under the Normandy Format . It has been crucial that Germany and France led negotiations under the Format .
 Ukraine has supported Ukraine on key matters, such as insisting that eastern Ukraine be demilitarized before any new political arrangements, or ‘special status’ for the embattled regions .
 EU and U.S. sanctions clearly signal who the aggressor is, even if it denies its involvement . EU and United States sanctions against Russia clearly signal the aggresser is, according to the EU .
 Ukraine has been supported in international tribunals, including the International Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea . Ukraine has also been supported by the International court of Justice .
 The ICJ ruled that its claims against Russia are proper and within the court’s jurisdiction . An interim success for Ukraine came in November 2019 when the ICJ ruling was made .
 Ukraine filed its case back in 2017, accusing Russia of violating international agreements against racial discrimination and financing terrorism . Ukraine filed the case in 2017 .
 Ukrainian side took three years to prepare 29 volumes and more than 17,500 pages of evidence against Russia . It took the Ukrainian side three years.
 Come Back Alive provides equipment, medical supplies, and training to the army . StopFake, the Ukraine Crisis Media Center, and Internews Ukraine are a trump card for Ukraine that the Kremlin failed to anticipate .
 Ukraine’s track record on reform is mixed. Despite the abovementioned achievements, Ukraine's track record has been mixed .
 Ukraine's success in countering Russian hybrid aggression doesn't belittle Ukraine's achievements in countering Russia's hybrid aggression . This per se doesn’t belittle the country’s achievements in counter-Russian aggression .
 Every incomplete reform or weak spot in its institutions is something that the adversary can capitalize on, especially in such spheres as security and defense .
 The reform efforts are sometimes seen as one step forward and one step back . The reforms are crucial for the country’s resilience .
 Ukrainian authorities have created an anti-corruption infrastructure . For example, the High Anti-Corruption Court, the National Anti-corruption Bureau of Ukraine, the Specialized Anti- Corruption Prosecutor’s Office, and the National Agency for the Prevention of Corruption .
Until now there have been no “big’ cases involving the prosecution and punishment of corrupt officials . However, until now, there has been no big cases involving corrupt officials.
 The abovementioned constitutional crisis, which dealt a blow to both anti-corruption infrastructure and the judiciary, is another case in point . Some interinstitutional controversies remain .
 The long-overdue reform of the SBU is still a work in progress, despite ambitious legislation, significant public pressure, and unprecedented Western support . The reform is still in progress.
 Ukrainian army of 2020 compared with that of 2014 is like a phoenix reborn from the ashes . Some standards should still be improved, but some of its standards should be improved .
 In 2018-2020, 77,000 contract officers, almost one-third of Ukraine’s armed forces, left the army .
 Ukrainian authorities must make more of an effort to make Ukraine’s armed forces a genuinely elite, mission-driven institution . Ukraine's armed forces must be more of a mission- driven institution .
 Ukrainian officials have not always managed the delicate balance between democratic freedoms and security, according to the Ukrainian government .
 Ukraine’s security-motivated 2017 ban of Russian social networks VKontakte and Odnoklassniki 47 caught unawares some of its Western partners . The move was later criticized as an infringement on the freedom of speech .
 No state-building process can run perfectly, especially in a country which is a victim of hybrid aggression . No state building process can be run perfectly.
 Any mistake made by officials could not only hurt the country, but also be exploited by the adversary . However, it is important to bear in mind that any mistake makes by officials can not only harm the country .
 Ukraine's experience lay the productive ground for lessons to learn and examples to emulate . This, as well as other chapters of Ukraine’s experience, lay the ground for lesson to learn .
Field offices in Ukraine’s East and South were out of the question . The mandate only covered the civilian security institutions and back in 2014 .