 Thesis Advisor: Anna Simons Second Reader: Michael Richardson Approved for public release . Thesis advisor: AnnaSimons Second reader: Michael Richards Approved.
 Unconventional warfare originated in World War II as a defensive tactic . It was used to assist an occupied ally during a conventional war .
 Special Forces has changed the definition of UW to include offensive regime change as a strategic option . Special Forces have changed thedefinition of UW.
 This type of UW was practiced extensively by the Central Intelligence Agency during the Cold War with poor results . It was used extensively by Central Intelligence agency during Cold War .
 The use of offensive UW by the United States is problematic for a variety of reasons, including unreliable proxy forces and negative international perception . The U.S. has been using the offensive UW for years .
The use of defensive UW under certain conditions remains justified and practical, but retains many of the same issues . The use of the defensive UW is justified andpractical, but it is still necessary .
 The thesis concludes that Special Forces better serves the nation’s interests by promoting itself as the premier combined force of the United States military .
Special Forces, unconventional warfare, covert action, nation-building, irregular forces, proxy forces, partner forces, foreign internal defense, security force assistance .
 This Page is the latest edition of this year's edition of The Daily Discussion . This page includes the top 10 picks of the best news stories of the year .
 Unconventional warfare originated in World War II as a defensive tactic . It was used to assist an occupied ally during a conventional war .
 Special Forces have changed the definition of UW to include offensive regime change as a strategic option . Since then, Special Forces has changed the definitions of UW .
 The soldiers ranged from officers and non-commissioned officers with years of combat experience in Iraq and Afghanistan . Some of the soldiers had less time in the Army than some of the veterans had in combat deployments .
 Regardless of experience, the soldiers were there for a common purpose . The soldiers were on the ground for the first time .
 He welcomed the students and reminded them that they were not done with the course yet . He welcomed them and reminded the students that they had not been done with it yet .
 This last stage will test the skills they had learned in the previous phases . It will also provide a final evaluation as to whether or not they deserved to graduate .
 The Master Sergeant then began an impassioned speech about why Robin Sage was so important . He then began a speech about the importance of Robin Sage .
 The Arab Spring was sweeping across North Africa and parts of the Middle East . The Spring was also sweeping across the region .
 Protests had recently erupted in Syria, with the Assad regime responding with deadly force .
 After decades of oppression by dictator Muammar Gaddafi, the people of Libya wanted freedom .
 Other special operations forces include units such as the United States Army Rangers and United States Navy SEALs .
 Green Berets were not chosen to conduct UW in Libya, because they had forgotten how they had done it . The group was not chosen because it was not known how to do it .
 Robin Sage was vital because it would remind students that UW was their primary mission, and they had to be ready to execute it at any given time .
Despite his well-intended bravado, the Master Sergeant had just mischaracterized and oversimplified a mission . UW has been repeatedly changed, expanded, and molded to fit real and perceived threats to the U.S. over the last seven decades .
 The U.S. has a long-term strategic interests in the United States . This thesis will contend that when utilized in a preemptive or offensive manner, UW often results in unintended consequences . The thesis will argue that when used in a pre-emptive manner,
 U.S. policy makers understand the limited scenarios in which the use of UW is appropriate . It is therefore vital that United States policy makers understanding the limited circumstances in which it is appropriate, while still recognizing potential pitfalls .
 The scope of this thesis is limited to the use of UW by the United States since 1945 . It is important to note that the scope of the thesis is only limited to U.S., not by other countries elsewhere .
 The Current Dilemma’s presentation was delivered to the author on 04 October 2016 .
 The Office of Strategic Services was established on 13 June 1942 under William Donovan . The Office was established in 1942 under Donovan .
 The OSS conducted ‘unconventional warfare’ as its secondary task . While its primary mission was to conduct intelligence operations, it conducted “uncon conventional warfare”
 The original concept for such special forces in World War II Europe was to support Winston Churchill’s idea of engaging people of occupied Europe in a guerrilla war against the Germans .
 Churchill hoped to tie down enemy forces by compelling them to engage in counter-guerrilla operations far from the front lines . In this way, Churchill hoped.
 Guerrillas could also sabotage railways and ambush enemy columns, delaying reinforcements from reaching the front and improving the prospect for Allied victory and a reduction in Allied casualties . Guerrilla could also delay reinforcements from the front.
 The original units were meant to sabotage and distract German forces to ease the advance of the main Allied force .
 Many of the teams were dropped into occupied France, where they linked up with various French resistance groups, organized arms drops, and conducted sabotage operations against the Germans . Many of them were dropped in occupied France .
 The OSS continues to be revered by the Special Forces community . Today, the OSS remains a Special Forces unit .
 The Jedburghs of 1944 were meant to do no more than assist French resistance forces in guerrilla-type operations against the Germans .
 This tacticallevel tasking was their definition of unconventional warfare . This tactical level tasking is the definition of the unconventional warfare.
 The UW mission is now a “US national strategic mission,” that requires interagency and Department of Defense cooperation .
 World War II continued to rage across Europe in 1944 . Bill Donovan had already started advocating for a post-war version of the OSS to continue its intelligence operations .
 The CIA’s creation led to further debate, this time over the proposed use of covert action .
 At the time, the Joint Chiefs of Staff thought that propaganda and covert activities were more suited to the State Department than the Department of Defense .
 Secretary of State George Marshall made it clear that he and the State Department wanted nothing to do with covert action . However, he made it quite clear that they wanted nothing.
 The purpose is to exert American influence over another government, organization, or individual . The second relates to the purpose of exerting American influence on another government .
 It is this second shared feature that ties covert action to today’s definition of unconventional warfare .
 The CIA began to experiment with offensive covert action in the years following World War II . Another Jedburgh veteran was establishing a new unit within the United States Army .
 Colonel Aaron Bank officially established the 10 th Special Forces Group in the summer of 1952 . The 10th Special Forces group was formed in 1952 .
 Bragg moved to Bad Tolz, Germany, in order to be better positioned to accomplish its mission . Bragg, the Group, soon moved to Germany to get better positioned for its mission in Germany .
 This was a less-than-ideal solution that assumed future conflicts would involve declared wars, most likely involving the Soviet Union . This was more likely than any other solution .
 The OSS veterans who had joined Special Forces objected to this split, but nonetheless began to produce doctrine that would help define their mission and purpose . The O SS veterans had been split from the Special Forces .
 The chapters in the early Special Forces field manuals were devoted to subjects like guerrilla communications, logistics and the selection and set-up of resupply drop zones .
 The original members of Special Forces did not immediately try to adapt unconventional warfare into an offensive mission . Unlike their brethren in the CIA, the original Special Forces members did not try toAdapt unconventional warfare .
 The original Green Berets fell into the “break glass in case of emergency’s category . The original green Berets were the first to fall into the emergency category .
 The Germans' posture in Germany was primarily defensive, and their original mission was only to be executed in the event of a Soviet offensive .
 The concept of unconventional warfare is now the subject of a joint publication that fully embraces UW as a strategy, not a tactic. Over 60 years later, the concept is now a strategy.
 The first is defined as a supporting line of operation within a broader military campaign . The second is defined by the first as a support line of operations within a wider military campaign.
 This is essentially a replica of the Jedburgh experience in World War II . It has merit in the event of a U.S. ally being invaded or occupied .
 This is the type of UW that has resulted in long-term strategic failure for the United States over the past 70 years . This is also the kind of UW. This is a type of U.S. strategic failure that has led to long- term strategic failure .
 The CIA embarked on a period of experimentation with offensive unconventional warfare . The new 10 th Special Forces Group was building its capacity to assist partisans behind Soviet lines .
 Some of its missions achieved immediate tactical success for the CIA, leading to the false assumption that UW could be used throughout the Cold War at minimal cost .
 Italy emerged as a battleground in what would become a half century-long Cold War against communism . The United States began implementing the Marshall Plan in 1948 .
 Truman authorized actions to prevent the communists from winning, which led to the CIA's initial foray into unconventional warfare .
 The CIA had no specific authorization to conduct covert operations . Still in its infancy, the exact role of the CIA was still being debated .
 The Truman Administration’s primary efforts were concentrated on overt political actions . 35 were pledged military support and funds on the condition that the communists were not elected. 35 were pledging military support.
 The smaller, covert portion of this strategy began with the CIA’s creation of the Special Procedures Group in late 1947 . The group specifically tasked to intervene in 33 Nutter, CIA's Black Ops, 51 .
 The SPG began laundering money and delivering it to anti-communist political organizations, 38 while also launching a disinformation campaign . The PCI was to win a $10 million budget .
 The result of these efforts was the defeat of the PCI in the 1948 elections . The PCI was defeated by the party in 1948 .
 As the 1950s began, the CIA had yet another opportunity to recognize some of the drawbacks of unconventional warfare .
 Albania had fallen under Soviet influence after World War II, and was being run by a communist government under Enver Hoxha 42 . In conjunction with Britain’s MI6, the CIA launched BGFIEND, an operation designed to overthrow the communist government .
 BGFIEND’s planners regarded the operation as a case study to be learned from rather than an indicator that an offensive UW mission has inherent flaws .BGFIEND's planners said the operation was a caseStudy to be learn from .
 The CIA decided to try again in BGFIEND . The CIA was determined to learn from its mistakes in BG FIEND .
Future Secretary of State John Foster Dulles criticized the Truman administration for failing to stop communist influence in Iran .
 Allen Dulles’ brother, Allen, was also slated to become the director of the CIA under Eisenhower . Allen was the brother of Dulles' brother, who was also set to become director of CIA .
 Eisenhower utilized the CIA to conduct preemptive unconventional warfare throughout his presidency . The CIA conducted preemptive warfare throughout the presidency .
 The removal of Third World leaders left their countries vulnerable to communist takeover . The replacement of those leaders with strongly pro-Western successors could be relied upon to pursue policies compatible with American interests .
 Mosaddeq moved quickly to end British exploitation of Iran, in which a British company, the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company, earned ten times as much profit as it paid in royalties .
 Britain organized a boycott of Iranian oil, but this failed to have immediate political effect . It then turned to the U.S. and the CIA for help .
Mossadeq was ousted and replaced by the Shah with the support of General Fazlullah Zahedi . The coup itself was successful .
 Zahedi began to consolidate power around the Shah after the coup, eliminating political competitors and contributing to the environment that would eventually lead to the revolution .
 The irony in the fact that the U.S. had successfully ousted a democratically elected government, only to replace it with an authoritarian monarchy, was apparently lost on the Eisenhower Administration .
 By ‘you’ he meant me and the two countries — Great Britain and the U.S. — I was representing. By 'you' he meant him and the three countries .
 Originally considered an asset by the CIA and the U.S. government, the Shah had since become a liability . The Shah was once considered a liability.
 Once in power, the Shah proved less interested in doing what the United States wanted him to . He was more interested in consolidating that power through the elimination of competitors and the oppression of his people .
 Many Iranians blamed this on the United States, arguing that the 1953 coup and the extensive United States support for the shah in subsequent years were largely responsible .
 The revolution had a deeply anti-American character, and U.S.-Iran relations have remained tense ever since . The revolution was a result of the revolution.
 Many Iranians still believe the U.S. is working covertly to undermine or overthrow their government . The coup has had such a powerful impact on Iran’s political consciousness that many still believe it is working.
 TP AJAX was quick to bookend his account of the 1978-1979 Iranian Revolution with both excuses and blame .
 Roosevelt says that the Shah was viewed by his people as an American puppet contributed nothing to the Iranian Revolution . He says the Shah's people saw him as a puppet, but he was not a puppet .
 Neither did his authoritarian crackdowns and elimination of political rivals . Neither did he eliminate his political rivals.
 Roosevelt regarded as the second most successful leader in Iranian history . Roosevelt regarded him as the most successful president in Iran's history .
 Roosevelt claimed that Dulles simply did not want to listen to warnings about future UW endeavors . He said he was instead eager to embark on them .
 Roosevelt tried to warn Dulles one last time, telling him, “If our analysis had been wrong, we’d have fallen flat on our, er, faces.’
 If we, the CIA, are ever going to try something like this again, we must be absolutely sure that the people and army want what we want . We must be sure that we are trying to do this again .
Despite the fact that TP AJAX involved rigged elections, staged protests, and a massive misinformation campaign, Roosevelt confidently told Eisenhower that, “With some help from us, the Iranian people freely chose an authoritarian monarch over their democratically elected prime minister.
 Operation TP AJAX secured Iran as an ally for the United States for roughly 25 years . The United States has been an ally of Iran for about 25 years.
 The adversarial relationship between the two countries is now approaching 40 years in length . However, the relationship is still at a high level .
 Iran has become a major power broker in the Middle East . Iran has consistently antagonized the U.S. and killed American service members .
 The failed Iranian hostage rescue, Operation EAGLE CLAW, resulted in the death of eight Americans and the public humiliation of the country . The failed Iran hostage rescue led to the deaths of 8 Americans .
 The Iran-Iraq War resulted in dozens more American casualties . The U.S. Navy destroyer shot down an Iranian commercial airliner, killing all on board .
 Iran became all the more eager to assist insurgents fighting against U.S. forces in Iraq following the 2003 invasion . President George W Bush declared Iran a member of the “Axis of Evil’s” in 2002 .
Exact numbers are difficult to determine, but Iranian training and equipment from the Quds Force is estimated to have caused hundreds of American deaths during the Iraq War .
 The Islamic State in Iraq and Syria reemerged in 2014 . Suleimani was quickly spotted on the ground in Iraq, advising Shi’a militias .
 At the time of the 1953 coup, none of these prospects were envisioned by the Eisenhower Administration .
Unpredictable warfare is crucial when weighing whether or not unconventional warfare is a viable strategy . But, appreciating that unpredictability is crucial, it's crucial to weigh whether and not unconventional Warfare is viable strategy.
 History has shown that there is little to no control over the installed replacement . When an overthrow is successful, history has shown.
 Nouri al-Maliki is no guarantee that he will continue to do what the U.S. government wants him to do once he is in power .
 Roosevelt’s descriptions of the over-eager, cat-like John Foster Dulles are amusing, but his assessment of the Secretary of State was correct .
 The Eisenhower Administration considered TPAJAX a major success, leading to the approval of Operation PBSUCCESS . The operation was a plan to overthrow the democratically elected government of Guatemala .
 The exact specifics of the overthrow are less important to the study of unconventional warfare than the results of the operation . As with TPAJAX, the exact specifics are more important than the result of the battle .
 UFCO dispatched some of its executives to meet with high-ranking officials in the State Department and the CIA . UFCO also unleashed a propaganda campaign designed to promote the narrative that Arbenz’s government was moving toward communism .
 The CIA executed Operation PBFORTUNE in the waning days of the Truman Administration . It was an effort to provide arms to dissidents and assist them in overthrowing Arbenz .
 Secretary of State Dean Acheson terminated the operation after word of America’s involvement in arming rebels spread .
 The same template used in Iran could be applied to Guatemala . It was thought that the same template could be used in Guatemala .
 "Triumph confirmed the belief of many in the Eisenhower administration that covert operations offered a safe, inexpensive substitute" "This “triumph’s” confirmed many in Eisenhower administration, says author .
 The aftermath of PBSUCCESS did not result in the same long-term adversarial relationship that TPAJAX produced . The consequences of the coup were embarrassing to the United States nonetheless .
 Within three years of the coup, Arbenz’s successor was assassinated, resulting in decades of dictatorships and turmoil in Guatemala .
 Other countries viewed any American activity abroad with suspicion .
 President Bill Clinton finally apologized to the Guatemalan people during a 1999 visit . Eisenhower himself never showed any remorse for the violence and destruction resulting from PBSUCCESS .
 The tactical successes claimed for TPAJAX and PBSUCCESS emboldened the U.S. government to continue its use of unconventional warfare in various forms over the next five decades .
 Scholars have noted that perceived achievements of TPAJAX and PBSUCCESS were primary contributors to later decisions to conduct UW operations such as the Bay of Pigs .
 The coups in Iran and Guatemala have led to complications and embarrassment for the U.S. Like the coups, the operations that followed would occasionally yield what appeared to be immediate success .
 The U.S. spent the next four decades investing in unconventional warfare campaigns, mainly 71 percent of the time .
 The U.S. John F Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School released the publication, A Leader’s Handbook to Unconventional Warfare .
 This handbook is designed to offer a quick overview of UW . It also includes nearly six pages of UW history .
 The author, Lieutenant Colonel Mark Grdovic, lists UW campaigns from the end of World War II through the 2003 invasion of Iraq . The author is also a former U.S. Army officer .
 The details of each of these campaigns are beyond the scope of this thesis, but it is interesting to note how he describes each effort .
 By the end of this effort, the U.S. had abandoned the Tibetan resistance forces in order to re-establish diplomatic relations with China .
 The campaign was soon shut down, with the United States embarrassed once again as its involvement in the coup was exposed . The U.S. was embarrassed again as it was exposed.
 The revelation of United States involvement also provided Achmed Sukarno the opportunity to extort food and weapons from the United States in exchange for silence about the event .
 ‘operational security in the United States was a complete failure’ 81 in the lead up to the operation itself, Grdovic says .
 The CIA attempted to establish networks in North Vietnam, but only managed to produce an infiltrated operation full of double agents . The CIA tried to establish a network in the country.
 Special Forces became involved and helped parachute agents into North Vietnam . Special Forces helped parachute the agents into Vietnam .
All support was cut off after inserting agents, with efforts shifting towards information operations . The North Vietnamese are trying to convince the North Vietnamese that there is a resistance force present amongst its people .
 Grdovic explains that the Contras were more paid mercenaries than actual revolutionaries concerned about their country . The Contras are more paid mercenary than the actual revolutionaries .
 The Iran-Contra scandal exposed what was supposed to be a covert operation, once again embarrassing the United States and causing it to terminate operations . The scandal exposed the U.S. government's actions in Iran .
 After the Soviets invaded Afghanistan, the U.S. started funneling money, weapons, and training to Islamic freedom fighters .
 While the mujahedeen successfully engaged the Soviets in a long guerrilla war, the aftermath quickly spun out of control .
Following the Soviet withdrawal, Afghanistan was plunged into a civil war . Some mujahedeen formed the Taliban and seizing control of the government .
 The Taliban would eventually welcome Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda into the country . Afghanistan would be used as a planning base for the 9/11 attacks .
 Fifteen years after the attacks, the U.S. remains engaged in Afghanistan, spending money and lives fighting the Taliban .
 Special Forces' role remained to conduct UW only during a time of war . The CIA began to wage offensive unconventional warfare against communists .
 One sees this transition not only in the changing doctrinal definition of unconventional warfare, but in several key events .
 SF added the term ‘unconventional warfare’ to their doctrine in 1955 . SF added “un Conventional Warfare’s’ term to the CIA doctrine.
 In 1961, the Army associated the relatively new Special Forces with guerrilla warfare, or resistance operations . The Army's special operations field manual, Guerrilla Warfare and Special Operations, was written in 1961 .
 Unconventional warfare operations are conducted in enemy or enemy controlled territory by indigenous personnel usually supported and directed by external source .
 Special Forces spent the majority of the war in a counterinsurgency role blended with internal defense . Some members of the Special Operations Group conducted direct action missions .
As the Cold War came to an end, unconventional warfare was given a revised definition and meaning for the Department of Defense . As the Cold war came to a end, the definition was changed .
 The new U.S. policy of supporting selected anti-communist resistance movements requires SF to focus on UW during conflicts short of war .
 Global urbanization dictates a shift in emphasis from rural GW to all aspects of clandestine resistance .
 The 1990 field manual for Special Forces lays claim to SF conducting unconventional warfare in both wartime and in peacetime . SF also declares SF capable of conducting UW independent from conventional operations .
 This marks an important step in SF’s evolving view of UW as an offensive tool, says the author .
 The 1990 manual fails to account for the complexities of the UW mission .
 It states explicitly that “SF units do not create resistance movements’ It states that ‘SF units don’t create resistance movement’
 The proactive form of UW articulated in the 1990 field manual would require very different procedures, particularly in terms of finding and contacting viable resistance forces .
 The definition of UW remains almost identical to the 1990 version . The 2001 manual pushes the concept of UW even further towards preemptive offensive action .
 The manual also discusses UW across a broad spectrum of conflict, and notes that it can be used anywhere along that spectrum . SF can conduct UW in situations short of declared war .
 Army SF is the U.S. force of the United States . The UW forces of potential adversaries have gained in relevance and importance .
 SF provides an effective capability to counter the emerging unconventional threat, as well as an increasingly viable and offensive asymmetric option for employing U.S. military power .
 SF identifies itself as the UW force of the Army, or even of the Department of Defense . It is not just as the Army force, but as the entire United States .
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld looked to United States Central Command and its commander, General Tommy Franks, for a response to the attacks .
 Franks and his staff quickly realized that they had no existing plans to conduct ground operations in Afghanistan . The rest of al-Qaeda was based in Afghanistan, where Osama bin Faden and the rest of the rest were based .
 The CIA presented its own plan to President George W Bush, proposing an unconventional warfare campaign using CIA assets, airpower, special operations teams, and indigenous Afghan forces .
 CIA operatives received Special Forces Operational Detachment Alphas on the ground in Afghanistan . They were linked up with warlords and fighters from the Northern Alliance .
 The ODAs, from 5 th Special Forces Group, coordinated airstrikes while accompanying and advising their Afghan partners in battles against al-Qaeda and the Taliban government .
 bin Faden fled the area and went into hiding . Within weeks, the Taliban had been driven from power .
 The first images from the newly declared “Global War on Terrorism’ were riveting. Back in the U.S.
 Instead of stereotypical soldiers with close-cropped hair and matching uniforms, Americans saw something much different . Instead of the stereotypical soldiers. Instead of armored vehicles and tanks, Americans see something different .
 Green Berets with long hair and shaggy beards rode on horses alongside their Afghan partners . They wore baseball hats and civilian hiking shoes instead of combat boots .
 Special Forces and the CIA successfully overthrown a sitting government, but they had done so with the full approval of the international community .
 The United States Army in Operation ENDURING FREEDOM . The U.S. Army was involved in Operation Enduring FREedOM .
 CENTCOM planners were ordered by the Bush Administration to prepare for an invasion of Iraq . The Bush Administration ordered planners to plan for the invasion.
 President Bush declared Iraq as a member of an “Axis of Evil” in his 2002 State of the Union address . mobili z ed a “Coalition of the Willing’s’ to support the upcoming invasion .
 Task Force VIKING was assembled to tie up Iraqi forces north of Baghdad, while conventional forces invaded from the south . The plan to invade Iraq was part of the plan to invasion Iraq .
 TF VIKING proved to be yet another success against all-odds story for Special Forces . American news networks focused mainly on the conventional assault force coming in through southern Iraq .
 TF VIKING effectively neutralized 13 Iraqi divisions and took two of the largest cities in Iraq . The Kurdish Peshmerga fighters made use of roughly 50,000 Kurdish fighters .
 The success of SF in Afghanistan and Iraq reinvigorated discussions about UW, and what SF’s UW role should be .
 A broad spectrum of military and paramilitary operations, predominantly conducted through, with or by indigenous or surrogate forces .
 The Bush Administration’s response to 9/11 had become heavily influenced by a group of neoconservatives whose philosophy was centered around utilizing preemptive force to promote American values around the globe .
 This thinking found favor with President Bush, and became enshrined in the 2002 National Security Strategy . This thinking was part of the 2002 national security strategy .
 What became known as the ‘Bush Doctrine’ lent primacy to preemptive warfare . It was designed to prevent state and non-state actors from attacking the U.S. first .
After successful invasions in Afghanistan and Iraq, the rebuilding of each country took a dark turn .
 Insurgencies blossomed and networks of irregulars, generally described as “terrorists, began launching attacks on civilians .
 The Department of Defense and the conventional military struggled to learn counterinsurgency . The SOF community specialized in counterterrorism techniques found their niche .
Kinetic, direct action operations emerged as the preferred mission across SOF . Green Berets had previously been envisioned as trainers and advisors as opposed to “door kickers’ and assault troops .
 discussions began at the U.S. Army Special Operations Command about whether the definition of unconventional warfare needed to be clarified . Observing how various SOF elements were likely to continue to be employed in the Global War on Terror.
 Special Forces community worried that SF was being pushed to the side as the wars in Afghanistan and Afghanistan continued . Mark Grdovic notes that leaders in the Special Forces were worried about SF being pushed on the side .
 This thinking was the catalyst for the flawed arguments to change UW to include operations against terrorists and insurgents, says the author .
 This perspective failed to account for existing charter that included CT and FID as primary missions for SF, as well as a misunderstanding of the environmental conditions and associated activities required to conduct UW successfully .
 Leaders in the community became more interested in figuring out how to relabel these types of efforts as UW and claim a proprietary ownership to the methodology of working alongside irregular forces .
 leaders tried to find ways to make UW fit within the CT plan against al-Qaeda . Instead of focusing on what SF could do to contribute in a CT or COIN campaign, leaders tried.
 SF now claims itself to be the country's UW force. In theory, this would bring SF back to the center of the conversation, since SF now claimed itself to the country’s UW force .
 SF's role under the Bush Doctrine has generated more debate. However, instead of clarifying SF’s role under Bush Doctrine, reconceiving UW simply generated a more debate .
 America had been attacked, there were two wars underway, and a nearly blank check had been given to the military to wage those wars . America was attacked, and there had been two wars under way .
 As the different branches of the military sought continued relevance and funding, each sought to stay as involved as possible in the ground wars in Afghanistan and Iraq .
 This latest version of the definition also included conventional military operations, which allowed UW to apply to nearly any operation being executed with a partner force . However, this latest version also included traditional military operations .
 As a result, other SOF units began to add UW to the lists of their core tasks .
 The reality at the time was that nearly every military element deployed to Afghanistan or Iraq was working with surrogates in one form or another .
 The Sunni Awakening began in Iraq in 2007, when conventional infantry units found themselves working with Sunni militias .
Regular infantry units were conducting UW on a daily basis, according to the doctrinal definition of UW . This meant that regular infantry units are conducting UW daily .
 2007 definition of UW was internally produced and never approved by Army doctrine writers at Ft. Ft. Army .
In 2016, my class received a capabilities brief for U.S. Navy SEALs . In 2016, while attending a Naval War College course for joint accreditation, myclass received a capability brief for SEALs.
 The SEALs are a force primarily dedicated to maritime interdiction . Their capabilities include unconventional warfare as one of their core competencies .
 According to 2007 definition, SEALs too could claim unconventional warfare as an area of expertise after working with Iraqi and Afghan partner units .
 In 2009 came a new U.S. foreign policy. The CURRENT DEFINITION of UW EMERGES was announced . In 2009, there was a new foreign policy .
 President Barack Obama was elected to office on the promise to end the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . Obama also pledged to avoid committing U.S. troops and resources to messy nation-building campaigns .
 President Obama’s campaign promises were a direct repudiation of the Bush Doctrine .
USASOC had begun to realize its 2007 definition of UW was causing major issues . Already, USASOC's 2007 definition had caused major issues.
 A working group of about 10 people was formed to try and re-clarify the definition once and for all . In response, a working group was formed.
 Activities to enable a resistance movement or insurgency to coerce, disrupt, or overthrow a government or occupy power by operating with an underground, auxiliary, or guerrilla force in a denied area . Activities are to enable the resistance movement and insurgency to.
 Members of the working group crafted their definition to include only very specific activities . The definition includes what could be considered unconventional warfare .
 The Global War on Terror strategy has dominated the global war on terror strategy for nearly a decade . However, their definition still showed traces of pre-emptive warfare thinking .
 The new definition restored the UW partner force to being a resistance movement or insurgency . The language that allowed for the use of offensive unconventional warfare.
 The definition allowed for the possibility that UW could be used as a tool for preemptive regime change against an undesirable government . It rendered it nearly identical in concept to the CIA’s covert operations during the Cold War .
 One sovereign nation rarely invades and occupies another in today’s world . However, one sovereign nation never invades.
 Some members of the working group thought the inclusion of the word overthrow would be politically disastrous . Some members thought it would have been politically disastrous.
 The more palatable trio of “coerce, disrupt, or defeat ’ was suggested instead . But defeat was determined to be too difficult to quantify .
 SF, the UW force of the United States, exists to use proxy forces to overthrow sitting governments . The U.S. government has been accused of using the UW to overthrow governments .
Had this definition been produced in 2003 or 2004, it would have fit perfectly with the American foreign policy mindset at the time .
 USASOC had just defined the parameters of a task that nobody in the Obama Administration seemed eager to embrace .
 The Obama Administration's hesitation should not be surprising, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is a simple and obvious statement, especially when looking at an American-style democracy . It's a simple statement. It's an obvious statement.
Senior military leaders are to provide sound advice about how to prosecute wars . The role of senior military leaders is to provide advice about prosecuting wars .
 The military does not decide when and where to wage those war, but is instead directed by its civilian masters . The military doesn't decide when, where and when to wage war .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff would likely be relieved of his duties for providing poor advice . For instance, he would be laughed out of the room, but likely relieved of duties .
 The Chairman and other senior military leaders must provide valid and feasible options to have their advice listened to and considered by civilian policymakers . It seems a ridiculous scenario, but illustrates how the Chairman and others have to provide valid options .
 To properly analyze the problems posed by unconventional warfare as a modernday policy option, we must split UW into two types . To properly analysis the problems of unconventional warfare, we need to split the two types.
 This thesis has referred to the first type of offensive UW— coercing, disrupting, or overthrowing a government without declaring war in order to further the interests of the U.S. This thesis refers to a type of "offensive UW"
 The second type pertains to the execution of UW during a declared conflict or war . The third type of execution is the death of a U.S. military officer during a conflict.
 The U.S. is responding to an aggressor or occupying power . One might call this defensive UW, so long as the United States is responding.
 Most historical examples listed in UW manuals are actually CIA covert operations . They are meant to conceal U.S. sponsorship .
 In accordance with today’s definition, the purpose of UW in an offensive scenario would be to coerce, disrupt, or overthrow another government . The purpose of the U.S. government is to coercion, disrupt or overthrow a government .
 Exposing U.S. sponsorship of these activities will continue to be, massively embarrassing for the United States . The United States has not declared war has been, and will still be, according to CNN's Tom Charity .
 The United States projects itself around the world as a promoter of democracy . It contends that people should have the right to choose their own government .
 If the U.S. is caught interfering in someone else's government, that makes the “shining city on the hill’s narrative much harder to sustain .
 Russia is providing an example of what happens when you get caught coercing or disrupting another government . Russia is currently providing a example of how a government can coerce or disrupt a government .
 The U.S. Director of National Intelligence released a statement directly accusing the Russian government of orchestrating a string of email hacks on high-level political organizations .
 Russia worked directly with Julian Assange’s Wiki L eaks to release those hacked emails in a manner that undermined the 2016 presidential election by attempting to sow doubts in the minds of the American populace about their political process .
 The email leaks were aimed exclusively at the Democratic National Committee and the campaign staff of Hillary Clinton .
 Democrats, however, were not the only ones to express their outrage over Russian intervention .
 Republican Senators Ben Sasse and Marco Rubio also denounced the Wiki L eaks attacks . They called on their party to do the same .
Say the U.S. decided to do in Russia what it did in Italy in the late 1940s . Say the United States did in Russia.
 The United States executed regime changes in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Libya over the past 15 years . The U.S. still lays claim to the moral high ground internationally .
 Turkish President Recep Erdogan's response to U.S. efforts to keep Turkey from becoming overly involved in the battle for Mosul . The problems that can emerge from this claim can be seen in Turkish President Erdogan’s response to United States efforts .
 SEAL Team Six executed the raid, but that the assault force had been hand-picked from within the unit . The assault force was not the only team to execute the raid .
 SEAL Team Six itself is one of the most secretive units in the U.S. military . SEAL Team six is a secretive unit in the United States .
 Operational security could be ensured by hand-picking the assault force . Only the most mature and professional operators could be selected .
 Matt Bissonnette published his book, No Easy Day, under the pseudonym Mark Owen . The raid took place just over a year after the raid . The book was published under the name of Mark Owen.
 The book was a tell-all about the raid and was immediately controversial since it came from a community that is supposed to value quiet professionalism . The book is published in a book called "The Book of the Raid"
Military memoirs written by the special operations community are available in Bames and Nobles stores .
 The number of special operations personnel without a Facebook page or Twitter account is dwindling . There are no Facebook pages or Twitter accounts without special ops personnel .
 The Special Forces battalion that I was previously assigned to has its own Facebook page . It is open to the public, despite containing pictures of members of the unit and their families .
 Websites like SOFREP.com and Facebook’s Operator As F*** have emerged . They talk about their exploits and complain about current government and military leaders .
 George Marshall's objection to having the State Department run covert operations was his belief that any ability to conduct diplomacy would be compromised by his organization's meddling in other governments’ affairs .
 He feared that the U.S. would be seen as promoting a certain set of values abroad . He also feared that executing operations that directly conflicted with those same values .
 George Kennan was initially a proponent of unconventional warfare . Kennan ultimately dismissed it as being in direct violation of American principles .
 George Ball expressed his concern that if the U.S. participated in unconventional warfare, it would be no different than the Soviet Union .
 Ball explicitly lists “noninterference in the affairs of other nations, respect for their sovereignty and selfdetermination’ as some of the important American principles that would be compromised by conducting unconventional warfare .
 The counterargument was presented to President Eisenhower in a report from Lieutenant General James Doolittle in 1954 .
 ‘standard’ used by Eisenhower and subsequent presidents when they assented to unconventional warfare . This “standard” is said to have been the justification used by the presidents .
 It is impossible to determine whether the formation of communist governments in Third World countries posed a true existential threat to the U.S. Since relatively few succumbed to communism, few have succumbed to communist governments .
 The Doolittle Standard today does not seem to work . However, trying to apply the Doolsittle Standard does not work .
 Russia remains an adversary of the United States, but appears to be more focused on gaining influence in Eastern Europe and parts of the Middle East . Radical Islamic terrorism has resulted in the tragic death of American citizens, but has never threatened the existence of the U.S.
 An argument can be made that today’s international stage simply does not justify the U.S. disregarding its own values .
 In fact, conducting unconventional warfare in the gray zone has been occurring since the start of the Cold War .
 The Cold War itself can be described as almost exclusively a gray zone competition between the United States and the Soviet Union . The U.S. and Soviet Union are both countries’ weapon of choice .
 The use of UW was meant to avoid conflict spilling out of the gray zone and into a full-blown conventional or nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviets .
The consequences of conducting UW in the gray zone are unpredictable . The consequences of the action are unpredictable, according to the team .
 Will Irwin notes that “proactive political and unconventional warfare can be enormously effective in furthering U.S. interests. As an example, Will Irwin says, the UW has failed to achieve its goals . Irwin: "Proactive political, unconventional warfare could be enormously successful"
 The Jedburghs were successful despite conducting operations that were both limited and reactive . They were also successful despite operating both limited or reactive .
 timing plays such a decisively important role in UW, says the professor . "The ability to recognize and act upon indicators of UW windows of opportunity is imperative," he says .
 This calls for an estimative intelligence capability focused specifically on structured and continual analysis of the prospects for or existence of internal dissent in the face of authoritarian rule .
 We must become much better at recognizing the conditions for domestic unrest . We must also recognize the emerging shape and scope of that opposition, the character and agenda of its leadership, the substance of its narrative .
 An early and growing in-depth understanding of such a movement can help determine if a benefactor-proxy relationship would serve U.S. interests .
 Religious sects and factions, diaspora populations, kinship networks, human rights groups, the urban poor and other underprivileged and neglected population groups, political constituencies, the media, economic and trade elites, corruption victim groups and political activists .
Simmering ethnic, clan, or geographical tensions and rivalries need to be fully appreciated . Simmering Ethnic, clan and geographical tensions should be appreciated .
 To accomplish this, a never-ending process of analysis must be used to continuously update the United States’ understanding of vulnerable populations .
 Such ethnographic sensing would also allow ‘discrete contact with an inchoate movement’ in order to begin shaping the movement into the United States’ desired resistance . The United States.
 By the time one reaches the moment of decision for initiating an unconventional warfare campaign or operation, it is too late to successfully conduct preparatory actions to understand a target population .
 The feasibility of the U.S. conducting this preparation continuously around the world is doubtful . However, the feasibility of this preparation is doubtful, according to the US .
 A third party must cultivate at least some level of trust, to include person-based trust . In order to assist a movement or social network in another country, a third party needs to cultivate some trust .
 To build person-based trust, communication and similarity are two important factors . To build trust, trust and communication are two key factors .
 If you speak the language and look like the person you are dealing with, you have a better chance of quickly building trust with that person .
 E Lawrence successfully influencing local populations despite their status as foreigners . tasking U.S. SOF to actively and continuously map human networks, cultivate social movements, and build resistance groups .
 The United States has built a special operations community that is overwhelmingly white and male . The difficulty in accomplishing this mission is further exacerbated by the fact that the U.S. has built an operation community that's overwhelmingly white .
 Within Special Forces, roughly 85% of the officers and enlisted men are white . The unit would be expected to conduct this preparation .
 SF personnel at a severe disadvantage if they were to attempt to map human networks or cultivate movements in vulnerable populations in regions like the Middle East . This putsSF personnel at the severe disadvantage.
 When competing for trust and influence among Arabs, it is reasonable to conclude that white, Christian American personnel would not gain as much traction as Americans of Arab, North African, or Muslim descent .
 White Christian who grew up in Dallas suburbs grew up as a white Christian . White Christian grew in Dallas, Dallas, and grew in the suburbs .
 The Eastern European Lodge Act Soldiers made up the bulk of 10 th Special Forces Group during the early days of the Cold War .
 The case against offensive unconventional warfare seems clear given its history . Justified, but STILL MESSY, is the case against unconventional warfare .
 The question of whether there is a role for defensive UW remains open . However, there is still a question about whether there's a role in defensive UW .
 Two such scenarios can be found in the recent actions of Syrian president Bashar al Assad and in those by Russian president Vladimir Putin .
 Assad’s response to protests in his country ignited a civil war, which is today approaching its sixth year .
 The resulting chaos allowed ISIS to expand out of Iraq and seize terrain in Syria . The result of the chaos allowed the group to take control of Syria .
 Putin’s seizure of Crimea in 2014 and subsequent sponsorship of the war in Donbass signaled to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization that Russia would not tolerate its eastward expansion . The move also augured the possibility of similar actions against NATO's Baltic State members .
 UW would be ideal for assisting an oppressed population against a dictator who proved increasingly willing to kill his own citizens in order to retain power .
 FID is applied only if the ousted governing body starts its own resistance campaign against the newly formed transitional government . FID, or COIN, is applied to the ousted government .
 At this point, it is critical to shift efforts from defeating the adversary regime to protecting the newly installed government and its security personnel from insurgency .
 The joint publication focuses on ‘former regime elements’ It fails to mention the possibility that external third parties may challenge the new government .
 The joint publication suggests that any relationship with resistance elements can simply be terminated, sent into dormancy, or given to other agencies within the United States government .
 The transition phase is the most difficult, and likely the most important, phase of a conflict . History has revealed the transition phase to be most difficult .
TPAJAX’s transition plan installed a leader who was viewed as an American puppet by his own people . For instance, TPAJax's transition plan installing a leader was seen as a American puppet .
 Operational planners failed to consider long-term effects of overthrowing a democratically elected government, leading to an eventual revolution against the Shah .
 Those behind PBSUCCESS failed to account for the consolidation of power and oppression of the Guatemalan people .
 The joint publication's claim that relationships with insurgents can simply be terminated or laid to rest . A very recent example reminds us of the dangers involved in abandoning a resistance after you have cultivated it .
 Bush publicly called for the Iraqi people to rise up in rebellion against Saddam Hussein . Bush called for Iraqis to rebel against Hussein .
 Kurdish and Shia forces heeded this call and attempted to oust the Baathist regime, only to have the United States pull its support .
 Hussein crushed both insurgencies, creating a Kurdish exodus that the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees at the time called the largest in its 40-year history . Hussein crushedboth insurgencies .
 "The day after the problem is not limited to unconventional warfare, but is applicable to any type of U.S. intervention. Admittedly, “the day after’s problem is the day after,” says the author . “The day
 The inability to predict what will take the place of a deposed government continues to plague policy makers and academic scholars . The Obama Administration's current response to the Syrian crisis has paralyzed the Obama Administration’s current response.
 In particular, I’ve yet to see any of the advocates of intervention lay out a plausible blueprint for a post-civil war political order in Syria .
 The U.S. remains committed to dismantling Bashar al-Assad’s regime, but we lack a serious notion of what will replace it . The United States remains committed.
 Getting rid of the bad guy and his henchman was the easy part, but we hadn’t the foggiest notion of what to put in their place .
 Some advocates attempt to sell UW by simply ignoring the requirement for transition altogether . Some advocates say transition challenges should be major source of concern for decision makers .
 The U.S. is allowing people to walk away from the United States . It's not clear if it was the intent of the U. S. to simply walk away, but this does not mean others .
 The U.S. Agency for International Development should be reconfigured in order to nation-build across the world in troubled countries, says Max Boot .
 Boot doubles down on this argument in a recent article in Commentary magazine . He says more positive results would have occurred in Iraq and Afghanistan had the United States kept troops there for an indefinite period of time .
 U.S. intervention won't work anymore: It would stoke distrust, invite uprisings, increase tensions with other major powers . Many Americans unwilling to get into the business of permanent occupation .
 U.S. interests are better served by cultivating legitimate leaders, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The United States wants to cultivate legitimate leaders .
 If the U.S. chooses to conduct UW, it seems likely that a serious investment and possible expansion of government would be necessary for the transition phase .
 No level of investment or infrastructure can guarantee predictable behavior from the proxy force . However, even if this was done, no level of investments can guarantee predictable behavior from proxy force.
 responsibility for governance is supposed to shift from local organizations to an established and functioning national government . Economic development is expected to expand from local markets to formal regional integration .
 During Robin Sage, the culminating exercise of the Special Forces Qualification Course, a popular scenario is presented to students as they train their guerrillas .
 The general script involves the guerrillas conducting, or attempting to conduct, a human rights violation . The scenario varies from class to class, but the general script is not the same .
 The guerrillas are eager to conduct a public execution . Often, a “captured pilot’s” is dragged into the “G-Base,” and the ‘G-base,’ is dragged in . Often a �
 My own team had parachuted into the exercise with pre-made “Laws of Land Warfare’s’ cards .
 We handed out these out to our guerrillas and then conducted a short class . We handed them out to the guerillas and conducted a class .
 There were minor objections and some accusations of hypocrisy . But in the end, our conveniently compliant guerrillas agreed to behave like professional soldiers .
 In late 2015, two Special Forces soldiers were disciplined for beating up a local security forces commander .
 Other commanders stole money, raped their way through villages, and conducted “honor killings’ of their own daughters . Other commanders steal money, rape their way into villages, they say .
 The issues were raised through the chain of command, but the Special Forces team was told to leave local grievances alone . They were told to allow the locals to resolve them .
 The Green Berets were informed that one of their militia commanders had kidnapped a young boy from a local village, chained him to a bed, and repeatedly raped him .
 The militia commander laughed at the Green Berets’ attempts to intervene and stop the behavior . After the commander laughed, the commander reacted physically .
 One of the Green Berets was relieved from command for striking the militia commander . Army attempted to forcibly retire the other for assisting the commander .
 Lieutenant Colonel John Paul Vann witnessed atrocities in Vietnam while advising those who belonged to an already-professional, uniformed military force .
 Soldiers were known to torture captured North Vietnamese guerillas by dislocating their shoulders, cutting them with Bowie knives, or forcing them to sit on the handle end of an entrenching tool .
 Incidents like these do not bode well for the eventual acceptance of the security force by the populace after the United States involvement ends .
 There is often no way to control the actions of indigenous forces, writes John Sutter .
 The current fight against ISIS in Syria and Iraq is already beginning to manifest related issues that come with working with indigenous forces . The fight against the ISIS in Iraq and Syria is already starting to manifest.
 The training and equipping of rebel forces by the Pentagon and the CIA ramped up in 2016 . It was reported that rebels backed by the CIA were actively fighting other groups that were backing the Pentagon .
 When identifying a resistance or guerrilla force to work with, the assessment seldom includes whether or not those forces will be capable of running a government as the conflict abates .
 The primary concern is to find groups willing to take up arms and fight against the occupying power or hostile government . The main concern, instead, is to finding groups who are willing to fight against occupying power .
 The Syrian Democratic Forces currently receive support from the U.S., but consist mainly of Kurds and a small minority of Arabs .
 The issue of preparation again comes into play. While its use is clearly justified, it is not the first time it has been used .
 The U.S. vetted its Syrian partner forces as individuals, not as units . With no prior knowledge of any of the resistance forces, the United States vetted its partner forces .
 There was no indigenous chain of command established, with a strategic leader on the side to vouch for the conduct of his forces .
 As a result, different groups with different objectives and agendas continue to compete, sometimes viciously .
 UW advocates might claim that this could be resolved via the continuous preparation discussed previously . UW advocates may claim that the issue is resolved via continuous preparation .
 Equipping a sponsored force can also create problems once the conflict ends . Equipping the force can create problems when the conflict is over .
 Over the past 15 years the United States provided nearly 1. mi llion firearms to Iraqi and Afghan forces .
 Hundreds of thousands of weapons are no longer accounted for by ISIS fighters . Many have been seen in the hands of ISIS fighters in pictures and video footage .
 Plans for unconventional warfare call for disarmament of guerilla fighters at the end of hostilities . It is difficult to ensure that weapons provided by a sponsor do not reemerge in the hands of enemies in future conflicts .
When objectives are not aligned between sponsor and its proxy force, priorities will not align either .
 The U.S. strives to create stable, independent countries that can stand on their own . The United States strives to make independent countries stand on its own .
 The successful hegemon has to create dependent allies to avoid relying on a temporary coincidence of interests . This is particularly the case in the absence of long-term shared enemies .
 The end of the Cold War might have made the task of the hegemon all the more complicated . The hegemonic has become more complicated.
 Once the conflicts in Iraq, Syria, or Afghanistan end, it is not clear what the U.S. and those it supports will continue to have in common .
 In early 2014, Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych was ousted from power . He was ousted in early 2014 .
 In the resulting chaos, it took Russia only months to annex the Crimean Peninsula and initiate a civil war in Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia achieved its objective of maintaining access to a warm-water port, while preventing Ukraine from aligning itself with NATO and the West . Russia used special operations forces, supplemented with conventional units, to maintain access to the port .
 As Crimea was annexed and Ukraine imploded, NATO and U.S. European Command grappled with what would come next .
 The initial prediction was that Russia would soon use similar techniques in the Baltic States Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania .
 NATO planners worried that by utilizing plain-clothed, covert SOF operatives, Russia could incite the same sort of chaos within NATO country .
 Putin would count on NATO not invoking Article V, and consequently, NATO would fail to properly defend one of its member states . According to the thinking at the time, by not undertaking conventional military action, Russia would not have to invoke Article V .
 NATO responded to the fear of Russian actions splintering the Alliance by increasing combined exercises across Europe . Instead, NATO responded with increased combined exercises.
 Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, edited by Colby Howard and Ruslan Pukhov .
 The Estonian Defense League holds weekend military exercises and competitions . It is designed to teach its citizens how to become guerrillas in the event of an invasion .
 Lithuanian authorities recently issued a manual to their citizens advising them on how to contribute to resistance movements against a Russian incursion .
 The prospect of a Russian invasion of the Baltics mirrors the threat faced by U.S. Special Forces soldiers in Europe early in Cold War .
 First members of 10 th Special Forces Group were meant to be stay-behind fighters in Europe to organize resistance movements after a Soviet invasion .
 The first response to a Russian invasion would be the invoking of Article V . There would be little debate about whether the presence of ‘Little Green Men’ meets the threshold for NATO members to agree that an attack had occurred .
 NATO’s actions over the last three years have clearly signaled to its members that Russian aggression against the Alliance will not be tolerated .
 This response would not be a unilateral effort organized solely by the U.S. This is not the first time the United States has responded to a request for help from other countries .
JFC-Brunssum is currently commanded by an Italian 4-star general officer . JFC- Brunssu is currently in charge of the Italian military force .
 The NRF would need to synchronize its unconventional warfare campaign with the NRF counter-attack to maximize both forces’ effectiveness .
 The U.S. would need to be coordinated and synchronized with NATO response plans, which requires more than just the United States working separately with individual countries .
 Effective lines of communication should be established within an occupied or attacked country, but among neighbors and resistance forces .
 Remote as the occupation of Estonia might seem, such a scenario offers a clear window into the kinds of circumstances under which unconventional warfare is most likely to work in the future .
 The United States did not act alone, but instead contributed to a multilateral effort . This is not dissimilar to the successful Jedburgh efforts of World War II, when the U.S. didn't act alone .
 The campaign would also be completely justified in the eyes of the international community . It would have a shared adversary and shared objectives .
 It would be defensive in nature. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it would be defensively in nature . It would also be defensive.
 The purpose would not be to overthrow a sitting regime, but instead to defend an ally from an outside aggressor . The purpose is not to overthrow the sitting regime.
 The Jedburghs succeeded in part thanks to their multinational teams, since at least one member was from the country in which they operated .
 This ensured some level of cultural connectivity to the population being assisted . This ensured at least some levels of cultural connection to the people being assisted.
 Marriages of convenience should be avoided at all costs since they will simply lead to more complex problem sets following the UW campaign .
 The United States coordinating potential resistance activities with Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia through a shared command would be a good example of this .
 This leader has to be able to coordinate with NATO, the United States, or a coalition . He has to have a high level of control of the resistance forces to prevent post-conflict issues .
 The never-ending nature of the debate over UW can be seen most recently in the response to a recent War on the Rocks article, written by Captain Andrea Filozof .
 Captain Filozof s article notes that proxy forces are unpredictable and often have longterm policy objectives that do not align with U.S. objectives .
 She also uses the term, “policy blowback,’ to describe situations in which long-term success is sacrificed for short-term solutions . She also says the term is used to refer to situations where success is lost .
 The doctrine holds that the U.S. can exert its influence through limited involvement to achieve its policy objectives . This doctrine is sidestepping the publicly unpalatable notion of large and prolonged military commitments .
 The perception that unconventional warfare requires only limited involvement is a dangerous illusion. Yet the perception that only limited participation is a danger illusion .
 The success of proxy forces often does not lead to the desired political outcome . Not only does training and equipping proxy forces still exact a heavy financial cost .
 The U.S. will at best waste vast amounts of defense spending, he says . At worst, the United States will find itself entangled in the same costly, long-term operations it has endured in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Colonel Dave Maxwell provided his comments and critique within hours of the article being published .
 According to Grdovic, the purpose of the working group was to clarify the definition of UW . The purpose was not to change it, not to clarify it .
 Captain Filozof: “It is not UW that is the problem. It is not the problem, it is the issue,’ says Maxwell .
 Special Forces' claim that they are the nation’s UW force is complicated by Special Forces’ claim. As this thesis has tried to make clear, the definition is problematic .
 The U.S. embassy team tries to work daily with its host nation government to further United States interests abroad . The real issue can be illustrated in the example of a United States embassy team .
 Commander of Special Operations Command Africa displayed unconventional warfare as a grayed-out capability . This was to prevent audiences from associating UW with SOF activities on the continent .
 The Alliance is built on the concept of collective defense . The Alliance does not want to entertain the notion of offensively interfering with other countries .
 SF has been defined in SF doctrine over the last 20 years . If no one outside of SF wishes to entertain the idea of engaging in UW as it is currently defined, then perhaps UW is the problem .
 It's time to reevaluate offensive UW and its utility in today's environment. Put more simply, if you are the only person in the room advocating for an offensive UW mission that no one else wants to undertake .
 The U.S. consistently used UW as part of its national strategy against communism to avoid conventional or nuclear war . As for the argument, consider the Cold War.
 During the 1950s, “Eisenhower was very cautious about committing military forces, understanding from experience from experience of unintended consequences,’s author says .
 A chess grandmaster strategizes not by only thinking about his next move, but by planning three or four moves in ahead . For instance, a chess grand master strategizes by thinking three or five moves in advance .
 The grandmaster tries to predict what his moves will provoke his opponent to do . Based on his experience and the rules of chess, the grandmaster attempts to predict his opponent's moves .
 The game has no rules at all, or no rules. But strategizing is not likely to work if the playing field is in disarray .
 Even the best planned, most well-intentioned UW campaigns will create some level of instability .
Knowing how to conduct UW is still valuable in the event that it is needed . Knowing how toconduct UW is important in the events that it's needed .
 offensive UW is one of the least likely missions SF will be asked to perform . However, it needs to be acknowledged that offensive UW will be acknowledged .
 It is likely that engaging in UW will do more harm than good, says John Sutter .
 SF is not the mission set that SF should prioritize, or claim as its core competency . Because of this, UW is not a mission set for SF, it is not to claim as a core Competency .
 The basic organization of a Special Forces ODA, or A-Team, has not been significantly altered since 1952 .
 The CIA’s own historical archives describe its Cold War efforts during the Cold War as having produced mixed results at best . The CIA's own historical records describe its efforts as having mixed results.
 Many examples exist of successful, long-duration, low visibility United States SOF-centric FID operations in Latin America, Asia, and Africa .
 From 1980 through 1991, U.S. support to El Salvador fighting an insurgency in that country included 55 personnel . The advisory force never exceeded 55 personnel.
 Similar success against lower level insurgencies took place in neighboring Honduras and Guatemala . Similar success happened in other countries .
 More recently, United States SOF has played a central role in effective long-term FID efforts conducted in support of Colombia and the Philippines .
 The mission went to Task Force PHOENIX, the commander of 2 nd Brigade, 10 th Mountain Division .
 Task Force PHOENIX II assumed this training mission, even the regular Army could not be bothered to participate .
 As an infantry lieutenant assigned to the 82 nd Airborne Division in 2006, I and my platoon were tasked with training an entire Kurdish battalion during our 15-month deployment .
 SOF sought to only train other SOF, while the conventional military would stand up and train the Afghan National Army and the Iraqi Army .
 Mine units were trained only for unilateral operations . This was the division of labor, despite the fact that conventional units were devoid of cultural knowledge or local language capability .
 To make matters worse, most conventional units were more focused on learning how to conduct counterinsurgency operations . The training of their partner force was a lower priority .
 The U.S. launched Operation INHERENT RESOLVE in Iraq in 2014 . It was the first time the United States has deployed troops to Iraq in the past two years .
 The first unit chosen to execute this mission was 3 ld Brigade, 82 nd Airborne Division, a conventional military unit .
 The Green Beret is a specially selected, and well trained, green Beret . The task should go to a specially trained, well trained Beret.
 The Green Beret is an NCO with cultural and language training, in addition to possessing knowledge about small unit tactics .
 The answer should already be known by every senior decision maker, whether civilian or military . That question deserves deeper study and discussion, but the answer should be known .
 Special Forces should promote itself as the premier combined force of choice for the U.S. military .
 Special Forces would not only increase its relevance amongst today’s Special Operations Forces, but it would also take important steps toward regaining its autonomy in operations around the world .
 Initially in Vietnam, Green Berets were dispatched as advisors, but were trusted to train and accompany their partner forces as they saw fit .
 These partners ranged from conventional Army of the Republic of Vietnam battalions to irregular Montagnard Civilian Irregular Defense units .
Today’s Special Forces should be given the same level of autonomy and trust to perform advisory missions in any conditions . Provided a host nation agrees, today's Special Forces must be given same level.
 The aim of this thesis is to question the wisdom of the United States conducting offensive unconventional warfare . The U.S. has been accused of using unconventional warfare.
 Iran continues to use proxy forces across the Middle East to further its interests . Iran is trying to coerce or disrupt governments that the United States is working to assist and stabilize .
 The U.S. does not have the same political, ethical, or diplomatic concerns as the United States does when it comes to conducting unconventional warfare .
Counter-unconventional warfare also warrants further discussion and study . Because of this, counter -uncon conventional warfare also warrant further discussion .
 simply understanding how to execute a tactic does not necessarily mean you are the best at countering its use . However, simply understanding a tactic doesn't mean you're the best.
 Army Special Forces should also evaluate whether their force structure and knowledge of UW makes them the optimal force for countering an adversary’s UW efforts .
 The answer can only be found in an additional hardnosed, unsentimental study .
 The CIA's Classified Account of its Operations in Guatemala, 1952-1954 . The CIA’s Classified account of its operations in Guatemala.
 In Mohammad Mosaddeq and the 1953 Coup in Iran, edited by Mark Gasiorowski and Malcom Byrne, 231. The 1953 Coup was the first in Iran .
 Advisory Missions and the Struggle for Hegemony in Afghanistan and Beyond. Advisory Missions.
 U.S. Army John F Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School, November 2009 .
 Robertson, Nic, Antonia Mortensen, Elizabeth Roberts, and Woj Treszczynski are among the seven members of the team .
 Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms, Joint Publication 1-02, is published in the Pentagon's Defense Dictionary .
 Testimony before the Subcommittee on National Security, Emerging Threats, and International Relations, Committee on Government Reform, House of Representatives .
 Donald P. Wright, Donald P., James R Bird, Steven E Clay, Peter W Connors, Scott C Farquhar, Lynne Chandler Garcia, and Dennis F. Van Wey are among the seven members of the team .
 The United States Army in Operation ENDURING FREEDOM . The U.S. Army was involved in Operation Enduring FREedOM .