 A Ukrainian pilot detained in Russia since 2014 has arrived home following a dramatic prisoner swap with Russia .
 Petro Poroshenko said plane carrying Nadiya Savchenko had landed in Kiev . Ukraine’s president said a plane carrying Savchenko was carrying him .
 She arrived from Russia in exchange for the release of two Russians held by Ukraine . She arrived in Ukraine from Russia.
 Savchenko’s return marks a triumphant moment for Ukraine, where she is viewed as a national hero . Savchenko is seen as a hero.
European Union decides whether to extend sanctions against Russia . It comes a few weeks before the European Union decides if to extend the sanctions . Putin's annexation of Crimea in 2014 and his covert invasion of eastern Ukraine.
 Putin, Poroshenko, Angela Merkel and Francois Hollande had a telephone conversation on Monday, Kommersant newspaper reports .
Russian media said that a special presidential plane sent by Putin had taken off from Kiev to Moscow . Russian media said the plane was sent to Moscow from Kiev .
 The plane arrived back at Moscow’s Vnukovo airport, where the two men were reunited with their wives . The plane returned to Moscow.
 The president was quoted as saying that he hoped the prisoner exchange would reduce tensions in the Donbas region .
 While in Russian jail, she was elected a member of the Ukrainian parliament . She was sentenced to a life in prison in Russia .
 She is widely seen in Ukraine as a symbol of resistance against Russia . She is also seen as an example of resistance.
 Dmitry Gudkov is the lone liberal opposition deputy in Russia's parliament . He argued that if Russia had exchanged Savchenko earlier, he might not have been murdered near Kiev in March .
 PARNAS party member Andrei Pivovarov wrote on Twitter that people shouldn't be hostages . The opposition party member is a member of the PARNAS Party .
 Ukrainian politicians were ecstatic with the reports Savchenko had been freed . Ukrainian politicians had been ecstatic with reports.
 MP Alyona Shkrum wrote on Twitter that Savchenko’s mother was complaining she hadn’t had time to cook a pot of borscht for her daughter's arrival .