 European leaders rebuffed calls from Ukraine for greater support against Russia . Kiev urged NATO to send ships into waters disputed with Moscow .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel asked Kiev to be "sensible" following the request from President Petro Poroshenko . European Union failed to agree to threaten new sanctions against Moscow .
 Russian forces seized three Ukrainian ships off the coast of Crimea on Sunday . Kiev has called on Western allies to back expressions of support with concrete action .
 Ex-Soviet neighbours locked in conflict over Russian-backed separatist regions . Incident was the most dangerous in years between the ex-Soviet neighbors .
 Poroshenko asked NATO members including Berlin to send naval vessels to the Sea of Azov to back his country . In an interview with Germany's Bild newspaper published Thursday, Poroshenko asks NATO members to send vessels .
 Merkel showed no signs of being ready to back military support. But she blamed Russia for tensions, while blaming it for tensions .
 Ukraine has urged Western governments to impose more sanctions on Russia over the incident . But there too has seen little support from the Ukraine government .
 The EU strongly condemned Russia's actions but could not agree on a tougher response . In a statement on Wednesday, the EU strongly condemns Russia's action .
 NATO spokeswoman Oana Lungescu said the issue would be raised at next week's regular meeting of alliance foreign ministers in Brussels . Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin is also expected to attend the meeting .
 Moscow and Kiev have traded angry accusations since Russian navy vessels fired on, boarded and captured the three Ukrainian ships . Moscow and Ukraine have traded accusations since the Russian navy fired on.
 Poroshenko on Wednesday signed an act imposing martial law for 30 days in regions bordering Russia, the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin insisted Moscow's actions were "lawful" because the Ukrainian ships crossed illegally into Russian territory .
 He said the incident was a provocation orchestrated by Poroshenko to shore up public support ahead of a tough re-election battle in a presidential vote set for March .
 The Kremlin on Thursday denied claims from Kiev that it was blocking access for Ukrainian ships to the Kerch Strait . The only crossing point between the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov .
 Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov: "As far as we know the Kerch Strait is operating normally" "On the contrary," he says .
 Ukrainian Infrastructure Minister Volodymyr Omelyan said on Wednesday that 18 Ukrainian vessels were awaiting permission to pass from the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov .
 Nine vessels were waiting in port on the Sea of Azov to pass in the other direction . Another nine vessels were awaiting in port to pass by .
 US President Donald Trump called off a planned meeting with Putin at the G20 in Argentina this week over Moscow's detention of Ukrainian sailors . The US President called off the meeting late on Thursday over the issue .
 The Ukrainian vessels -a tug and two gunboats - were trying to pass through the Kerch Strait from the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov . They were refused access and chased into international waters by Russian vessels .
 The sailors had been transferred to Moscow for holding in the city's notorious Lefortovo prison . Two of their lawyers said Thursday that the sailors were transferred to the capital .
 Seibert says a deployment of the German navy toward the Crimea coast is not being planned at the moment . He says the government is encouraging de-escalation .
 Ukraine's concerns that the construction of the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline bypassing Ukraine threatens Ukraine's position of a gas transit state . The pipeline also threatens the entire European energy security .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko called on the European Union to take real steps to stop the "creeping annexation" of the Sea of Azov by the Russian Federation .
 Russia has now deployed nearly 24 combat aircraft, including 16 Su-27s and 8 MIG-29s to Belbek Airfield, #Crimea .
An FIM-92 Stinger missile is fired from an Army Avenger vehicle . US Air Force/Samuel King Jr.
 The Pentagon has been focusing on preparations for a potential clash with a peer, or near-peer, adversary like Russia .
 The U.S. Army in Europe has made a number of changes to how it operates . The changes come amid heightened tensions with Russia .
 The most recent change was the return of an air-defence unit stationed on the continent permanently .
 The United States Army in Europe has made a number of changes in recent months . The Pentagon is preparing for a potential fight against an adversary with advanced military capabilities, like Russia or China .
 The Army activated the 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment in a ceremony at Shipton Barracks in Ansbach, near the city of Nuremberg in southern Germany .
 The battalion has a long history, serving in the War of 1812, the Civil War, World War II, and the Vietnam War . The battalion was formed in 1812 .
 The U.S. military withdrew from the Cold War in the 1990s . It was deactivated in the late 1990s.
Todd Daniels, commander of the 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment, uncovers the battalion colours during the activation and assumption of command ceremony at Shipton Kaserne.
 Its return brings new and important short-range-air-defence, or SHORAD, capabilities, according to Col. Col. John Sutter .
 David Shank is the head of 10th Army Air and Missile Defence Command . The new unit is part of the 10th Air and missile Defence Command, of which the new group is part .
 Air Defence Enterprise is a tremendous step forward for the Air Defense Enterprise, says Shank .
 The battalion will be composed of five battery-level units equipped with FIM-92 Stinger missiles, according to Stars and Stripes . The battalion is expected to be equipped with five battery level units .
Stinger missiles fired from the Avenger Air Defence System . US Air Force/Samuel King Jr.
 Air Defence Artillery units were for a long time embedded in Army divisions . The service started divesting itself of those units in the early 2000s . Military planners believed the Air Force could maintain air superiority .
 The Army started trying to address the shortfall in 2016 after finding a gap in its SHORAD capabilities . But in 2016, after finding the gap, the Army started attempting to address it .
 In January, the U.S. Army in Europe began training with Stinger missiles . The light antiaircraft weapon can be fired from shoulderand vehicle-mounted launchers .
 Lightweight, short-range antiaircraft missiles are mainly meant to defend against ground-attack aircraft, especially helicopters, that target infantry and armoured vehicles .
 Unmanned aerial vehicles – used by both sides in the conflict between Russia and Ukraine – are also a source concern .
A 35th Air Defence Artillery Brigade member loads a Stinger onto an Avenger Air Defence System . Rachael Jeffcoat is a member of the brigade .
 US Army Europe has been relying on Avengers defence systems and Stinger missiles . Operation Atlantic Resolve began in 2014 as a way to reassure allies in Europe of the United States commitment to their defence .
 The Avenger is a short-range-air-defence system that can be mounted on a Humvee and fires Stinger missiles . The 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment, will be the only one in Europe that fields the Avenger .
 Army Materiel Command is overhauling Avengers that had been sitting in a Pennsylvania field waiting to be scrapped . The Army has also been pulling Avenger systems that were mothballed .
 Marion Jo Nederhoed/US ArmyA United States Army Avenger team during qualification in South Korea, October 24, 2018 .
 The Army has also fast-tracked its Interim Short Range Air Defence program to provide airand missile-defence for Stryker and Armoured Brigade Combat Teams in Europe .
 The system includes Stinger and Hellfire missiles and an automatic 30 mm cannon, as well as the M230 chain gun and a 7.62 mm coaxial machine gun .
 Army aiming to have the first battery by the fourth quarter of 2020 . Final prototypes of that package are expected in the last quarter of 2019 .
 The activation of the 5th Battalion, 4th Air Defence Artillery Regiment is part of a broader troop increase the Army announced earlier this year . The increase in forces stationed in Europe will come from activating new units rather than relocating them from elsewhere .
 The new units will include a field-artillery brigade headquarters and two multiple-launch-rocket-system battalions and supporting units in Grafenwoehr Training Area and the garrison in Baumholder .
 The activations were scheduled to begin this year and should be finished by September 2020, the Army says . The Army says the activations are scheduled to start this year .
 Russia is building up its land forces and weapons along the border, Ukraine's president says . Germany's Chancellor Angela Merkel warns Russia not to block Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov .
 Tensions between Russia and Ukraine are still escalating a week after a naval clash in the Black Sea on November 25 . Russia fired on three Ukrainian naval ships then seized them and their 24 crew members .
 The majority of men and hardware assigned to Russia's Western Military District . The numbers have not been verified, but they would account for the vast majority .
 The Ukrainian ships sailed to the Kerch Strait, the only waterway leading into the Sea of Azov . The clash comes as the Ukrainian ships sail to the site of a new Russian bridge linking occupied Crimea with the Russian mainland .
 Russia accused the Ukrainian vessels of violating Russian territorial waters . Ukraine has denied the charge .
 Ukrainian officials say Russia has now imposed a de facto blockade on its two main ports in the Sea of Azov . Russia has allowed only ships destined for Russian ports through the strait . Ukraine says Russia is now imposing a De facto blockade.
 Merkel criticizes Russian move on sidelines of Group of 20 summit in Buenos Aires . Merkel spoke to reporters Saturday on the sidelines of the summit .
 A 2003 Russia-Ukraine agreement designates the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait as shared internal waters . A 2003 agreement designated the sea as sharedinternal waters .
 Moscow has asserted greater control over the passage of Crimea . But following Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea, Moscow is asserting greater control .
 Ukrainian President Poroshenko convinced the Ukrainian parliament to implement martial law in ten border regions . The ships were seized in response to the seizure of the ships .
 Many in Ukraine and abroad have criticized the martial law order, noting that playing up the Russian threat is politically beneficial to Poroshenko, who faces re-election in March .
 The martial law order includes a ban on entry to Ukraine of all Russian males aged 16 to 60 . The move is designed to prevent undercover Russian military units from infiltrating the country .
 Poroshenko says this tactic was used after Russia seized Crimea and began to support separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine . More than 10,000 people have been killed in the conflict since the start of the conflict .
 Two Ukrainian gunboats, together with a tug, attempted to cross from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait into the Sea of Azov . Ukraine controls two major port cities --Mariupol and Berdyansk .
 Moscow accused Kyiv of ignoring protocol in applying for passage . Nevertheless, Moscow accused the Russian government of ignoring protocols .
 The small shallow-water Gurza-M-class gunboats have a crew of only five and are limited to just five days of autonomous voyage . The Ukrainian convoy turned back to Odessa after a multi-hour standoff just outside the Kerch Strait .
 Russian forces did not allow them to withdraw peacefully and attacked, purposefully ramming the tugboat and using live munitions after a demand to stop engines was ignored .
 The Berdyansk gunboat was hit multiple times by heavy machinegun fire and apparently by armor-piercing rockets fired from a Ka-52 helicopter gunship and an Su-30 jet . The Berdansk gun boat was hit several times.
 The three Ukrainian ships surrendered and were boarded by Russian commandos . The ships were taken off Ukraine's coast .
 Gurza-Ms are river gunboats with some coastal sea operational capabilities . They are also river gun boats with some coast-based capabilities .
Two gun turrets originally designed for a Ukrainian-made BM-3 armored vehicle . They have two gun turrets.
 These vessels are equipped with a 30-millimeter automatic gun, a grenade launcher and laser-guided Ukrainian-made Baryer-VK anti-tank missiles .
 Ukraine began building these gunships as a cheap alternative after 2014, when it lost almost its entire fleet during the annexation of Crimea . The gunships were built as a cheaper alternative to Ukraine's military equipment .
 The passage of two more gunboats may have annoyed the Russians . But on their own, those two small craft could not have flipped the balance of military power in the Sea of Azov .
 Russian military went berserk, fired to kill, and captured ships that did not seem to pose any immediate threat . Still, the Russian military did not appear to pose a threat to ships .
 The Russian defense ministry’s threat assessment apparently implies that a future Ukrainian naval base in the Sea of Azov could eventually become a deployment point for Western ships and forces .
Ukrainian vessels could still play a vital role in guarding this base against Russian commando infiltration . Ukrainian vessels could play a key role in protecting the base .
 Russian submarines and warships of the Black Sea Fleet cannot operate there effectively . The United States and its allies have some modern well-armed warships capable of operating in the coastal littoral .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko has called on NATO to deploy forces to the Azov Sea to counter Russian aggression .
 The fact that no NATO member is presently planning to send any ships to the Azov Sea will hardly calm the Russian nightmare assessment of the West's naval superiority there .
 Russia has been constantly using the Sea of Azov and the Kerch Strait to move corvettes armed with long-range Kalibr cruise missiles from the Caspian Sea through the Volga-Don channel . Russia has also been using the Black Sea, the Bosporus,
 These corvettes have been shooting Kalibr missiles at Syria from the Caspian and from the Mediterranean . They have also been shooting missiles at the Syrian regime .
 Russian corvettes may use the rear position in the Caspian to attack any other targets in the larger Middle East . A deployment in the Black Sea or Mediterranean is essential, says the Russian military .
 A NATO-backed Ukrainian naval base in Berdyansk or Mariupol could seriously impede Russian naval operational plans, Moscow seems to believe .
 The fear of a Western-led conspiracy against vital Russian interests in the Black and Azov seas may explain the extreme Russian reaction .
 This cancelation will be seen in Moscow as a nasty snub, but also possibly as additional conformation of a Western-led conspiracy surrounding the Azov Sea . The cancelation is seen as a snub.
After a naval skirmish, Poroshenko declared 30 days of martial law in regions bordering Russia .
 Moscow may solve the alleged Sea of Azov vulnerability problem while, at the same time, possibly securing a land corridor from Russia to Crimea .
 The Russian military has announced a “division of S-400 missiles has been urgently deployed at Dzhankoy, in northern Crimea . The main rail and highway connecting Crimea with Moscow traverse the salty Sivash marshes that form the Western tip of the Sea of Azov .
 #Russia could stop #Ukraine from being able to call in it's Airforce or naval forces to stop any attack on #Mariupol or #Berdyanks . This map is a map of the country's cities and cities .
 This gives the Russians a major strategic advantage if they launch any attack in Eastern Ukraine . This gives them a big strategic advantage in the region .
 Russia is building up its land forces and weapons along the border, Ukraine's president says . German Chancellor Angela Merkel warned Russia not to block Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov .
 Ukraine's president has called-up army reservists to strengthen its defences over fears of a Russian invasion .
 Petro Poroshenko declared martial law at the end of November . reservists will be summoned for training as part of the martial law he declared .
 Some military units will be redeployed to strengthen the nation's defences in a ratcheting up of tensions between the neighbouring countries .
Martial law declared in parts of Ukraine on 26 November . Russian coastguard fired at and seized three Ukrainian naval vessels and 24 crew members off the Crimean Peninsula . He also called on Germany and its allies to boost their naval presence in the Black Sea .
 The Kremlin said Mr Poroshenko's latest announcement is an "absurd" attempt to inflame tensions .
 All Russian males aged 16 to 60 have been barred from entering Ukraine . Mr Poroshenko said the move was needed to prevent Russia further destabilising his country .
 Russian military says its forces in Crimea are conducting drills involving Bal and Bastion long-range anti-ship missile systems . The sailors taken from the Ukrainian ships in November by Russia have been placed in custody for two months .
 Ukraine and Russia have blamed each other for the naval incident which ramped-up sour relations created in 2014 . Russia annexed Crimea and backed separatist rebels in eastern Ukraine .
 Kiev says its ships were in international waters while Russia claims the boats were violating its borders . Kiev says it was not violating its border with Russia .
 Mr Poroshenko has said he tried to arrange a phone call with Mr Putin to discuss the standoff . But he was refused the call .
 The UK does not currently have a presence in the Black Sea . Defence Secretary Gavin Williamson said Ukraine was a "steadfast partner"
 NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg holds a news conference after a meeting with the ambassadors at the Alliance headquarters in Brussels, Belgium, Nov. 2018 .
 Russia's recent attack on Ukrainian naval vessels will likely top the agenda at a NATO meeting this week . NATO searches for a robust response in the wake of the Kremlin's latest act of aggression on Europe’s borders .
 U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo is scheduled to join other foreign ministers for two-day meeting in Brussels . American demands for more military spending from NATO allies will also be discussed .
 President Petro Poroshenko: "This is an enormous threat and together, together, with our allies, we are searching for an appropriate response to it"
 The Ukrainian leader wants NATO to send warships to the Azov Sea . The Azov sea is supposed to be shared between Moscow and Kyiv under a 2003 agreement .
 Ukraine says Russian warships have blockaded the Kerch Strait off Crimea . The territory it forcibly annexed in 2014 was annexed by Ukraine in 2014 .
 NATO is under pressure to offer a robust response at Tuesday’s foreign ministers’ summit . NATO has been criticized for its lack of response to the crisis .
 We call on Russia to ensure unhindered access to Ukrainian ports and allow freedom of navigation for Ukraine in the sea.
 U.S. President Donald Trump cancelled a planned meeting with his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin at the G20 summit . The incident took place in the Azov Sea in the Russian Sea .
 NATO foreign ministers will discuss Ukraine and Georgia’s ambitions to join the alliance . NATO foreign minister will also discuss military spending and Ukraine's ambitions .
 Foreign ministers are also due to discuss Operation Resolute Support in Afghanistan . About 16,000 personnel from 39 NATO member states and partner countries are involved in training and assisting Afghan forces .
 U.S. Navy regularly sails into the Black Sea to conduct exercises with NATO members Romania, Bulgaria and Georgia and Ukraine .
 President Vučić and Mr Haradinaj brief them on the outcome of Wednesday's meeting of NATO Foreign Ministers on the Western Balkans .
 I underlined that both Belgrade and Pristina should show calm and restraint, and avoid any provocative statements or actions .
 I spoke with President Vučić on the need to de-escalate current tensions . I also spoke with the President about the need for a calm atmosphere .
 The EU-mediated dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina remains the only way to bring durable peace and stability to the region. I reminded both that the EU- mediated dialogue between the two countries is only way of bringing durable peace.
 NATO remains committed to the security and stability of Kosovo through our UN-mandated KFOR peacekeeping mission .
 Ukrainian soldiers move to position in APC during military drills in Honcharivske, Chernihiv region, Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian parliament voted to withdraw from a wide-ranging treaty on friendship with Russia . The move is the latest step in escalating tensions between the two neighbors .
 The Supreme Rada overwhelmingly supported a motion by President Petro Poroshenko not to prolong the treaty . The treaty comes up for renewal in April .
 The camouflage-clad president on Thursday visited an air base to announce an upcoming dispatch of troops to the Russian border .
 The Russian coast guard fired upon and seized three Ukrainian naval vessels and their crews . The long-simmering conflict between Russia and Ukraine started with Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014 .
 Ukraine's foreign minister reiterated his country's call for the release and safe return of the 24 Ukrainian sailors .
 Pavlo Klimkin warned that since the Crimean annexation Russia has not pulled back but has extended operations into the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov . The Crimean annexation has not been stopped by Russia .
 Ukraine's President Poroshenko introduced martial law for 30 days after Crimea's annexation . Ukraine hasn't done anything even after the annexation of Crimea .
 The Ukrainian parliament voted not to prolong the friendship treaty with Russia . The treaty is up for renewal next April . Ukraine's territorial waters will be doubled to 24 nautical miles .
 Ukrainian authorities say this will allow the coast guard and the navy to be more efficient in patrolling the area to prevent military threats .
 The bill allows Ukrainian border guards to open fire without warning on potential attackers . The bill also allows Ukrainian Border guards to shoot without warning .
 Large alert air defence exercise going on in Russian Western and Southern Military Districts .
 Reports of units moving and conducting simulated launches from many areas . Reports of unit moving and conduct simulated launches .
 Ukraine parliament gave authority for border guards to open fire without warning to protect sea areas . Ukraine parliament gives authority for marine border guards.
 The U.S. has begun making the necessary preparations to sail a warship into the Black Sea . It comes amid heightened tensions in the region following Russia's seizure of Ukrainian ships and detention of Ukrainian sailors .
 A State Department spokesman said the United States carries out its activities consistent with the terms of the Montreux Convention . The State Department said the U.S. carries out the activities "consistent with the term of the Convention"
 The U.S. Navy sailed the USS McCampbell near contested waters in the Sea of Japan Wednesday . The action is bound to irk Russia .
 The U.S. warship conducted what the Navy refers to as a "Freedom of Navigation Operation" to push back against Russian claims on the waters .
 Moscow lays claim to areas that far exceed the 12 miles from the Russian coastline that is guaranteed by international law . A spokesman told CNN Wednesday that Moscow lays claims to areas.
 Ukraine’s Ambassador to the U.N. Volodymyr Yelchenko revealed on Thursday that Russia has deployed nuclear weapon carriers in Crimea .
 Moscow has tightened its military grip over the Black Sea and Sea of Azov region, Yelchenko said . The area was annexed back in 2014 amid civil unrest against the Ukranian government .
 The Sea of Azov is where Russian troops illegally rammed and seized three Ukrainian ships in late November . The opening in the Black Sea that leads to the Kerch Strait is where the incident occurred .
 Russia may be preparing for the complete re-nuclearization of Crimea, says Yelchenko . The idea would raise alarm among international peacekeepers .
 Yelchenko’s claims follow a Fox News report this week showing the deployment of S-400 surface-to-air missile batteries at a Crimean airbase . The Russian military and Ukrainian navy ships attempted to enter the Sea of Azov .
 The incident has raised fears that Moscow may be intending to invade Ukraine . Russian President Vladimir Putin has played down such speculation .
 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo issued a 60-day ultimatum for Russia to correct its “material breach’ of the nuclear treaty signed during the Cold War . Putin warned this week of an arms race with the United States .
 Hungarian Foreign Minister Peter Szijjarto delivers a statement during the Geneva Conference on Afghanistan, at the European headquarters of the United Nations .
 There is no escalation on the battlefield yet. Normal exchange of fire is normal, but no escalation is expected .
 NATO will supply Ukraine’s military with secure communication equipment this month, its head Jens Stoltenberg told President Petro Poroshenko at a meeting on Thursday .
 Stoltenberg praised Ukraine’s ‘calm and restraint’ after Russia seized of three naval vessels and their crew off Crimea last month .
 NATO chief reiterated support for the former Soviet nations’ aspirations to join the alliance . Moscow vehemently opposes the plan which Moscow vehemently oppose .
 Russia is resisting international calls to release the ships and men seized in the Kerch Strait . It controls access to the Sea of Azov near Crimea region that Moscow annexed from Ukraine in 2014 .
 EU leaders will discuss Ukraine and Russia over a summit dinner later in the day . The summit will take place in Kiev, Russia and Ukraine .
 The bloc's leaders are expected to offer Ukraine help for regions affected by Russia's actions in the Azov Sea . But stop short of imposing further sanctions on Russia, something sought by more hawkish governments .
 Russia still holds Ukrainian ships and sailors seized near Crimea, U.S. national security adviser John Bolton says .
 Russia seized three Ukrainian navy vessels and their combined crew of 24 last month off the coast of Russian-annexed Crimea . Russia accused them of illegally entering Russian waters .
 European Union leaders will reaffirm support for Ukraine in its standoff with Russia . Ukraine has said Russia captured the two small gunboats and one tugboat illegally .
 The EU's 28 heads of state will offer Ukraine help for its regions suffering after Russia seized three of its naval vessels and their crew off Crimea last month .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation has once again threatened Ukrainian diplomats working in Russia . The Russian Federation says Kyiv is failing to ensure safety of Russian diplomats in Ukraine .
 Two Russian diplomats working in Ukraine have been added to the database, according to an UNIAN correspondent in Russia . Russia's Foreign Ministry says the move "threatens their security"
 She called on the Ukrainian authorities to strictly comply with the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961 . She called for the Ukraine authorities to comply with provisions of the Vienna convention on diplomatic and consular missions .