 Analyses of damage done to Muscovy by Macedonia’s accession to NATO – including comments by Pres Poroshenko .
 Salisbury update – it appears the third covert operator did not exfiltrate from the UK or did so covertly . Salisbury Update: It appears the fourth covert operator didn't exfiltate from UK or do so covert.
 Election update and controversy over Rada banning Russian nationals from election monitoring teams . Rada has been accused of using Russian nationals as election monitors .
 The ROC suffers a catastrophic loss in Kyiv with the defection of its “brains trust of 12 leading clerics to the OCU, authors of church doctrine, policy, and key public relations figures .
 In Russia persecution of the Witnesses escalates, while a coven of Witches casts spells on the Vozhd’s enemies . Russia is truly descending into its medieval past, producing a media frenzy .
 Future historians may label this period the Second Oprichnina, as many Russian observers suggest it is . Many Russian observers say it is the second period .
 Russia will have to develop new types of weapons in a limited time frame in response to the US withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, Russian Defense Minister Sergey Shoygu said on Tuesday .
 The defense industry has been given two years to create a ground-based variant of the Kalibr system with the long-range cruise missile that “proved itself in Syria’s war zone .
 Russian President has instructed the Defense Ministry to take response measures, Shoygu said .
 The Russian general says there is no need for additional funds to be allocated from the federal budget . The new projects will simply be allocated funding from the existing resources of the state arms program .
 The most recent version of the program was signed by President Putin at the start of 2018 . It allocates 22 trillion rubles to arms production and procurement for the Defense Ministry, Interior Ministry, Russian National Guard and other departments .
 Deputy Defense Minister Alexey Krivoruchko has been tasked with overseeing the budget for the new missiles .
 He is expected to “initiate the relevant development activity in a short time’s short time, Shogyu says . He is also expected to reallocate funds to carry out the mentioned operations .
 Before the treaty, the Soviet Union had missiles of this category aimed at NATO’s European member-states .
 U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo warned that if Russia fails to return to compliance with the treaty within six months, the United States will completely break off the treaty .
 Washington intends to invest $494 billion in a completely updated ‘nuclear triad’ over the next 10 years . The Congressional Budget Office says the plan will take 10 years to complete .
 The Pentagon will allocate $234 billion to maintaining and upgrading the nuclear weapons delivery systems . $15 billion will be used to finance tactical nuclear weapons, and $106 billion to develop new systems .
 The new arms will include reduced capacity W76-2 warheads and new cruise missiles for submarines . The arms will also be reduced to reduced capacity. The new weapons will include fewer warheads and cruise missiles .
 The United States also intends to add 12 new nuclear submarines to its fleet . The U.S. also plans to add more nuclear submarines .
 Russia successfully test-fired an enhanced version of RS-24 Yars intercontinental ballistic missile from the Plesetsk spaceport in the Arkhangelsk Region on 6 February .
 Moscow time on February 6, a mobile Yars solid-propellant intercontinental ballistic missile was test-fired from the Plesetsk state testing spaceport, the Defense Ministry said .
 The warheads arrived at the designated area at the Kura practice range on the Kamchatka Peninsula in the Russian Far East .
 The purpose of the launch was to check tactical, technical and flight characteristics of the advanced intercontinental ballistic missile system . The launch was intended to check the capabilities of the missile system.
 The RS-24 Yars is a Russian strategic missile system . It is a mobile or silo-based solid-propellant intercontinental ballistic missile with MIRVed warheads . The system has a range of warheads .
 The ICBM was developed by the Moscow Institute of Thermal Technology under the supervision of Academician of the Russian Academy of Sciences Yuri Solomonov .
 Russia has conducted a new test of the RS-24 Yars while tensions increased among Russia and USA . Donald Trump pulled the United States out of a nuclear arms control treaty in place since the Cold War .
 U.S. President Donald Trump announced the United States would leave the pact last week . It has long accused the Russians of violating the pact .
 Washington and Moscow pull out of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty . NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg commented on Washington and Russia pulling out of treaty .
 Another U.S.-Russian nuclear treaty could soon expire without renewal, a senior Russian diplomat has said . Washington's withdrawal from a Cold War-era arms-control pact could soon end .
 North Macedonia could be complete by year's end. Political analysts said the accession of the country now known as North Macedonia was a setback for Russia .
 Macedonia is on its way to join Nato next year – despite a Russian push-back in the Western Balkans and beyond . Macedonia is set to join NATO next year .
 The path of North Macedonia to NATO was very difficult, the head of state said . North Macedonia demonstrated unity, he said . The country demonstrated unity.
 The European Commission decided on the membership of North Macedonia in the European Union on February 6 . The head of state added that on the same day, February 6, the European Commission also decided.
 Permanent representatives of all 29 countries of the Alliance signed a protocol on the accession of the Republic of Northern Macedonia to NATO in the future .
 Northern Macedonia will take part in meetings of NATO and the North Atlantic Council as a guest country's envoys .
 Macedonian Foreign Minister Nikola Dimitrov announced on February 6 that the new name of the country would finally be approved as soon as the amendments to the Constitution came into force .
 The Mission of Ukraine to NATO Vadym Prystaiko said Ukraine could join the Alliance after Macedonia . On January 8, head of the Mission of Ukrainian to NATO said Ukraine would join the alliance after Macedonia.
 The Russian Federal Security Service proposed to transfer the fifth-generation mobile communications in Russia to domestic SIM cards, Russian cryptography and Russian cryptography .
 The initiatives were proposed by the FSB representatives at a meeting of the network infrastructure working group of the Digital Economy project .
 SIM cards must support these algorithms, explained one of the interlocutors of Vedomosti .
 The FSB military unit announced a closed tender for 3 million rubles in August 2018 . The proposal to develop requirements for the IT security of fifth-generation networks based on Russian crypto algorithms, SIM cards and equipment .
 The FSB has long believed that foreign cryptography and equipment pose risks to national security . Cisco security expert Alexey Lukatsky suggests switching to domestic cryptography .
 FSB proposed improvements are very expensive, says Huawei representative . FSB says it is necessary to assess the real need in order to decide whether to participate in this tender .
 The FSB has to be certified according to the requirements of the FSB for encryption tools . Lukatsky says it is easier and cheaper to protect only traffic between base stations with Russian cryptography .
 If traffic is encrypted between the end devices, he believes that base stations can not be certified . This option is unrealistic because operators will not be able to fulfill SORM requirements and they will have difficulties with foreign networks .
 It is unlikely that Russian cryptography will be supported by international SIM standards . It is not likely that Russia will be able to support international standards .
 Department of State Security and Military Intelligence of Lithuania has blocked investments of a Russian corporation into a Lithuanian company . The company is suspected of collecting cartographic data for the Russian army .
 Russian oligarch Vladimir Yevtushenkov's company Sistema was planning on acquiring a Lithuanian company through the investment firm of his son, specializing in cartography and aerial photography .
 Sistema holding company owns the Russian company Kronstadt . Kronstadt won the Russian government’s tender for equipping the center of electro-cartographic data in Russia .
 Russia consistently strengthens military facilities in the Kaliningrad region . The additional NATO forces deployed in the Baltic region reduce the likelihood of conflict, Interfax reported .
 New military units are being formed, new armaments and military equipment are being supplied . intensive military training is being conducted on land and sea landfills of the region, a document says .
 Belarus is given the role of a “buffer’s state in the Russian military doctrine . Belarus is bordering on Lithuania .
 The Russian Federation uses Belarus to plan military operations and demonstrate military power . The deepening military integration and economic dependence reduces the ability of Minsk to implement independent defense and security policies .
 The authors of the document emphasize that in the event of a military conflict, the increase in the national armed forces of the Baltic countries and the NATO facilities deployed in the region will allow avoiding the wide involvement of NATO and reducing the likelihood of a conflict.
 Belarus President Alexander Lukashenko ordered to strengthen border security . He demanded to take “exhaustive measures’ to increase border guard units and form new ones .
Political expert Tatyana Stanovaya says Vladimir Putin has left Russia’s elites to fend for themselves .
 Stanovaya argues that the current murder investigation against Senator Rauf Arashukov recalls the 2016 arrest of then Economic Development Minister Alexey Ulyukaev . The case has more sweeping political repercussions and weakens multiple political institutions, structures, and key influence groups .
 The plane belongs to an offshore company registered in Seychelles whose owners are unknown . Prigozhin’s family regularly appears in photos taken in the cabin of a similar-looking jet .
 The newspaper Novaya Gazeta tracked M-VITO’s flights for the past couple of years for a new special report .
 The military officer entered the UK under the name Sergey Fedotov . He came to Britain on the same day the other two hit men travelled to the UK to assassinate Skripal .
 The third Russian agent implicated in the Salisbury nerve agent attack aborted his planned exit from the UK . He remained in the country, raising the prospect he remained in Britain .
 He was using a passport whose number differed by only a few digits from the fake passports used under the names of Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov . The passport was used by the same name as the fake passport used by Petrov .
 Trump administration has yet to impose new sanctions required by the law . Nearly 3 months after deeming Russia in violation of a chemical weapons law, the Trump administration still hasn't imposed new sanctions .
 Det Sgt Nick Bailey was contaminated while investigating the Salisbury Novichok attack in March . He was contaminated during the investigation .
 Leaks expose UK's strategy to revive Cold War tensions and justify increasing intelligence budget . Former Pentagon adviser Karen Kwiatkowski tells Sputnik .
 The Verkhovna Rada has adopted the law introducing amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine . — Ukrinform. —Ukrinform — is Ukrin form .
 The Verkhovna Rada has backed amendments to the Constitution on Ukraine’s path to the European Union and NATO, UNIAN correspondent says .
 EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini has issued a declaration on the alignment of certain third countries with the European Council’s decision concerning restrictive measures in view of Russia's actions in Ukraine .
 U.S. National Security Advisor John Bolton has welcomed a meeting with Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin . The meeting reaffirmed the common positions of Washington and Kyiv .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker has said the United States is working to strengthen Ukraine’s resilience and deter further Russian aggression . Volker said the U. S. is working for Ukraine to strengthen its resilience .
 We are working together to strengthen Ukraine’s resilience and deter further Russian aggression . We are also working to strengthen the Ukraine's resilience.
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin met with top U.S. officials on February 7, 2019 . It's time for peace for Ukraine, Volker wrote on Twitter .
 Resolutions are adopted to be implemented, and the UN monitors their implementation . Resolutions will be implemented and UN monitors its implementation .
Ukrinform. This also applies to the “Crimean’s resolution, which demands the release of captured Ukrainian sailors . The resolution also demands the released of captured sailors .
 The European Court for Human Rights has cancelled the planned February 27 public hearing on Ukraine’s suit against Russia involving Crimea . The Kyiv-based Ukrainskaya Pravda ezine has said the court's press service has said . The court has said
 Moscow City Court rejected appeals against the court ruling to extend the arrest of the first four Ukrainian sailors captured by Russian military in the Kerch Strait . The coordinator of the team of lawyers, Nikolai Polozov, has reported on Facebook .
 Ukrainian-based Prosecutor’s Office for the Autonomous Republic of Crimea jointly with police have begun a pretrial investigation into the illegal pollution of the Black Sea with toxic waste in Russian-occupied Crimea .
 The pretrial investigation is conducted by prosecutors jointly with the Ukrainian police . Prosecutors jointly with Ukrainian police are conducting the investigation .
 The Embassy of Ukraine in France has called on the French news agency Agence France-Presse to fix the map where Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula is designated as Russian territory .
 Russian-led forces mounted 11 attacks on Ukrainian troops in Donbas, eastern Ukraine, in the past 24 hours .
 33 convicts transferred to Ukraine-controlled territory, so they could further serve their sentences .
 Ukraine's State Border Guard’s naval forces in cooperation with Naval Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and other units of the Joint Force Operation have conducted training exercises in the Sea of Azov .
 The aim of the exercises was to repel a mock enemy attack from the sea . The aim was to stop the mock enemy attacks from coming from the ocean .
An intruder vessel ignored the requests and legal requirements of Coast Guard ship and Naval Forces ships . The vessel carried out dangerous maneuvers at high speed, trying to approach the shore for a possible landing .
 In the northern part of the Sea of ​​Azov there was a complex of training marine, aviation and artillery components . It provides control over the water area in the area.
 The interaction of the naval group in the composition of the ships of the State Border Guard Service and the Naval Forces of Ukraine was worked out . This is reported by the Ukrainian Military Portal in the training complex .
Regular airplanes and helicopters of the Joint Forces, air defense and artillery. Their actions were covered with air by regular airplanes, helicopters and air defense .
 The training took place in difficult meteorological conditions and with limited visibility . The training was held in difficult weather conditions .
 Seven thermal imaging sights and eight night-vision devices were stolen from the Ukrainian Army’s warehouse located Lviv region .
 Optics were donated to Ukraine by the U.S. government as part of an international technical assistance program, SBI says .
 The abduction of military property occurred due to the warehouse manager's negligent attitude to the accounting and security of the entrusted property .
 Washington has provided Ukraine with more than $1 billion in “security assistance’s funds since February 2014 . Ukraine has been given $1billion in ‘security assistance' funds.
 U.S. aid accounts for about 90 percent of Ukraine’s Armed Forces, according to the United States .
 Ukrainian soldiers repelling Russian proxy forces in Donbas have spoken with EUobserver . The conflict in eastern Ukraine has been ongoing for four and a half years.
 The grey zone between the warring sides is also a grey zone in terms of information . The grey zones between the two sides are also agrey zone.
 The modernized rocket launchers system was developed by Shepetovsky repair factory in cooperation with other enterprises of the national defense industrial complex . The system was built by the company in cooperation.
 As a base, the KrAZ-5401Ne cross – country chassis with a carrying capacity of 9 tons was developed by PJSC AvtoKrAZ in 2016 .
 The Government of the Republic of Lithuania has passed a resolution to donate munitions worth EUR 255,000 to the Ministry of Defense of Ukraine .
 The Baltic State has been supporting Ukraine since the beginning of the Russian aggression in 2014 . The Baltic state has been supported by the Baltic State since 2014 .
 Lithuania previously provided material support to the Ukrainian Army and elements of military weapons, in particular rocket munitions . Lithuania previously had material support for the Ukrainian army .
 Ukraine's operating banks received a net profit of UAH 21. billion in 2018, which is the maximum historical indicator . Ukraine’s operating banks got a net profits of U AH 21.billion in 2018 .
 First Deputy Head of the National Police of Ukraine, Vyacheslav Abroskin, has said a suspect in organizing the murder of a Ukrainian activist Vitaly Oleshko was detained in Lviv on February 7 .
 The man has been hiding from law enforcement across Ukraine for the past five months . The man is believed to have been hiding in Ukraine for five months.
Eight Ukrainian citizens among the sailors of the SEA SCAN 1 vessel seized off the coast of Portugal . The vessel was carrying 2. tonnes of cocaine .
 The Verkhovna Rada in the framework of de-communization directed to the Constitutional Court a bill on the changing the name of the Dnipropetrovsk region to Sichaslavsk region .
 In the fall of 2018 the parliament did not have enough votes to send this bill to the Constitutional Court . The bill was not sent to the court by the parliament in 2018 .
 The Constitution of Ukraine and the Rules of Procedure of the Verkhovna Rada determine the procedure for amending the Basic Law of Ukraine .
 The document is considered by the Verkhovna Rada Committees and recommends to the parliamentarians whether to consider legislative initiatives or not . Then the committee considers the document to be considered .
 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine prohibited observers from the Russian Federation to participate in the election process in Ukraine . The Russian Federation banned observers from participating in Ukraine's election process .
 The law provides the amendments to the law on the elections of the president, lawmakers and local elections . The law also provides the changes to the laws on the president and lawmakers .
 The department sees no legal obstacles for the adoption of this law. So, the department seesno legal obstacles.
 The Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine’s parliament, has introduced amendments to the electoral legislation . The amendments ban citizens of the aggressor state from being official observers in Ukraine's elections .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker called on Ukrainian authorities to allow Russian observers to monitor the presidential election in March 2019 . Ukrinform.
 The mutual absence of citizens of the conflicting countries in OSCE has never prevented the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights from monitoring an electoral process . The mission must be successful in Ukraine as well.
 Ukraine’s Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Kateryna Zelenko said this in response to a request to comment on the statement by United States Special Representative for Ukraine Kurt Volker on the possibility of admission of Russian observers to the Ukrainian presidential election .
 The mutual absence of citizens of the conflicting countries in the OSCE has never prevented ODIHR from successfully conducting the election observation process, says Zelenko .
Official observers from Ukraine did not go to the presidential election of Russia in 2018 . She recalled that official observers from Russia did not attend the election .
 U.S. Special Representative for Ukraine Negotiations Kurt Volker called on Ukrainian authorities to allow Russian observers to monitor the presidential election in March 2019 . Volker calls on Ukraine authorities to let Russian observers monitor the election .
 Talks on members of the foreign observation mission are currently under way between the OSCE/ODIHR and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine .
 Polls suggest comedian Volodymyr Zelenskiy is a frontrunner in Ukraine’s presidential election .
 The fact-checking VoxCheck project “Liars and Manipulators Rating’s” project has analyzed statements of Ukrainian politicians .
Politicians often repeat what they say in the central media, says VoxUkraine media director .
 The sample included 1,962 claims on reforms and financing of the army, the state of the economy and the fight against corruption, medicine and education .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko on his Twitter account on Thursday afternoon launched an opinion poll regarding the accession of the Ukrainian state to the North Atlantic Alliance .
 Viktor Medvedchuk told how Ukraine could reach an agreement with Donetsk in 2014 . He said the opposition Platform – For Life could reach a deal in 2014.
 Not with Shufrich, but Ukraine with these prodigal sons, proDigal people . Not with shufrich.
 Turchynov: We're ready to go, to catch up this list of questions and start a dialogue . I told Turchyov we were ready to start a Dialogue . We were prepared to go.
 I called them and stated that our leader had a proposal to release the hostages . I called the hostages and said they had been held hostage for more than a decade .
 Trilateral Contact Group appeared in June after a new President was elected, Medvedchuk says . Then, it was resumed in June, in a month after the new president was elected .
 Former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych appeared at a press conference on 6 February in the Moscow offices of the state-controlled 'Russia Today' agency . This was not the former Ukrainian President’s first press conference since he fled to Russia after the bloodshed on Maidan .
 It was not the first such event since he fled to Russia after the bloodshed on Maidan . His message seemed closely coordinated with that coming out of the Kremlin .
 This time the performance appeared aimed at trying to influence the Ukrainian presidential elections at the end of March . The performance appeared to be aimed at attempting to influence Ukrainian elections .
 The press conference came two weeks after Yanukovych was convicted of state treason . Yanukovych was sentenced to 13 years’ imprisonment .
 Yanukovych's attempts to present himself as the victim of political persecution were less than convincing . There are several reasons for concern about that court trial due to flaws in the law enabling trial by absentia .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin would probably feel confident that he would not be asked what you should call on him to send troops into Ukraine if not treason . He could probably feel comfortable that he wouldn't be asked if he was treason .
 Russian state television. The account of the events five years ago was heavily edited and only likely to convince Russians .
 His claim that the political pressure allegedly brought to bear on the court in Kyiv was “unprecedented’s’. His claim was a particularly memorable moment from an ex-President in hiding who had imprisoned his main rival .
 Yanukovych says Interpol has not issued a Red Notice on him and that he can, allegedly, travel where he wants . Yanukovych's assertion that Interpol hasn't issued him was the only unexpected moment in the event .
 Interpol has placed at least one young Ukrainian – the friend of abducted student Pavlo Hryb – on its list . It has refused in the case of Yanukovych, citing fears that his prosecution could be political .
 Neither he nor Putin's press secretary were willing to explain what his status is in Russia . Neither he, nor Putin’s press secretary, were willing.
 Russia is known to have given several Berkut special force officers wanted for crimes against Maidan Russian citizenship . Some of the high-ranking people close to Yanukovych, like Vitaly Zakharchenko, the former Interior Minister .
 Yanukovych had not given one of these ‘press conferences’ for a year, and it had been hyped up in advance .
 Most of it repeated the themes that Yanukovych – and the Kremlin – have repeated before about Maidan .
 Crimea's "loss" attributed to the Ukrainian authorities having divided the country . There was nothing new about Crimea either, with nothing new to the region .
 Yanukovych came out with some pronouncements that bore absolutely no scrutiny . Looking heavily made up, Yanukovych made some statements that bore no scrutiny.
Lawyer says his lawyers have passed documents to the investigative bodies to start an investigation . He says he was really to blame for the loss of Ukraine .
 Kremlin says it was Maidan activists who gunned down activists . In short, almost exactly the refrain from the Kremlin, says the Kremlin .
 Yanukovych repeats Putin's line about state's 'interference' in religious matters . Ukrainian Orthodox Church cane was created after Yanukovych's previous press conference .
 The key difference to previous press conferences was the constant reference to the coming presidential elections . Previous press conferences were the same.
 President Petro Poroshenko, Yanukovych claimed, cannot possibly win through fair elections . If he does win, this will mean that the elections were rigged .
 UNIAN's Moscow correspondent Roman Tsymbalyuk reports that even here Yanukovych was simply parroting the prevailing Russian narrative .
 Yanukovych asserted that Ukraine should allow polling stations in occupied Crimea and Russia . He claimed that it was fear of votes against those now in power that made them refuse to do so .
 The Ukrainian Central Election Commission could prevent mass election fraud . There are arguments on both sides, at least with respect to Crimea, the recent Russian ‘elections’ illegally held there .
 The parliamentary elections in Ukraine should be the subject of very close scrutiny over the next months . What active measures it may take to support another presidential candidate and to generally influence the outcome, first of the presidential election, then the parliamentary elections .
 Putin effectively spelled out one extremely negative method soon after Russia’s attack on three Ukrainian naval boats near Crimea and the seizure of 24 Ukrainian POWs on 25 November 2018 .
 There has been no movement for so long on exchanges of POWs and civilian hostages in occupied Donbas, or of political prisoners held in occupied Crimea and Russia .
 Political consultant Viktor Ukolov said the Kremlin is preparing a pretext for intervention against Ukraine with the help of Ukraine's fugitive ex-officials .
Disgraced president said agreement had been signed together with leaders of the then opposition . Russian representative Vladimir Lukin did not sign the document .
 Yanukovych also said he had just returned to Russia after he received treatment for his injury abroad . Yanukovych said he just returned after receiving treatment in Russia .
 Ukraine's Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko has said Viktor Yanukovych would be better off if he availed himself of his right to defend himself . Yanukovych came to Kyiv and argued his position in the court of appeals .
 Twelve Kyiv priests of the former Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate have joined the newly created Orthodox Church. The Church of Ukraine was the former Russian Orthodox Church .
 The intellectual elite were involved in the formation of church policy and education . They also played a significant role in Ukraine in creating a positive public opinion .
 The Orthodox Church of Ukraine received autocephaly from the Constantinople Church in January 2019 . The UOC's Kyivan Metropolitanate of the UOC posted a list of clerics who went “into a split,” that is, that is.
 The intellectual elite was involved in the formation of church politics and education . The UOC-MP, reports Religion in Ukraine.
 The Metropolitanate of the UOC has forbidden not only to serve, but even to partake in communion .
 Metropolitan Volodymyr’s previous course of openness to society and dialogue was curtailed in 2014 . Metropolitan Onuphri is now in power with the coming to power of Metropolitan onuphri .
 The Orthodox Church of Ukraine will continue their ministry in the Orthodox Church. Now they will continue to serve in the church of Ukraine .
 Primate of the newly created Orthodox Church of Ukraine says he sets three key tasks for himself . Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine Epifaniy says he set three key goals.
 Ukraine’s lavras may become subordinate to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine in the coming years, Epifaniy says .
Without spiritual education, in general, and without the development of education, we won't be able to do this, he told the Novoye Vremya weekly .
 I believe the Lord will create such conditions where lavras will become part of the local church of Ukraine . I believe that the Lord is creating such conditions.
 I think this will happen in the coming years, perhaps even within a year . I think that this will be happening in the next few years, maybe even within the year .
Lavra monks to independently come to realize that there is no other way than the unification to create our modern history together, he said .
 They have no will for dialogue, that’s because they have no arguments, that's because they are no arguments . That is, that is, they are not interested in dialogue .
 I am ready to communicate with them and find time for dialogue about the unity of all Orthodox Christians in the united church . But I'm ready to talk with them. But I am also ready to speak with them, says the author .
 Turkey closed the historic Halki seminary in 1971 . Orthodox Christians hope Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s visit signals that Turkey might let it reopen .
 Russian witches and seers performed on Tuesday one of their most powerful rituals, “the circle of power,” to pass on their mystical energy to President Vladimir Putin .
 Dozens of people who claim to have supernatural powers stood side by side, reading spells in their effort to support the Russian head of state .
 Self-proclaimed leader Alyona Polyn said the main intention of the gathering is to enhance quality of life in Russia, the whole world in general .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin is getting some paranormal support from a coven of Moscow witches looking to cash in.
 Dozens of witches and seers gathered in the Russian capital Moscow on Tuesday . They chanted spells and incantations to protect Putin .
 Russian witches and seers performed one of their most powerful rituals, "the circle of power" to pass on their mystical energy to President Vladimir Putin .
 We must treat all religions equally, that's a fact, says the Jehovah's Witnesses .
 We also need to consider the country and the society in which we live, says the author . But we need to also consider the way we live.
 We should count the representatives of religious communities among the various destructive or even terrorist organizations, he says . That doesn't mean that we should be counting the representatives.
 Jehovah’s Witnesses are also Christians, and I don’t really understand why they’re persecuted, says author .
 Police in two Russian regions have detained more members of the Jehovah's Witnesses . A Danish adherent of the religious group was sentenced to six years in prison in Russia .
 The Second Oprichnik was the first involved Ivan the Terrible persecuting noblemen not loyal to him . He used members of the middle and lower classes as loyal apparatchiks .
 The name oprichnik refers to land Ivan “separated from the rest of the administrative state, to have direct and autocratic rule over . The name Oprichnik means "separated" from rest of Russian state .
 The separate property “oprichnik’s” was seized from the former owners, and put under autocratic control of Ivan . This means that the separate property was seized. This is the first time the property has been taken over .
 I wonder if Sorokin is an openly political figure, if he saw what was coming with the turn of the screws from Putin to total autocracy .