 Russia isn't going to stop in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, but it's not going to do so . Russia is still in Crimea, Ukraine .
 If you have no personal knowledge of these facts, you can take it from President Barack Obama .
 He admonished the world to “stay vigilant and stay focused on the importance of upholding the principles of territorial integrity” regarding Ukraine .
 The president failed to disclose how he knows that Putin has territorial conquest on the agenda .
 The rhetoric of Obama about Ukraine reminds me of the 2008 war between Russia and Georgia . The rhetoric is a commonly-accepted version of a 2008 war.
 President Mikheil Saakashvili was out in front bemoaning the tragedy that was inflicted upon his country . SaakASHvili is a former president of the country .
 The Ukrainian crisis is similar to what happened in Georgia, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Georgia was another case where reliable facts were hard to find . Despite the assertive headlines, Georgia was one of the few places to find reliable facts .
 There were a lot of confident allegations, but few hard facts on the Georgian side of the story . There were no hard facts about the Georgian story .
 The Russian counter-version of the story claimed the Georgians started the conflict and that Russia was merely being reactive . The Russiancounter-version claimed theGeorgian conflict started and Russia was just reacting .
 A multinational EU mission issued a report that blamed Georgia for the war . Later, a multinational EU fact-finding mission issued the report . The report blamed Georgia.
 It is that Kyiv invaded Donbass, the area in which thousands of Ukrainians have died in horrific battles .
 It was territorially whole, constitutional, and not beset by bloody internal war . It was territorial, constitutional. It was not a bloody internal conflict .
 Many observers, like Obama, automatically equate the borders of the new Ukraine with those of former Ukraine .
 The notion that the new Ukraine is entitled to all the territory of the former Ukraine is quite tenuous . The notion is tenuous, says the former Ukrainian government .
 It chased the democratically-elected president Yanukovych out of the country under threats of death . It chased him out of country under threat of death.
 It ruled from February 27, 2014 until June 7, 2014 when President Petro Poroshenko assumed office following a democratic election .
 Two areas of former Ukraine, Donbass and Crimea, declined to become parts of the new Ukraine . In the meantime, two areas of ex-Ukrainian territory declined to be part of new Ukraine.
 The new Ukraine never had controlled those territories, and the majority of the inhabitants wanted no part of the new Ukraine . The majority of those in the Ukraine wanted to leave the Ukraine .
 I find it is hard for many people to wrap their minds around the foregoing explanation . I found it hard to wrap your minds around this explanation .
 The media drumbeat has constantly sounded out the Kyiv-centric version of things . The media has always sounded out Kyiv's version ofThings .
 In Spain there is a revolution whereby people who feel antagonistically toward Catalonians take over by force in Madrid .
 The junta immediately advances threats that diminish the cultural and linguistic heritage and practices of Catalonians . The government is trying to protect Catalonian culture .
 The situation in Ukraine is much more complicated due to the Soviet background, differing World War II related sentiments and legends, and a well-crafted demonization of Putin in the press .
 All the flap about Russia sending troops and weapons into Eastern Ukraine has things backwards . Russia sent troops, weapons into eastern Ukraine on Friday .
 What’s being called Eastern Ukraine in the press is in reality Donbass, according to a report .
 Russia actively denies that it has supported Donbass with military personnel and equipment . Russia also denies it has support for Donbass .
 The campaign was just made the villain by a skillful campaign based on fabrications .
 World attention has been diverted from Kyiv’s transgressions and the horror they have wreaked. Unfortunately, world attention is being diverted from the transgressions .
 I've documented in my book Ukraine in the Crosshairs how those allegations are not fact based . I’ve documented in his book Ukraine.
 I think it is very important to question why the press, the US, NATO, and the EU have so contorted their depiction of the Ukrainian crisis . The EU and the U.S. are among the countries involved in the Ukraine crisis .
 The Maidanists claimed from the start to be seeking greater democracy and closer ties to Europe . Ostensibly, the Maidanist claimed to be seek greater democracy . They also wanted closer ties with Europe .
Before Maidan protests, there was no threat of a Russian invasion, there were no fighting “separatists,’s no war in Donbass . The divisive issue spawned the internal conflict that precipitated the great Ukrainian crisis .
Sanctions were not causing ruinous economic damage to many countries . Ukraine was whole. Ukraine was entire .
 Relations between U.S. and Russia were not in dangerous disarray . There were no war-torn Donbass cities, towns, and villages .
 Thousands of now deceased Ukrainians were still alive . The opportunity for replacing the unpopular leader Yanukovych through a democratic election was on the immediate horizon .
 The Ukrainian people have been given a good look at what's transpired and tell me what tangible benefit has accrued to the Ukrainian people. Take a goodLook at what’s transpired.
 It is difficult to imagine why anyone would believe that association with the EU will undo all the damage that conflict has caused .
 In the end, the horrors inflicted upon Ukrainians by the junta were totally unnecessary, ineffectual, and counterproductive . The horrors inflicted on Ukrainians were completely unnecessary and counterproductive.