 Ukrainian Conflict Is About To Escalate Once Again. While United States Midterm Elections Draw Nearer 3. out of 5 based on 10 ratings .
 The U.S. midterm elections are drawing closer it appears that the Ukrainian conflict shows promise of escalating once again .
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko noted an increase in combat readiness of the Ukrainian Armed Forces to repel Russian aggression . On October 11th, Ukrainian President Poroshenko said the military was ready for combat .
 Groups of forces that are ready to repel aggression on potentially dangerous areas have been created, and not only from the east, but from the Crimean direction .
 The troops should be kept ready from Transdniester and from the north, Poroshenko said .
An increase in the aviation fleet and the fleet of anti-aircraft missiles has also strengthened the country’s air defense .
 The State Council of the Republic of Crimea claimed that it was the Ukrainian authorities who tried to carry out sabotage in the Crimea . In response, the state council of the republic of Crimea said that it had tried to sabotage the region .
 Anyone who is closely following the conflict on the territory associated with the Crimea understands that all provocations come precisely from the Ukrainian side .
 Poroshenko said that he had just finished inspecting the Clear Sky 2018 multinational exercises . Poroshenko announced the new brigades during his announcement of his announcement .
 It has 50 aircraft from all NATO member countries and our Ukrainian air force . It is the largest air force in the country .
 The purpose of the exercise is to increase the level of compatibility of our combat aviation with the air forces of the United States of America .
 On September 27th, Ukraine also received two free old cutters from the U.S. Navy .
 This happened during Ukrainian President Poroshenko’s visit to the United States Coast Guard Base in Baltimore .
 Ukraine will have to pay $10 million for renovations of the vessels in Baltimore . The vessels will remain until fall of 2019 .
 The U.S. Navy also officially began construction of a maritime operations center at Ochakiv Naval Base in Ukraine .
 The maritime operations center is one of three projects that are currently planned to be executed by the Seabees in Ochakiv . It will serve as a major planning and operational hub during future military exercises hosted by Ukraine .
 Other future Seabee projects in Ochakiv include a U.S. naval facility and entry control points with perimeter fencing . Other future projects will include a United States naval facility.
 The CIA has a lot of influence on the country’s intelligence office . The CIA is a powerful intelligence agency .
 Since 2014, the United States has provided total military aid of $1 billion to Ukraine . U.S. has provided $1billion to Ukraine since 2014 .
 Ukraine was provided with old hardware which the United States would not utilize . This also included military trainers and the missiles .
 With mid-term elections in the U.S. mid-terms, it is necessary for the Trump and his aides to present power and show that they can place the “escalation between Ukraine and Russia under control .
 It would not be surprising for there to be an incident similar to the assassination of Zakharchenko to cause tensions in Eastern Ukraine to grow .
 The “Russian aggression’s narrative is a valuable internal policy tool in the U.S. It provides justification for the United States to fuel its military industry complex and show force against a mostly speculative threat .
 U.S. candidates use conflicts around the world as a sort of “bargaining chip” to secure a larger portion of the vote .
 New Global economy Crisis is looming and U.S. need scapegoat to blame .
 Jews, many of who are Khazar have a long bloodlust for Slavic Russian Orthodox . Many of the Jews are Jews who have long blood lust for the Orthodox .
 They are the ones behind U.S. policy vis a vis United States towards Russia . They are behind the U.N. policy.
 Israel is heavily involved in training the Ukrainian army, and supplying the with arms . Israel is also involved in supplying the Ukraine army with arms.
 The Mongols returned the lands to their proper owners, the Slavic Russian princes known as the Muskovites . They dream of their old ancient Kingdom of Khazaria .
 Jews want Russia for her material resources which dwarf any other nations . And Jews want her materialresources which dwarf other nations.
 Putin came in and put a stop to a weak Russia in the 1990s. They descended on a weak Russian in the 90s, plundered much, but Putin put it down .
 IDF snipers were responsible for the massacre at Maidan in Kiev, Ukraine .
At least in Russia the military is resisting Jew plots as the downing of IL-20 in Syria showed . At least in Russian military is resisting Jew plots, it showed .
 Russia needs to respond forcefully in Ukraine and support the pro-Russian forces, Russia says . Russia must respond forcefully to the Ukraine crisis and support pro-Russia forces .
 Ukraine army is a fake army….they are unable to retake Donbass vs farmers&miners army . So if Russia invade all Azov coast to Crimea…it would be the same scenario as Crimea .
 Putin has stated that Russia will not allow Ukraine to use the people of the DPR & LPR for a shooting gallery . Crimea is Russian land, and Crimea is Russia land .
 For those dimwitted proxy force Ukrainians, the translation is simple . If you expect a long life expectancy, don’t listen to your colonial master .
 Once Nord stream 2 is done by late 2019 Russia will move in Ukraine, Syria and Afghanistan against the racist supremacist global Jewish confederate slave empire dictatorship .
 Russia just be patient and win in every area possible. It’s a smart strategy by Russia just to be patient, win in all areas possible .
 The war winds down in Syria, so the U.S. moves to start another war .
 The USA is war, and war is the USA, like vampires without blood they will die . The U.S. is like a vampire without blood, and the USA will die.
 Syrian war will continue as U.S. and Zionists want to create a quasi state in Euphrates and Idlib .
 Russia will have to support an inevitable Syrian and Iranian assault to liberate all of Syria . Russia will be forced to support the assault by Syria and Iran .
 America is like herpes, you can never get rid of them, but sometimes you can go into remission . True, America islike herpes, but you can always get rid.
 Ukraine is an eternal part of Russia and should come back in mother Russia’s lap . Ukraine is a mother-of-two and should return to mother Russia.
 Putin should have acted more decisively when the Don Bas nationalists were on the verge of liberating all of Ukraine, Putin said . Putin should be more decisive on the issue of Ukraine.
 The U.S. and NATO hyenas are trying to turn Ukraine into another launch pad against Russia . They have done in Kosovo with the Balkanization of ex-Yugoslavia .
 If Ukraine attacks, their army and their statehood should be destroyed and Ukraine should be taken back to Russian federation under the name of Novorossia or MalorOSSia . Ukraine should also be taken to Russian Federation under the names of Nov or Mal or Novor
 The peaceful & fair solution for Ukraine is to split the country along its natural border the Denieper river . The peaceful and fair solution is to separate the country from its natural borders .
Those to the east can have an election and decide what they want to do . Those to the East can have a vote and decide their future plans .