 In early September, Ukraine inched closer to a globally recognized national Orthodox church . Constantinople Patriarch Bartholomew placed the country under the jurisdiction of U.S. Archbishop Daniel of Pamphilon and Canadian Bishop Ilarion of Edmonton .
 Moscow faces up to the prospect of losing a religious struggle in Ukraine that could have far-reaching implications . This move was the latest in a series of blows to the Kremlin as Moscow faces a religious battle in Ukraine .
 Since 1685, the Russian Orthodox Church has claimed that Ukraine lies within its canonical territory .
 The two appointments by Constantinople are part of preparations to grant the Orthodox Church in Ukraine autocephaly from the Russian Orthodox Church . The two recent appointments were part of the recent appointments.
 Many observers believe that separating Ukraine’s Orthodox Church from Moscow is the last step the country needs in order to become independent .
 Ukraine has been actively seeking autocephaly since before it became independent in 1991 . Ukraine became independent from the Soviet Union in 1991 and has been trying to find a way to get it .
 Metropolitan Filaret broke with Russian Orthodox Church to establish Ukrainian Orthodox Church-Kyiv Patriarch during Soviet collapse in 1991 . Constantinople did not recognize the move .
 There have been two competing Orthodox churches in Ukraine ever since . Due to these rival maneuvers, there has been two rival Orthodox churches.
 The UOC has been loyal to Moscow and has enjoyed international recognition . UOC-KP has been unrecognized but is widely seen to represent an independent Ukraine .
 The split loyalties of the Russian Orthodox Church and UOC have left them unable to maintain the appearance of neutrality . Since Russia’s annexation of Crimea and military aggression in eastern Ukraine, the split loysalties have left the church unable to stay neutral .
 Russian Orthodox Church clergy have blessed Russian nationalists traveling to fight in the Donbas .
 Some UOC clergy have refused to serve at funerals of Ukrainian soldiers . UOC Metropolitan Onufry and fellow senior clergy refused to stand in the Ukrainian parliament in honor of slain soldiers .
 Millions of Ukrainians are questioning how they can remain within a church that takes sides against their nation . This has had a major impact on public opinion .
 There is another factor currently working in favor of Ukraine’s Orthodox independence bid .
Until 2014, Ukraine’s post-Soviet leaders had lacked the political credentials to secure progress towards Orthodox independence . Until 2014, Ukrainian leaders lacked political credentials.
 President Viktor Yushchenko’s strong support for the UOC-KP was perceived by many within the Orthodox church as being too anti-Russian .
 President Leonid Kuchma was even-handed, while President Yanukovych openly backed the Russian Orthodox Church .
Senior UOC clergy have supported the UOC-KP and the smaller Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church in seeking autocephaly .
 President Poroshenko has adopted a legalistic approach to seeking autocephaly that has left the Russian Orthodox Church with little room to maneuver . In addition to these advantages, Poroshenko also has adopted legalistic approaches to seekingAutocephalia .
 Events taking place far beyond the borders of Ukraine are also playing a role in the unfolding religious struggle between Moscow and Kyiv .
 Russia has overplayed its hand in the Balkans and many believe this has helped to undermine Moscow’s position within the Orthodox world .
 Russia’s involvement in an attempted coup in Montenegro to thwart the mountain nation from joining NATO garnered international headlines in 2016. Russia's involvement in the attempted coup garnered international attention in 2016 .
 Moscow and Athens have traditionally strong ties between the two cities . This was a particularly shocking development in light of Moscow's strong ties with Athens .
 The decision to grant Ukraine autocephaly has much to do with size and power . The decision was made in the wake of the country's economic crisis .
 Both Greece and the Constantinople Patriarch have had enough of Russia’s overbearing interference .
 Ukrainian Orthodox Church has emerged as a way of cutting Moscow down to size . They see the emergence of an autocephalous church as way to cut Moscow's size .
 The process could eventually lead to Russian losses that are disproportionately larger than Ukraine itself .
 In the USSR, two-thirds of Russian Orthodox Church parishes were located in Soviet Ukraine . In the Soviet Ukraine, more than half of the church's parishes are located in the country .
 This concentration of parishes in Ukraine does not directly correlate with traditional geographical understandings of pro-Russian sentiment in the country .
 In Soviet Ukraine, the majority of Russian Orthodox Church parishes were in western and central Ukraine . That remains the case today .
 There are actually far fewer Russian Orthodox parishes in the Donbas than elsewhere in the country .
 There is relatively little chance of a “civil war’s” breaking out in Ukraine over religion . Due to these regional realities, there is relativelylittle chance of an ‘civil war'
 UOC faithful are more likely to join Ukraine’s new autocephalous church . Instead, a majority of the U OC faithful are likely to go to the UOC .
 Many Western journalists repeat this falsehood, which is nearly always included in Western histories of Russia .
 Russian and Western historiographies tend to ignore the inconvenient existence of Ukrainians . Both Russian and western historiography tend toignore the inconvenientexistence of Ukrainians.
 Even when acknowledged, they typically appear as virtually indivisible from Russians and Belarusians . They typically appear to be virtually indibisible from Russia and Belarusian citizens .
 Russians believe Kyiv Rus gave birth to the three eastern Slavic nations of Russia, Ukraine and Belarus . Russian President Vladimir Putin constantly reiterates that KyivRus gave birth.
 Throughout the Tsarist, Soviet, and contemporary eras, Russia’s goal has always remained to achieve a reunion . Russia's goal is to reunite with its former allies .
 The Kremlin has sought to replace the lost ideological arguments for closer union of the Communist epoch . These ideas have gained additional momentum in the post-Soviet era .
 In the late 2000s, the Kremlin began to promote the concept of a so-called Russkiy Mir that stretched far beyond the boundaries of the modern Russian state to embrace millions of ethnic and cultural kinsfolk .
 The objective was to unite Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine around the Russian Orthodox Church to form the core of the future Eurasian Economic Union . The objective is to unite Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Ukraine .
 At the NATO-Russia Council in 2008, Putin called Ukraine an artificial state .
Ukrainian overtures have not proved very persuasive to the increasingly self-assured Ukrainian audiences of the post-Soviet years .
 Ukraine decisively rejected the Russkiy Mir ideology in 2014, resulting in the failure of Kremlin-orchestrated uprisings in a host of Ukrainian regions . The current stalemate in eastern Ukraine has led to the current crisis .
 support for membership in the Eurasian Economic Union has plummeted . Support for membership has also plummeted in recent years .
 Autocephaly will reinforce the growth in Ukrainian patriotism while supporting further national integration and spurring a final divorce from Russia . It will support further integration and support further national Integration .
Independent Ukrainian Orthodox Church would undermine Russia's position as the world's biggest Orthodox Church . An independent Ukrainian Orthodox church would undermine the Russian Orthodox Church.
 The Ukrainian and Romanian Orthodox Churches would both be roughly equal in size . The Ukrainian, Romanian Orthodox churches would both have roughly equal size .
 Constantinople would have a staunch Ukrainian ally in its dealings with the Russian Orthodox Church . Meanwhile, Constantinople would also have a strong Ukrainian ally .
 An independent Ukrainian Orthodox Church would be pro-European . The Russian Orthodox Church is predictably anti-Western much like the Putin regime itself .
This would radically alter the balance of power within the Orthodox world . This would radically change the power balance within the world .
 Within Ukraine itself, autocephaly would deepen the ongoing strengthening of the Ukrainian national identity .
 This is an identity rooted in the concept of European integration and increasingly distant from a Russian state perceived as both hostile and unattractive . This is a concept rooted in Europe's concept of integration .
 Only 1% of young Ukrainians support the Russian model of development, according to a recent survey . 70% of Ukrainians oppose it, including 56% of Russian speakers .
 This reflects deteriorating attitudes towards modern Russia as a civilizational partner . This reflects the country's deteriorating attitudes to modern Russia .
 The Russian Orthodox Church is the last major source of Putin’s soft power in Ukraine .
 If Constantinople completes the process of Ukrainian Orthodox independence, Ukraine's movement out of Russia’s orbit will become irreversible .
 The creation of an autocephalous Ukrainian Orthodox Church is Ukraine's ultimate answer to Putin’s aggression. In that sense, the creation of a church is Ukraine’S ultimate answer.