 Patriotic Heresy vs. the New Cold War Fallacies of U.S. policy may be leading to war with Russia .
 Stephen F Cohen is the author of The Nation's new book, "The Nation," and The Nation .
 Doug Chayka prepared the text below for remarks to the annual US-Russia Forum in Washington, DC, held June 16 .
 Obliged to abridge my text to the time allocated to speakers, I have restored the deletions here and spelled out a number of my impromptu comments .
 We meet today during the worst and potentially most dangerous American-Russian confrontation in many decades, probably since the Cuban missile crisis.
 The Ukrainian civil war, precipitated by the unlawful change of government in Kiev in February, is already growing into a proxy US-Russian war .
We are already in a new Cold War, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: It's one potentially more dangerous than its US-Soviet predecessor, which the world barely survived .
 This means that the kinds of miscalculations, mishaps and provocations the world witnessed decades ago will be even more fraught with danger . This is because of the kind of mishaps that have been seen decades ago, says author .
 Russia may resort to its much larger arsenal of tactical nuclear weapons if threatened by NATO’s superior conventional forces .
 Washington and Moscow today may make such mutual restraints even more difficult .
 The same is true of the surreal demonization of Russia’s leader, Vladimir Putin . Putin is a kind of personal vilification without any real precedent in the past .
 The U.S. policies that have contributed so woefully to the current crisis are few in number, says John Sutter . Sutter: We're not in number without influential supporters and unorganized. We're opposed to the policies that've contributed to the crisis .
 I am old enough to know our position was very different in the 1970s and ’80s, when we struggled for what was then called détente . I'm old enough. I'm not a new member of the Détente team .
 We were a minority, but a substantial minority with allies in high places, even in Congress and the State Department . We were also a minority in Congress.
 Our views were solicited by mainstream newspapers, television and radio . Our views are published by mainstream media .
 The American Committee on East-West Accord's board included corporate CEOs, political figures, prominent academics and statesmen of the stature of George Kennan .
 We have no access to the Obama administration, virtually none to Congress . The Obama administration is a bipartisan bastion of Cold War politics, and little to the mainstream media .
 We have access to important alternative media, but they are not considered authoritative, or even essential, inside the Beltway . We do have access, but we do not have the same access to alternative media .
 In his long lifetime, I do not recall such a failure of American democratic discourse in any comparable time of crisis . In my long life, he says, he does not recall this failure of America's democratic discourse .
"I will speak in a more personal way than I usually do," he says . "About my episodic participation in the very limited mainstream media discussion, I will speak more personal"
 Moscow's view of the Ukrainian crisis is almost entirely missing in mainstream coverage . Recalling the American adage ‘There are two sides to every story,’ I sought to explain Moscow’s view of Ukrainian crisis .
Russia's policies could lead to a new Cold War, writes CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: Washington's bipartisan Russia policies may lead to just such a crisis . He says Russia's policies have led to a "new Cold War" in Washington .
 I expected to be criticized, as I was during nearly 20 years as a CBS News commentator, but not in such personal and scurrilous ways . I expected the criticism, but it was not personal, and I was not criticized .
Until now, I have not bothered to reply to any of these defamatory attacks . Until now, he has not been able to respond to any defamatories .
 I think they are directed at several of us in this room, indeed at anyone critical of Washington's Russia policies, not just me . I do so today because I now think they're directed at many of us. I doso today because of this .
 Moscow's anti-Russian ad hominem slurs are based on distortions and on the general premise that any American who seeks to understand Moscow's perspectives is a ‘Putin apologist’ and thus unpatriotic .
By defaming us, they seek to obscure their complicity in the unfolding disaster and their unwillingness to rethink it . By defaming ourselves, they sought to obscure the complicity in their complicity and their reluctance to rethink.
 Beyonce and Jay Z’s Sexy Romance Afun4u The Top 5 Largest Aircraft in the World AfUn4u Top 10 Motorcycles of the Future Afun 4u Top 7 Women Who Earn More Than Their Husbands .
 Bush told Vietnam we should have stayed there fighting. It's "my country right or wrong" still rules, but that explains Bush's advice .
 Our HUAC computer databases are much more organized and available than ever before . We fear in all quarters to speak out. Our H UAC computer database is more organized than ever .
 Globalization with fall of Soviet Union means western European corporate and christian orthodoxy now believes the world can be converted to a one dominating culture .
 This is a hot war and it is only a matter of how far and how quickly it is allowed to escalate, says CNN's John Sutter . "This is aHot war," says Sutter. "It's a hot battle and it's only a Matter of how quickly and
 Russia as the villian of the peace. It is so endearing to see the U.S. sit back and let others fight a war that they provoked and successfully framed .
 NATO and the EU have to be the stupidest bastards on earth to so blindly be sucked into this ruse that has the potential to do great harm to themselves .
As with the invasion of Iraq this war is also starting with the big lie . The question remains how many lives will be lost before the truth catches up .
 U.S. foreign policy is without a doubt guided by psychopathic imbeciles as Russia is not a third world country .
 No one in Washington seems even capable of addressing the existential danger posed by a US-Russian war . Nuclear war is absolute suicide for the human race, says author .
 They're too stupid to understand what they're actually dealing with, except in the most abstract manner, says CNN's John Sutter . They're just too stupid, he says .
 Russia is only concerned with advancing the PNAC and Neocon agendas . They think Russia will endlessly back off from confronting the Mighty Mighty USA .
 Samantha Power, playing Condi Rice's ghost at the UN, is just the latest example of Samantha Power .
 NATO lost its reason for being at the collapse of the USSR, is reshaping itself as the US's world-wide army .
 Many have emergency contingency flights booked for New Zealand . I also believe that many have emergency flights booked .
 Earlier the idoitic masses are fooled by the patriotism or nationalism because majority are basically illiterate . Earlier the Idoitic mass are fooled by patriotism and nationalism because most are illiterate.
At this present condition when homelessness and joblessness are nearer to hell then starting another new war may be a self-inficted wound . But at this present moment when homelessness is nearer toHell then starting a new war could be aSelf-inflicted wound .
 Food prices would be soaring to the sky and there would be more homeless and jobless ctizens created in humongous numbers .
 The number of limbless veterans would cover the streets of any city of this country . In addition, the number would cover any city in the country .
 A war would break out before going down to the pages of history this superpower will have a last bite . But inspite of those facts, I do believe there is a larger chance that a war will break out .
 Other matters will attract attention quite soon there's just too many pressing matters happening world-wide .
 Cohen from the very outset of the Orange Revolution 2. On Amy Goodman's Pacifica broadcast, he says .
 Cohen was the originator of the story that Ukraine's uprising was primarily by fascists and neoNazi groups . Cohen was also the author of the book "Ukraine's uprising"
 There's a high percentage off the Right Sector flags in Maidan . Well, we should all recall that the Kremlin was saying the opposite .
I don't think you can seriously argue the motives and ideology of the Right Sector . I don't believe the motives of the right Sector can be seriously argued .
 Your arguments are weak, not related to anything and you start with ad hominem attack, implying Cohen's monetary motives and disingenuous representation . Your argument is weak. Your arguments aren't related to any of the things you say .
 The talks between Ukraine and Russia about Crimea going back to Russia have been going on for a long time . The talks are expected to continue for the next few weeks .
 Most Russians will tell you that they don't like how it was done but glad it's done after all . Most Russians don't want to see how it's been done but are glad it is done .
 Crimea has been invaded by Russian forces in Crimea since March 2014 . It is not clear whether the people in Crimea were happy to be invaded .
 Guns are in their faces and a armed force of drunken thuggish Russians prowl their streets . Russians are drunk and drunk in the streets.
 I am not a Russian nationalist but I don't like geopolitical games that are hidden under the blanket of moral superiority and fighting for freedom and democracy . I'm not aRussian nationalist. I'm fighting for democracy, freedom and freedom, not for geopolitical games .
 You appear to try to take this high ground but disregarding quite a bit of the preceding events . You appear not to take the high ground, but disregarded quite a lot of the previous events .
 The better organized and trained forces are ultra nationalists. Vote or note, vote or note. The best organized and training forces areUltra nationalists .
 Without the support from US, it's also unlikely that the coup would have taken place . The coup would be unlikely to have happened without US support .
 You can direct your own eyeballs to the NATO bases and the involvement of British and American special services in to the present situation . You can also direct yourself to NATO bases .
 Cohen stresses that a lot of responses of Russia are retaliatory . Cohen stresses out the point that many of Russia's responses to Russia are retaliation .
 It's up to international lawyers to decide the matter . It doesn't make annexation of Crimea totally correct .
 Your latest comment shows that you really have no idea how things went down in Crimea .
 The film is a propaganda piece or Hollywood movie. While I don't claim to know everything and everybody, certainly what you are describing is rather from another propaganda piece, it's not .
 "They don't exist, they shouldn't exist," says CNN's John Sutter . "Oh they do exist but they're all Nazis," he says . "They do exist, oh they do exists, but they are all Nazis"
In his warped and twisted analysis, the people of Ukraine are incapable and undeserving of having a say in their own fate . In his warped analysis, he says the Ukraine people are incapable of having their own destiny .
 Yanukovych can't be demonstrating because they're tired of the saturation of corruption they lived with under Yanukovych . Yanukovych's government has been accused of corruption in Ukraine .
 Vicky Nuland divided 5 billion dollars in cash among all of them . No, that can't be why the people are mad, it must be because VickyNuland split the money .
 The world would be a better place if we started considering people as human beings and not pawns who happen to inhabit some "sphere of influence" Some people are drawn up to the insecurities of some paranoid sociopath .
 Putin has done the exact same thing in Russia, says Cohen . Putin has eliminated the free exchange of ideas, eliminated all vestiges of a free press, severely curtailed civil rights .
 Cohen comes across with his self-pitying persecution complex to defend the actions of a man who has murdered journalists and those with whom he doesn't agree . It's funny Cohen comes out with a self-Pitying persecutor complex, he says .
 The successful political ploy provides a win in every circumstance . As so well illustrated in "House of Cards" the political ploy is successful .
 The allied powers Plan A is as illustrated in the article . Here's a situation with a robust Plan B The allied power Plan A .
 Russian resistance to Plan A is to destabilize the region and slow or even stop Russian integration into the European economic arena . Plan B, in the case of Russian resistance, is to stop American dominance in European affairs .
You have also employed innuendo in slurring the author of this article . You have also used innuenda in slurred the author.
Even petty penalties for dissent in regard to Russia could adversely affect your career. A few have sought my guidance, and I always advise, "Even petty penalty for dissent could adversely affected your career," he says .
 At this stage of life, your first obligation is to your family and thus to your future prospects .
 The lives of these youth and all of us are and will be effected by the actions now being taken world wide vis-a-vis Russia . The lives will be affected by the action now.
Politics really matters in USA for your relations with customers, suppliers, professors, etc. I've been to USA a few times, what you think of politics really matters .
 It's not like in Europe, or Russia or elsewhere where there's job and there's political views . If you're doing a good job nobody gives a damn about you being a Buddhist/Communist/Hippy/-lover/etc. If you are doing a great job,
 Mr novictim don't quite understand the meaning of the word but is trying to attack me . Mr noVictim doesn't understand the word. He doesn't know what the word means .
 He's implying that, me liking the article is related to my nationality and there for is either incorrect or fallacy . He's implied that, I like the article, I liked it, and there is either wrong or fallacy.
 Russia is rapidly becoming a Soviet-style dictatorship, with state-controlled courts, statecontrolled media, political prisoners, and glorification of Putin . He does not care that Russia is becoming aSoviet-style dictator, with the state- controlled courts, and state-run media, and
 Putin does not care that Putin's actions are, even in the tiniest details, replicating what Hitler did in 1930's . He doesn't care that he is replicating Hitler's actions .
 One can only marvel at how a man who knows Russia (but blissfully lives in outside it) can be so ignorant .
 Russia may become less than prominent in the world order, and then his qualifications, knowledge of the Russian language and knowledge of all the things Russian, may become obsolete and uninteresting to everyone around him . It is also possible that his views are driven by the fear that Russia could become less
Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of brainwashing Russia . He has been in power for years, but he is now in power with an iron fist . He is known to provide intellectual comfort to the disgusting man ruling Russia .
 8% of seats in the Ukrainian parliament are given to ultranationalists . But even if I mentioned the fact, it would not invalidate my point, he says .
 Cohen is hypocritical when he presents the Ukranians as fascists while whitewashing Russia, he says . The same can be said about it, Cohen says .
 Ukraine did want to move in the direction of the democratization and respect for human rights by joining EU . But was brutally stopped by its jingoist neighbor led by their venerated fuerer .
 It's just economics, with our world military and secret police pushing it on the world, says author . It's not economics, it's just Economics, with the world military pushing it, he says .
 Nuclear and Fracking, that is the Obama agenda, even if it takes the CIA and military .
 The clearly hate solar, with the 50% bs German company conjecture based tariff . The clearly hates solar.
 Or giving a few billion dollars to thermo-nuclear research so that we can start making electricity from Deiteriy, Tritiy and potentially from anything in the dustbin .
 Any new nuclear is 20 years away from generating commercial power . Realistically, any new nuclear would be 20 years from commercial power.
 We need to put the big money into research on streamlining and automating the solar roof and parking lot installation phases . We need more money to streamline and automate solar roofs and parking lots .
Change the bog bias from nuclear, fracking and tar sands to citizens, rooftop parking lot solar, and local municipalities waste toe heat, electricity fuels and raw materials .
 Waste energy and resource use needs a lot of research, mostly to measure and test the system out there and report on who well they work .
 5 months ago Putin control rebels, he sends them arms and his army . Sadly, the gov is a see more 3& % .
 Ukraine is in Russia's part of the world, so its strictly a matter for Russia to decide . Russia is in the world's part, so it's not a matter of Russia's decision .
 Based on and other evidence, it looks like Putin is not just "helping" one side, but creating the civil war in the first place .
 The government of Ukraine has been swinging back and forth between East-oriented and West-oriented factions for decades . The government could accommodate many of the East's demands without a war, I suspect .
 Putin can openly use force, intimidate other neighboring countries, and perhaps even invade beyond Ukraine . I wonder if Putin is militarizing the situation not to help Russian Ukrainians .
 Interior Minister Arsen Avakov at once came out with a detailed and plausible explanation, which was disseminated by media throughout the world .
 Avakov said "terrorists" had attempted to storm the building . The armoured vehicles were sent to help police .
You're facts and fallacies omit a helluva lot but they raise some interesting points . You're facts, fallacies omitted a lot, but they're interesting points.