 Ukraine would be able to make its own domestic and foreign policy choices . Ukraine would have to choose its own foreign and domestic policies .
 Ukraine would be unable to govern itself effectively or orient itself towards the West . Ukraine would not be able to orient itself to the West, according to the EU .
 In 2014 Russia launched a campaign of violent subversion to compel Ukraine to ‘federalize’ its political system . Russia launched the campaign in 2014 to force Ukraine to federalize its political systems .
 Ukrainians fought back en masse, forcing Russia to resort to increasingly open military intervention . Belying Russian expectations, Ukrainians foughtback en masse .
 Russia inflicted crushing defeats on Ukrainian forces, yet was unwilling to pay the price that further high-intensity war would have exacted . Russia was unable to pay for the cost of the war that would have taken place .
 Russian and Ukrainian positions are considered mid-point between the two countries . One prevalent view is that implementation means finding a mid- point between the Russian and Ukraine positions .
 Ukraine has been under pressure from Russia over its role in Ukraine . However, attempts to do so have failed to lead to any discernible change in Russian policy .
 Western policymakers should acknowledge the starkness of the Minsk conundrum. Instead of trying to resolve an unresolvable contradiction, Western policymakers must acknowledge the contradiction .
 It would view the Minsk and Normandy processes mainly as conflict management tools . It would also view the processes as conflictmanagement tools .
 Western governments would meanwhile maintain support for long-term political and economic reform in Ukraine . In line with the priority attached to upholding Ukraine’s sovereignty, the EU/Ukraine Association Agreement is the anchor .
 It would proceed from the assumption that the region should not be legally reincorporated into Ukraine for the foreseeable future . But it would proceed to the assumption the region shouldn't be reinc incorporated into Ukraine .
 Russia's stand-off with Russia over Ukraine would be troubling and unnerving . Many decision-makers in the West would find it troubling, unnerving, says David Cameron .
 Russia's undeclared war in eastern Ukraine has entered its seventh year, with no end in sight . The Kremlin-backed 'Donetsk People's Republic' and 'Luhansk People’s Republic' against Ukraine’'s central authorities .
 By mid-February 2020, the death toll had climbed to almost 14,000 . More than 30,000 people were injured in the incident . The death toll has now risen to almost 15,000.
 Ukraine is now home to almost 1. million registered internally displaced persons . The ninth-largest number in the world is the ninth- largest number .
 The economic impact, measured in lost output and trade, almost certainly runs into tens of billions of dollars . The impact of the loss of assets and output is measured in loss and damage .
 The war has driven political relations between Ukraine and Russia to an unprecedented low. Unsurprisingly, it has driven the war to a unprecedented low .
 Relations between Russia and the leading Western powers have sunk to their lowest point since the early 1980s . Relations between the two countries have meanwhile sunk to the lowest point in the 1980s.
 Implementation of the Minsk agreements of September 2014 and February 2015 remains the professed goal of Western policy . The Minsk agreement sought to end the war, which was aimed at ending the war .
 'Minsk implementation' is a mantra for policymakers, reiterated publicly by leaders and privately by officials . ‘Minsk Implementation’ is a Mantel for policymakers .
 heads of state of the ‘Normandy Format’4 met after a three-year gap . Bursts of activity – most recently in December 2019 – have not broken the logjam .
 Attempts at implementation have foundered because they are mistakenly predicated on compromise . Attempts have been foundered.
 The background to the Minsk agreements drove the crisis that engulfed Ukraine in 2013–14 . This question drove Ukraine's crisis in 2013-14 .
 At the core of the proposed pact was a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement . The agreement would eliminate most tariffs on trade in goods .
 Ukraine would transpose much of the EU acquis communautaire into its own legislation . Ukraine would be the first country to introduce such legislation .
 The Kremlin had come around to the view that it was a realistic threat. But by late 2011, the Kremlin had gone from the view to a more realistic threat .
 Three factors in particular informed the Russian leadership’s change of position. Three factors included the change of the Russian leader's position .
 The Kremlin had become concerned about the EU’s expanding profile in the non-Baltic post-Soviet space .
 'The War in Ukraine was Supposed to End 5 years ago,' says the EU . The AA is not a geopolitical instrument .
 This figure includes IDPs displaced as a result of Russia’s annexation of Crimea . This figure is based on the number of people displaced in Russia by Russia .
 The real number of displaced persons could well be much higher than the registered figure . The real figure could be much lower than theregistered figure .
 Russia saw the agreement as a challenge to its view of the post-Soviet space as its self-proclaimed sphere of influence . Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine saw this light.
 AA promised to establish a radically different model of governance on Russia’s doorstep . Many Russians considered to be virtually indistinguishable, culturally and historically, from their own .
 Merely raising that possibility implicitly challenged the authoritarian system which Vladimir Putin had consolidated in Russia . He believed it had already been threatened by contagion from Ukraine after the 2004 Orange Revolution .
 Russia was by now championing its own integration project, the Eurasian Economic Union . Putin described in October 2011 as one ‘pole’ in a ‘multipolar’ global order .
 Russian policymakers considered Ukraine’s accession to the EAEU vital,9 the point being that Ukraine could not join it and have an AA with the EU .10 Stopping Ukraine from signing the AA had become a priority for the Kremlin .
 Ukrainian leaders rejected earlier Russia-led integration initiatives . Successive Ukrainian leaders had rejected earlier Russian integration initiatives.
 Russia was wary about joining a customs union – the first stage of integration into the EAEU – given the constraints that this would place on their ability to run an independent trade policy .
 Viktor Yanukovych replaced Yushchenko as president in 2010 . So it proved with Yanukovych, who replaced Yanukovych as president .
 Yanukovych sought a balance between Ukraine’s relations with the EU and those with Russia . Yanukovych sought to balance Ukraine's relations with EU and Russia .
 At the same time, he also flirted with engagement with the EAEU . He floated various arrangements short of membership .
 Russia was not fooled, however, and from 2012 stepped up economic pressure to force Yanukovych to drop the AA . Increasingly isolated internationally by his administration’s corruption, growing authoritarianism and economic incompetence, Yanukovych started to buckle .
 He had planned to sign the AA at an EU/Ukraine summit in Vilnius in November 2013 . He was due to attend the summit in November.
 The Kremlin stepped in with a $15 billion loan and other inducements, confident that Ukraine’s economic problems would eventually force Yanukovych to give in .
 Yanukovych’s about-face sparked demonstrations in Kyiv – the so-called ‘Euromaidan’ protests – which at their peak drew hundreds of thousands of people .
 The authorities gradually intensified the use of force against protesters in the early weeks of 2014 . Between the EU and Russia, 6 Dragneva, R and Wolczuk, K, were among the protesters .
 Russian Resistance to Democratization in the Former Soviet Union, Farnham: Ashgate Publishing Limited .
 Weakened by elite defections and buffeted by international outrage at its brutality, Yanukovych’s administration imploded .
 Yanukovych fled Kyiv on 21 February, arriving in Russia shortly afterwards . Yanukovych fled the country in February .
 Ukraine’s unicameral legislature, the Verkhovna Rada, removed him and installed him as acting president . Oleksandr Turchynov is now acting president, pending a presidential election in May .
 Yanukovych's overthrow rocked the Kremlin, which ordered Russian troops and irregular forces to occupy Crimea .
 The new leadership in Kyiv may have been concerned that the new leadership would cancel the lease on Russia's Black Sea Fleet base . The smoothness of the operation indicated that a contingency plan had been drawn up earlier .
 A referendum on 16 March 15 recorded an implausible 96. per cent vote for incorporation into Russia on an equally unlikely turnout of 83 per cent . The referendum was held in Moscow on March 15, 2014 .
 The ‘Novorossiya project’ Annexing Crimea was cathartic for Russia’s leaders and for many ordinary Russians .
 Ukraine did nothing to counteract Ukraine’s increasingly westward orientation. But it didn't do anything to counteract the country's westward orientation .
 The 'Novorossiya project' is a campaign of violent subversion designed to turn the east and south of Ukraine . Many of the country's ethnic Russians and Russian-speakers lived against the authorities in Kyiv .
 Putin often makes the claim that Russians and Ukrainians are ‘one people’ with a shared destiny . The initiative reflected a view of Ukraine that is widely held in Russia .
17 Supposedly a mish-mash of disparate regions glued together under Tsarist and Soviet rule, Ukraine is thought to be inherently weak and unstable because of its regional, linguistic and confessional fault lines .
 It is seen at the same time as an organic part of the ‘Russian world’ without which it becomes an unsustainable entity .
 Ukraine’s integration into ‘alien’ Western-led structures would be perverse and dangerous. By extension, Ukraine's integration into 'alien' West would be dangerous, says the author .
 Russian decision-makers think that they could bring the authorities in Kyiv to their knees . Ukraine's government has been gripped by paralysis since Yanukovych's ouster .
 This also rendered unconstitutional the subsequent referendums held in Donbas in May . This was also unconstitutional in the May referendum in the city .
The general feeling inside the Kremlin was that Ukraine had ceased to exist as a state . The general feeling in the Kremlin is that Ukraine is no longer a state.
The central government was no more, and the eastern regions would follow Crimea into Russia’s embrace . The central government would be no more .
 The locals would be in favour, and there would be no military resistance . The locals are in favour. There would also be no resistance .
 After the Revolution, for a number of reasons the Bolsheviks – let God judge them – added historical sections of the south of Russia to the Republic of Ukraine .
 This was done with no consideration for the ethnic composition of the population, and these regions today form the south-east of Ukraine .
 The Novorossiya project seems to have originated among officials, political consultants, nationalist ideologues and business figures . The project was created by a number of officials, including political consultants .
 Sergei Glaziev, Putin’s adviser for the EAEU, played a prominent early role . He was Putin's adviser.
 The Novorossiya project was a loosely organized affair executed by networks of provocateurs and saboteurs . It was supported by Russian intelligence operatives .
 The Presidential Administration in Moscow provided general oversight of this opaque constellation . Vladislav Surkov, another of Putin's senior advisers, would emerge as the key official dealing with Ukraine .
 The overthrow of Yanukovych set off unrest in eastern and southern Ukraine . It was soon apparent that the Kremlin had misjudged the mood there .
Local activists and Russian agents organized rallies and attacked official buildings in cities in the east and south during March .
 The authorities remained broadly loyal to the provisional leadership in Kyiv . They attracted little support in Kharkiv, Dnipro and Odesa .
 Many there feared his Euromaidan successors, whom they considered illegal usurpers . Many feared his successors, who they consideredillegal usurpers, would be illegal usurps .
Fragile from the start, the local standing of the new authorities in Kyiv evaporated as power was appropriated by regional forces . Business oligarchs, organized crime figures, remnants of the Yanukovych ‘clan’ and socially excluded groups.
 Some actors saw as a threat to the positions they were carving out for themselves . But alongside hostility towards new leaders in Kyiv, there was ambivalence about growing Russian influence .
 The Kremlin would have to intervene more directly to take charge in Donbas . The Kremlin could have to do more directly.
 Putin referred to Novorossiya during his annual phone-in on 17 April . Kharkov, Lugansk, Donetsk, Kherson, Nikolayev and Odessa were not part of Ukraine then .
 These territories were given the Ukraine in the 1920s by the Soviet Government . The territories were handed to the Ukraine by the Soviets in 1920s .
 Potemkin and Catherine the Great fought in a series of well-known wars . They were won by Potemkins and Catherine The Great in the war .
 The centre of that territory was Novorossiisk, so the region is called Nov orossiya . The region is known as NovorOSSiya .
 Russia lost these territories for various reasons, but the people remained . Russia lost the territories for several reasons .
 Putin's remarks signalled support for the orchestrated violence that had exploded five days earlier . Putin’s remarks signalling support for orchestrated violence.
 Armed irregulars seized Sloviansk and Kramatorsk in Donetsk oblast in April . They then used the cities as bases for raids against other urban centres .
 Its leaders proclaimed the establishment of the Donetsk People's Republic on 6 April . The Luhansk People’s Republic was proclaimed on 27 April .
 Both regimes held referendums on 11 May, claiming large majorities for ‘self-dependence’ Russia’s objectives.
 Ukraine's regions would then exert a stranglehold over the central authorities, stymieing Ukraine’s Western integration . These regions would also exert astranglehold on central authorities .
 The Novorossiya project aimed to promote ‘a secessionist revolt that the Kremlin could use to exert leverage over the geopolitical future of Ukraine’ Within this framework, the Kremlin had three objectives .
 The first was to promote the ‘federalization’ of Ukraine, allegedly to reflect the latter’s divisions and to restore stability .
 Kremlin wanted to bring this about through constitutional reform. Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine wanted this to be brought about through reform .
 Lavrov persuaded his counterparts to give their general endorsement to this demand . The diplomatic community swung into action to contain the crisis .
 Ukraine, Russia, the U.S. and the EU met in Geneva on 17 April and called for a ceasefire, disarmament and an amnesty . The EU also called for an amnesty and a ceasefire.
 Russia sought to confer a spurious legitimacy on its own activities by pretending that it was not a party to the conflict . It portrayed the conflict as a civil war, which it portrayed as a war, and that constitutional reform would be a settlement between equal sides .
More irregulars, along with operatives from Transnistria, were sent in to take charge of the DNR/LNR during the spring and summer . More irregulars were also sent in for this third goal .
Russian state structures set up embryonic state structures and imposed top-down order on chaotic local situations . They set up state structures, subjugating or driving out local elites identified as obstacles to the extension of Russian influence .
 Tighter control also enabled the Kremlin to rein in those Novorossiya operatives who had criticized what they saw as Russia's failure to intervene sooner and more firmly .
 Russia reiterated its demands throughout the summer at meetings of the Normandy Format group . D-Day landings on the 70th anniversary of the D- Day landings in France were held in France .
 Ukraine, Russia, Germany, France, Ukraine, Ukraine and France are the main forum for attempts to manage the crisis . This is the first time the crisis has been managed by a group of countries .
 The Normandy heads of state set up a Trilateral Contact Group on 8 June . The Normandy head of state is the head of the Normandy state .
 The TCG contained representatives from Russia, Ukraine and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe . It was charged with conflict management and resolution .
 At Russia’s insistence, DNR/LNR representatives joined the TCG on 23 June . At Russia's insistence, they joined theTCG.
 According to the Kremlin, this put them on a par with the authorities in Kyiv . The Kremlin says this puts them on the par with Kyiv's authorities .
 War in Donbas The Novorossiya project was already in trouble . The project was also in trouble when it began .
 Besides failing in Kharkiv, Dnipro and southern Ukraine, it lacked broad support in Donbas . Besides failing, it lacks broad support.
 The ATO initially relied on reservists, militias funded by business oligarchs and volunteer battalions . From May, ‘territorial defence battalions’ formed in each oblast of the country and trained by the Ukrainian Armed Forces .
 ATO pushed DNR/LNR forces on to the defensive in May after an uncertain beginning . The ATO has been in charge of the ATO since the beginning of May .
 Petro Poroshenko's victory in the presidential election on 25 May was the first time that a Ukrainian president had been elected without a second round run-off . Politically, it was reinforced by surging patriotism throughout Ukraine .
 Poroshenko was confident enough to put forward a 15-point peace plan on 20 June .
 Its political sections made concessions to the insurgents – a partial amnesty, joint police patrols in the post-ceasefire conflict zone, decentralization and draft changes to the Constitution .
 He called for a 10-km buffer zone on the Ukraine/Russia border to stop Russia resupplying its proxies . Crucially, he called for the 10- km buffer zone .
 Russia responded to the ATO by sending into Ukraine more irregulars and heavier and more advanced equipment, including surface-to-air missiles,39 and supporting DNR/LNR forces with long-range artillery firing from its own territory .
 Ukrainian forces recaptured Sloviansk, the symbolic centre of the insurgency, on 5 July . They had pushed the DNR/LNR forces into a narrow strip running from Donetsk through Luhansk to the Russian border .
 Ukraine’s negotiators sent Surkov their latest peace proposals on 25 August . The Novorossiya project is on the verge of defeat .
 The border buffer zone should be established by 5 September, according to the report . Russia should secure the ‘self-disbandment’ of the DNR/LNR by 14 September, the report says .
 Up to 6,500 Russian troops, organized into battalion tactical groups, invaded Donetsk oblast . Up to 5,000 Russian troops.
 Ukraine lost several hundred soldiers and many of its armoured vehicles at Ilovaisk, southeast of Donetsk . They decimated a large Ukrainian force at Ilovisk .
 Russian forces regained much of the lost territory in subsequent days . DNR and LNR units, again supported by regular Russian forces, regained much.
 This document is from a haul hacked from Surkov’s email account and subsequently published . It is from an email account hacked from the account of Surkov's account .
 The Minsk-1 agreement was signed in the capital of Belarus on 5 September 2014 . This was the context in which the first Minsk deal was signed .
 OSCE has proposed banning landmines and drones, except OSCE drones . It also reiterated the call for foreign troops to be withdrawn .
 The Verkhovna Rada passed a temporary law on special status on 16 September . In line with Minsk-1, the law was passed in line with the Russian government .
 It scheduled pre-term local elections in occupied Donbas for 7 December . The elections will take place on 7 December.
 The law also prohibited central authorities from dismissing local councils . The announcement of a ceasefire had little effect .
 As fighting continued, Russia bolstered the DNR/LNR regimes to make them invulnerable to renewed pressure from Ukraine . The summer crisis is a repeat of the summer crisis .
 To strengthen the legitimacy of the regimes, ‘presidential’ and ‘parliamentary’ elections were held on 2 November . The date stipulated in the temporary law on special status .
 Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine results enabled the installation of new Moscow-backed local leaders. Western Policy.
 On 15 December, Russia created an inter-ministerial commission to manage the DNR/LNR economies . The commission was created by the Russian government .
 The DNR/LNR and the rest of the country were moving further apart . Developments in Ukraine simultaneously showed that the DNR and rest of Ukraine were moving closer apart .
 Parliamentary elections on 26 October produced a majority coalition in the Rada . Rada committed to deeper Western integration .
 Ukraine's east/west electoral divide is shifting eastwards, with ‘pro-Western’ parties doing better in the south and much of the east than their ‘ pro-Russian’ rivals .
 In November, authorities in Kyiv began cutting economic and financial ties with the DNR/LNR . They set up crossing points across the line of contact and fortifying their military positions in the region .
 Fighting intensified in parts of Donetsk oblast at the turn of the year . The fighting intensified in part of Donetsk.
 Most notably, insurgents supported by Russian troops attacked Ukrainian positions at Debaltseve, a transport hub near the administrative line between Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts .
 Ukraine's forces withdrew from Debaltseve on 18 February 2015 . The engagement was not as destructive as the battle at Ilovaisk .
 The Minsk-2 agreement was brokered by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President François Hollande of France . As fighting raged at Debaltseve, emergency negotiations took place.
 The document was signed on 12 February 2015 by representatives from the OSCE, Russia, Ukraine, the DNR and LNR . It has been the framework for subsequent attempts to end the war .
 The product of hasty drafting, it tries valiantly to paper over yawning differences between the Ukrainian and Russian positions .
 As a result, it contains contradictory provisions and sets out a convoluted sequence of actions . It is a result of a series of contradictory provisions .
 The Minsk-2 agreement was endorsed by United Nations Security Council Resolution 2202 on 17 February . The agreement was approved by the Security Council on February 17 .
 The day after the pullback of heavy weaponry from the contact line, a dialogue on local elections will start in accordance with Ukrainian law and the temporary law on special status adopted in September 2014 .
 There is now no reference to Poroshenko’s buffer zone or an OSCEmonitored security zone . There is no mention of Poroshenko.
 'decentralization' will take account of 'peculiarities' of occupied Donbas, as agreed with DNR/LNR representatives .
 Ukraine will adopt ‘permanent legislation’ on special status before the end of 2015 . Ukraine will also adopt “permanent law’s’on special status .
Political sections of Minsk-2 are weighted heavily in Russia’s favour . The political sections of the Russian political party are heavily weighted heavily .
 The provisions on special status go way beyond the brief reference in Minsk-1 . In particular, the provisions onspecial status go far beyond the Brief reference .
 Exceptionally farreaching in scope, they would be enshrined in a permanent law and an amended constitution .
 Minsk-2 does not envisage a buffer zone, there would be nothing to prevent Russia from resupplying its DNR/LNR proxies before it did return the border to Ukraine’s control .
 Ukrainian authorities in Kyiv have agreed to implement a deep constitutional reform so as to satisfy requests for self-dependence . It's called: decentralization, autonomization, federalization – of certain regions of their country .
 This is the essential, deeper meaning of the decision taken by the authorities . The decision was made by authorities in the UK .
 Implementation of these measures would in effect destroy Ukraine as a sovereign country . Implementation of the measures would also destroy Ukraine .
 The DNR and LNR would be reincorporated into Ukraine but as distinct political, economic and legal entities tied to Russia . A constitutional Trojan Horse would give the Kremlin a lasting presence in Ukraine’s political system .
 radical devolution to Donbas might well prompt other regions to press for similar powers, causing central authority to unravel and effectively balkanizing Ukraine .
 DNR and LNR would be able to sign agreements with other countries . Yet the DNR could also establish Russian military bases on their territories .
 The adoption of Russia’s demands might so weaken the central authorities in Kyiv that implementation of the AA would be rendered impossible . The adopted of Russia's demands may so weaken central authorities that implementation would be impossible .
 The German and French leaders seem to have been so keen for a ceasefire that they assented to political provisions at odds with Ukraine’s existence as a sovereign entity and EU integration .
 Putin did not use the word ‘independence’ in Ukraine, which would contradict the formal reincorporation of occupied Donbas into Ukraine .
 Ukraine's ‘non bloc’ status under Yanukovych was compatible with the continued presence of Russia’s Black Sea Fleet in Crimea . By way of precedent, Ukraine's 'non bloc' status was compatible.
 Russia intended to retain its military presence in Transnistria following the reintegration of the region . Moldova’s constitution contains a neutrality clause .
Despite Russia’s efforts, Minsk-2 was not just the product of intense pressure on Ukraine . Despite Russia's efforts, the war was not the result of intense Pressure on Ukraine.
59 few Ukrainians threw in their lot with Russia in the spring of 2014, according to the Russian media .
 Ukrainians fought back en masse, probably killing several hundred Russian troops and irregulars60 . They were stopped by Russia's army at Ilovaisk and at Debaltseve .
Russia could have had little doubt by early 2015 that even if it inflicted mass casualties on Ukraine, it would incur further heavy losses itself . Russia could have suffered mass casualties if it did not inflict mass casualties .
61 Ukraine could not destroy Russia’s proxies, yet Russia was unwilling to sustain further high-intensity war with Ukraine . Ukraine was unable to prevail, but its readiness to fight to defend its sovereignty gave Russia pause .
 Minsk-2 reflects this stalemate on the battlefield that it is an inherently contradictory document . It is precisely because Minsk 2 reflects that it's an inherently conflicting document. It's precisely because it's a contradictory document.
 The agreement makes the return of the border to Ukrainian control contingent on a political settlement agreeable to Russia and its proxies .
 The settlement includes provisions favouring the re-establishment of Ukrainian control over Donbas . However, it also includes provisions for re-establishing Ukrainian control of Donbas before a settlement has been finalized .
 Articles 1 and 2 envisage a lasting ceasefire and the pullback of heavy weaponry from the contact line before a dialogue on elections is held . Articles 2 and 3 envisage the pull back of heavy weapons from the Contact line .
 Ukraine can credibly argue that the pullback of heavy weaponry must be completed before election preparations begin . Article 4 is ambiguous about whether the dialogue begins the day after the pull back has started or day after it has finished .
 Russia has yet to withdraw its troops, equipment and irregulars from Ukraine . Article 10 in effect requires it to do without preconditions – thus relinquishing control over the border .
 Russia has strengthened the DNR/LNR’s armed formations and tightened its control over them . They are now effectively appendages of its own military. Russia has meanwhile strengthened the armed formations .
 OSCE/ODIHR standards make it impossible to hold elections in Donbas, according to article 12 .
 Russia's special status as set out in Minsk-2 is unworkable, according to the Russian government . Russia has made even more extreme demands in May 2015 .
 It far exceeds what most Ukrainians consider an acceptable price for peace, as polls repeatedly show . The price is far higher than what Ukrainians consider acceptable for peace .
Ukrainian leader who even appeared open to these ideas would probably commit political suicide . Any Ukrainian leader who appears open to such ideas would likely commit suicide .
 The draft did not refer to special status . This despite the fact that the draft didn't refer to a special status.
 President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has had to tread carefully . He made ending the war central to his election campaign in 2019 . Poroshenko’s successor has also had to step carefully .
 The DNR and LNR would not receive anything like the powers listed in Minsk-2; nor would they gain constitutional 'special status' This is unacceptable to Russia .
 Ukraine's version puts the re-establishment of control in the east before a political settlement . Ukraine’s version of the Ukraine version puts it in the middle of the conflict .
 Donbas would be reintegrated in line with the national decentralization programme and subordinated afresh to the authorities in Kyiv . Donbas will be re-integrated into line with national decentralisation programme and subordinate to authorities .
 This would entrench Russian-controlled statelets, breaking the back of the Ukrainian state . It would prevent central authorities from running the country as an integrated unit and torpedoing its westward integration .
 Only then would Ukraine regain control over the border, although whether Russia would allow that is moot . Russia would not allow that.
 Minsk implementation has been the avowed goal of Western policy since 2015 . ‘Minsk implementation’ has been a goal of West policy since 2014 .
 U.S. and EU policies have not been as clear and as consistent as they could and should have been, as policymakers like to think .
 Some decision-makers focus on making Russia change its policy . Some would be 66 Shandra . Leaked Kremlin emails show Minsk protocol designed as path to Ukraine's capitulation .
 The draft permanent law was adopted at first reading but did not get any further . It was eventually withdrawn from the Rada agenda in 2019 . The draft law was later adopted at the first reading .
 The temporary law on special status passed on 16 September 2014 has been rolled over each year since its expiry in 2017 . It is part of a ‘de-occupation’ law naming Russia as an aggressor and occupying power .
 The de-occupation law also wound up the ATO and transferred responsibility for military operations to the armed forces . The law also transferred responsibility to the military.
 Russia may suspend handover if dissatisfied over special status and constitutional reform . The implication is that Russia might suspend the handover.
 Russian demands in May 2015 would make the DNR/LNR responsible for border management . In any case, Russian demands would make it responsible for the border management.
 Some face two ways, voicing support for Ukraine’s sovereignty while hoping that an agreement acceptable to Russia is possible . Others seem prepared to accept anything that returns Europe to what they consider normalcy .
In Western capitals, particularly in Europe, it is that implementation means identifying a point between the Russian and Ukrainian positions as regards elections and special status .
 In this connection, two diplomatic initiatives stand out . The Morel Plan and the Morel plan stand out in this connection .
 Ukraine would at the same time provisionally adopt a special-status law, which would become permanent once the OSCE/ODIHR had ruled the elections to be free and fair . Ukraine would also adopt special- status law, if the law was approved .
 Germany's foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, called for entry into force of a special-status law on the same day that elections were held in Donbas .
The Steinmeier Formula also got nowhere because of opposition in Ukraine . The Steinmeier F1 got nowhere due to opposition.
 Zelenskyy signed the first written version of the original version in the autumn of 2019 . But it was resuscitated in the fall of 2019, when it was signed by Zelensyy .
 Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin has backed down in Ukraine . He said he would not assent to elections in Donbas while Russian troops were there . Russian troops are there .
 Ukrainian authorities in Kyiv had reclaimed control of the border with Russia . They suggested that free and fair elections could be held in Donbas before Russian troops had withdrawn .
 Both proposals were also based on the 2015 draft permanent law on special status . Both proposals are based on a 2015 draft law.
 The explosive reaction to the law in Ukraine at the time exposed the strength of domestic opposition to it .
 The law would have been anywhere near enough for the Kremlin, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Minsk-2 has been implemented in Russia so that everyone gets something . Some Western policymakers have tried to find a way to implement Minsk2 so that all people get something .
 Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine maintains that Ukraine must agree the Russian interpretation of the political sections of Minsk-2 with the DNR/LNR before it could even notionally get the border back .
 Russian decision-makers did learn one lesson from the failure of the Novorossiya project .
 They no longer think that Ukraine will collapse imminently; getting it to assent to their version of Minsk-2 will take longer than they thought . They don't think that Ukrainian government will collapse.
 The support of Western countries, led by the US, is what has prevented Ukraine from capitulating . By such logic, the support of the U.S. is what's prevented Ukraine's capitulation .
 Russia has kept up incessant pressure – periodic military escalation, economic sanctions, information war, cyberenabled attacks, covert meddling in Ukraine’s domestic politics . This explains why Russia has been keeping up constant pressure .
 Russia hopes to convince others that its neighbour is a failed state. By trying to divide and disorient Ukraine.
 Western capitals will eventually prioritize the restoration of ties with Russia, withdrawing their support for Ukraine and/or pushing for concessions .
 The replacement of Surkov by Dmitriy Kozak as the senior Russian official responsible for Donbas should be seen in this context . The replacement earlier this year of Sur Putin's Surkov was replaced by Dmitry Kozak .
 Kozak has already sounded more constructive than the relentless Surkov . Born in Soviet Ukraine and one of Putin’s trusted fixers, Kozak is one of his trusted fixer .
 There is no evidence that Russia has altered its position on Minsk-2 implementation. Yet there are no evidence Russia has changed its position .
 Kozak fronted the abortive attempt to resolve the Moldova/Transnistria dispute along lines almost identical to Russia's preferred solution for Donbas .
 The move may be an attempt to capitalize on renewed political infighting and fragmentation in Kyiv in recent months .
 Other senior Russians share their scornful view of Ukrainian national identity . Some senior Russians express themselves less obnoxiously in public .
 Kozak oversaw the inter-ministerial commission managing the DNR/LNR economies . Kozak also oversaw the Inter-Ministerial Commission managing DNR and LNR economies.
 President Emmanuel Macron of France is eager to mend fences with Moscow . France's President Macron has been in Ukraine for months .
 The Ukraine crisis has been blamed for Ukraine's problems . Ukraine's president has been criticized for its actions in recent months .
There is an alternative way to approach implementation of the Minsk agreements, says author . Proposing an alternative approach to implementation would be an alternative to the current approach .
 First, Western governments should define their objective, unequivocally, as the defence of Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 This would be the bottom line that too often has been missing from policy debates in Western capitals . It would be a sign that too many policy debates are missing from Western capitals.
 It would mean being guided by what the authorities in Kyiv decided was feasible in terms of implementation . Even if this proved unacceptable to Russia, as it almost certainly would. It would also mean beingguided by the authorities was feasible .
Ukrainian public opinion seems remote given where Ukrainian public opinion is. Equally, Western leaders should support a Ukrainian leader who freely reached agreement with Russia on these questions .
 What they should not do is push Ukraine to cede ground on the core issues. What they shouldn't do is pushing Ukraine to give up on core issues, say the government .
 That would contradict Ukraine's commitment to uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty. That would be a contradiction to their commitment to upholding Ukraine's sovereignty .
 The likeliest effect would be to undermine the authorities in Kyiv, he says . Russia would be destabilizing the political situation there and encouraging Russia to press for more concessions .
 In absence of a settlement acceptable to Ukraine, Western governments should view the Minsk agreements and Normandy process as mechanisms for ending the conflict in Donbas. Second, Western countries should view them as mechanisms to end the conflict .
 Decision-makers should welcome practical dialogue and confidence-building measures . withdrawal of weapons, prisoner exchanges, allowing OSCE mission full access to the conflict zone, environmental/ ecological risk mitigation .
 Ukraine and Russia should not expect movement over political issues, which would continue to divide the two countries . But they should not be expecting movement over the issue of political issues .
 The Minsk and Normandy processes would see many more ‘draws’ as Zelenskyy described the December 2019 Normandy summit .
 The third element of this approach is not, strictly speaking, part of the Minsk agreements . It flows from the commitment to uphold Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 It would require Western capitals to maintain support for political and economic reform in Ukraine . It would also require support for the country's economic reform .
 Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine has been called for structural reforms to unlock its economic potential .
 The EU/Ukraine AA provides a long-term anchor that Ukraine otherwise lacks, and is supported by international donors . Looking further ahead, the focus should be gradual implementation of the EU/ Ukraine AA .
 This would strengthen institutional resilience in the face of Russian pressure, which will continue without a political settlement to the Kremlin’s liking . This would strengthened institutional resilience, which would strengthen the Kremlin's resilience .
 Implementing the AA would require rebuilding (or building from scratch) much of Ukraine's state .
 It is debatable whether Ukraine has the capacity to deliver the AA in its entirety . The prioritization of certain chapters would be advisable .
 Such an undertaking would also require a major commitment from Western countries and donors . Such a commitment would also need to be made by Western countries, donors .
 Sustaining that at a time of ‘Ukraine fatigue’ and with governments and electorates battered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
 Ukraine has frequently failed to deliver IMF programmes since the mid-1990s . It is imperative that donors apply firm conditionality to assistance, particularly as regards IMF programmes .
 Russia should dial up the violence in a major way. Western assistance should include the supply of defensive military equipment to reinforce the capabilities of Ukraine’s armed forces .
 The international community needs to build its policy toward Moscow over eastern Ukraine . Until there is a clearly positive change in the core Russian approach, the international community must build its policies toward Moscow .
 Large Russian units have already fought twice in Ukraine, once even during peace talks . For now, this may seem highly unlikely, but it may be highly unlikely .
 Moscow could resort to such means again if the lower-cost, lower-visibility approach of supporting the entities in a protracted conflict fail. Moscow could also resort to lower- cost, lower -visibility approaches if the conflict fails .
 Western governments should encourage the authorities in Kyiv to take a more inclusive approach to those in occupied Donbas . Fourth, Western countries should encourage authorities to be more inclusive .
 Unlike the de facto states in Abkhazia and Transnistria, the DNR and LNR are not fully consolidated . Unlike the De facto states, they are not completely consolidated .
 Russian actions were critical in fomenting war in 2014. Georgia and Moldova were the two countries involved in the conflict .
 People either side of the contact line retain similar identities . Crucially, people on both sides of the line retain same identities .
 The longer the occupied region exists in a separate space dominated by Russia, the likelier it is that an identity overtly hostile towards Kyiv will crystallize . The current division to harden still further.
 Successes and Failures of Economic Reform in Ukraine’, in Hale, H and Orttung, R , Beyond the Maidan .
 A study of eastern Ukraine’s separatist-held areas’ in De Waal, T and Von Twickel, N. , Beyond Frozen Conflict .
 Certain actions by the authorities in Kyiv have added to this danger . Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine has added to the danger .
 DNR and LNR authorities have expropriated large companies on their territories . Supposedly intended to combat smuggling and corruption, it depressed trade across the contact line .
 Such isolationist actions lend respectability to those in occupied Donbas, making reconciliation even more difficult .
 This is more than a pragmatic argument over how to make reintegration eventually happen . There is a principle at stake. This is about more than an argument over whether it will happen .
 Ukraine’s justified claim to sovereignty over occupied Donbas should go hand in hand with a recognition that those there are entitled to be treated as Ukrainian citizens .
 Zelenskyy has adopted an inclusive tone, but more needs to be done to address humanitarian issues, rebuild trade links and facilitate people-to-people ties .
 DNR and LNR will not be de facto parts of Ukraine any time soon, fifth said . That said, fifth, Western governments should assume that the DNR, LNR won't be part of Ukraine. That said.
 For reasons of principle and consistency, Western capitals should continue to recognize Ukraine’s de jure sovereignty over occupied Donbas .
An attempt at early reintegration would impose intolerable strains on Ukraine . But an attempt atEarly Reintegration could impose intolerable strain on Ukraine, an official says .
 Reconciling communities traumatized by war will be an immense challenge . Reconciled communities will be a huge challenge for many .
 The DNR and LNR are enmeshed in Russia’s military/security, economic and media spaces .
 The political gap separating them and Kyivcontrolled territory is wide and will become wider if Ukraine continues to reform to EU standards . Ukraine will become larger if it continues to reforms to the EU.
 integration on terms agreeable to Ukraine would mean the effective dissolution of the DNR/LNR regimes . Integration on terms agreed to Ukraine.
 There is no chance that the Kremlin would accept that in the foreseeable future. The Kremlin is not likely to accept that.
 A reformed and prosperous Ukraine might eventually act as a magnet, drawing people in occupied Donbas to reintegrate .
 Russia’s attitude would still have to change before it could happen. Russia's attitude to Russia would still need to change to change .
Until then, the priority for Western governments should be to help defend the sovereignty of unoccupied Ukraine against Russian pressure .
 The approach sketched here would logically entail a lengthy stand-off with Russia . Finally, the approach would logically involve a lengthy standing-off .
 This would last until Russia’s leaders acknowledged Ukraine to be a sovereign country . This would be the last time Russia's leaders acknowledge Ukraine is a sovereign nation .
 That seems inconceivable as long as the current leadership holds power in Moscow . It is also unlikely to happen quickly in the post-Putin world .
 U.S. and EU sanctions on Russia that are tied to implementation of the Minsk agreements would remain in place for the foreseeable future .
 The expropriation of assets by the DNR/LNR regimes on 2 March followed a decision by the authorities in Kyiv the day before to regulate trade . The blockade at that point remained unofficial .
 The expropriation added to political pressure on Poroshenko to make the blockade official, which he did on 15 March .
 The deficiencies of the Minsk agreements have prompted calls for them to be abandoned and replacements negotiated . The deficiencies have led to calls for their failure to implement them .
 A variation on this is the suggestion that the authorities in Kyiv should simply cut ties with the DNR and LNR . In this version, this version cannot be reintegrated and are a costly burden on Ukraine .
 The main effect of a unilateral Ukrainian decision to withdraw from the Minsk framework would be to remove any remaining diplomatic constraints on Russia, giving it a pretext to re-escalate the fighting .
 Ukraine could be left even more isolated. In addition, such a move might well splinter Western support for Ukraine .
 The Minsk Agreements have often been called into question by critics . Critics argue that they disadvantage Ukraine and have failed to bring about an end to the conflict .
 All relevant actors should remember how unlikely it is that a new agreement could be reached – still less a better one – would be if there were none at all .
 Russia's undeclared war in Donbas is Moscow’s latest attempt to limit the sovereignty of Ukraine . Moscow has seen Ukraine as the heart of their self-proclaimed sphere of influence .
 Having annexed Crimea in March 2014, Russia launched a campaign of violent subversion in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Russia tried to force Ukraine to ‘federalize’ its political system . Using teams of insurgents (local activists and provocateurs) from Russia itself, Russia used teams of rebels .
 The aim was to create pro-Moscow regimes in these regions that would, once reintegrated into Ukraine, enable Russia to control its neighbour from within . The aim is to create a pro-Russian regime that would allow Russia to take control of Ukraine .
 The Novorossiya project quickly turned out to be a crass misjudgment – ‘a conceit of Russian geopolitical culture’ as one observer put it .
 The readiness of many more to fight in self-defence compelled Russia to resort to increasingly open military intervention to save its proxies . Russia's readiness to defend itself has prompted Russia to step up military intervention .
 Russia inflicted crushing defeats on Ukrainian forces in September 2014 and February 2015, yet was unwilling to pay the price that further high-intensity war would have exacted . Russia inflicted defeats on Ukraine forces in the past two years .
 Russian foreign policy was a stunning failure of Russia's foreign policy. By almost any standard, this was a shocking failure of Russian foreign policies .
 Brookings Institution Press: ‘… it is not clear that letting the Donbas go would solve the problem with Russia’
 Russia's goal of getting Ukraine to join a Russia-led bloc is further than ever from being realized . Russia’s goal is to get Ukraine to joining a Russia -led bloc .
 The war has soured the Ukrainian public toward Russia, and it makes it harder still that a pro-Russian government will come to power in Kyiv . Much of the pre-2014 population that was most pro-Russia resided in Crimea or the occupied Donbas cannot now vote.
 Tensions between Ukrainian democracy and Russia’s ambitions there is higher than ever .
 Minsk agreements reflect two irreconcilable views of Ukraine’s sovereignty – the Minsk conundrum . This tension pulses through the Minski agreements .
 Ukraine sees the agreements as instruments with which to re-establish its sovereignty . Ukraine sees it as an instrument to restore its sovereignty.
 It demands a meaningful and lasting ceasefire, followed by the complete withdrawal of Russian troops and the return of the border to its control .
Free and fair elections in the DNR/LNR would be held according to OSCE/ODIHR standards . The elections would be free and fair, according to the standards .
 Following reintegration of the DNR/LNR, Ukraine would make its own domestic and foreign policy choices .
 Russia views the Minsk agreements as tools with which to break Ukraine’s sovereignty . By contrast, Russia views them as tools to break the Ukraine's sovereignty .
 It demands that elections be held in occupied Donbas before Ukraine has reclaimed control over the border . Ukraine demands that its proxies would win, knowing that they would win .
 An extreme form of special status would be written into Ukraine’s constitution, crippling the central authorities and turning the DNR and LNR into Russian-controlled mini-states .
 Ukraine would be unable to govern itself effectively or to orient its foreign policy to the West . Ukraine would not be able to orient itself to the west .
 Only then would Russia return the border to Ukraine’s control, although it is doubtful this would actually happen .
 The Morel Plan and Steinmeier Formula have sought to bridge the Russian and Ukrainian stances . Western attempts to resolve the Minsk conundrum have been made by the West .
 Ukraine has heaped pressure on Ukraine and made a delicate situation even more fragile . Not only have they failed, they have heaped Pressure on Ukraine, but they have made it more fragile.
 Russia’s leaders have felt vindicated in their view, first, that Ukraine is inherently weak and unviable . Second, that Western governments lack the spine for a drawn-out confrontation .
 Well-intentioned attempts at conflict resolution may have made a political settlement that protects Ukraine's sovereignty even less likely .
 Such episodes underline the need for extreme caution when talking about Minsk implementation, which easily merges with a presumption that the Ukrainian and Russian positions can be split down the middle .
 Ukraine is sovereign, or it is not, and stop trying to square this circle . Instead of searching for an optimal point, Western policymakers should acknowledge the starkness of the Minsk conundrum .
 There is an alternative way to approach implementation of the Minsk agreements . There is, however, an alternative approach to implementing the agreements .
 Western Policy and Russia’s War in Eastern Ukraine would make the defence of Ukraine's sovereignty the unambiguous premise of Western policy .
 This would mean adhering to Ukraine’s interpretation of the Minsk agreements, particularly as regards elections and special status . This would be the first time Ukraine has changed its interpretation of its agreement .
 Some policymakers would recoil from this prospectus, which they would find troubling and unnerving . Some would find it troubling, but others would recoil.
 The twin realities laid bare by Russia’s war in eastern Ukraine mean that the Minsk agreements are not susceptible to such logic . The Minsk agreement is not susceptible of such logic.
 A protracted stand-off over Ukraine need not preclude cooperation with Russia in other areas, to the extent that this is possible . Russia and Ukraine have been involved in a long-running dispute over Ukraine .
 Russia's relationship with Russia would be fractious, difficult and sometimes dangerous . It would require constant attention and management. It would also mean a relationship would be difficult and dangerous .
 Those inclined to reject such an approach because they find it too uncomfortable ought to ponder the alternative . But those inclined to rejected such a approach ought to consider the alternative.
 Attempts to implement the Minsk agreements that do not start from an unequivocal commitment to support Ukraine’s sovereignty will continue to fail . It will risk destabilizing Ukraine itself – with potentially grave implications for long-term security in eastern Europe .
 More than six years after Russia launched its calamitous and futile war against Ukraine, Western decision-makers need to decide which of these answers best serves their countries’ interests .
 Duncan Allan is an associate fellow with the Russia and Eurasia Programme at Chatham House . Allan is the director of Octant Research & Analysis Ltd, an independent consultancy .
 For more than 28 years he was a member of the UK Foreign & Commonwealth Office’s research analysts’ cadre . He worked on the countries of the former Soviet Union, particularly Russia and Ukraine .
 Acknowledgments I am grateful to James Nixey, Orysia Lutsevych, Ľubica Polláková and Anna Morgan in the Chatham House Russia and Eurasia Programme .
 Jake Statham and Anna Brown copy-edited the manuscript, and gave me invaluable advice and help . Jake St. Statham, Anna Brown gave me valuable advice.
 Kirk Bennett, Laurence Broyd, Alexander Hug, Donald Jensen, James Sherr, Rebecca Loughna, and Kataryna Wolczuk are among the anonymous reviewers .
 Our mission is to help governments and societies build a sustainably secure, prosperous and just world . We are committed to building a sustainable, prosperous, just world.
 No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical . No one has the permission of the copyright holder .
 The opinions expressed in this publication are the responsibility of the author of the article . The opinions are theresponsibility of the writer . The author is responsible for the publication of this article .
 Volodymyr Zelenskyy, Angela Merkel, Emmanuel Macron and Vladimir Putin attend a press conference at the Élysée Palace in Paris .