 His research interests include international relations, foreign policy analysis, security studies, and geopolitics . He also has interests in international relations and security studies .
 No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or used in any form or by any electronic, mechanical or other means, without permission in writing from the publishers .
 Turkuvaz Haberleşme ve Yayıncılık A.Ş., İstanbul SETA.org.org: 66 GOP Çankaya 06700 Ankara TURKEY Tel: +90 312.551 21 00
 It has a strategic position in the Black Sea region and has vast mineral resources . It has vast resources in the region, including vast mineral reserves .
 The Russian Empire was the battlefield between the Russian Empire and its enemies for many centuries . The country has a rich history and its territory, especially the eastern part .
For the tsars and the Soviet leaders, Russia represented security against an invader . The size of Russia represented the countries geopolitical security against the invader, says the author .
 Shortly after the February 2014 Ukrainian revolution a pro-Western government came to power in Kiev . The Ukrainian government was formed in February 2014 .
 Moscow understood it has to intervene to avoid such a scenario and launched a hybrid war against Ukraine . Moscow understood that it had to intervene.
 This report aims to identify the main reasons behind Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine . It also aims to highlight the reasons behind the conflict .
 The report presents the main components of the hybrid war that is being waged to destabilize Ukraine . The report was published in September .
 Russia has used economic, psychological, and cyber warfare against Ukraine . Russia has organized espionage activities on its territory in order to destabilize the country .
 The same tactics can be used to destabilize another country after they are adapted by the aggressor to the targeted country’s profile .
 The report presents the main threats to Ukraine’s national security since 2014 .
 Ukraine underlines efforts made by Ukraine to counter hybrid threats . It also underlines the efforts made to counter the hybrid threats.
 It discusses a selective range of issues like proxy war, trade war, propaganda, cyberattacks, infiltration, sabotage, and clandestine operations . It also discusses the issue of cyberattacks and infiltration .
 The Russian Federation implemented the hybrid war concept in Ukraine between 2014 and 2018 . This report aims to highlight hybrid war characteristics and the ways in which the Russian Federation implement the concept .
 The report tries to promote an understanding and awareness among the decisionmaking leaders about the hybrid war threats .
 In the last years, a number of articles have been written about Russia’s hybrid war against Ukraine . None of them have presented specific information and examples of all the hybrid activities .
 This report presents these events and underlines the complexity of this kind of war in order to promote a better understanding of the issue at hand . The report is based on the findings of the World War II conflict .
 In the following days, thousands of people took to the streets of Kiev and other cities to protest .
 President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych postponed the signing of the European Union Association Agreement at the Vilnius summit following Moscow’s pressures .
 The decision generated a great wave of dissatisfaction among Ukrainian citizens and triggered the following events . Ukrainian citizens were unhappy with the decision .
 The Azarov government and President Yanukovych's fate along with the future of Ukraine under Russia’s influence was decided at the summit in Vilnius .
 Thousands of pro-European protesters took to the streets to show their dissatisfaction about the postponement of the signing .
Violent fight with police forces in February resulted in the death of dozens of people in February .
 President Yanukovych had already fled to Russia . It all ended on February 22 when the parliament decided with an overwhelming vote .
 At the same time, it was decided to appoint an interim president and to set the date of May 25, 2014, for holding presidential elections . The date was set to be set for presidential elections in May 2014 .
 The Ukrainian Parliament repealed the law on the policy of the state language that allowed the use of minority languages in public institutions in the regions where minorities exceeded 10% of the population .
 The ethnically Russian minority accounted for more than 10% of the region's population . The Russian language became a regional one in Ukraine .
 The abrogation of the law raised a great deal of dissatisfaction among the Russian-speaking population . The majority of the population represents a majority in the southeastern region of Ukraine .
Unsatisfied with parliament's decision and encouraged by pro-Russian propaganda, Russian-speaking population took to the streets to protest .
 The Russian Federation says it must act to protect its strategic interests . The latest political changes in Kiev and the new leadership made it clear to the Russian Federation that it must action .
 The occupation of Crimea was in full swing in February 2014, while the Ukrainian Parliament was voting for the new pro-Western government .
 Russia's special forces managed to occupy the peninsula without firing a single shot . On March 18, 2014, the Russian Parliament voted for the annexation of Crimea .
 The following points are important when speaking about Crimea in geopolitical terms . Crimea is the region of Crimea in the Crimea region .
 Due to its position it assures the dominance over the Black Sea from Crimea you can easily reach any shore of the Black sea .
 The loss of Crimea would have severely limited Russia’s maneuvering freedom . Russia would have had lost its influence in the Black Sea region .
Russia could not allow Crimea to become a port for NATO’s warships . Also, Russia could not let Crimea become a ports for NATO's warships .
 Macdonald Alastair and Pavel Polityuk, “Ukraine Government Pledges Russian Language Rights’, Reuters, 18 April 2014 .
 Crimea also facilitates access of the Russian Federation to warm waters and the World Ocean which was drastically limited after the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Crimea also allows access to the Russian federation to warm water and the world Ocean .
 Russia's ports in the Arctic Ocean are frozen six months a year . The Russian fleet's access to the World Ocean was severely limited due to the lack of access .
 The main objective of the Russian Federation after 1991 was to project its naval power and influence to the Mediterranean Sea, the Middle East, and the Atlantic Ocean . After 1991, the main objective was to projects its naval influence to Mediterranean Sea and Middle East .
 Russia's naval doctrine published on July 26, 2015 . This objective was also mentioned in Russia’s naval doctrine .
 After the annexation of Crimea, Russia tried to destabilize Ukraine by supporting protests in the eastern part of the country .
10 thousands of pro-Russian protesters expressed their dissatisfaction with the repeal of the law on the policy of the state language . On March 1, in the regions of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kharkiv, Mariupol, and Odessa, 10 thousands of protesters expressed dissatisfaction .
 The main core of the protesters was coordinated by Russia’s secret services . The protesters were led by Russia's secret services.
 In the same month, the rebels declared Luhansk's independence under the “Luhansk People's Republic,’ all with Russia’s help and its coordination .
In Northeast Ukraine, Pro-Maidan Occupiers are Routed by Counter-demonstrators, The Washington Post says .
 Ukraine was not able to immediately start an operation for retaking control of its occupied territories for the following reasons . The critical internal situation after the revolution was the reason .
 A ceasefire was reached on September 5, after the Minsk Agreement, it would not be respected by the two sides . Despite the fact that a ceasefire was agreed, it wouldn't be respected .
 On February 12, 2015, the Minsk II Agreement was signed by Ukraine, Russia, Germany, France and Ukraine . The Minsk Agreement is a package of measures to end the conflict .
 The region continues to remain a hot spot on the map of Europwe . Fighting between the Ukrainian army and pro-Russian separatists backed by Moscow is still underway .
 The Russian Federation’s interest in the short term is to continue the conflict in order to put continuous pressure on Ukraine and on its leadership .
 In the long term, Russia wants to transform the war in Eastern Ukraine into a frozen conflict, like those in Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Transnistria .
 The Russian Federation used its gas energy resources as a political weapon to force the new government to act in its interest . Moscow can block Ukraine's accession to the European Union and to NATO .
 Its purpose is to undermine the state order and to discredit Ukraine, the pro-Western leadership and its allies, the U.S. and the European Union . The European Union is trying to undermine Ukraine's state order .
 Moscow triggered a complex cy14. In addition, as part of the hybrid war, Moscow triggered the cy14 . The hybrid war was also part of a hybrid war .
 Kiev Launches 'Anti-terror Operation' in East – Live Updates’.
 Michael Kofman and Katya Migacheva are the authors of Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine . The authors are also known for their work in Ukraine and Crimea .
 All these tactics used by the Russian Federation aim to weaken, destabilize, and disintegrate Ukraine . They are known in the specialty literature as elements of a hybrid war .
 The conflict is part of the hybrid war waged by the Russia Federation in Ukraine . The complexity of this war will be analyzed in the following chapters .
 This report covers the period from February 2014 to December 2018 . It defines the peculiarities of the hybrid war in Ukraine and its complexity . The report is based on a report by the European Commission .
 It can be encountered in the 5th century BC during the Peloponnesian War and targets all levels of war, from the tactical and operational to the strategic .
 A New Paradigm for Stability Operations in Failing States is published in the U.S. Army War College, Pennsylvania, in 2007 .
 It is more profitable for a state to start a hybrid war against an opponent in order to achieve its political goals. Therefore, it is more profitable for the state, in terms of costs and risks .
 The aggressor state acts on as many levels as possible to undermine the state concerned . This is the first time a state has acted on its own.
 The purpose is to make it fall apart from the inside or to influence its internal and/or foreign policy according to its own interests . The purpose was to make the country fall apart.
 The third parties can fund one of the state or non-state actors involved in the conflict by offering weapons, fighting techniques, money, military training, and soldiers or mercenaries .
 The Russian Federation offers all the necessary support to the separatists in order to preserve their occupied territories and to keep the Ukrainian army in check . The Ukrainian army is in check.
 Yemen and Syria are other examples of conflicts where other state actors are involved in the war through proxies . Yemen, Syria and Yemen are also examples of state actors in the conflict through proxies.
 The Russian Federation was actively involved in the protests in late February in Crimea and in March 2014, in the southeastern part of Ukraine in the regions of Odessa, Kharkov, Mariupol, Donetsk and Luhansk .
 The operation was carried out by the Russian army involving all armed forces . 27 mercenaries were present, their role in the operation was minimal compared to that of the Russian Armed Forces .
 The Donbass region is very important for Ukraine since it holds the largest reserves of coal and steel in the country . It is where the chemicals and turbines needed for nuclear power plants are produced .
 The protests that broke out in eastern Ukraine in March 2014 were used by the Russian Federation to exploit the dissatisfaction of the pro-Russian population in its own interest .
 Hundreds of people have crossed the border from the Russian Federation to join the pro-Russian demonstrators .
 Russian intelligence services recruited volunteers through social media platforms and especially men between the ages of 18 and 45 . This was coordinated by Russian intelligence service .
 Among them were members of intelligence services, especially GRU agents . Among them are members of the Russian army known as the Main Intelligence Directorate .
 In the beginning, the Ukrainians had the role of agitators and they later sabotaged and recruited fighters from among the Ukrainians .
 A significant number of rebels also came from officers and non-commissioned officers in the army, police, and intelligence services .
 Many were long before recruited by the Russian intelligence services . Among them were many long before being recruited by Russian intelligence service .
 The maintenance of violent protests was intended to create a state of chaos, to create tensions in society, to show the illegitimacy and inability of the government .
 Russia put pressure for breakup of Ukraine and tried to trigger a federalization process . At the same time, through these protests, Russia also put pressure on Ukraine .
 Kiev accused Moscow of encouraging and supporting the protests through the GRU . Kremlin denied any involvement in the protests .
 Since April, paramilitary groups paid and trained by the Russian Federation joined the protesters .
 Serbia, Serbia, Moldova, the Republic of Moldova and the Russian Federation were also no28 . Also the presence of mercenaries from Serbia, 34, and 35 under contract with Moscow were also No28 .
 Sam Judah, “Russian Site Recruits ‘Volunteers’ for Ukraine’s Ukraine, has been working for the Ukrainian government for more than a decade .
 Roman Goncharenko, “Russians Hold Key Posts with Ukraine Separatists’, Deutsche Welle, July 31, 2014 . He says, ‘Russians hold key posts with UkraineSeparatists'
 Nemanja Rujevic, “Serbian Mercenaries f fighting in Eastern Ukraine’s Eastern Ukraine, is a former member of the Ukrainian army . He is known for his role in the conflict in Ukraine . He has been involved in the Ukraine conflict for more than
 Investigation Reveals Ukrainians fighting in Russian PMC Wagner .
36 people were fighting next to separatists in August 2014, up to August 2014 . Besides them, American, French, Italian, German, and two Romanian volunteers were also fighting .
 In May 2014, SBU identified a mercenary group named "Wagner" that was fighting in Donbass . The group had links with the Russian Federation .
 This is mainly due to the state of the Ukrainian army and the lack of funds . This is due to a precarious state of Ukraine and a lack of money .
 The Ukrainian army's offensive in early July made it possible to regain control of the part of its territory that was occupied by the separatists . The Ukrainian Army's offensive made it Possible to regain Control of the area .
 The latter now controlled only the large cities of Donetsk and Luhansk . The latter is now controlled by the city of Donetsk .
 The Russian Federation provided the separatists with fighters, tanks, rocket launchers, sniper rifles, anti-personnel weapons, and armored personnel carriers with guns .
 Photos of Russian soldiers from the battlefield posted on social network Vkontakte testify to the contrary . Moscow continued to deny the presence of its troops on Ukraine’s territory .
 At the end of July, a series of photographs show Russian soldiers near military trucks, arms, and Russian military equipment were posted .
 By the end of August, there were 1,000 Russian soldiers in Eastern Ukraine, according to NATO . There were more than 2,000 soldiers in eastern Ukraine .
 The separatists managed to increase the front line up to the Azov Sea near the port of Mariupol . The number of Russian soldiers was between 7,000 and 8,000 .
 In August, the Ukrainian army for the first time entered in a direct conflict with the Russian 36 .
 Russian Troops are Shelling Ukraine, according to a report from the Russian government .
 On August 25, ten Russian paratroopers were captured in Eastern Ukraine .
 The identity tags worn around their necks and testimonies recorded by Ukrainian troops were undisputed evidence of the Russian army in Ukraine .
 Russian Ministry of Defence said soldiers crossed border in Ukraine accidentally while executing patrol missions .
 Moscow confirms presence of Russian paratroopers at 60 km from the Russian-Ukrainian border . The government of Ukraine had been sustaining for several months .
Despite the signing of the second Minsk treaty in February 2015, the conflict is still ongoing . Despite the second treaty, the terms of the agreement were not respected and the conflict continues .
 Oksana Grytsenko, “Thousands of Russian Soldiers Fought at Ilovaisk, Around a Hundred Were Killed’.
 Roland Oliphant and Tom Parfitt, “Capture of Russian Paratroopers in Ukraine Overshadows Talks with Russia’s Russia”
 Most intelligence officers enrolled after the establishment of the SBU were recruited from the Fifth Directorate of the KGB, which acted in the Soviet Socialist Republic of Ukraine and reported directly to Moscow .
 The Soviet Republics declared their independence in 1991 . Between the Russian and Ukrainian intelligence services, a secret line of communication was maintained .
 Since 2010, Russian intelligence services gained a growing influence over their Ukrainian counterparts . Viktor Yanukovych won the presidential election in Ukraine .
 Yanukovych was a Kremlin loyalist whose election campaign was supported and paid by Moscow . He was a Putin loyalist.
 He appointed Russian citizens or persons who had links with the Russian intelligence services as the Minister of Defence and as heads of the intelligence services .
 Democratization, Corruption, and the New Russian Imperialism, (Praeger, Santa Barbara: 2015), 470.
 Philip Shishkin: "How Russian Spy Games are Sabotaging Ukraine’s Intelligence Agency" He says Russian spy games are "sabotaging" Ukraine .
 Russian agents sabotaged the security institutions of Ukraine by ensuring that they are weak and unable to face a crisis or an external threat .
 The SBU counterintelligence department knowingly allowed Russian intelligence agents and officers to carry out espionage and subversion activities on Ukraine’s territory .
 The SBU counterintelligence allowed Russian intelligence services to recruit intelligence officers from all the Ukrainian security structures . Russian intelligence agencies were also allowed to recruit officers from Ukraine .
 Kalinin was a Russian citizen, a former KGB agent, and was born and educated in Moscow .
 In March 2015, Petro Poroshenko declared that 80% of the SBU officers were FSB agents .
 Ukrainian president fled to the Russian Federation in February 2014 . Oleksandr Yakymenko, the SBU director, and Hryhoriy Illyashov, the SZRU director and other high-level intelligence officers also fled .
 The head of the SBU from Crimea along with 90% of the intelligence officers from the agency betrayed the country and joined the Russian Federation . The SBU is the head of a Russian agency from Crimea .
 The new director of the SBU found an empty building when he entered the agency headquarters .
 The computers and hard drives containing the data of 22,000 SBU officers and informants were destroyed . All relevant information regarding the cooperation between the SBU and the FSB had disappeared .
 In Ukraine’s eastern regions, one-third of SBU intelligence officers from Donetsk joined separatists .
 Alexander Khodakovsky was the head of the counterintelligence department . He was supposed to identify traitors and foreign agents . He is known for his anti-terror efforts .
 In addition, a large number of SBU officers from Luhansk joined separatists .
 The operations did not have the expected results due to the information leak to the Russian intelligence . The operations were not expected to be successful .
 Several SBU officers were captured by separatists while carrying an undercover mission .
 New directors of SBU65 and SZRU66 fired hundreds of intelligence officers and many of them were accused of treason . Many of them had been accused of being treason .
 The SBU and the SZRU hired hundreds of intelligence officers, including a lie detector, to ensure they are not Russian agents . Shortly after, the SBU hired more than 200 intelligence officers .
 The directors of all the departments within the two services together with their deputies and heads of units from all regions were changed . In addition, the directors of the departments in the three services were also changed .
 The leakage of information has not been definitively resolved . However, the leakage of info has not be definitively resolved.
 Even after this process there were still Russian agents in the Ukrainian intelligence agencies . Even after the process there are still Russians in Ukraine .
 Russian Federation knew in advance the military plans of Ukraine’s special operations . This offered a great advantage to the Russian Federation which in some cases known in advance .
 Ukraine had broad access to Ukraine’s top secret information, vulnerabilities, names of intelligence officers, details about their covers, locations, and operations .
 Three SBU officers from the Alpha Unit were captured by the separatists while they were conducting a secret operation in the city of Horlivka .
 A surveillance mission in occupied territories. They were evaluating the possibility of arresting a valuable target . They were realizing a surveillance mission.
 Ukraine had to clean all its security agencies of Russian agents . They were captured because of a leak inside the SBU.70.70 .
 Taras Kuzio, “Who Committed Treason in Ukraine?’s Ukrainian Policy, March 1, 2016.
 Ukraine’s sSecurity Service says “Separatists Acted on a Tip to Capture SBU Officers, Kyiv Post, 28 April 2014 .
 SBU officers arrested a Russian citizen working for GRU in Chernivtsi .
 He wanted to obtain classified information about the sketches of the new missile systems developed by Ukraine . He also wanted to get information on the new missiles developed by the country .
 The Ukrainian authorities arrested an officer of the Anti-Terrorism Operations 27.07.07 . He was arrested for providing classified information to Russian intelligence services about the army's operations .
 The Ukrainian army detained a person in the Donetsk region that illegally crossed the Russian-Ukrainian border . The person was detained in Donetsk region .
 He was collecting information for the Russian Federation about the positions and vigilance of the Ukrainian army .
 The SBU detained an officer of the gendarmerie, an agent of the Russian Federation, 31.07.2014 who was preparing the assassination of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine .
 The SBU detained a high-ranking officer who worked in the Ukrainian army staff and sent information regarding the operations of the army to the Russian 04.02.2015 Federation .
 He was disseminating false information about alleged battles lost by the Ukrainian army and about the unbearable conditions on the front . In order to undermine the soldiers' morale, he was also spreading false information.
 A senior officer of the Ukrainian gendarmerie was detained by the SBU for high 18.05.2015 treason .
 He provided classified information to Russian intelligence services about the positions of the Ukrainian army and its infrastructure . He also provided information about the position of the Ukraine army and infrastructure .
 Ukrainian Troops for Russian Intelligence have been arrested in Ukraine . They have been accused of being involved in a series of crimes .
 The Deputy Chief of the Anti-terrorist 16.06.2016 Operations Zone was arrested for providing classified information to Russian intelligence services .
 The head of a department within the Ukrainian army was arrested and charged with high treason . He is accused of high treason in Ukraine .
 He was recruited by the GRU in 2015 and managed 22.12.2016 to provide 60 classified documents . He was hired in 2015 by the U.S. Government to provide classified documents.
 In 2016 alone, there were 83 cases of espionage and high treason, SBU says .
 An intelligence officer from the SBU was arrested in the Kerson region for col16.08.2017 laboration with the FSB.83 . An official of the Ukrainian gendarmerie was caught providing intelligence to 11.10.102017 the Russian intelligence services .
 Ukraine's counterintelligence service announced that they arrested a Russian 15.12.2017 citizen that was working for the Russian Foreign Intelligence Service in Cherkasy region .
 The Deputy Head of Protocol Department of the Prime Minister of Ukraine was detained by the SBU . He was accused of providing classified information to the Russian intelligence services .
 Due to his position he had access to highly important information from inside the Cabinet of Ministers .
 At the same time, he was also the Prime Minister's personal translator during meetings with high-level representatives of other states .
2017 discussed behind closed doors with high-ranking officials from other states . He had access to almost everything that was 21.12.12 .
Ukrainian Prime Minister Volodymyr Groysman was arrested just months before he was arrested . He accompanied Ukraine's Prime Minister to the United Kingdom during an official visit .
 There he interpreted for Groysman during a meeting with the UK Prime Minister .
 He had also interpreted the dialogue between Groysman and Vice-President Joe Biden in July 2016 .
 In less than 24 hours another Ukrainian citizen was arrested for spying for 21.12 years .
 A high-ranking SBU officer from the Kiev Central Unit was arrested for providing classified information to Russian intelligence services .
 Luke Harding, “Ukrainian Interpreter Who Visited May Arrested on Russian Spying Charges’, December 21, 2017 .
 The SBU detained a person working in a state-owned company under the 21.04.2018 Ministry of Defence . The person was detained by the SBU.
 She was accused of providing strategic intelligence to the Russian intelligence services . She was also accused of giving strategic intelligence.
 The SBU detained two men that were working for the local government in the Zaporizhzhya region . They were accused of spying for the Russian Federation .
 Between July 2015 and October 2018, they offered information to the Russian intelligence services about the sociopolitical and socioeconomic situation of 12.10.2018 the region .
 Zaporizhzhya has tried to organize subversive activities like riots and mass protests . They also tried to organizing subversive activities such as riots, mass protests and riots .
 This region is one of the most important industrial centers in Ukraine . It produces steel, aluminium, aircraft engines, automobiles, and other heavy industry goods .
 This gives the region a strategic importance for Ukraine’s army and industry sector . The region is important for Ukraine's army and Industry sector .
 He was working for the GRU, Russia’s military intelligence service, for three 10.12.12 years . According to the SBU, he was working in Russia for three years .
 GRU wanted to obtain Ukraine’s most successful UAV models operating on the Donbas front line and other information about its air force capabilities . The GRU also wanted to get Ukraine's most successful models.
 The SBU director claimed in December 2014 that he had cleared the intelligence services of Russian agents . But some of them remained and continued to transmit classified information .
 Russian secret services have managed to penetrate deeply into Ukrainian institutions, government agencies, intelligence services, and branches of the armed forces . Russian secret service has managed to infiltrate key Ukrainian institutions.
 The FSB and GRU mainly targeted the recruitment of SBU senior officers . They used bribes, pressures, blackmail, threats, and even physical violence to reach their goals .
 During the period of 2014-2018, the SBU dismantled numerous networks formed by Ukrainian citizens and controlled by Russian secret services .
 These groups collected information on the positions and activity of the army, military, and strategic facilities in Ukraine's border areas .
 Denys Krasnikov, ‘Ukraine’s Security Service Uncovers Russian Spies, Corrupt Judge’, Kyiv Post.
 Between 2014 and 2018, both the GRU and the FSB carried out numerous clandestine operations on the territory of Ukraine . The GRU, FSB and GRU carried out clandestine operations in Ukraine between 2014-2018 .
Given that their number is high, a selection based on open sources is offered below . Given that their numbers are high, the selection is offered.
 Unidentified individuals fired a grenade at an army depot in the city of Kharkiv . Unidentified people fired the grenade.
 Unidentified individuals used a grenade launcher to hit the liquefied gas tanks of the Kharkivregiongaz company . The explosion triggered an 11.01.2015 explosion .
 The grenades did not hit their target but hit the company's technical room . The grenades didn't hit the target but did hit the technical room.
 A railway bridge linking the Zaporizhzhya region to the Donetsk region was blown up just as it was being crossed by a train loaded with coal .
 The line was frequently used by the Ukrainian army to transport military equipment and supplies near the conflict zone . A railway bridge was blown up in the region of Luhansk .
 A portion of the railway linking the Dnipropetrovsk region to the Donetsk region was blown up as a train loaded with coal was crossing it . In the city of Kharkiv, a tank wagon containing fuel and lubricants was also blown up .
 The saboteurs' special interest is due to the fact that the route is used by the 31.03.2015 Ukrainian army to arm its troops .
 Ukrainian army's purpose was to interrupt or at least delay the delivery of weapons and supplies to the Ukrainian army .
 The roof of the 26.12.2015 building caught fire but it was quickly extinguished without causing great damage .
 A Russian grenade was found at the scene, indicating a sabotage attempt . The grenade is believed to be a Russian grenade . It was found in a Russian apartment .
 A former FSB intelligence officer who betrayed his country and fled to Ukraine 18.11.2016 was kidnapped in Kiev . This is the largest armament depot in the territory of Ukraine .
3 The Balaklia armament deposit was attacked once again and 138,000 tons of weapons exploded . The SBU managed to capture the kidnappers at the border with the Russian Federation .
 Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko accused the Russian Federation of sabotage activities . The Russian Federation has been accused of sabotaging Ukraine .
 Ukraine lacks adequate facilities for storing weapons in maximum safety . Ukraine lacks facilities for storage of weapons in the country's capital .
 The level of security around warehouses is also weak, which makes it easy to organize sabotage activities . At the same time, the security level around these warehouses is weak .
 Denis Voronenkov was a former deputy of the Russian Parliament and a critic of 23.03.03 . Putin was assassinated in the center of Kiev in 2017 .
 A SBU officer was assassinated after a car bomb attack in the city port of Mariupol . He obtained Ukrainian citizenship in 2016 after he fled Russia .
 The officer, a former deputy of the counterintelligence director of Donetsk, helped capture dozens of Russian agents .
Ukraine's Exploding Munition Depots give Ammunition to Security Concerns, says Tony Wesolowsky .
 SBU says Russia’s FSB Fails to Kidnap its Renegade Officer Who Fought for Ukraine’.
 Ex-Russian MP who fled to Ukraine killed in Kiev, March 23, 2017 .
 This poses serious 27.09.092017 problems to the Ukrainian army in terms of arms supply . This posesserious 27.9.09 2017 problems.
 The interruption of the continuous flow of arms required in the struggle in Eastern Ukraine could lead to the inability to maintain the front line or organize an offensive operation .
 The research and production headquarters of the Photoprylad complex in Cherkasy was attacked by grenades . A Chechen woman who fought as a volunteer in the Ukrainian army was assas30.10.3 . 2017 sinated in the Kiev region .
 The Photoprylad Company is part of the stateowned military industrial concern Ukroboronprom . The company is a key component of Ukraine's 05.04.2018 defense industry .
 The SBU prevented the assassination of Arkady Babchenko, a Russian journalist 30.05.2018 and a critic of Vladimir Putin . Among others, it produced guiding and firing systems for armored vehicles, anti-tank missiles, and night vision devices .
 The assassination attempt was ordered by the Russian intelligence services . Three depots with ammunition exploded simultaneously . Another exploded at the 6th Arsenal of the Ministry of Defence ammunition depot .
 The incident was catalogued as an act of sabotage organized by the Russian Federation . The incident has been catalogued by Russian Federation as an acts of sabotage .
69,500 tonnes of munitions, including 43,000 tonnes ready for use, were stored . The aim of the Russian Federation is to weaken Ukraine’s capability to supply its army which fights in Donbass .
 Alec Luhn, “Ukrainian Military Intelligence Officer killed by Car Bomb in Kiev’s Kiev, was killed by a car bomb .
 Christopher Miller, “Kyiv Car Bomb Kills Man in Suspected Targeted Attack’, August 8, 2017 .
Russian Journalist Arkady Babchenko was killed in Ukraine in May 2018 .
 No Coincidence Sabotage Is the Main Version Given Proximity to Russia Border”, UNIAN.
 Ukrainian Spec-op Troops Penetrated Country's Biggest Ammo Depots – Journalist.
 The railways are strategic in terms of their importance for the Ukrainian army which is fighting in Donbass . The railways in these regions are strategic for the Ukraine army .
 It receives fuel, lubricants, arms, troops, ammunition, and other important supplies via this railway system . The railway system receives fuel and lubricants.
 Between 2014 and 2018, dozens of explosions and bomb attacks took place . Several dozens were foiled by the SBU130 in Kiev, Odessa, Nikolaev, Kherson, Zaporizhzhya, Kharkiv, Lviv, and Mariupol .
132 false alarms were recorded over the last four years in which different people announced bombs had been placed in railway stations, subway stations, airports, and public institutions .
 The purpose of the bomb attacks and false alarms is to create chaos and to spread panic among the population in order to destabilize Ukraine, says the Ukrainian government .
 Russian intelligence services are planning the assassination of Ukrainian political and public figures to destabilize the country . SBU Director Pavlo Hrytsak announced the plan on August 17, 2017 .
 The Russian Federation is also using NGOs to organize and to fund protests in Ukraine . In November 2016, the SBU and the SZRU mentioned in a joint press release that the Russian Federation was also using nonprofits to organize .
 The population and the international public must also believe that the war is over and nothing can be done . The population must also think that the world is over.
 Otherwise, the will of the population can change the situation on the field. Otherwise, it can change a person's life on the ground .
 The second element is represented by direct threats, which intimidate, mislead, demoralize, and put pressure on the enemy’s leadership and population . The third element is the second element, which intimidates, mislead and demoralize .
 Actions like the continuous threat of war or invasion, massing troops at a state’s borders, massed troops at the borders, blocking access to international waters, cutting the gas supply, organizing assassinations, bomb threats and acts of sabotage .
 PROPAGANDA is especially important for the aggressor state to have a good propaganda machine that can influence and manipulate public opinion and attitude of the targeted population .
 propaganda can intimidate and demoralize a part of the population, making it unable to act against a threat . At the same time, propaganda can intimidating and demoralizing a part.
 Andrew Rorth, “Ukraine President Warns Russia Tensions Could Lead to 'Full-Scale War'’’
 propaganda has been increasingly used by state and non-state actors to achieve their goals . Since then, propaganda has become increasingly used to achieve goals .
 In our days, propaganda is often associated with fake news . But this is only one outcome of propaganda .
 Propaganda can also present true information in order to promote a doctrine, ideology or ideas, and to make them known to the public .
 propaganda can target the disinformation of a specific group, whether ethnic, racial, religious, or an entire population . propaganda can also target a specific population in order to make it act in the way the sponsor wants .
 The state which disseminates propaganda must know the targeted audience very well only in this way will propaganda be efficient and yield results . The state must also know the target of its propaganda is to be efficient .
 Disinformation seeks to convince the public of the superiority or inferiority of a subject . Be it a candidate of a political party, a president, a government, a state, or a cause .
146 to vote for a certain party/candidate,147 to organize protests, to remain passive in the face of a threat to national security, to support or to disagree with government policies or local/national decisions .
 In most cases, the disinformation sponsor aims to manipulate public opinion for political purposes . In many cases, it aims to influence public opinion by using disinformation .
 Vladimir Volkoff, Tratat de dezinformare, trad. de Mihnea Columbeanu, Antet, Bucure�’ti, 18, is a former member of the Romanian National Council of Romania .
 Media, books, brochures, and agents of influence help promote propaganda . Also, media, books and brochures are used to promote propaganda.
 The A Department, also known as the Disinformation Department of the First Directorate of the KGB, is responsible for espionage and subversion . It has the ability to organize subversive actions in different states .
 Protests, uprisings, massive defamation campaigns of foreign personalities and leaders, are all the areas of expertise of the A Department .
 The source of propaganda is known, it can easily be identified . The information may be true or partially true .
 It is very important to double-check the information from every newspaper or news agency before drawing a conclusion .
 In some cases, pieces of information can be omitted on purpose or accidentally .
 Sometimes false information and exaggeration can be used as we see in Russia Today, Sputnik, or Sky News . We encounter this kind of propaganda when a state or a non-state actor wants to promote a certain ideology, doctrine, idea, event, leader, etc.
 During the Cold War, the Radio Free Europe station that broadcasted in Eastern European communist countries promoted democracy .
 The Radio Station presented itself as a source of information that did not represent the voice of the U.S. But it also spoke out for the dissidents and the oppressed people of communist countries .
 The RFE was secretly funded by the United States Congress through the CIA154 . Its purpose was to spread information about democratic values, life in Western countries, and the horrific dictatorships of Eastern Eu149 .
 Jasper Jackson and Sorin Cristian Semeniuc, “Sky News Defends Report on Gun Running Amid Claims of Faked Meeting’, The Guardian.
People from communist countries like Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Poland were able to access information banned by their regimes . Through the RFE, people from those countries could access information from their countries .
 The aim was to influence the population in order to change the communist regimes from the bottom up through revolutions . The aim is to influence people to change their regimes from bottom up to top .
 White propaganda is also used to promote religions, the glorious past of a state, the performances of a national team, and the necessity to start a war,157 .
 White propaganda can target the misinformation of a population and of a group based on political orientation, ethnicity, race, religion, for political purposes . White propaganda is often false, or exaggerated information .
 Russia Today tries to spark tensions between the white and the black population in the U.S.
 The actor behind this campaign, namely the Russian Federation, wants to increase racial tensions in U.S. society .
 The source that releases the information may or may not be correctly identified and the accuracy of the information is not certain . The information may be incorrect, but it may be difficult to identify .
 Some information can be published on different sites, blogs, or groups on social media platforms without knowing who is behind it .
 A good example is the 1980s KGB operation to disseminate the theory that the HIV virus was created by the U.S. as a biological weapon .
 First, the information appeared in India and was later taken up by other sources of information .
 The goal was to spread an antiAmerican sentiment in the Third World . The goal is to spread the anti-American sentiments in the third world .
 Ewen Macaskill, “Former Bush Press Secretary Claims Iraq War Fuelled by Propaganda’’s ‘Former Bush press secretary’ claims Iraq War was ‘fuelled’ by Prop propaganda .
 The source cannot be identified or is attributed to a source that is not responsible for disseminating the false information . The source is not known or attributed to the source .
 Its purpose is to spread false information, to misinform, manipulate, and to lower the morale of a group or population .
 During the Second World War, the Nazi intelligence services set up an undercover radio station that broadcasted English news about the war and presented itself as a British station .
 The station broadcasted false information about the situation on the front with the aim of lowering the population’s morale .
Thousands of fake accounts on social networks like Facebook and Twitter were used to influence voters' opinions . They used tens of thousands of fake account accounts on Twitter and Facebook to influence votes .
 Russians paid to share false information, modified photos, and to add negative comments . The users of these networks did not know that there were not Americans behind those accounts .
 The media in the Russian Federation began an extensive campaign of discrediting the new government . The new government is described as a fascist junta that took over power .
 The Kremlin's propaganda was particularly effective among the Russian minority concentrated in Eastern Ukraine and Crimea . The minority were watching especially Russian TV channels .
 Pro-Russian elites in the region played an important role in instigating protests against the new leadership . Also, pro-Russian leaders in the area played an key role in the protests .
 After the Ukrainian revolution in February 2014, Russian propaganda presented Ukraine as a bankrupt state led by fascists . After the Ukraine revolution, Russia claimed Ukraine was led by fascism .
 Kofman and Migacheva, Lessons from Russia’s Operations in Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, 11.2, are the authors of the book . The book includes lessons from Russia's Operations in Ukraine and Crimea .
 Eric Draitser, “Solving the Crisis in Ukraine,’s ’solving the crisis in Ukraine’, March 19, 2014 .
 Russia-24,172 Russia Today, Komsomolskaya Pravda,173 and NTV,174 characterized the protesters as "radical militants" Also, Rusisan propaganda presented Ukraine as a state from which Russian ethnics flee because of ultra-nationalists .
 The same TV channels highlighted that the protesters were the first who opened fire against the law enforcement forces . The protesters were first to open fire against police, the same channels highlighted .
 An article in Russia Today dated March 3, 2014, presented the scenario that snipers who killed dozens of demonstrators during the protests were hired by the protesters' leaders .
 The snipers were brought to Ukraine by the Russian Federation to help Yanukovych deal with the protests . In fact, they were brought in to help deal with protests .
 In July 2015, the chief military prosecutor of Ukraine investigating the role of the SBU before and during the February 2014 revolution, declared that the intelligence service of Ukraine, at the request of the FSB, waged an information war against its own citizens .
 Russian propaganda aimed to discredit Ukraine, weaken the civilians’ and army’s morale, and encourage interethnic tensions . The aim was to discredit the pro-European protesters and the idea that Ukraine should join the European Union .
 Propaganda focused on repeating the same false themes that it packaged in simple and clear messages so that it can be understood by everyone .
 Russian propaganda pays special attention to this subject in order to influence the thinking and the behavior of the Ukrainian soldiers .
Russia wants to affect and break Ukrainian soldiers morale, to make them desert their army . Russia wants to discourage other people from joining the army .
 Bryan Macdonald, “Four Years After ‘Euromaidan,’ Corruption Is Still King in Ukraine’s Ukraine, 2018 .
 Robert Longley, “An Introduction to Psychological Warfare’s’ new book, will be published on March 1, 2019 .
 The purpose of the propaganda has in the same time a subversive role . The purpose is to promote the use of propaganda in a subversive way .
 National morale is one of the nine elements of a state's power, according to Hans J Morgenthau .
National morale represents the determination wherewith a nation supports its foreign and domestic policy in time of peace or war . National morale represents a nation's determination to support its foreign policy in times of peace and war .
 At the same time, national morale influences the agricultural and industrial production, the efficiency of the armed forces and the actions of its diplomatic body,206 .
On July 15, 2016, when a coup attempt took place in Turkey, people showed a powerful spirit of unity . People were able to react to a situation of internal crisis, says the author .
 People prevented the coup by going out on the streets and standing in front of soldiers and tanks . People prevented coup by standing outside soldiers and the tanks .
 The loyalty of the people to the constitution and their belief in the legitimacy of the political system were the main forces behind their actions . The loyalty to the people was the main force behind their action .
 The effect of propaganda is stronger on national morale when the internal situation is affected by poor governance . Also, the effects of propaganda are stronger on the national morale .
 The incompetence and corruption in state structures, lack of reforms, low living standards, and a large gap between the rich and the poor, decrease the morale of a population, says the author .
 Due to the delicate domestic situation, a large proportion of the population tends to believe 200 . The country's population is estimated to be around 200 .
 Blackstock, The Strategy of Subversion; Manipulating the Politics of Other Nations, 24. Blackstock: The Strategy Of Subversion .
Survivors Recall 2016 Defeated Coup Night in Turkey. Nilay Kar Onum and Kubra Kara, “Survivor Recall 2016defeated coup Night inTurkey’s’
 The level of education and information among a certain population is very important in order to counter propaganda . At the same time, education and knowledge among a Certain population is also important .
 The population should be informed daily by the government about fake news in mass media, it should offer examples and present true information .
 In the long run, poor governance can make people lose their respect, attachment, and loyalty to national symbols . In the short run, bad governance can lead to a loss of respect and attachment to symbols .
 In this context, power can easily be taken over by different political, social, social or paramilitary groups . The groups are funded and controlled by other state actors .
 The takeover of power can be accomplished through early elections, the initiation of a censure motion by the opposition parties, a coup d’état or a revolution .
 Sometimes, behind the last two events, intelligence services of other states can be present as gray eminences .
 Their interests vary greatly, ranging from dissatisfaction with the internal213 or external policy direction of the state concerned, to controlling its natural resources .
Before the coup they were publicly against the domestic and foreign policy of Egyptian President Mohammed Morsi and the relations between countries were not optimal .
 The first democratically elected president was ousted by the Egyptian army . Then, the first democraticallyelected president was overthrown by the army .
 The UAE sent $3 billion and Saudi Arabia sent $5 billion in aid to Egypt . Shortly after the coup, the UAE sent a total of $4 billion .
 Egypt's Chief of General Staff Abdul Fattah al-Sisi organized the coup and took over power . Egypt’s chief of general staff AbdulFattah Al- Sisi took over the country .
 The CIA Finally Releases Details of Iranian Coup, Foreign Policy, 20 July 2017 . Bethany Allen-Ebahimian, “64 years later, CIA Finally releases Details of Iran Coup’s Iranian Coup”
 Julian Borger, “Russian-Trained Mercenaries Back Bosnia's Serb Separatists’, January 12, 2018 .
 Saudi Arabia is taking a risk by backing the Egyptian Coup, says David Hearts .
 The Egyptian government has pledged $3 billion to Egypt and $5 billion to Saudi Arabia . The U.S. government has spent $1.5 billion in the past year .
 Egypt ceded sovereignty of two of its islands in the Red Sea to Saudi Arabia in 2017 . Four years later, he ratified a document through which Egypt cedes sovereignty to Saudi Saudi Arabia . The document was signed by Egypt in 2013 .
 Tiran and Sanafir Islands are strategically placed at the mouth of the Gulf of Aqaba . The islands are located at the mouths of the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea .
 The decision angered the population and the opposition accused him of handing over the islands in return for economic aid . This decision angered.
 In the years after the Egyptian coup, Cairo received billions of dollars from Saudi Arabia in economic aid .
These are good examples of how certain states try to influence other states’ domestic and foreign affairs . These are good example of how some states are trying to influence their own affairs .
 In April 2019, the Sudanese military organized a coup and took over control of the country . The military took over the country in April 2019 .
 To demoralize the population of the state concerned and disintegrate its constituent groups, to demoralize its population . To demoralized the population, the state's population would disintegrate their constituent groups .
 To discredit the authority, the activity, and the image of the state, the government, the presidency, and civil servants, and elites, says author .
 To induce the population of a state into passivity, to block its reaction if a group takes power by force or if the state is invaded . To induce a state to act, a group can take power if it is taken by force .
Egypt's President under Fire over Red Sea Islands transfer to Saudi Arabia .
Opposition Grows to Egypt's Plan to Cede Islands to Saudi Arabia, says Amina Ismail .
 "Arab States Foment Sudan Chaos While United States Stands By, May 5, 2019"
Saudi Arabia, UAE to send $3 billion in Aid to Sudan, says Khalid Abdellazi .
 Alican Tekingündüz, “The Saudis, Emiratis, and the Future of Turkish Projects in Sudan’s Sudan, 2019 .
 Petro Poroshenko declared that the Russian Federation is preparing a massive manipulation campaign in order to influence the parliamentary and presidential elections in 2019 . He stated, “The tentacles of Moscow have penetrated social networks heavily, they hold a grip on certain media, they are present in cyberspace.
Ukrainian authorities are trying to undermine the state order and influence the Ukrainian electorate . Their purpose is to pass false information to undermine state order, to influence and manipulate the electorate, they say .
 Between March 2014 and August 2018, the Security Service of Ukraine destroyed dozens of networks that were working for the Russian Federation and were disseminating propaganda .
 Andrei Soshnikov, “Inside a Pro-Russia Propaganda Machine in Ukraine’s Ukraine,’ he says .
 Russian propaganda is not only spread by the Russian Federation through the means mentioned above, but also in Ukraine through television channels, press agencies, bloggers, and members of social networks .
 Ukrainian TV channels and press agencies do not promote Russian propaganda so as not to lose their transmission licenses . The most popular ones do not promoting Russian propaganda .
 Ukrainian National Television and Radio Broadcasting Council block several proKremlin Russian television stations . In order to limit the impact of Russian propaganda on the population, the council blocked several stations .
 Ukraine decided to add other Russian channels to the list of those forbidden . On April 15, 2017, Ukraine added another Russian channel to its list .
 The National Security and Defence Council of Ukraine also banned several sites with Russian content, social platforms and search engines like Yandex . All of them from the Russian Federation .
 The last two closely monitor Russian propaganda and point out false information to read237. The last 2 closely monitor Russia's propaganda .
 Stephen Ennis, “Ukraine Hits Back at Russian TV Onslaught’s, March 12, 2014, is a Russian TV show .
 Among the channels that are most read and watched by Ukrainians are 1+1, 2+2, TET, UNIAN TV, STB, Novyi Kanal, ICTV Inter TV, K1, K2, MEGA, NTV, and Chanel 5 TV
 Some oligarchs are used by oligarchs in domestic political struggles to discredit their opponents . Some are used to promote the activities of the parties they support .
 direct threats are the second element of psychological war . Direct threats are a second element in psychological war.
 Such actions are represented by threats of war or invasion, massing troops at a state’s borders245 or blocking its access to international waters . Such actions have been represented by threat of war, invasion or invasion .
Other states can use energetic blackmail, assassinations, bomb threats and acts of sabotage . Other states can also use energy blackmail and assassinations to sabotage .
 A state actor puts pressure on its enemies’ governments, security structures and population, to affect their morale, and to maintain a state of permanent tension and fear of war . These are realized by a state actor in order to put pressure on their enemies' governments.
 Between 2014 and 2018, Russia threatened Ukraine with war numerous times . Russia threatened the country with war several times .
 In March 2014, the Russian Parliament authorized the use of military force into neighboring states to protect Russian citizens . The use of force was authorized at the request of Vladimir Putin .
 This created a weighing fear among Ukrainian populations and leaders that an imminent invasion will take place . This creates a weigh fear among Ukrainians and leaders.
 Vladimir Putin threatened Kiev with serious consequences for Ukraine if it attacks separatists in Donbass . In August 2016, Putin threatened Ukraine with consequences if it attacked the separatists .
Between 2014 and 2018, the Russian Federation continuously massed troops at Ukraine's borders . In the same period, Russia's president numerous times ordered his country's military to be in a state of combat readiness inducing the idea that he is preparing an invasion .
 These actions were realized in order to maintain a permanent state 244 . The state is now in a state of 244 .
Russian Parliament Approves Troop Deployment in Ukraine, says Russian Parliament .
 Kim Sengupta, “What Lies Behind the New Russian Threat to Ukraine’s Ukraine, August 12, 2016.
 This put a permanent pressure on Ukraine’s leadership, on its security institutions, and disseminated fear among the population . This puts a permanent Pressure on Ukraine's leadership and on security institutions .
 Russia blocked the entrance of three Ukrainian ships into the Azov Sea by blocking the Kerch Strait . The ships and their crew were captured by Russia .
Limiting or denying Ukraine access to its ports from the Azov Sea through the Kerch Strait violated Article 37 and Article 38 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea . Limiting or deny Ukraine access.
 Moscow had been warning Kiev since September 2013 with economic repression if it were to sign the Association Agreement . The table below shows how Russia triggered an economic war .
 Ukrainian Prime Minister Arseniy Yatsenyuk said his country does not recognize the price rise . He said Russia's actions represent an act of economic aggression .
Ukraine's EU Trade Deal will be ‘ Catastrophic, Says Russia’ says Russia .
 Vladislav Vorotnikov: "Ukraine Crisis May Have Serious Implications for the Meat Industry"
 Agata Wierzbowska-Miazga, “Russian Economic Pressure on Ukraine’s Ukraine, March 26, 2014 . The Center of Western Studies is based in Ukraine .
 Andrey Ostroukh and Alexander Kolyandr, “Gazprom Bill Puts Ukraine under pressure’s Ukraine under Pressure’.
2014 threaten Ukraine to shut off the gas and actually did this for short periods of time between 2014-2018 . The delivery resumed in 2014 but by 2018 Russia continued to 16.06.06 .
 Ukrainian products no longer had a sales outlet and exports could not be rerouted to EU countries because they did not meet sanitary-veterinary standards imposed by the EU . The Russian Federation prohibited the import of dairy products from Ukraine 28.07.2014 on the grounds that they
 Ukraine represented a big exporter 14.08.2014 of beer and vodka for Russia, which brought it earnings of millions of dollars .
 Russia imposed 01.11.2018 sanctions on 68 Ukrainian companies . At the same time, Russia imposed a total of 1.10.10 years of sanctions .
 Moscow wanted to show to the new leadership in Kiev the price they have to pay for choosing a pro-European path . The new leadership wanted to force it to pursue pro-Russian policy .
Russia Cuts off Gas Supply to Ukraine After Talks Collapse, says Shaun Walker . Walker: "Russia C cuts off gas supply to Ukraine after talks"
 Vladimir Soldatkin, Natalia Zinets, ‘Gazprom Seeks to Halt Ukraine Gas Contracts as Dispute Escalates’
 Russian Meat Trade Restrictions have led to Ukraine's loss of $4.5 million . Russian Meat trade restrictions have been imposed in Ukraine .
 Maxim Stulov, “Russia Bans Dairy Imports from Ukraine’s Ukraine, July 27, 2014 .
 Alexander Kolyandr, ‘Russia to Ban All Fruit and Vegetable Imports from Ukraine’ The Wall Street Journal, October 2, 2014, published a report on the Russian ban .
 Ukraine's economy has stabilized due to the involvement of the European Union, the United States, the IMF, and the World Bank, which massively financed Ukraine . However, due to its involvement, its economy has been stabilized .
 The signing of the European Union Association Agreement in June 2014 significantly helped the country's economy . Between 2014 and 2018,270 the EU provided Ukraine €3.9 billion in economic aid .
Over the same period, the United States provided approximately $1.3 billion in military assistance,272 loans of about $3. billion,273 and $2.4 billion in USAID funds .
 The IMF and the World Bank have provided loans to Ukraine . The EU and the U.S. have also provided loans for Ukraine .
From February 2014 to January 2018, the IMF provided $8.5 billion and the World Bank provided $5 billion . Without the economic aid received from these actors, Ukraine could not have coped with the economic war by Russia .
 Kiev would not have been able to continue the war in Donbass and deal with its economic problems . Also, Kiev would have been unable to deal with the economic problems of Donbass .
 The U.S. has released $200 million in Defensive Aid to Ukraine . Russia has been given a $1.5 million loan to Ukraine.
 Between February 2014 and September 2018, the information systems of state institutions and private companies were targeted by Russian hackers under the coordination of the intelligence services .
 Ukraine has become a Russian test bed for computer viruses and a training ground for breaking into servers and computer networks . Ukraine has also become a test bed.
 The Russian secret services performed the main operations in the cybernetic field in order to destabilize Ukraine . The table below shows the key operations performed by the secret services .
 Russia knows very well the vulnerabilities of Ukraine’s communication system . Ukrtelecom uses Russian-made telecommunications, and internet equipment and systems . 278 276.278 276.
 The right-wing candidate actually did not obtain more than 1% of the votes . The candidate did not get more than a quarter of the vote .
 Ukrainian company that deals with the cyber-security of the server. The attempt was 24.05.2014 thwarted by the Ukrainian company .
 Russian hackers helped by a virus caused a power strike affecting three regions in the western part of Ukraine . The purpose of the Russian hackers was to help the Russian propaganda machine publish fake news .
 The incident interrupted the supply of energy to approximately 225,000 users . The incident happened in the early hours of the morning .
 This was also 23.12.2015 confirmed by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security a few days later .
 The SBU blocked the provision of programs that helped Russian intelligence services steal information from the computers of strategic institutions and private companies in Ukraine . This was the first time that the United States government officially recognized that a power blackout was caused by a virus .
 Russian intelligence services were using Ukrainian commercial entities to plant spy programs in the networks of military 25.11.2016 and industrial enterprises .
 Kiev's electricity grid was targeted by a cyberattack that left the northern part of the capital without electricity . A group of hackers used a malware program installed on Android devices to monitor Ukrainian soldiers .
Information was obtained regarding the 22.12.2016 location of the infected devices and the communications stored on them . The information was obtained about the location of those infected devices .
 The information was used in support of pro-Russian separatists in Eastern Ukraine . The information is used to support the separatists .
Russia Hammers Ukraine with Massive Cyber-Attack, March 15, 2014 . The country has been hit by a series of cyber attacks .
 The U.S. State Department has been investigating Russian cyber attacks on other nations . The Russian government has been blamed for some of the recent attacks .
Ukraine Investigates Suspected Cyber Attack on Kiev Power Grid. Pavel Polityuk, ‘Ukraine Investigating Suspected cyber attack on Kiev power grid’
9 Ukrainian banks and the Ukrenergo energy distributor company were 27.06.062017 targeted by cyberattacks . He expressed his belief that this was strong evidence that Russian services are leading a cyber war against Ukraine .
 In November 2017, Dmytro Shymkiv, deputy head of the Ukrainian presidential administration, said 99% of the cyberattacks on Ukraine come from Russia . The action did not affect the sources of supply, but in the case of the banks it caused difficulties in
 The operating system of Odessa Airport was infected with a virus . He highlighted the lack of experts and funds needed by Ukraine to defend itself in this cyber war .
After the attack, workers were unable to process customers’ data on computers, and 24.10.2017 they had to do it manually . It caused several flight delays .
 The inauguration of the Cyber Security Situation Center took place in Kiev . The Kiev metro payment system was also affected by the cyberattack .
 If the attack would have succeeded, the supply of chlorine used to purify the water in the Ukrainian 11.07.2018 water would have been interrupted .
 A similar cyberattack occurred at a petrochemical refinery in Saudi Arabia in August 2017 . A similar attack occurred at the same refinery in August 2016 .
 The hackers in this case aimed to sabotage the company by triggering an explosion . The hackers are believed to have targeted the company in the past .
Ukraine hit by 6,500 Hack Attacks, Sees Russian 'Cyberwar' in 2016 .
Ukrainian Banks, Electricity Firm Hit by Fresh Cyber Attack, June 27, 2017 .
 Ukrainians Not Prepared for Cyber Attacks, Kyiv Post, November 17, 2017 .
 Pavel Polityuk and Jack Stubbs, “New Wave of Cyber Attacks Hits Russia, Other Nations’, published October 24, 2017 .
Russia Hackers “Preparing Huge Malware Attack’ on Ukraine Businesses, claims Cyber Police Chief ”
 “A Cyberattack in Saudi Arabia had a Deadly Goal. Nicole Perloth and Clifford Krauss, ‘A Cyber attack in Saudi Saudi Arabia Had a Deadly goal’
 Ukraine's state fiscal service was targeted by more cyberattacks which disrupted the programs used by taxpayers for filing taxes . The purpose of the attacks is to destroy Ukraine's strategic infrastructure, he said .
 According to the SBU, Russia's aim was to destabilize 04.12.2018 Ukraine’s judicial information system . The SBU says the aim is to destabilise the judicial system .
 What are Ukrainian Virtual Cops doing? What are Ukrainians doing?
 Ukraine suffered even further because of the war and economic sanctions imposed by the Russian Federation .
 Ukraine’s strong dependency on Russian markets and natural resources caused serious problems . Moscow imposed economic sanctions and stopped gas supplies to the country .
 The hybrid war triggered by the Russian Federation generated serious problems for Ukraine . Ukraine was unprepared for this kind of situation but succeded to adapt and fight against the hybrid threats .
The conflict made Ukraine a stronger state with more powerful institutions for fighting a hybrid war . The conflict made the country a stronger country with more power.
 This paper presented the main characteristics of a hybrid war and the ways it is fought with specific examples . The paper was designed to facilitate a better understanding of the topic .
 To combat hybrid threats to national security a state needs political will, good leadership, and strong institutions which are effective and capable of coping with crisis situations .
 At the same time, it has to identify its vulnerabilities in 55 RUSSIA’s HYBRID WAR in UKR AINE .
 The state has to reduce its external dependency on any other state for different products or resources . The state must also reduce its dependence on other states for different resources .
 It has to make sure that it has multiple sources of supply from other states . It must make sure it has several sources of supplies from other countries .
 Another step in fighting hybrid threats is to create a body responsible for identifying fake news and subversive news .
 This institution must present true information and showcase the main promoters of the fake news for the population to be aware of their content . This institution needs to show true information to the public .
 It should create public registries for unreliable/suspect sources . Also, it should create private registries.
 A state needs a well-trained army equipped with modern fighting technology and capable of performing counterterrorism and counter-insurgency missions . Another option is to block the content .
 The army and security forces should realize applied national exercises, war games, and have international training . The army should realize applying national exercises and war games .
Good cooperation between state institutions, decision-makers, and military, police, and intelligence services is needed . Also, good cooperation between the state and the military is needed, according to experts .
 The latter must be able to penetrate terrorist and insurgent groups and provide relevant information about their activities and plans .
 State security institutions must have efficient counterintelligence departments to block intelligence officers from being recruited by foreign intelligence services . State security agencies must also block foreign intelligence officers being recruited.
 Foreign intelligence services must be specialized in offensive counterintelligence actions to allow false information to be transmitted to agents and to prevent intelligence officers from turning into double agents .
 High-Tech, Information and Cyber Conflicts, in Connections: The Quarterly Journal, Volume: 16, No. 2, 16.2 .
 "Anonymous Strikes Again, Takes over Syrian Defense Ministry Web Site" Hayley Tsuyakama, “Anonymous Strikes again, takes over Syria's defense ministry Web Site’
 Cyberattacks should be treated very seriously and the state should invest in scientific research and the development of specialized software and hardware able to fight in cyber-security .
 The existence of teams to engage in counter-revolutionary, counter-insurgency activities can make a decisive contribution to fighting hybrid threats, says the author .
 The existence of an anti-propaganda agency to raise awareness of false news is imperative for countering a hybrid war . The agency's existence is imperative to counter the hybrid war.
Tom Finn, “Qatar National Bank Investigating Alleged Data Hack’s’, April 27, 2016, is the latest in a long line of investigations .
 Yet Another Group Hacking for China's Bottom Line.
 Alex Hern: "Hacked Satellite Systems could Launch Microwave-Like Attacks, Expert Warns" Hern says the system could be used to launch a new satellite system .
 Chris Graham, “Cyber Attack Hits German Train Stations as Hackers Target Deutsche Bahn’s train stations.’
 Jeanne Meserve, “Hackers Reportedly Have Embedded Code in Power Grid’s Power Grid,’.
 Jordan Robertson and Michael Riley, “Mysterious ’08 Turkey Pipeline Blast Opened New Cyberwar’, Bloomberg, December 10, 2014 .
 LSE Institute of Global Affairs, London, 2017, is a London-based think-tank . LSE is based in London, London and London, and has a London office .
 A Psychological Warfare Casebook is published by Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1958 . It was written by William E. Morris and JANOWITZ Morris .
 The Washington D.C. book is published in 2012 . It is the fifth edition of SAGE, a book by Victoria O’DONNELL .
 The Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms is the Department of Defense's Dictionary of Defense Dictionary .
 Lupta pentru putere si lupta pentu pace, trad. de Oana Bosoi, Alina Dragolea, Mihai Zodian, Polirom, Iași, 2007. Lupta   ’
Boleslaw: "Offensive Counterintelligence and the Challenges Facing Polish Intelligence Services" Boleslaw is the author of the National Centre for Strategic Studies .
 British Clandestine Psychological Warfare against the Third Reich, East Sussex, 2010 .
 Vladimir, Vladimir, Tratat de dezinformare, trad. de Mihnea Columbeanu, Antet, Bucure�’ti . Vladimir,  Vladimir, Tratat,   Vladimir, Vladimir.
 The European Commission, 16.04.2018, available at ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/countries-and-regions/Countries/ukraine/.
 Investigation Reveals Ukrainians fighting in Russian PMC Wagner’s Wagner . Euromaidan Press.com/2018/06/07/ karpaty-donbas-syria-the-ukrainian-mercenaries-russia-recruited-
 Ukrainian Policy, 01.03.2016, available at ukrainianpolicy.com/tag/yanukovych/.
 "Hackers Reportedly Have Embedded Code in Power Grid," says Jeanne, “Hackers reportedly have Embedded code in power grid’s system .
 "A Cyberattack in Saudi Arabia had a Deadly Goal," says Nicole, KRAUSS Clifford .
 For the Russian Federation it was clear that its influence in Ukraine and its fleet presence in the Crimean Peninsula were threatened . The Russian Federation's fleet presence was threatened.
 Moscow understood that Ukraine would continue its accession steps to the EU and NATO . It had to intervene to avoid such a scenario .
 This report aims to identify the main reasons behind Moscow’s hybrid war against Ukraine . It also aims to reveal the main reason behind the conflict .
 On February 27 2014, unidentified armed men linked to the GRU seized the buildings of the main public institutions in Crimea and raised the Russian flag.
 In less than a week, Russia took control over the peninsula and on March 18, 2014, the Russian Federation annexed Crimea . The Russian Federation took control of Crimea in March 2014 .
 Moscow encouraged protests among the pro-Russian population in the eastern part of Ukraine in March 2014 .
 Russia has used non-state actors in eastern Ukraine to act as its proxies in the war . Since May 2014, Russia has been using non- state actors in the Ukraine war as proxies .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions declared independence shortly after they declared their independence . It has supplied them with money and combat equipment .
 At the same time, Moscow started economic, psychological, and cyber warfare on Ukraine . Moscow has organized espionage activities on its territory .
 Russian Federation implemented hybrid war in Ukraine between 2014 and 2018 . Report aims to highlight characteristics of hybrid war and the way in which the Russian federation implemented them .