 No person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid 0MB control number . Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person will face a penalty .
 The Ukrainian parliament approved a new pro-Westem government in February . The new government was approved by the Ukrainian parliament .
 Russia responded to the change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine’s Crimea region and annexing it .
 In April and May, armed pro-Russian separatists seized areas of the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine . The region was made possible by men, weaponry and leadership from Russia .
 U.S. and NATO officials say Russia stepped up its support to the separatists . Ukraine forces regrouped and made substantial gains against the separatists in July and August, but in late August and early September, officials say .
 Both the Russian troops and the separatists have been supplied with hundreds of tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, surface-to-air missiles, and other military equipment .
Ukrainian forces have lost ground and may lose more if Russia continues to press its offensive . Russia has lost ground in Ukraine since the start of the offensive .
 The war has added to these problems, including the destruction of infrastructure in the Donbas and a steep drop in the value of Ukraine’s currency .
 The Ukrainian government has received the first two installments of a $17 billion IMF loan designed to stabilize its finances . The IMF loan is designed to help stabilize the Ukrainian government .
 The IMF has warned that if the war continues, Ukraine could need another $19 billion in financing . However, the IMF has also warned that the war could need more money .
 The European Union unveiled an 11. billion Euro aid package for Ukraine . The aid package is part of a $11. billion package for the Ukrainian government .
 The EU has imposed sanctions on over 70 persons from Ukraine and Russia . Russia held responsible for undermining Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as state-owned firms in Russia .
 The Administration requested and received funding from Congress for $ 1 billion in loan guarantees for Ukraine . The Administration received funding for $1 billion.
 The Administration says that the U.S. is providing over $184 million in aid to Ukraine this year to help Ukraine carry out political and economic reforms .
 The Administration strongly condemned Russian’s annexation of Crimea and its incursion into eastern Ukraine .
 The United States has imposed sanctions against 64 Russian individuals and firms for destabilizing Ukraine . The U.S. has imposed the sanctions on 64 Russians and firms .
 President Obama signed a bill requiring Radio Free Europe-Radio Eiberty and Voice of America to increase broadcasting in eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova . On April 3, Obama signed H.R. 4152 into law .
 Russia’s Seizure of Crimea and Support for Insurgents in Eastern Ukraine. Russia's Seizur of Crimea is Russia's second largest region .
 It occupies a sensitive position between Russia and NATO member states Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania . It occupies the sensitive position in the region .
 Ukraine's political scene has been dominated by ‘oligarchs’ (powerful, politically well-connected businessmen, mainly based in eastern and southern Ukraine) Since Ukraine achieved independence in 1991, Ukraine’s political scene is dominated by 'oligarch' businessmen .
 Yanukovych's government was criticized for massive high-level corruption, in part committed by his own family and close associates . His government has been accused of massive corruption .
 U.S. and EU officials expressed concern over the government's human rights record . The targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution, they said .
 Many observers have believed that despite growing dissatisfaction with the government, there was little likelihood of public unrest in Ukraine, given widespread disillusionment with the political class .
 Ukraine made a last-minute decision to not sign an Association Agreement with the European Union in November 2013 . It would have aligned Ukraine more toward Europe, at least in the areas of economics and trade .
Ukrainian special police attacked peaceful protestors in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti .
 Through the next three months, the Yanukovych government alternated between attempted crackdowns and conciliatory gestures .
 “Berkuf riot police attempted to clear protestors from the Maidan and other areas of Kyiv, with the support of roving gangs of street thugs hired by the government .
 The death toll may have caused support in the Ukrainian parliament, which was controlled by pro-government Parliamentarians, for the crackdown .
 Yanukoyvch and many of his supporters in the government and parliament fled the capital by February 21 . The former president of Ukraine has been accused of corruption .
 Ex-President Yanukovych and dozens of other top officials of the former regime are being sought by police for their part in killing and injuring Maidan protestors and other regime opponents . He and some of his closest supporters are currently in Russia .
After Yanukovych and his supporters fled Ukraine, the Ukrainian parliament has passed sweeping measures . After Yanukovych fled the country, the parliament has rapidly passed measures .
 Oleksandr Turchynov, a long-time top aide of Tymoshenko, was elected as speaker of the parliament . He was made acting president until new presidential elections were held on May 25 .
 The government includes members of Fatherland, as well as Freedom, a far-right nationalist party, and Maidan activists . No key figures from the former ruling regime were among those included .
 Many Maidan protestors view the new governing parties very skeptically . They suspect that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime .
 Russia's Seizure of Crimea and Support for Insurgents in Eastern Ukraine. Russia responded to change of government in Kyiv by seizing Ukraine's Crimean peninsula .
 In March 2014, thousands of pro-Russian protestors demonstrated in the Donbas region and in Kharkiv .
 Unrest in eastern Ukraine soon took an even more ominous turn in April 2014 . Unrest took a further turn in the east of Ukraine in April.
 Armed men stormed and occupied key government buildings and broadcast facilities in Donetsk and Euhansk . More than a dozen other towns in the Donbas region were targeted .
 Ukrainian police and security forces have failed to maintain or restore order in eastern and southern Ukraine . One striking factor early in the conflict was the repeated failure of Ukrainian security forces to maintain order .
 Donetsk and Luhansk regions were “helpless’ against separatist forces, police say . They admitted that local police were ‘helpless' against separatists . They have to be rebuilt from scratch.
 Explanations given for this phenomenon include low morale, corruption, and lack of professionalism . Explanations include alleged covert political games played by oligarchs affiliated with previous regime .
 Efforts by supposedly elite security forces to restore order were often met with humiliating failure and substantial casualties . Efforts to restoreOrder were often meet with humiliating failures and casualties .
Ukrainian leaders have used armed volunteers to supplement the regular security forces . Ukrainian leaders have been using armed volunteers as a supplement to the regular forces .
 The leaders of the ‘Donetsk People’s Republic’ and the “Euhansk People's Republic” declared their entities to be sovereign states after the vote . The vote was held in the 'Donetsk people's Republic'
 Acting President Turchynov said the real turnout for the vote was 32% in Donetsk region and 24% in Euhansk . The real turnout in the Donetsk region is 32%.
 Turchynov may have tacitly conceded that the “republics and/or independence may be supported by a significant minority of people in these regions, which is in fact consistent with public opinion polls .
Public opinion polls have repeatedly shown that the overwhelming majority of people in eastern Ukraine do not support separation from Ukraine or annexation by Russia .
 Polls also show great distrust in eastern Ukraine for the current government in Kyiv . Some analysts say it is due to a massive propaganda effort in Russian media .
 The destruction of parts of the Donbas in the fighting may also harden feelings against Kyiv among some inhabitants .
 Current Political Situation on May 25, 2014, Ukraine held a presidential election . Ukraine's presidential election was held in May 2014 .
 Poroshenko is a pro-Westem billionaire whose holdings include Roshen . Roshen is a leading chocolate brand in the region .
 The lowest turnout was in Donetsk region and Euhansk region . Russian-backed separatist gunmen seized polling places and used threats, kidnappings, and other forms of intimidation .
 An International Election Monitoring Mission, which included several Members of Congress, observed the elections .
 A preliminary statement from the mission said the vote was “largely in line with international commitments and with a respect for fundamental freedoms in the vast majority of the country” Despite the “hostile security environment’ in Donetsk and Euhansk, the vote is in line
 President Poroshenko announced a peace plan to end the conflict after taking office . It included a cease-fire, the laying down of arms by the separatists, and the opening of “humanitarian corridors’s”
 Poroshe nk o initially supported amnesty for the separatists, except those involved in serious crimes, and the repatriation of fighters from Russia .
 Poroshenko says he favors decentralizing Ukraine’s currently highly centralized governing system . Poroshenko said he favors free use of the Russian language in Ukraine .
 President Poroshenko declared a ceasefire to give time for the implementation of his plan on June 20 .
 Ukraine reversed its former vow not to negotiate with "terrorists" and held talks with separatist leaders on June 23 . Some of whom agreed to abide by the ceasefire .
 Separatist forces did not respect the ceasefire throughout its 10-day duration, and repeatedly attacked Ukrainian troops . Separatists did notrespect the ceasefire during its duration, according to reports .
 Russia continues to receive armed personnel and weapons from Russia . They also continued to receive weapons and armed personnel from Russia.
 In July and August, Ukraine scored the most significant successes of its campaign so far . In July, Ukraine routed some of the most professional of the separatist forces from strongholds in Slovyansk, Kramatorsk, and other towns .
 Russia stepped up its support to the separatists in late August and early September . U.S. and NATO officials said that Russia had stepped up support for the separatists .
 Belarus President Poroshe nk o said on September 4 that he was ordering his military to prepare for a cease-fire on the 5* if a bilateral cease- fire is agreed to at a meeting in Minsk .
 Poroshe nk o said cease-fire would be followed by the “gradual introduction of a peace plan’s’S.
 Pro-Russian separatists have de facto independence and receive formal or informal support and recognition from their Russian patrons . Such a cease-fire has occurred in Transnistria in Moldova, and Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 President Poroshe nk o dissolved Ukraine’s parliament on August 25 . New parliamentary elections for October 26 .
Foreign companies often cite rampant corruption and serious shortcomings in the rule of law as key stumbling blocks to foreign investment . However, foreign companies cite such issues as rampant corruption as a key stumbling block .
 War in the Donbas has stopped production and damaged infrastructure in this vital industrial region .
 It is unclear what economic link s will exist between this region and the rest of Ukraine when the fighting ends .
 Ukraine's Gross Domestic Product dropped by 4.7% in the second quarter of 2014, according to the country’s statistical office .
 The IMF has agreed to combine the third and fourth loan tranches of Ukraine . Ukraine hopes to receive the loans by the end of the year .
The IMF has warned that if the war continues, Ukraine could need another $ 19 billion in financing from the international community . The IMF has also warned that the war could need more money if it continues .
 The reform plan will involve significant expenditure cuts, including cancelling wage and pension increases, cutting government employment and social spending, and cutting corruption through a new government procurement law .
 Revenue increases also envisioned, including ending tax evasion schemes and other frauds . Revenue increases are also envisioned .
 Ukraine’s government has already announced sharp increases in utility prices for domestic consumers .
 Ukraine's Foreign Policy priorities are to secure international support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . Ukraine's main foreign policy priorities include non-recognition of Russia's annexation of Crimea and international assistance .
 The government is reevaluating the former government’s renunciation of NATO membership aspirations . The government has not done so yet, but has not yet done so.
 Some political forces in Ukraine are calling for Ukraine to seek NATO membership . Others are more cautious, perhaps out of concern about further Russian aggression . NATO is unlikely to accept Ukraine as a member anytime soon.
 At the September 2014 NATO summit in Wales, the Allianee agreed to set up four trust funds to help Ukraine’s military in sueh areas as logistics, command and control, military personnel issues .
 Russians often point out that their ancestors spilled a great deal of blood to incorporate Crimea and most of the rest of Ukraine into the Russian empire .
 Russia reacted with hostility to the emergence of a new, more pro-Westem leadership in Ukraine in February 2014 . Russia reacted to the rise of the pro- Westem leadership.
 Russian forces invaded Ukraine’s Crimea region in late February and annexed it in March . Russian forces invade Ukraine's Crimea region.
 Russian Foreign Minister Lavrov has called for making Russia the second official language in Ukraine . constitutional reform s would confirm Ukraine's neutral status .
 Moscow has insisted on “federalization’ of Ukraine under which the various regions would have wide autonomy in the areas of the economy, finances, culture, language, education, and external economic and cultural ties with neighboring countries .
 Russia’s federalization proposal appears to be an effort to cripple the central government in Kyiv, analysts say . Ukraine's current pro-Westem orientation.
 Moscow has so far declined to recognize the Donetsk and Luhansk ‘people’s republics’ as independent countries or annex them to Russia .
 Russian official statements maintain that Moscow is asserting that the “people's republics’s” are a legitimate expression of the public will in the Donbas . Moscow says their “leaders’ are legitimate interlocutors for Kyiv.
 Putin's attempt to test how far he can go in destabilizing Ukraine while avoiding additional sanctions by the EU and U.S. Some observers have explained the apparent variance between Russia's words and deeds .
 Some analysts believe Russia may use the same tactics it has used in other former Soviet territories . If Moscow cannot pressure Kyiv to agree to its federalization plans, some analysts believe it may use same tactics in Moldova .
 The chaos created by the Moscow-backed groups could still serve Russian goals . Russia does not recognize the separatist entities or send in “peacekeeping’s troops to protect them .
 The disorder could cripple Ukraine’s efforts toward European integration, a key Russian goal . The disorder may also cripple the Ukraine's efforts to European integration .
 Kyiv has refused to cede control of one of its key economic assets . Moscow’s efforts have been unsuccessful, even with friendly governments in Kyiv .
 In June 2014, Bulgaria stopped work on South Stream, at least temporarily, due to objections from the European Commission about the project’s compliance with EU energy regulations .
In March 2014, Oettinger indicated that the EU’s overall natural gas consumption attributed to Russia via Ukraine, had in fact, declined . The fact, along with increased gas storage facilities and pipeline interconnections in EU countries, has diminished Russia's leverage over
 European countries could take more serious steps to find alternatives to Russian gas . The EU and Russia have not been able to replace all of that gas with currently available alternative sources .
 Ukraine has so far refused to pay the increased amount and is demanding a new gas contract with a lower price . Ukraine has thus far refused the increased price and has demanded a new contract.
 On June 16, Gazprom cut off gas supplies to Ukraine, due to its nonpayment of outstanding debts . The gas company cut off supplies to the country due to unpaid debts . Gazprom says it is still paying outstanding debts.
 Russian gas continues to flow to European countries despite the cutoff against Ukraine . Russian officials have warned the Europeans that Ukraine may siphon off Russian gas supplies meant for Europe .
 Ukraine claims to have enough gas in storage to last until late this year . Ukraine says it has enough gas to last for the rest of 2014 .
 Ukraine will have to purchase additional gas supplies in the next few months to maintain enough pressure in the pipeline system to supply gas to Europe this winter . Ukraine's leaders concede that Ukraine will need to purchase more gas supplies .
 If it cannot, Europe may undergo its third gas crisis in less than a decade . If it can't, it could be Europe's third crisis in more than 10 years .
 Ukraine has begun to import small amounts of gas from Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia . Ukraine has been importing gas from Hungary, Hungary and Slovakia this way .
 Ukrainian officials admit that “reverse flow’s’ supplies alone will not suffice to meet demand in Ukraine this winter . However, Ukrainian officials say “ reverse flow” will not meet demand .
 Ukraine could develop its own shale gas deposits and improve exploitation of its conventional gas reserves . In the long term, Ukraine could import liquefied natural gas from Azerbaijan, Central Asia, and elsewhere .
 Ukraine will have to make much greater strides in energy conservation . Ukraine will also have to be more energy conscious, say experts .
 The European Union’s main instrument to promote European values and deepen economic ties with Ukraine is the Association Agreement .
 DCFTA further opens potentially lucrative EU markets to Ukraine . It also requires it to adopt EU legislation and standards and to gradually expose its own firms to tough competition .
 Ukraine's government armounced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement . It was the first in a series of events that led to the regime’s demise .
 The EU and Ukraine signed the parts of the Association Agreement dealing with political issues in March 2014 . The parts dealing with economic issues (including the DCFTA) were signed on June 27 .
 EU has already lifted tariffs from almost all Ukrainian imports through November 2014 . It is hoped the economic parts of the DCFTA will have come into force .
 On May 12, 2014, the EU added 13 additional names of Russian officials . Two companies based in Crimea were added to the list .
 On July 29, the EU agreed to impose sanctions on Russia's financial, defense, and energy sectors . The EU agreed on July 29.
 The measures barred buying or selling debt, equity, or other financial instruments issued by five Russian state-owned ha nks with a maturity of over 90 days . The measures also banned future arms sales and imports from Russia .
 The sanctions were crafted to reduce the economic harm to EU countries, for example, by not targeting the sensitive natural gas sector . The sanctions include the sale of dual use technologies to civilian firms, or France's planned delivery of two amphibious assault ships .
 The EU is considering new sanctions in response to Russia’s increasingly brazen intervention in Ukraine .
 U.S. officials urged Ukrainian leaders and protestors to find a peaceful, democratic solution to Ukraine’s political upheaval .
 President Obama and Administration officials tried unsuccessfully to reassure Russia that the U.S. was not in a geopolitical competition with Moscow over Ukraine .
 The United States has suspended most bilateral cooperation with Russia . The U.S. has suspended the most bilateral Cooperation with Russia.
 Bank Rossiya was also sanctioned due to its role as the personal bank of senior Russian officials .
 The Administration sanctioned 17 entities, including ha nks and other businesses . The Administration also sanctioned 17 other entities .
 Russia has not yet chosen to move forward, and these sanctions represent the next stage in a calibrated effort to change Russia’s behavior . The sanctions represent a calibrated attempt to change the Russian behavior .
 The sanctions imposed so far appear to have had little effect on Russian behavior . The sanctions have not had little impact on Russia's behavior .
 Administration officials condemned the May 11 “referendums’ held by the separatists in eastern Ukraine as illegal and invalid .
 President Obama and Administration officials warned that the United States will impose additional sanctions on Russia if it disrupts Ukraine’s May 25 presidential election .
 President Obama congratulated the people of Ukraine on holding the presidential election despite threats from Russian-backed separatists . On May 26, Obama congratulated Poroshenko on his victory .
 President Obama met with President-elect Poroshenko in Warsaw on June 4 .
 The two leaders discussed Poroshenko’s plans for reforms, including in economic reform, improving the investment climate, fighting corruption, and reducing energy dependence on Russia .
 The U.S. discussed a package of assistance to Ukraine to support reforms in these areas . They also discussed training and equipment for Ukraine’s law enforcement bodies and armed forces .
 Vice President Biden attended President Poroshenko’s inauguration on June 7 . Biden attended Poroshenko's inauguration .
 U.S. Sanctions on Russia in Response to Events in Ukraine, coordinated by Dianne E. Rennack .
 Press reports claim that U.S. business groups with interests in Russia have lobbied heavily against unilateral sanctions . European competitors could take advantage of them to squeeze out United States firms .
 The United States imposed sanctions unilaterally on key firms in Russia’s financial, energy, and military technology sectors . The sanctions include Gazprombank, Vnesheconombank, Novatek, and Rosneft .
After the Malaysian airlines tragedy on the 17, the EU largely matched and even in some cases went beyond these sanctions . After the Malaysian Airlines tragedy on 17*, the EU was largely matched .
 The Administration responded by adding Rank of Moscow, VTB Bank and Russian Agricultural Ra nk to the list of companies with restricted access to U.S. capital markets .
 The U.S. allocated $92,391 million in aid for Ukraine in FY2013 and $86,125 million in FY2014 . The United States allocated $91,000 in aid to Ukraine in 2013.
 In its FY20I5 Congressional Budget Justification, likely drafted before the crisis in Ukraine, the Administration requested $57 million in Economic Support Fund assistance for Ukraine .
 Ukraine is also expected to receive $6 million in USAID Global Health funding, $22 million in State Global Health Funding, $2 million in INGLE law enforcement aid, $1.1 million in IMET military training assistance, and $2million in Foreign Military Financing
 A reduction in energy subsidies is one of the most politically sensitive conditions the IMF put on its loan to Ukraine . The IMF has put on the Ukraine loan to the country .
 The United States also provided help so that Ukraine can hold free and fair presidential elections in May 2014 . The U.S. also provided assistance to Ukraine's presidential elections .
 The Administration said it would send additional advisors in such areas as public debt management, macroeconomic policy, and budget and tax administration . Three banking advisors already in Kyiv .
 A full list of what Ukraine is seeking has not been disclosed, but press reports claim that Ukraine has asked for arms and ammunition, communications gear, intelligence support, aviation fuel, and night-vision goggles .
 The amount included 300,000 Meals Ready to Eat to Ukraine in March, at a cost of about $3 million . The amount was estimated at about $2 million .
 An additional $8 million in non-lethal ineludes explosive ordinanee disposal equipment and handheld radios for Ukraine’s military and engineering equipment .
 The funding will pay for body armor, night vision goggles, and communications equipment . The money will also be used to pay for communications equipment and body armor .
 The package will support economic reforms, assist constitutional reform, decentralization, and confidence-building in eastern Ukraine . It will help diversity Ukraine’s trade and increase its energy security .
 The Administration has notified Congress of its intent to use $ 19 million in Global Security Contingency Fund authority to train and equip four companies and one tactical headquarters of the Ukrainian National Guard . The plan is part of their efforts to build their capacity for internal defense .
 The training would take place in 2015 at a Ukrainian training site in Yavoriv, in western Ukraine .
 As of August 2014, the U.S. has obligated or notified $52 million in security assistance to Ukraine since the start of the crisis in March .
 The FY2015 foreign operations appropriations bill was approved by the Flouse Appropriations Committee on June 24 . It contains $215 million above the President’s pre-crisis request for Ukraine and other former Soviet countries facing Russian aggression .
 The Senate committee version of the bill contains $100 million in additional funds for this purpose . The Senate Appropriations Committee approved the bill on June 19 .
 The 113* Congress has passed legislation in response to the current political crisis in Ukraine . Other legislation has also been passed by Congress .
 The House also passed S 2183, which requires Radio Free Europe-Radio Eiberty and Voice of American to start a programming ‘surge’ to provide accurate information to eastern Ukraine, Crimea, and Moldova in order to counteract Russian propaganda .
 On May 14, 2014, the House Armed Services Committee reported the FY2015 National Defense Authorization Act . It would prohibit United States funding for military-to-military cooperation, information sharing, and other nonproliferation activities with Russia .