 The Ukrainian delegation will try to prevent the elimination of sanctions on Russia's demand .
 The Russians disagree with our version of the placement of peacekeepers in the Donbass . The Russians have not yet offered any alternatives themselves .
 Lieutenant of the Armed Forces of Ukraine found hanged in the territory of the military unit in Brovary .
 Information from the SBU helped the United States strike on Russian mercenaries in Syria on February 7 .
 The EU expects the immediate release of Sentsov and all Ukrainians illegally detained in Russia and the occupied Crimea .
 The Ukrainian diplomat, who was expelled from Hungary, returned to Ukraine . The diplomat was expelled by Hungary .
 End of Sentsov's hunger strike means he is in critical condition, Ukraines' ombudsperson says .
Latvian special services announced that Russian GRU repeatedly attacked the cyberspace of the country . Latvian Special Services announced that GRU had repeatedly attacked.
 Ministry of Finance negotiating with him to abandon some operations conducted in Europe so that these operations do not find themselves under sanctions .
 The Ukrainian delegation will try to prevent the elimination of the possibility of imposing sanctions on the Russian Federation . The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe will be held in Strasbourg on October 8-12 .
 The Ukrainian delegation is convinced that Moscow wants to destroy an organization called for the defense of democracy . The Russian government wants to protect the rule of law and human rights .
 The Russian Federation plans to employ mercenaries of the private military company Wagner to destabilize the Balkans .
 They have already illuminated "not only in Syria and Ukraine, but also in Africa and Asia" They have been illuminated in Ukraine, Ukraine and Africa .
 I emphasize, in our opinion, perhaps it will be their next application in the Balkans . I emphasize. In our Opinion, in their opinion, maybe it would be the next application for Balkans .
 It is difficult to explain the presence of a dozen citizens of the Balkan countries in Wagner .
 Guskov said that foreigners PMC mercenaries will be used by Russia to destabilize the situation in their countries . Guskova said foreigners will also be used to destabilise the situation.
 Many foreign fighters have already received Russian citizenship and still do not leave the Russian Federation . He also said that many foreign fighters "Wagner" have already been given Russian citizenship .
 Special Representative of the United States Department of State Kurt Volker is counting on a new meeting with the President of the Russian Federation, Vladislav Surkov . Volker will meet with Surkov's assistant to the President.
 A UN peacekeeping mission would guarantee security in the occupied territory . The mission would create conditions for Minsk agreements to be implemented, says Volker .
 The Russian side did not agree to the proposal, so he asked for their proposals . The Special Representative of the State Department noted that the Russian side didn't agree with the proposal .
 Russians do not agree with the proposals we have made, but have not yet offered any options themselves, says Volker .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin expressed the opinion that the presence of UN peacekeepers in the Donbas would be in favor of resolving the conflict in eastern Ukraine . The RF Ministry of Foreign Affairs has made a draft resolution for consideration by the UN Security Council .
 Poroshenko urged Secretary General to send an evaluation mission to Ukraine . Poroshenko said Ukraine needed a UN peacekeeping arm .
 peacekeepers should be placed only on the line of separation of the warring parties, not on the entire occupied territory of the Donbas and especially on the Russian-Ukrainian border .
 U.S. Special Envoy to Ukraine Kurt Volker said Russia was ready to ensure that the U.N. peacekeeping mission in the Donbas was deployed . The mission was deployed on the line of collision.
 Petro Poroshenko said that more than forty countries are ready to take part in a peacekeeping operation in the occupied territory of Donbas .
 GPU Andriy Lysenko is a spokesman of the GPU and a spokesman for the GPU .
 The deceased from 06 to 10/7/2018 was assigned to a daily recruiting assistant to another military unit . It was previously established that according to the order of the military commander, the deceased from 6 to 10-7/ 2018.
 A group of the military prosecutor's office of the Darnytsia garrison of the Central region of Ukraine immediately went to the scene .
 The Darnytsky garrison is an investigating and operational group of the Desnian Police Department of the National Police in Kyiv . It is also an operative response unit of the Central Directorate of the Military Service of the Law Enforcement Administration .
 The body of the deceased was delivered to the Bureau of Forensic Medicine Kyiv, "he said .
 Information from the Security Service of Ukraine helped the U.S. strike at Russian mercenaries near the city of Deir-ez-Zor in Syria in early February 2018 .
 Igor Guskov is the head of the SBU apparatus, Censor.NET reports . He says he is in an interview with Ukrainian News.NET .
 "Because we eat them have shown who these people are, as they are secretly killing," says one person . "They have shown what they are," he says .
 I think that our American colleagues, having received such information, properly arranged their armed forces. Therefore, I think, our colleagues, have been properly arranged. I believe that our U.S. colleagues have been informed of such information .
 Guskov: "They realized that they were not colleagues from the Russian army and even not mercenaries, but secret killers" "It was even easier for them, because they realized they weren't colleagues"
 He noted that as a result of the United States military strike near Deir Ez-Zor, 82 Russians were killed .
 The Obolonsky District Court of Kiev issued a text of a letter from former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych . He requested the Russian President Vladimir Putin to enter the territory of Ukraine .
 Yanukovych accused Western countries of terrorism and violence. In his text Yanukovych accused the West of terrorism .
 " Chaos and anarchy, life, health and human rights prevail in the country, especially in the south-east," wrote Yanukovych to Putin .
 Former President Alexander Goroshinsky's lawyer said Yanukovych sent a similar letter to leaders of European countries . But they allegedly ignored him, he said .
 Prosecutors ask the court to sentence Viktor Yanukovych to 15 years in prison to ex-president Viktor Yanukovych in case of state security .
 The European Union expresses its solidarity with Oleg Sentsov . The EU expects an immediate release along with all illegally detained Ukrainian citizens in Russia and Crimean peninsula .
 Russian authorities refused to provide him with proper medical treatment at a hospital . The Russian Federation violated his human rights as well as his obligations in the field .
On May 16, 2018, lawyer Oleg Sentsov said that his client May 14 declared an endless hunger strike .
 Sentsov demands the release of all Ukrainian political prisoners who are in Russian prisons . Sentsov wants all political prisoners to be released .
Lawyer Dmitry Dinze, representing Sentsov's interests, washed away that his client would stop the hunger strike on October 6 . Dinze's lawyer said Sentsov would stop his hunger strike.
 Attorney Dmitry Dinze and sister Sentsova Natalia Kaplan reported that the convicted director began to decompose the liver and can refuse the kidneys .
 According to Russian doctors, Sentsov may not survive the hunger strike .
 As part of the Russian private military company Wagner, 10% are citizens of Ukraine . 10% of Wagner's citizens are Ukrainian citizens .
 "The number of citizens of Ukraine, including the inhabitants of Crimea, who have adopted Russian citizenship, does not exceed 10%," he says .
 The Wagner PVC has no permanent staff, it is a contractual basis and rotation takes place from 3 months to 3 months or more . Guskov noted that the Wagner PVC is not permanent .
 Ukrainian citizens who fought in the Donbass, then 3-4 times, were in Syria and participated in hostilities . He noted that in this unit many Ukrainian citizens fought in Syria .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov announced this during a joint press conference with Italian Foreign Minister Geno Moovero-Milanese .
 Lavrov stressed that the indicated citizens of Russia did not hide during their trip to The Hague . He stressed that Russia's citizens were not hiding during the trip to the Hague .
 The Netherlands did not provide "facts or materials" regarding the involvement of these Russians in cyber attacks . The Russian Foreign Minister also emphasized that the Netherlands didn't provide facts or materials about these Russians .
 The Netherlands accused the Netherlands of implementing a "reformed propaganda action" against Russia . The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation accused the Dutch of implementing the action . The Dutch government also accused Russia of implementing an "reformed" propaganda action .
 On October 4, the Netherlands announced the deportation of 4 Russians who were preparing a cyberattack for the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and named their names . The 4 Russians were also named .
 British investigation believes that Russia is involved in the poisoning of the Violinist .
 Ministry of Defense of said that missiles, which destroyed MN17, are not in their arms .
 The head of state noted the need for preparation and adoption of appropriate changes to the legislation . The state's chief of state said the legislation should be prepared and adopted .
 "This technology is also one of the forms of interference in elections through money coming from the east, from Russia," saysoroshenko . "I hope as the decisive actions of the Central Election Commission," he says .
 The President said draft legislative proposals were ready for consideration by the National Council for Reforms . The President invited the newly elected members of the CEC to join this process .
 All 14 candidates for the updated CEC have undergone a special examination . The council has decided to increase the number of members of the Central Election Commission to 17 people .
On October 5, new members of the CEC took an oath in the session hall of the Verkhovna Rada . The CEC elected a chairman, deputies and secretary at a closed meeting .
 The diplomat, who was expelled from the consulate in Budapest, returned to Ukraine . The diplomat was expelled.
 Hungary sent a Ukrainian consul from the country in response to a declaration by a non-Hungarian Hungarian consul in Berehove via a passport scandal in Transcarpathia .
 The conflict broke out after a video distribution at the consulate in Hungarian passports in the Berezhny inhabitants of Zakarpattya appeared on the network .
 The consul then advised these people not to talk about dual citizenship to the Ukrainian authorities .
 The EU accused Russian President Vladimir Putin of illegally depriving Ukraine of the director Oleg Sentsov . The EU accuses Putin of depriving the director of the Ukraine director .
 The European Union expresses its support for Sentsovo and expects its prompt and adequate treatment and immediate release . All Ukrainian citizens illegally detained in Russia and the Crimea are released .
 Ukraine's Human Rights Commissioner says Oleh Sentsov has stopped his nearly five-month hunger strike . Liudmyla Denisova says Sentsov's hunger strike has stopped .
 Russia, only verbally, without any medical certificates, assured us that his physical condition was satisfactory . Russia only verbally told us that he was fine .
 They would not have 'persuaded' him into stopping his hunger strike . They would have exerted psychological pressure on him, they say .
"A person with such goals, with such will, devotion and a sincere Ukrainian position, could not give up," Denisova wrote on social media .
 She noted that the process of ending the hunger strike is even more complicated and worse than hunger strike itself . She said the process is more complicated than the hungerstrike itself .
"I have demanded earlier that he be provided with highly qualified specialists, but the Kremlin has never done it," she said . She said .
 Nutritionists have to work out a scheme for bringing him out of the hunger strike . Only professional nutritionists must work out scheme to bring him out.
 I demand Russia speed up the process of granting me access to Oleh Sentsov . I demand that Russia speedup the process to grant me access .
 "If necessary, I will come to the Labytnangi colony even today, "she said. If necessary, she said, "I will come"
 Sentsov’s cousin-sister Natalia Kaplan said March 16, 2018 that her brother Oleh reported on his failing health in a letter .
 He in particular said that he is losing his hair and has his teeth crumbling into small pieces . He said he has lost his hair.
 On May 14, 2018, the fillmmaker went on an indefinite hunger strike demanding to release all Ukrainian political prisoners held in Russia .
 The Bureau for the Defense of Satrsme of Latvia reported that the Russian Intelligence Agency of the GRU repeatedly attacked the cyberspace of the country .
Latvian special services. This is reported by DELFI with reference to the statement of the Latvianspecial services .
 Russian hackers attacked for intelligence purposes, according to the Bureau of Defense of Self-Defense . Russian hackers received private correspondence and documents .
For the most part, the purpose of hackers was the Latvian state authorities, in particular the defense sector . Sometimes the GRU also attacked private companies and media .
 According to bios, hackers used a phishing method the spy sent an email to the victim .
 The Stsluzhba expressed confidence that behind these attacks is a group of hackers of the GRU . The GRU is responsible for cyber attacks against the World Anti-Doping Agency .
 No foreign special services were trying to influence the elections in Latvia, the department said . At the same time, the Department emphasized that no foreign special Services were trying.
On October 5th, 5th in large-scale hacker attacks of the Russian Federation accused Germany .
 Russians caught by Russians back in April when they tried to break the network of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in The Hague . Former intelligence officer Sergei Skrypal was poisoned in April .
 Germany and Britain could impose new sanctions against Russia through cyber attacks . It was also reported that Germany and UK could impose more sanctions on Russia .
 Britain sees the possibility of a cyberattack against Russia in the event of a series of aggressive actions by the Kremlin .
 Poland hopes the United States will impose sanctions against North Stream-2 . Poland hopes U.S. would impose sanctions on North Stream 2 .
 This was announced by Prime Minister Mateusz Moravetsky, reports RMF24, reports Censor.NET.NET .
"I think that by the end of the year everything will become clear on this issue," he said . He said he expects the issue to become clear by end of year .
 North Stream 2 has to transport about 55 billion cubic meters of Russian gas annually from Russia to Germany via the Baltic Sea .
 The transit of Russian gas through the Ukrainian GTS is one of the largest items of export of Ukrainian services . The transit is a major part of the GTS's exports of gas to Ukraine .
 In 2018, revenues from Russian gas transit surpassed Ukrainian gas imports by $0.0 billion . In 2017, Russian gas transport revenues from Ukraine surpassed Ukraine by $1.5 billion .
 Loss of transit by Ukraine will mean a loss of a significant part of currency earnings . Loss of transport by Ukraine could mean a significant loss of part of the country's currency earnings.
Opponents argue that North Stream 2 will increase EU dependence on Gazprom . Ukraine, Poland, Moldova, the Baltic States, the United States and Denmark also oppose the project .
 The Russian monopolist supplies about a third of the total volume of gas used in Europe .
In "Natskorpus" so do not trust potential partners from "Svoboda" Oleg Tyagnybok tried to negotiate separately with the public movement "DIA" last year .
 The ""DIA" movement was also dealt with by the ""Right sector" Yarosh had previously been a leader, according to representatives of the ""PS" They are referred to as "younger partners" at the talks .
 To win I need to choose the right tactics and follow it during the fight. To win, you need to follow it in the fight, says Cevallos .
 In addition, I have to be in great shape to adjust to the rival rhythm. In addition to being in good shape, I must adjust to rival rhythm .