 Five years into Ukraine's conflict with Russia, Moscow seems to have Ukraine pinned against the ropes . Russia has been in conflict with Ukraine for five years .
Ukraine's ambition of joining the European Union and NATO is indefinitely stalled . Ukraine's ambition to join the EU and NATO has been stalled .
 It has no realistic way to reclaim control of Russian-annexed Crimea, or to end the war with Russia-backed separatists in the east .
 Comedian is leading in the polls for Sunday's presidential election . It's no wonder a comedian is leading the polls.
 The Kremlin has long seen Ukraine's plan to join NATO as a threat that must be fended off at all costs . But its calculations that the conflict in eastern Ukraine's Donbass region would scuttle the nation's membership bid seems to have worked .
 Moscow saw his ouster as a Western-staged plot and responded by quickly annexing Ukraine's Crimea . The move is seen by most countries as illegal, and backing a separatist insurgency in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine has signed an association deal with the EU and won a much-coveted visa-free travel deal . Ukraine has since signed an agreement with the European Union .
 President Petro Poroshenko's popularity has been eroding the popularity of the Ukrainian president . But his hopes for joining the EU appear as elusive as ever, and that has contributed to public disenchantment .
 The United States and the EU have maintained strong political support for Ukraine, most recently over Russia's seizure of Ukrainian ships and their crews .
 NATO and EU have made it clear they are not going to put Ukraine on a track to membership any time soon . But both NATO and the EU have said they will not put the country on a path to membership . The EU and NATO have said it is not likely
 German leaders fear that opening the path to NATO for Ukraine would strain relations with Russia .
 EU is still dealing with integrating its youngest members, including Romania and Bulgaria . Putting Ukraine on that path now would be unworkable, says Meister .
 Western allies have been exasperated with the slow pace of Ukraine's institutional reforms and efforts to combat corruption . Western allies also have been increasingly exasperated by the pace of the reforms .
 The U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch, issued a harsh statement criticizing a Constitutional Court ruling . The ruling absolved Ukrainian officials of the obligation to prove legitimate the origin of their assets .
 Ukraine's top prosecutor claimed that Yovanovitch had given him a list of people his office shouldn't prosecute . U.S. State Department rejected the claim as false .
 Russia has paid a high price for annexing Crimea and backing rebels in eastern Ukraine . Putin may have succeeded for now in impeding Ukraine's closer integration into Western alliances .
 The United States and the EU have hit Moscow with several waves of economic and financial sanctions . The U.S. and EU are restricting its access to global financial markets and cutting supplies of key energy and defense technologies .
 In 2015, France and Germany brokered a peace agreement that reduced the scope of fighting in eastern Ukraine . About 13,000 people have been killed in the conflict since the start of 2015 .
 The Minsk deal required Ukraine to grant sweeping autonomy to the rebel regions . The deal was broadly rejected by Ukraine's political forces .
 The conflict in the east and rampant official corruption aren't the only problems in Ukraine worrying the West .
Last week, ambassadors of the Group of Seven leading nations sent a letter to the Ukrainian Interior Ministry . They voiced concern about the threat posed by extreme right groups ahead of the elections .
Ultra-right groups have targeted gay and women's rights activists and Roma encampments around the country . International human rights organizations have long raised alarms about the rise of the ultra-right group .
 The state-sponsored glorification of leaders of Ukraine's World War II-era nationalist movement has angered Israel and Poland . The glorification includes an insurgent army that sided with the Nazis .
 Tensions have also simmered between Ukraine and Hungary over the alleged violation of ethnic Hungarians' rights in western Ukraine .
 Austria strongly criticized Ukraine's refusal to grant entry to a reporter as an "act of censorship" Earlier this month, Austria strongly condemned Ukraine's decision to deny entry to an Austrian reporter .
 Yuras Karmanau in Kiev, Ukraine, and David Rising and Frank Jordans in Berlin contributed to the report .