 The plan included a proposal how to reconcile Ukraine and Russia and lift anti-Russian sanctions . The plan includes a proposal to reconcile the two countries .
 It suggested to hold all-Ukrainian referendum on leasing Crimea to Russia, withdrawal of troops from Ukraine and lifting sanctions from Russia . In particular, it suggested that it would also hold a referendum on holding the Crimea referendum .
 Kremlin called the plan 'an absurd' and denied connections to formation of it . The Kremlin called it an ' absurd'
 Flynn resigned because of his leaked conversations with Russian diplomats on lifting U.S. sanctions . A week later Flynn resigned due to leaked conversations on lifting American sanctions .
 Artemenko claimed that he turned over material compromising Poroshenko to the American government with the help of Valentin Nalivaychenko – Head of Ukrainian Security Service . He also claimed to have turned over the material to the United States .
 He was the president of  SKA Kiev football club, later he went to prison for stealing $4 million through it . He was president of the club before he was jailed .
 Artemenko was imprisoned together with Mykola Karpyuk – a frontman of far-right Ukrainian organization UNA-UNSO till March 2014 . Artemen Ko was imprisoned with MyKola KARPyuk - a frontman for far- right Ukrainian organization.
 In 2000-2001 he and Artemenko were activists in protests "Ukraine without Kuchma" They were jailed for 4,5 years and jailed for four years .
 During Maidan at 2013-2014 Karpyuk’s organization became a part of Right Sector a union of far-right movements, which was set off during Maidan .
In March 2014 after "referendum" in Crimea he went to Russia to negotiate with Putin's aides about destiny of Crimea . In March 2014 he visited Russia after the Crimea referendum .
 He was arrested by FSB officers on Russian-Ukrainian border and later condemned to 22 years in prison . He was later sentenced to 22. years in jail .
 Yulia Tymoshenko Bloc was a member of the party's leadership before taking the leadership of a new political movement . The party's odious leader was the leader of a political movement.
 MP excluded from the party after NYT article brought to the lights the delivery of a ‘peace plan’ MP was excluded from party .
 Former ‘Right Sector’ leader Dmytro Yarosh was responsible for the finances there . Yarosh is a former leader of the 'Right Sector' He was also a former member of the ‘right sector’
 Interpol deleted the information about international search of Dmytro Yarosh two years after Interpol removed the information . Interpol also deleted information about the search.
 He is an advisor to the Chief of the General Staff . Now he is a non-affiliated member of parliament and a member of Parliament .
 Artemenko told in Hromadske’s interview that couple days before the referendum on the status of Crimea was held on March, 2014, a meeting with Dmytro Yarosh and other right movements took place .
 Karpiuk with the head of Kyiv Right Sector department will go to Russia to negotiate on the top-level . It was decided to go to the country to negotiate.
 Some propositions from a person, close to Karpiuk, appeared. Then the question of the annexation of Crimea was arrised .
Mykola Karpiuk and his collegue frim Right Sector were arrested on the Russian-Ukrainian border . The next day after the referendum Mykola was arrested .
 Russian court sentenced him to 22,5 years of detention for allegedly participation in the Chechen war on separatists side . He was sentenced to 22.5 years in prison for allegedly participating in the war on the separatists side.
 Artemenko claims that he worked seven years in the U.S. and owned a logistics company in Qatar . He claims that his work was connected to supplying military bases .
 Artemenko said his “peace-plan with Russia had been developed by a group of Ukrainian MPs and two key figures of this story . The personal lawyer and special advisor of Trump, Michael Cohen and the American businessman of Russian origin Felix Sater.
 Sater got acquainted with Sater through mutual friends and Cohen he knows since the time he founded a family “business on ethanol’s’ in Ukraine .
 He claims that before that he actively cooperated with U.S. intelligence agencies and allegedly helped to find Osama bin Laden . He claims to have been involved in the hunt for bin Laden.
 Michael Cohen – Trump’s lawyer – is said to be the United States President's connecting link to the Kremlin .
 In January 2017 ‘BuzzFeed’ published an article on Trump’s ties to the Russian government . It claimed that Trump has been cooperating with it for many years through Cohen .
 Cohen met secretly Russian emissaries in Prague on 29 August 2016, according to articles .
Ukranian MP's 'peace-plan' to the White House was transmitted to White House . Now he is denying that he transmitted the MP’s ‘ peace-plan’ to the House .
Artemenko confirmed meeting with Artemenko and receiving this plan from him . But he confirmed he had met with him and received this plan .
 In March 2016 the Obama Administration imposed sanctions on Russia for annexing Crimea and what followed in Crimea and Donbas . The Obama administration imposed sanctions in March 2016 .
 One of Obama’s last actions as President was the extension of those sanctions . One of his last actions was the extensions of the sanctions .
 Unless Trump changes something, they will last another year – until March 2018 . Unless Trump change something, he will last until 2018 .
 Trump has the right to undo the decision of his predecessor by decree . Trump also has the power to undo his predecessor's decision by decree.
Experts believe that right now the majority of American politicians don’t support lifting the sanctions . However, some of the politicians, including some of his own team, don't support lifting sanctions .
 Senators Ben Cardin and John McCain proposed a new law in January 2017 . President has to give Congress good reasons in order to lift sanctions .
 The Senate told ‘Hromadske’ that it may happen any moment, as soon as there is a need. The Senate said it may be any moment.