 The Arctic Ocean Earth's northernmost sea is stirring. Lawrence Enigmatic mystery 76 Love songs My funny Valentine 76 Race .
 The cloud that is helping cure cancer is helping cancer patients .
 Scientists and engineers at Virginia Tech harness supercomputing power to analyze vast amounts of DNA sequencing information and help deliver lifesaving treatments . Using Microsoft Azure and HDInsight, scientists and engineers use Microsoft's Azure andHDInsight .
 The next big breakthrough might not be found in a test tube, but in big data . It could be the first big breakthrough in the future .
 This is the Microsoft Cloud Microsoft Cloud learn more at microsoftcloud.com.com 6 The world this week The Economist this week .
 Kayla Mueller, an American aid worker held by is, had been killed . It was confirmed that Kayla was killed .
 Fosun, the largest privately owned conglomerate in mainland China, won its bid for Club Mediterranee . The holiday-resort firm was wildly popular in the 1970s but has struggled over the past decade .
 You know the slightest imprecision can keep you from getting what you want. So you know the smallest imprecisions can keep them from getting the best .
 State Street Global Advisors offers over 140* SPDR ETFs . They cover a broad range of asset classes, so investors have the tools they need .
 Spdrs.com/highlights.com: If you have a craving for precision, visit us at spdr.com.com/.
 Anvisfj'iis Precise in a world that isn't State Street Global Advisors . Before investing, consider the funds' investment objectives, risks, charges and expenses .
 To obtain a prospectus or summary prospectus, caii 1.866.787.2257 or visit www.spdrs.com.com .
ETFs trade like stocks, fluctuate in market value and may trade at prices above or below tbe ETFs net asset value .
 So do many Russians, including shameless Putinists, who denounce the West’s decadence but exploit its schools and stockmarkets . So does many Russians who denounce West's decadence.
 Russia will be embraced when it has rulers who treat the world, and their own people, with respect not contempt, however long that takes . It should let them know that Russia, a great nation dragged down a terrible path, should be embraced by Russia .
 The imf reckons that American growth will hit 3.6% in 2015, faster than the world economy as a whole .
 America’s trade deficit was about 6% of GDP in 2006 . The deficit had more than halved by 2009 .
 The countries of the single currency are running a current-account surplus of about 2.6% of GDP . The surplus is largely due to exports to America .
 Germany’s trade surplus is as large as it has ever been. At 7.4% of gdp, Germany‘s trade deficit is as big as it's ever been, according to the statistics .
 The renminbi rose by more than 10% against the dollar in 2010-13, to the annoyance of U.S. politicians .
 The maturity and interest cost of the debt, two-thirds of which is owed to official European creditors, are so generous that Greece pays a smaller share of gdp in debt service than Portugal and Italy . Greece pays less than Portugal, Italy and Portugal.
 The government is now required to run a primary budget surplus of 3% of gdp this year, rising to 4.5% from 2016 onwards .
 If an athlete insists on running backwards, even the most patient trainer can't help him . If a patient trainer cannot help him, he can't be helped by an athlete .
 Your pay is low for your qualifications, but at least the holidays are long, and the pension is gold-plated .
 Teaching should be a profession for hard-working altruists who want to improve children’s life prospects .
 Many Mexican teachers have inherited their j obs . Brazilian ones earn less than other public servants, and retire much earlier . Many Mexican teacher's j obs are Brazilian .
 Yet it's possible to persuade the hardworking and ambi. Yet it is possible to convince the hard working andAmbi to teach .
 Teach for America sends star graduates from elite universities for two-year stints in rough schools . Private employers snap up its alumni-but many stay in teaching .
 Such schemes are small, but show that when teaching is recast as tough and rewarding, the right sort of clamour to join .
 That may well mean higher pay-hut also less generous pensions and holidays . That may also mean higher wages and less generous holidays .
 China's army began admitting foreign journalists to its monthly and highly uninformativebriefings only last year . Now he must make it behave responsibly S O SECRETIVE is China’s army .
 Chinese generals-some of whom speak dismissively of American strength-that America still wields a very big stick . It would be a timely reminder to Chinese generals.
 Their alumni do not stand out in the same way they often do in Britain. Their alumni don't stand out as well as in the UK .
 Eurthermore, cognitive behavioural therapy is better at treating depression and reducing suicidal urges than drugs . The therapy is more effective at reducing depression than drugs.
 Yes, it is paid out of the tax pot rather than a discrete pension fund . It is not a tax pot, but it is a pension fund.
 Eree bus passes, winter heating allowances and the like are indefensible if they are paid out regardless of wealth . EreeBus passes and winter heating allowance and like are not indefensible.
 The southern euro zone has started to recover nicely some four to six quarters ago . Europe's southern countries have remained ‘stuck with nearzero growth’
 Greek indicators have started to nosedive with the rise of the Syriza threat . Eor Spain and Portugal, leading indicators project stronger gains ahead while Greek indicators are nosediving .
 If Greece reverses its own labour reforms it will probably sink back into recession . If Greece now reverses it will likely be back in recession .
 Berenberg London's debt stock as a share of gdp, which you regrettably do, looks unpayable .
 Greece's debt is at extremely concessional terms, resulting in an effective interest rate on public debt that is lower than Germany’s . Greece's public debt-service burden is about the same as U.S.'s .
 One of the hyenas depicted on the Eebruary 7th cover is cocking a leg while urinating .
 Hungary's most powerful businessman has unleashed invective towards his country's prime minister . Some of their experiments might work Hungary's angry media baron .
 None of the popular hagiographies of St Va lenti n e give a ny hi nt of hi m li li ki n g chocolate .
 A story has surfaced of an airline trying to getapprovalfora standing section on a plane .
 I America'sjobs report, released on February 6th, showsthatthe economy is in rude health .
 Wages have increased 2 Schumpeter. What's more, wages have increased two Schumpeters .
 People who work for religious organisations should think about the consequences for their personal lives .
 Qobal Chief iMecutive XLIjroup trie Andmen, Chief iftecutivt Officer, Aon BenfieLd Qmip Chief finandaf . AHiCurifioni GtiterjH MdrgtretA Wsh
Spedot RepmentottYe of the Secrirtary-Geneml for DiiOiter Riyk Auction. Spedot repmentott Ye of theSecrirtaries- Geneml .
The pft>^r4miiie the relorm olMix'dikiiul tniiitiij^ in Pdkiiiun jiitis id . Iftiprdve td, et^iuJ o|>|>, et.
Ky Iwcd tnUiir^ 4s well -b tcjchlti^ jtid IcJitiitiiti^ iiuictiih .
 Your Profili You liavr a Master deg^, pceieralil^' in wcaiioiuiuJ iraining, eitgineeriiig or business science .
 Y'bu also have at least 10 iivani of pfolesskuial ex|vrience mih designing, devrloping, itiiplementiiig and evaluatiiig qrt3T progratnmes and teaching and Irarning nia
Jeiicnceof coofieraiing with Olga nUatio ns and WdikingW'ith nmltinaiianal teams, pteictahly in ctiumries undergoing conHici and cruik Further inforniaikui on the position
 The World Economic Forum is the international institution committed to improving the state of the world through public-private cooperation .
 The Tropical Forest Alliance 2020 is a global public-private partnership where partners take voluntary actions, individually and in combination, to reduce tropical deforestation associated with the sourcing of commodities such as palm oil, soy, beef and paper & pulp .
 You are particularly competent at delivering international forestry or agricultural partnerships, publicprivate engagement, project and project and team management, public speaking, problem solving and synthesizing . You are especially competent at deliver international forestry and agricultural partnerships .
 As the director of TEA 2020, you will be its recognized leader to all external constituents, partners and partners . You will be the head of the World Economic Eorum and our various networks .
 The TEA 2020 steering committee will lead and manage theTEA 2020 secretariat . It will ensure its objectives and expected deliverables are met on time .
 Your key responsibilities: Provide intellectual, strategic and operational leadership . Lead and manage the REPRO Department ensuring it fulfils its mission . Act as a catalyser and generator of innovation and changes .
 Your skills: Expe fierce in strategic leadership, in particular in scientific areas related to EFSA's remit . Good knowledge of Risk Assessment and EU food and feed safety principles .
 The Green Climate Fund is a newly established multilateral finance institution . The fund is a new multilateral Finance institution .
 The Econon^ist Intelligence Unit helps leaders prepare for opportunity and act with confidence when making strategic dedsions .
 The OU is the global star>dard in providing quality, actionable intelligence to the public and private sector . Respor^sible for production a nd quality, you wi ll contri bute to all a reas of the region's editorial output .
 This will involve focusing on specified countries to produce several reports per month . Ely will also prepare daily research notes which interpret political and economic events . The report will be produced by Ely's office .
 To succeed you must have experience of analysing a r>d forecasting political and economic trends . Strong writing and editing skills in Ingbsh are key to success .
 Commonwealth Secret ar at on financing for OevelOpment poicy issues . This is an opportunity for inotvkJua^s, companies. tn»nktanks, acaoemic and rese.rrinsttutions to undeftake short ‘ten
 G20 workings and policy: debt sustainability: innovative finance for development . We are seeking to estab*sh a poo* of spec^st expertise which we can qyicWy access Con&tXtants w# be ^^proached .
 Ukraine’s president said February 12th, after all-night talks, they were put away “No good news,’ said Retro Poroshenko .
 Putin's purpose is not to rebuild the Soviet empire-he knows this is impossiblehut to protect Russia’s sovereignty . Mr Putin’'s purpose isn’t to rebuild Soviet empire.
 Russia’s confrontation with the West lies a clash of ideas. Also in this section 21 Russia's European supporters behind Russia's confrontation with West .
 Russia feels threatened not by any individual European state, but by the European Union and nato, which it regards as ex-nato . Russia feels threats not by the EU but by nato. Russia regards nato as a "pansionist"
 International Institute for Strategic Studies says it is hard for multinational bodies such as NATO and the eu to craft a response .
 Nearly all its large-scale military exercises in the past decade have featured simulations of limited nuclear strikes . Nearly all of the past 10 years have featured simulation of limited strikes .
 Ukraine would stay out of the Eu and nato. It would end Ukraine’s hopes of ever regaining sovereignty over its territory other than Russian terms .
 Many pro-Russian parties did well in last May's European elections, taking between them a quarter of the seats . Such behaviour is in the Kremlin’s pocket, and why P opulist parties of both right and left, many pro- Russian, did well.
 Syriza is cool on sanctions against Russia, and opposed to expanding them . Syriza also opposes expanding them.
 Russia's leader has accused the West of double standards in dealing with Russia . Russia's president says the West has a 'double standards'
 France’s National Front, the foremost right-nationalist party, openly admires Mr Putin .
 Hungary's far-right Jobbik party won 20% of the vote in parliamentary elections last April . It is avowedly pro-Russian .
 UKip’s leader Nigel Farage has called Mr Putin the world leader he most admires-at least as a political operator .
 Russian media falsely portrayed these lackeys as official, independent election observers .
 The Economist was last seen in the cold war . It was the first time Russia had seen the Economist in more than a decade .
 Russia is harder to deal with than the old Soviet Union, Mr Stoltenberg says .
 A signed photograph of Scott Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, competes for space with snaps of Rand Paul and Jeb Bush-all three of them presidential hopefuls .
 Private Schools occupation and possessions most of the change is taking place lower down, thanks to vouchers aimed at poor kids .
 Some states use tax credits to reimburse parents for private tuition. Only now are they being ex-ex-fans .
 Each voucher is worth $8,500 a year, compared with $17,500 to educate a child in the public school system . Under the dc scheme, each voucher isworth $8k a year .
 There are sound public-health reasons for taxing tobacco, but as the map shows, the higher the taxes, the biggerthe black market .
 Firms added more than im net new jobs in the three months to January, the best showing since 1997 .
 unemployment is now 11 percentage points lower than its 2009 peak . Among 16 -19-year-old men, hit hard by the recession, unemployment is 11 per cent lower than 2009 peak.
 T he father of Maj or Maj, a character in Catch 22, a novel by Joseph Heller, makes a good living not growing alfalfa . Things are also looking better for those T he dad of Maj .
 Between 2008 and 2012, $io.m. was paid to farmers who had been dead for over a year . Between 2008-2012, $IO.m was paid.
 Most of the money goes to big, rich farmers producing staalready in work . The money is spent on big, big farmers. Most of it goes to rich farmers who produce staals ready in work.
 Average weekly earnings in January were 2.8% higher than they were a year earlier . The biggest increase since mid-2011 was the biggest increase in January .
 Inflation will remain close to zero in 2015 and growth is not wild. That would lead to big problems in an economy where inflation will remain near zero . That would be a big problem for the economy.
Ms Yellen should enjoy the recovery while it lasts, says Ms Yellen . She should enjoy pie commodities like corn and soyabeans in states such as Iowa .
 New system was meant to save around $23 billion over a decade-partly through cuts to food stamps for hard-up families . The new system was intended to save $23billion over the years .
 No matter how complex your business questions, we have the capabilities and experience to deliver the answers you need to move forward . No matter what complex your questions, you have the ability to answer them .
Deloitte is the world's largest consulting firm . The firm is based in London, London and London .
 The usda predicted that net farm income would decline by 32% between 2014 and 2015 . Ominously, on February loth the usda, predicted thatNet Farm income would fall by 32%.
 Falling prices reduce the cost of subsidised crop insurance to the tax . Back in May 2013, President Obama felt able to boast that al-Oaeda in Pakistan and Afghanistan was on a path to defeat .
 Alfalfa non-growers still have bumper times ahead. AlfalfA non- Growers are still on the road to success .
 Some Democrats grumbled that the new aumf is too vague, lacks geographic limits and sets no timetable for repealing it . Some Democrats said it would need to be renewed after three years .
 Mr Obama already claims legal authority for today’s strikes under a broad reading of the 2001 AUMF . It permits attacks on al-Oaeda and “associated groups, as well as under his presidential powers of national self-defence .
 New authorisation invites the Republican-controlled Congress to give explicit backing for a long-lasting campaign to “degrade and defeat’s’ is .
 Some Democrats fear the current language could allow Obama or his successor to launch a fresh ground war in the Middle East .
 The new 2015 aumf “builds on and adds to it’s on, he says . But rather than supersede that old authorisation or place time limits on its validity, this new 2015 ‘ builds on and Adds to it.
 Alabama’s first same-sex marriages were solemnised on Eebruary 9th .
 Roy Moore ordered probate judges in Alabama not to allow gay marriages . The first gay marriages were due to take place on February 8th .
 In Arkansas as a whole, tickets have sold 2. times as fast as Eandango, an online ticket seller, expected .
 "They won’t say anything because they [will bel in the same situation,’ she predicts .
 Gay couples in Mobile were not allowed to wed on Eebruary 9th . Many gathered to celebrate anyway before one of the city's Mardi Gras parades .
 memoirs published on February 10th Mr Axelrod recalls fretting about breaking Mr Obama’s campaign commitments .
 Even if the country is more resigned to partisanship than in 2008, that is still true, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Chavez expropriated or nationalised 1,200 companies, from steelworks to cleaning products . Public payroll has more than doubled in 16 years .
 Jorge Giordani was Chavez's economic guru . Some $20-25 billion was swindled in 2012 alone, he says .
 Even before the oil price collapsed, “21st-century socialism’ had become unaffordable . ‘21st century socialism” was unaffordable.
 Between them, the government and pdvsa, the state oil company, issued more debt than any other emerging economy in 2007-11 .
 The fiscal deficit is heading for 20% of gdp this year, according to independent economists . The deficit will be 20% this year.
 This includes debt payments by the government and pdvsa adding up to $10. billion in 2015 . This includes the government's debt payments, which are expected to reach $10 billion .
 Some importers will be charged closer to the market rate for dollars . The changes will come on Eebruary 10th .
 Sintesis Financiera unemployment rate is 18 Estimate t Forecast . Excludes price-controlled goods and seasonal fluctuations .
 The Economist studied more than 45,000 rulings issued in 2004-13 by the constitutional, administrative and electoral chambers of the supreme court . In no case did they rule against the government.
 Mr Capriles’s strategy is to win a parliamentary election due by the end of this year . He could then perhaps trigger a referendum to recall Mr Maduro, which the constitution allows in 2016 .
 Prosecutors have identified at least 2. billion reais in ‘suspicious payments’ on Petrobras contracts . The former purchasing chief has revealed that 3% of the value of all his division’s contracts was diverted to the PT and its allies for personal gain or campaign
 Petrobras has scrapped two of the unbuilt refineries, after spending $1 billion on them . It has abandoned work on doubling output at another and on revamping a petrochemonboth sides .
 Mr Lopez, the propaganda holds, is a fascist who would strip the poor of everything they have gained, he says .
 Eixing the level of national content so high was a recipe for delay and extra cost . The national content level was so high that it was the recipe for delays and extra costs .
 An opposition party sweeps Delhi P OLITICAL cycles in India are speeding up . The opposition party is sweeping Delhi POLITICAL cycle cycles .
 Mr Kejriwal one of the biggest wins for any party, anywhere in India, since independence . Aap won 67 of 70 seats in Delhi on February 7th .
 If the election had been held in July the earliest plausible date, enthusiasm for Mr Modi might have swept in the bjp . Mr Modi has recently won four other state polls .
 Many voters, even some bjp mps privately, welcomed a check on what is widely seen as his arrogance . He is known as highhanded and aloof in government .
 One bjp minister, in Delhi in December, called non-Hindus ‘bastards’ and earned only a light reprimand from Mr Modi .
 The aap’s main strategist, Yogendra Yadav, talks of his party filling a vacuum in the national opposition . Yadav is the party's main strategist .
 A test looms in assembly elections in poor but populous Bihar, where the bjp hopes to expand .
 Prince Philip awarded knighthood to Prince Philip on January 26th . Prince Philip is the husband of Australia's head of state .
 Naha / . a area of ENLARGEMENT m election victory last November with a pledge to stop the project . Naha/ , a area OF ENLarGEMENTm election victory.
According to ancient Okinawan lore, a paradise known as nirai kanai lies out to sea . Hiroshi Ashitomi, a protest leader, says that according to ancient Okinawa lore a paradise lies on sea .
 One member of his review panel worries that the governor may have appointed too many conserva. The Henoko project is not especially worried about theHenoko project .
 Vietnam’s youthful population of 9om adds up to 1.5m each year to the growing work pool . Vietnam's youthful population adds to the number of people in the country .
 Once, Vietnam sought to work in the Soviet Union and its satellites . Once, Vietnamese sought to worked in the USSR and its satellite satellites .
 The dog restaurant's kitchen has a metal cage next to a dog restaurant’s kitchen .
 South Korea will close the gates again unless the share of illegal workers among tons of them is shared . Permits were later issued again on a trial basis, but Vietnam’s labour ministry said in January that South Korea would close gates again .
 Ms Hang says she has already saved the $3,200 needed for the renovation of the family home .
 Mr Anwar fell out with his mentor, Mahathir Mohamad, during the Asian financial crisis in 1998 . He emerged as the leading advocate of re/ormasi-fundamental reform of an ossified, corrupt political system .
 Najib's reputation as a liberal and moderate has been dented by his government’s use of another archaic and draconian law, on sedition, to hound its critics . So, unfairly or not, the case has harmed the image of Malaysia’
 imdb, a sovereign-wealth fund, has been handed a weapon in the troubles surrounding imdb .
 Politicians from both the opposition and umno have called for investigations into imbd . The imbd.
 The most difficult ones require the ending of Malaysia’s rules mandating commercial discrimination in favour of the Malay majority, a system to which many in umno are wedded .
 The pla is the party’s armed wing-its soldiers swear allegiance to it rather than the people or the country .
 Eighting military graft is intended to enhance both of these qualities . The graft is meant to enhance the qualities of the military .
 In the 1990s the pla, at first with the party’s blessing, dived into commerce . The pla was founded in the 1980s with the Party's blessing .
 In 1998, Jiang Zemin called a halt to most pla commerce, but the armed forces never rid themselves of graft . In 1998 President Jiang Zmin called the halt to the most plA commerce, and the armed force never rid itself of graft.
 Mr Xi’s military clout gives him a greater chance of success than his predecessors in curbing graft in the pla .
 The Chinese New Year holiday is a peak in consumption and prices . In the Gregorian calendar, Eebruary is January and Eeb February .
 Erench director Jean-Jacques Annaud had been banned from China for making ‘Seven Years in Tibet’ The film depicts the Chinese army invading Tibet .
 China Eilm Group made Mr Annaud a rare foreign director of a Chinese feature film with a budget of more than $4om .
 Mr Annaud says he was surprised when representatives of the Beijing Eorbidden City Eilm Corporation visited him in 2007 to ask him to make the film .
 There were some domestic critics online who did not care for the novel or its author . Some would have liked to derail the film project .
 China's statisticians wait until March to publish the full range of data for the economy . January and Eebruary are lumped together to assess the true state of retail sales and industrial output .
 Audience figures rocketed to tens of millions as it won scoops that included airing video and audio tapes of Osama bin Laden .
 In this section 42 Israel's partisan newspapers 42 Palestine's culinary delights 43 South African tourism 43 Justice In Chad and Senegal 44 Nigeria's delayed vote . For daily analysis and debate on the Middle East and Africa, visit Economist .
 cbc, a private Egyptian channel founded in 2011 by Muhammad al-Amin, offered airtime in November 2012 to a popular sketch show by Bassam Youssef .
 Yediofs attacks on his family, he bridled, were no longer taking place daily in print, but hourly on the internet . He bridled his family.
 Eor years he and his Israeli wife have brought tens of thousands of Americans, including congressmen, on partisan tours of Israel .
 The Economist February 14th 2015 dude social media and small independent outfits . .
 Networks in rebel-held Syria broadcast local news via YouTube channels or Eacebook pages . A few including Aleppo Today broadcast on satellite .
 The genie of feisty and critical media may be stuffed back into the lamp, but not the thirst for information .
 Eorget the white vegetable that, when boiled, resembles a brain and releases a gassy aroma redolent of cheap cafeterias .
Translated literally, zahara baladi means wild flower, and it usually makes its appearance some time in February, just as the terraced hills erupt in colourful blooms .
 GDP growth has limped, at about 2% for the past two years and unemployment is at 35% and rising . It is a bright spot in an otherwise dismal economy .
 World Travel and Tourism Council rules will come into effect come what may be the first time the rules will go into effect .
 A leaked report by Grant Thornton said the policy could cost more than ioo,ooojobs .
 Mr Habre, now aged 72, has been living in Senegal since fleeing from Chad at the end of his reign .
 A new Senegalese president, Macky Sail, gave the case a fresh lease of life . Aminata Toure, an anticorruption campaigner, served as prime minister until last summer .
 The Extraordinary African Chambers were created with the endorsement of the African Union . They oversaw the innovative creation of the ExtraordinaryAfrican Chambers .
 Mr Habre could not, in any case, be tried before it, since his alleged crimes were committed before the icc was set up . He could not be tried.
 AU said last year it would promote its own continental human-rights court-hut leaders and their senior officials . Last year the AU said it would promoting its own Continental human- rights court.
 Private polls conducted for both parties suggested that the vote had gone ahead as planned .
 Electoral delays are not unusual in Nigeria-the 20u presidential poll was postponed too-but this hold-up is particularly controversial because it was forced by the army .
 Jibrin Ibrahim of the Centre for Democracy and Development called the army's action ‘direct blackmail’ of the electoral commission . Ibrahim said the army’s action was “direct blackmail of the Electoral commission.
 Nigerians are asking whether the enforced pause will swing the outcome of the vote . The question many Nigerians have asked is whether it will swing a vote .
 Germany is investing too little-hurting Europe, the world and itself . Germany under Chancellor Angela Merkel is largely wrong about economic policy, economists say .
 Public investment in Germany-shared by the federal, state and local governments-has fallen from 6% of gdp in 1970 to 2% now .
 The main reason for low domestic investment is uncertainty and nervousness over the future . Michael Hiither, the Cologne institute’s director, says the main reason.
 Half the firms polled by Mr Hiither’s institute claim that this makes any new investment unattractive .
 The Justice and Development party has made unprecedented overtures to the Kurds . The party has eased bans on the language and talking to the imprisoned pick leader, Abdullah Ocalan .
 Hizbullah was used by the Turkish state to fight the pick in the 1990s . It escalated into street battles between pick supporters and Huda-Par, an Islamist Kurdish party, whose precursor, Hiz Bullah, was used in the fight .
 The PICK insists that Huda-Par has links to IS and that Turkey backs both . The Pick insists that Turkey back both Huda and Turkey backs the PICK .
 She insists the hdp will win the minimum 10% of the national vote needed to win parliamentary seats in June’s election .
 Mr Putin is due in Budapest on February lyth, two weeks after Mrs Merkel . It is a fitting image, given that he is due to be in Budapest two weeks later .
 Hungary has taken a €io billion ($ii billion) loan from Russia to upgrade its ageing nuclear power plant . The country's nuclear plant has been ageing for decades .
 The spectacle of a handcuffed imf head doing the ‘perp walk’ aroused special outrage . The spectacle was captured on camera in a video posted online .
 French are torn between instinctive respect for privacy over sexual behaviour and creeping moral disquiet .
 The presiding judge in the trial, which opened on February 2nd, made it clear that this was a criminal, not a moral. The trial is set to take place in the UK .
 Mr Orban has since come back into line, supporting Ukraine’s sovereignty . But he has since been stressing Hungary's commitment to nato . He has also supported Ukraine's sovereignty .
 The case against Mr StraussKahn hinges on whether he knew that women who attended soirees libertines, or group-sex parties, were paid .
Journalist Jean Ouatremer said it was time for the media to examine their own silence .
 Ukraine, which borders Hungary, casts a long and ever darkening shadow . Ukraine's border with Hungary has a long, ever darkened shadow .
 Mr Timmermans insists his job is about getting Europe to work better, not acting as deregulator-in-chief . His approach has riled Eurocrats and members of the European Parliament .
 In 1991, he holed up in a government building during an attempted coup, talking to focal mps and dispatching reports back to The Hague . He was in Moscow during a diplomatic stint in 1991, when he was in charge of the Russian government .
 The soothsayer of subsidiarity Eor years has been in firefighting mode . The eu has been battling to hold the euro together or reacting to unrest in its neighbourhood .
 Mr Timmermans is well placed to take on Brussels’s bureaucratic machine . Eluent and more-or-less accentless in six European languages .
 Dr No was buried alive under a heap of bird guano . Dr No had grand plans of his own .
 Europe's bureaucrats and lawmakers may not be too fond of him, but Mr Timmermans should at least escape that fate .
 Britain has slipped from fourth to sixth in the global defence spending league since 2012, according to sipri . France, Saudi Arabia, Russia, China and America have also slipped to sixth .
 The hangover from what are perceived to have been costly and unsuccessful campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan and a sour, introspective national mood, reflected in the Commons defeat for the government in August 2013 over action in Syria .
 The Milibandwagon wanted their country to aspire to be a great power . Not accept decline-the highest level since the first survey in 2010 .
 The Conservative-led coalition can also claim success in dealing with the Ministry of Defence’s overheated equipment budget .
 £147 billion this year to £86 billion by 2020. That requires departments that are not protected to cut day-to-day spending .
 Britain fails to meet its NATO commitment to spend at least 2% of GDP on defence . Cameron again pledged to do so at the alliance summit he hosted in Wales only in September .
 The owner of the Ivy restaurant in London withdrew sprsm in cash in a single day . His lawyer has said this involved no impropriety .
 Authorities have collected just £i35m in tax, interest and penalties-less than 1% of the estimated total in the accounts . In 2011, the authorities said all 6,000 British-held accounts were “ripe for investigation’s’.
 Conservative mps have gleefully pointed out that the misdeeds took place during the previous leak . The misdeed was revealed by the leak.
 In witness protection Unknown HSBC Geneva Geneva HSBC Geneva HSBC 2009 Herve Falciani Under French protection . Under French Protection .
 The Economist and an unidentified ex PwC employee . The Economist. The Economist .
 The gift of storytelling may be one of life’s most powerful — and envied — skills . Remember Your Stories.
 The Great Courses has brought the world's foremost educators to millions who want to go deeper into the subjects that matter most .
 Labour's early showing in the campaign has been more divisive than unifying, even as its appeal appears less national . The party's shrinking support in Scotland and tin ear to the more afQuent south, by the day .
 Labour leader has mainly been promising to spend oodles on the nhs, while launching blistering attacks on business . His objection is to the fact that, instead of trying to fix Labour’s big weaknesses-its weak polling on the economy and on Mr Miliband's fitness for
 Labour leader denounced him as a Monaco-based tax avoider . Boots, Boots, dared squeal, said he was a 'tax-avoider'
 Australian campaign chief, Lynton Crosby, rules with an iron bar . Compared with the Conservatives, Crosby rules with a iron bar.
 Sarah Sackman was out canvassing in north London suburb of East Einchley Bagehot . She was asked to explain how a Labour government would be different from the Tories .
 Mr Miliband instructed his lackeys to “weaponise the nhs, on the basis that Britons love it. Yet she was following orders, Mr Miliband said .
 Labour invented it and it is creaking under the pressures of an ageing population .
 Pupils of xfA recruits do just as well in reading as those of other teachers . In maths, their test scores are better than those of others .
 Teach First's training has been rated ‘outstanding’ in all 44 categories reviewed by Britain’s schools inspectorate . Also in this section 54 English-language teachers' woes.
 Some countries add weekend gatherings and seminars for participants to swap ideas and commiserate . The early retention rate is similar to xfA itself .
 Dzameer Dzulkifli runs Malaysia’s scheme-which could be a waste of more than their time . Such support is expensive in the rural areas where many are based .
 The cost of the xfA model is what may prevent it going mainstream . The cost is what might prevent it from becoming mainstream .
 Several schemes, including those in Bulgaria, India, Malaysia and Mexico, are doing better than the state at tracking teaching quality and student out .
 A fifth of school principals in Washington, DC, are xfA alumni . Kaya Henderson is the schools chancellor and several of her senior staff .
 Many who leave teaching move to social programmes or start-up ventures . Many of those who leave teach move to start-ups or social programmes .
 Ms Sarmiento says her main task is to ensure her pupils believe that, too, too . She says she is trying to ensure pupils believe she does .
 English-language staff teach over 200m Chinese pupils, a heroic, if mind-boggling, teacher-pupil ratio .
 Many speak scripted English in class and prefer to focus on the pen-and-ink grammatical work on which pupils are examined .
 Japan has said it will bolster the mandatory English requirement for children in primary school-hut only from 2020 when the country hosts the Olympics .
 Armando Velazquez, a mid-career English teacher, refuses to speak a word of Spanish in the classroom and makes the whole of his lessons conversational .
Today's pupils must first learn enough English to become tomorrow's competent teachers . Even if the most promising innovations are widely copied, fluency will come only gradually .
 Mr Wang-who owns Sunseeker, the British maker of the sleek craft seen in James Bond films, celebrated his latest deal on February 10th .
 The previous month he took a 20% stake in Atletico Madrid football club . He also took a 10% stake.
 Why authors need to be entrepreneurs? For daity coverage of business, visit Economist.com/business-finance.com/.
 In August it launched a 5 billion yuan venture with Baidu and Tencent, two leading internet firms, to devise ‘online to offiine’ services . Consumers use their smartphones to choose products but are then led to a physical shop .
 Dalian Wanda’s recent move into cultural industries has clearly been made with government support . Citigroup: The firm's recent move in cultural industries is made with Government support .
 Public documents show that it received at least 7. billion yuan in subsidies between the start of 2011 and mid-2014 .
 In December his firm held a celebration in the interior city of Wuhan to mark the opening of a culturally-themed development . His firm held the celebration in December .
 So smarter cars and roads equipped with sensors will use our highly secure cloud to keep traffic moving . The cloud will be used to monitor traffic in cars and other vehicles .
 The purpose of fashion shows is changing. All nghts reserved 58 Business Fashion designers Strutting their stuff .
 Some industry commentators wonder if there are better ways for fashion brands to spend their marketing budgets than parading their wares at more and more shows .
 A recent survey of the luxury industry by the Boston Consulting Group concluded that word of mouth over was the biggest influence on consumers’ purchase decisions . The Economist February 14th 2015 took magazines last year as the most influential magazine .
 A 59metre, 8o-tonne freighter is perfect for anyone looking to break into interstellar trading . For $180 you Lean buy a Constellation Taurus.
 Bitcoin-inspired publishing platform raised $i8m. Its nearest competition is Ethereum, a Bitcoin-based publishing platform .
 There is a chunk of the audience that “doesn’t want those compromises,’ says gig’s owner, Chris Roberts .
 GIG has already sent some of them a module that lets them take a tour of their new spacecraft . Another lets them stage dogfights with other craft, and another lets them perform dogfights .
 The Office of Eoreign Assets Control, the arm of the Treasury that oversees sanctions, closed the loophole in August .
 It said the transaction had taken place on August 6th and had been registered on August nth . The sanctions were expanded on August 13th .
 Rossiya later seems to have given away its remaining stake in Sogaz by transferring ownership of Abros to Abros itself .
 According to corporate records, a stake of 0.004% is held by a firm called Bolshoi Dom 9 . Six shareholders (including its largest investor, Yuri Kovalchuk) all own stakes in Rossiya or are affiliated with the bank .
Until March 2014, 43.6% of Gunvor was owned by Fentex Properties, of which Mr Timchenko is the sole beneficial owner .
European subsidiaries of Russian companies thought to be controlled by parties on sanctions lists appear to be indirectly owned by them .
 Western governments design them with a degree of ambiguity, so as to encourage Western firms to play safe and shun any company that might be connected with targeted people .
 West may be weakening one of the most powerful tools it has in its dealings with Russia . Russian-linked firms sidestep them through well-timed share transfers .
 The Economist. The Economist is now The Economist . The Economist's new book, The Economist, will be published on February 14th .
 A LEXIS TSIPRAS and his radical left Syr/^iza party worked for more than a year while in opposition to prepare their policy platform .
 Over 8o committees were charged with producing specific proposals for overhauling different sectors of the Greek economy .
 At the end of 2009 Greece owed €301 billion, then around 127% of gdp, mainly to the private sector . At the start of 2009, Greece owed around €301billion .
Today it owes around €315 billion . All but €70 billion of which comes from public lenders . Today it owes €315billion .
 Panayotis Nikoloudis says there are 3,500 cases of large-scale tax evasion amounting to €7 billion . They could yield €2. billion in 2015, he says .
 It would reduce its primary The Economist budget surplus to 1.5% of gdp . Second, it would cut its primary budget surplus from 3% this year and 4. 5% in 2016 .
 Commercial property has been delivering excellent returns K eep interest rates low for long enough . Property market will eventually boom, says Buttonwood .
Sabina Kalyan of cere Global Investors says that prime offices in Madrid are now changing hands at 4.5%, compared with 8% at the bottom of the market .
 The world economy is not exactly racing, but forecasts predict growth of more thani% in euro area and Japan and more than 3% in America .
 I Safe as offices CommerdaL property, average annuaLtotaL returns to September 2014, % 3 year 5 year 10 years 10 year 10 year 0 4 8 12 16 16 which investors are most enthusiastic about, .
 Deals involving development land fell by 29% globally last year, including a 3% decline in Europe .
 Investors have even been willing to accept a negative yield on bonds issued by Nestle . Nestle, a Swiss foods group, is a Swiss food group .
 If inflation returns, property will be a better hedge than conventional government bonds . Property will be better hedged than government bonds.
 Greece's debts could generate savings worth 17% of GDP, according to Mr Darvas . Greece's debt crisis could also generate savings, he says .
 China’s Cosco, which already runs a profitable container terminal O IL’S fall may be good for consumers, but it has hurt private-equity firms .
 Denmark’s Maersk were frontrunners among the shortlisted bidders . More money was raised for energy buy-outs in America in 2014, and more deals were made .
 Buy-out firms have also begun to invest in oil companies themselves, a more straightforward bet on the oil price . But the buy-out companies are also starting to invest themselves .
 Samson, an American producer partly owned by kkr, has also fallen in value . Samson is a producer in the U.S. and is part of kkr .
 India's gdp rose by 7.5% year on year in the fourth quarter of 2014, a shade faster than China’s .
 GDP is typically measured by reference to the prices and structure of the economy in a base year . GDP is usually measured byreference to the price of the country's economy .
 Over time this snapshot becomes less relevant, and GDP figures are less accurate, so the base year is updated every few years . Over time, this snapshot is less relevant.
 Eirms’ top-line growth has slowed in part because prices are not rising as quickly as fast as quickly .
Fiscalyears ending March, 2011-12 national statistics base year from 2012 onwards falls . 2012-2012 figures will be released on March 31, 2013 .
 The cso reckons gdp will grow by 74% in 2014-15 in real terms, half a percentage point faster than in the previous year . The c so reckons that gDP will growth by 74%.
 Arun Jaitley presents his first full-year budget on Eebruary 28th .
 The Eederal Reserve’s talk of higher rates is the opposite of what its economy needs . The E federal Reserve's talk is the same as what the economy needs.
 The award is designed to provide work experience for a promising journalist or would-be journalist . The Economist mitmq will spend three to six months at The Economist .
 Japan appears as another rich country in which wealth is becoming ever more concentrated . The problem is not the super-rich I N THOMAS PIKETTY’s bestseller, ‘Capital in the Twenty-Eirst Century’
 It is certainly another rich country in which the book is selling well . The book is being published in the UK .
 Schwab and others like it are trying to become more like precarious obs, who account for a rising share of the workforce .
 The average annual salary for permanent employees is around Ysm , compared with ¥2m for less secure workers . The average yearly salary for Permanent employees is about Ysm .
 Robert Eeldman of Morgan Stanley says the economy would grow faster if people were paid for what they accomplish . He says if people are paid for their work, the economy will grow faster . Eelderman says people should be paid to do what they do
Capital has been selling overi30,ooo copies so far in Japan . "Capital" has sold more than 100,000 copies of the book .
 Eidelity announced the acquisition of eMoney which provides wealth-planning products to a large number of small advisory firms who use them to bring in and retain clients . Earlier this month, Eidelity bought eMoney to broaden its offerings .
 The four biggest British supermarket chains all offer some form of price-match guarantee . Anyone who has visited a British supermarket will be familiar with such seemingly generous deals .
 Net of the resulting £2 rebate, the upstart’s steak would cost just £3. The upstart's steak would be £3 .
 A firm can sell to customers at a high price while using a guarantee to attract more price-sensitive, hassle-tolerating customers . Eor instance, if some customers are too busy to shop around, a firm could sell to them at high price .
 A price-guarantee may be an attempt to signal genuinely lower prices and thus stand out from the crowd . Einally, a price-Guarantee might be a attempt to sign up to lower prices .
On close examination, that sounds like an effort to abate a price war, not start one . On close examination. It sounds like a effort to Abate a Price War, not begin one .
 USCGC Healy set off from Seward, Alaska, to sail north through the Arctic Circle into the Chukchi Sea .
 AiX rise in temperatures at the equator-from, say, 25X to 26X-will have effects, but does not change much . AiX rises in temperatures will have effects but not much.
 Between 1996 and 2014, the rate rose to i48,oookm^ even though the past two seasons have seen an increase in summer ice compared with the low point in 2012 . The rate has risen since 1996, but it has also risen since then .
 The Economist February 14th 2015 . Also in this section 70 Replacing orbiting infrastructure 71 Measuring the sea's acidity 71 . The two have different properties .
 In 1982 a column of Arctic seawater with a cross-sectional area of a square metre fixed 26 milligrams of carbon a day . In the summer of 1982, the column was fixed to a square metres of carbon .
 There has been a substantial increase in the number of cod-especially of sexually ac. There has, for example, been a large increase in cod- especially of sexually-acually ac.
Study by Bjarte Bogstad of Norway’s Institute of Marine Research found that the blubber of both species had declined from being 40mm thick in the early 1990s to less than 35mm now .
 The Arctic zooplankton on which they feed are being replaced by more temperate species that are harder to catch or less nutritious . The whales may be suffering because the Arctic zoplankon on which the whales feed is being replaced .
 The fish, called the capelin, has begun to swim northward in search of cooler waters . They also suffer indirectly, through the loss of their main prey, a fish called the Capelin, which has begun swimming northward .
 Dr FernandezMendez thinks a shortage of these may limit Arctic Ocean’s productivity even if most of the ice melts .
Politicians love to trumpet new infrastructure but take much Less interest in maintaining what already exists .
 Many satellites launched for important purposes such as monitoring solar weather, tracking the climate and just helping people navigate are Limping along in need of repLacement .
 A solar-weather satellite launched in 1997 with an intended Lifetime of five years . One that is about to be substituted \stUe Advanced Composition Explorer .
 That still Leaves a Lot of other elderly satellites in similar need of retirement. That still leaves a Lot.
Natural selection B iological evolution happens by random mutation and selection . Such marine measurements are important to track the acidification of the ocean .
Living organisms, mutation and selection seem to have arrived at an optimal result . About by rising carbon-dioxide levels in the air, carbon dioxide levels have risen .
 At the industrial era's dawn in the mid-i8th century, the ocean’s surface waters had a pH of 8.2.2 .
 Since then, they are reckoned to have absorbed about a third of the carbon dioxide emitted by the burning of fossil fuels .
 Preliminary studies suggest that some animals are already finding it harder to survive than they used to . Preliminary Studies suggest some of these animals are finding it hard to survive .
 Dr Chen thinks his device might be commercialised for as little as $1,000 . anb’s is similarly frugal .
To cut costs as much as possible it employs standard D-cell batteries and cheap memory cards to record data . To cut costs, the company uses standard batteries and memory cards .
 Commercial lcds are cheap, but holography is costly because they need far smaller picture elements . Holography screens need far fewer picture elements than commercial lcDS .
 Dr Smalley was able to use red, green and blue light simultaneously to create a coloured, holographic image .
 The next task is to scale the design up by linking many crystals together, to create an image both bigger than a single crystal’s display .
Living-room holography may be yet another hoary prediction of the future that actually does arrive in the present .
Two trailers for Andrei Zvyagintsev’s new film, “Leviathan, opened in Moscow earlier this month . The domestic response to the film is a lot about today's Russia, says Economist .
 Had “Leviathan’s” been made then, the mayor would have been a local party boss, the new church a Palace of Culture and the priest a kgb general .
 The Church has adopted the role of guardian of the state . Like the icGB-the Committee for State Security-the church has adopted a role .
 In today's Russia it is not the people, but the church itself, the film concludes .
 To some on the Republican right in America, this evolution is a rake's progress . Oe is a debasement of the currency leading to hyperinflation and economic ruin, some say .
 At other times redenomination also helped to boost activity, an early version of oe. At other time redenominations also helped.
 The Economist February 14th 2015 prices were remarkably stable during this period . Over the short run, however, the discipline required by this standard required some short, sharp slumps .
 The advent of universal suffrage after the first world war made it impossible for democratically elected governments to impose such costs on their voters . commodity money disappeared and “fiat money (ie, money that is what the government declares it to be) became the norm .
Jonathan Cape; £25 W ’HEN Thomas Stearns Eliot died in 1965 . Few other poets could claim to match his achievement .
 Eew previous biographies have been able to delve into the early years of Eliot’s life . Eliot's life was written in the early days of his life .
 He was introduced to modern Erench poetry which would profoundly change the way he wrote . During his time at Harvard-where he also spent time writing bawdy ballads with his drinking companions .
 Ned Lawrence knew that his family was different, in some unspoken way, from other families, and that he was not at all like his four brothers .
As a middle-class boy growing up in Oxford at the turn of the 20th century, Lawrence was certainly idiosyncratic .
 His letters from teenage cycling trips round Prance contained lots of information about castles, but only intermittent signs of real feelings .
 Much about Lawrence remains an enigma because he wanted it that way . But these bits never quite constitute a whole, comprehensible human being .
 A new play considers race in the office J ACLYN has an attitude problem . Parents, Mr Gioia Theatre Grey area NEWYork, is a theatre in the Grey area .
 Tonya Pinkins is black. Like many critics today, he is gripped by a regrettable need to say The Economist is black .
 The doctor’s machinations inject something toxic into their chemistry . The two had been friendly, but the doctor's machinations injected something toxic .
 Anyone seeking a prescription for racial harmony will not find it in this play . The play is called "The White House of Racial Harmony"
 The answers, awkwardly, are hardly black and white, something about the internet . The answers are mostly about the Internet .
 The love song has outlasted religious, social and political objections for centuries . But it will survive Miley Cyrus and Justin Bieber-and grumpy intellectuals .
 The Laadanhip P^ogramma brings together the v^ry ba&t International leaders for ibrea we«ks of inspiration, insight, insight and iilumma .
You can refresh your perspective and rejuvenate your thinking, we giva you the c^nce to refresh your thinking .
 Tbs School is also ranked independently in the top of UK bufmess sebOOtS for its Business and Manaffemenr researcK .
 Wharton's top-ranked faculty will empower you to inspire others through the innovative thinking and strategic vision required to create a culture of excellence .
 Global Executive MBA High achievement takes place in the hamewoHt of high ecpcfctation . The achievement is the highest in the world.
 TheXBAbrGfobof Lecrdem Ifa The Global MBA combines the strengths of three vfodd-class graduate schooU . The XBAbrgfob of Lec thirdem If a Global MBA ends the disciplines of Internationa] relations
 The program targets indIvkJuali who manage, conduct or furKl evaluations in a development context .
 AMRO is in the transition period of becoming an international organization . AMRO will become an international organisation in the coming years .
 Specialists will conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN-i-3 members and advanced economies . They will work on CMIM related issues .
 Specialists will conduct sectorial based economic surveillance and research on ASEAN-I-3 members and advanced economies . They will work on macroeconomic and financial statistics and work on CMIM related issues .
 S MIGDi which will be located ecroea two The tWPa^irg' to be developed &» private sector prqjecta by appropriately qualified deveUipc^ OFWP .
 Experience emphasising integrative approaches to natural resource management will be favoured over engineering approaches or the provision of water for other services .
As women are currently under-represented, we would particularly encourage applications from Asia and Latin America at this time . We welcome applications from everyone irrespective of gender and nationality .
 The names and current contacts of three referees should be sent by e-mail to ISPC-Membership@fao.org by March, 10th 2015 . Applications include a covering letter stating interest in, and suitability for, a fullv. with publication list .
Nominations of candidates by third parties will be considered if contact with nominees and submission of all relevant documents can be completed in the same time frame . Nominations by third party will be  considered if nomination of nominees is completed in same timeframe .
 The last dale for Sale of RTQ Bidding DcKtimsnte la hereby eidended upto 05 095015. The lastdale for sale of RTq Bidding Bidding.
 RFP bidding documents shall be issued subaequenUy id the Qualified Bidders, ahortiisted through Stage-l bidding prooeees .
 Ter^ino-Comrnercial Bid A Envei^ It: Price Bid. Auction from eligiC>la bidders on 'FOR Destination' basis .
 Bidding documents for aH ihe ihe above mentioned Packages shai be on sale from 99.015015 to 02.035015 The dale A time of recekM of bids (both lechno-commercial and price bid) for above mentfoned p
 The date and time csf opening of Price Bids for the respectivB Packages shall be Intimated aeperalsly after opening of TedYKJ-Cornmefcial Bids .
 Readers are recommended to make appropriate enquiries and take appropriate advice before sending money, incurring any expense or entering into a binding commitment .
 I Global defence spending increased by 1.7% in 2014, following three years of decreases . I Global Defence spending increased 1.6% in 2013, according to I Global .
 Russia's own defence spending increased by 8.3% in 2014 . It continues to spend more as a percentage of GDP than America .
 Other markets % change on Dec 31st 2013 Index Feb 11th one week in local currency in $ terms United States 2,068 .
 Listen in cars, planes and trains with no interruptions using the full offline listening mode . Use the full online listening mode to listen in cars and planes .
 Richard von Weizsacker died on January 31st, aged 94 F orty years, as the Old Testament shows . He was the first president of Germany's reunited country .
 The cdu boss revelled in political combat. The head of state stood apart, a figure of decency, dignity and goodness .
 The Rosetta Stone way is the way to learn e language . E-language is a form of language used in English .
 The Economist Espresso's new daily app delivers a stimulating shot of analysis and insight every weekday morning .