 The interview in the above matter was held in Room HVC-304, Capitol Visitor Center, commencing at 10:08m.
 Congress can do 6 under Article I to have it in a SCIF, 7 to defy historical precedent . It guarantees the participation of 9 counsel, White House counsel, in an adversarial 10 way .
 17 1 officer for more than 27 years, under five Presidents, under 5 Presidents, three 2 Republican and two Democrats . And then if we could start behind here, we could be behind 17 1 officers .
At the same time, I have been instructed by my 6 employer, the United States Department of State, not to appear .
 Ukraine's resiliency in the face of Russian aggression in the defense, energy, cyber, and information spheres, and empowering institutions in civil society to tackle corruption .
Ukrainian embassy in Kyiv is working out of its embassy in Ukraine, says U.S. ambassador . "We can be proud of our efforts and our resolve in Ukraine over the past 5 years," he says . "Much more remains to be done"
 U.S. officials have spoken publicly in Ukraine to push back on Russian aggression and corrupt influences . They have been subject to defamatory and disinformation campaigns, and even online threats .
 You don't step in to the public arena of 4 international diplomacy in active pursuit of U.S. principled 5 interests against venal vested interests without expecting 6 vigorous pushback .
 The director general had not had any contact from any member on the leadership of the Department .
 A Well, there was a line in there that the committees had been attempting to bully, intimidate, and threaten career foreign service officers . The committees were trying to bully and intimidate foreign service officials .
 17 wmmm took issue with my raising the additional 18 information, and the conversation rapidly, I would say, 19 either escalated or degenerated into a tense exchange . And my read of the 16 request would include that .
 Foreign Services are being intimidated, says U.S. ambassador . "Welt, welt, you say that the career Foreign Services is being intimidated"
 The tone and further 5 back and forth between L and my counsel was fully professional and respectful . Q And I assume you did not have any further conversations with 37 1 A No, and I think as counsel can confirm, he was taken off 3 of my account, he said .
 A He said he had not yet succeeded in securing an agreement to issue such a statement . He said it was not yet successful in securing a deal.
 The first conversation was on September 28th, Saturday, when I was picking apples . Q had he heard about your interaction with A So that came later .
 He was the only Foreign Service officer outside the European Bureau who initiated contact and came to his office . He then subsequently came to my office .
 He checked in with me several times over the last 2 weeks to see how he was doing . So he checked in several times to see what he had been doing .
 The U.S. ambassador has been an ambassador in four missions, including Afghanistan . He has also been ambassador in Afghanistan, including in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
Carol Perez: "I had concerns that outside of the European Bureau, the leadership in the Department was not actually signaling its support for the career Foreign Service officers" Perez: I reached out to the director general, Carol Perez, on October 1st .
 Ukraine is the country's largest country in Ukraine . Ukraine has been in the European Bureau for more than a decade .
 Q You haven't seen memoranda that -A I've seen the letter that I signed in April 2016 . Q You've seen a letter that you've seen from April 2016.
Q You mentioned the documents that the State IG had provided to Congress . Q You mentioned that the documents had been provided to the Congress .
 A reporter emailed me, a person I'd never had contact with, and to whom I did not respond, claimed that she had seen the documents and asked me a question . She asked me, and with the many dozens of emails from media over the last several weeks, I didn't
 This was after -it was probably a day or 2 after the IG came up and passed documents. A this was after –it was likely a day and 2 after it was passed .
 A guess is, to the best of my recollection, I conveyed the information, I said . A my guess is to thebest of my memory, I told CNN .
 She shared that she had had a similar conversation with him . She may have had a conversation that she shared with him.
 I had better insights into the mind of Yuriy Lutsenko than Rudy Giuliani, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I had better insight into Yury Lutsko than I did of Rudy Giuliani"
17 renewal of a relationship is the first time a relationship has been renewed . The first relationship was a 17-year-old relationship .
 The President may have retweeted something affiliated with the Hannity Show the second day .
 A I honestly, again, I have started following Twitter more than I did before March, but I was not an active follower at that point . A IHonestly, again. A I Honestly, again,. I have begun following Twitter.
 The deputy 12 director was a former Georgian national named Gizo Uglava . He was the former Georgian National Deputy 12 director .
 The public record would show that the media outlets quoted that press guidance, says the ambassador . The embassy was being attacked with allegations that we felt were baseless, he says .
 A narrative continued to be pushed until the narrative was still out there . A narrative was pushed until there was still a narrative still out of the story .
 The request from the embassy is endorsed by the European Bureau . There should be a high-level endorsement of Ambassador Yovanovitch .
 This is an issue of believabi1ity about someone who routinely lies. And so as I said, this is a issue ofbelief1ity, I said .
 Do you know if the name 5 Vi tali -I apologize for these pronunciations? I apologize for this pronunciation .
 U.S. officials had with Ukrainian officials in sharing our concern about the direction of governance and the approach, harassment of civil society activists, including Mr Shabunin, was one of the issues we raised, yes. A I think, you know, if we're going back,
 A To the best of my recollection he was one of the individuals who helped popularize the information that came out of the black book . A To The best of his recollection he said he was a member of the group that helped popularized the information .
 At some point Andy shared with me where he had heard the first information . But at some point he shared with him where he'd heard the initial information .
 Ukrainians followed his reemergence as a U.5. figure 3 very closely . Mr Manafort had spent a decade in 2 Ukraine .
 Zlochevsky is in Dubai 5 right now . He's been friends with him for 21 years . He did, however, say, welt, he did, and he's in Dubai five now .
 The company is actually a major player, thanks to all the licenses he granted to himself, when he was a minister . It is a company that throws elbows and uses political strings .
 A Because it has a history of not just competing on quality of service. A Because of its history of competing onquality of service . A Because It's a Because it's not just competition on quality, but it's also a way of competing for quality .
 SI billion in aid was freed up after Shokin's removal . Shokin made statements that have been videotaped about how he played a role in removing Shokin .
 Former President Poroshenko asked for a former New Jersey State prosecutor in one of his 6 calls with then-Vice President Biden . He had served for 2 years as an anti- corrupti on 10 adviser under contract to the Department of Justice in 11 Ukraine .
 The case against Zlochevsky was dismissed by the team of prosecutors that were there prior to Mr Shokin going into office .
When she was Ambassador and I was Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, we were in regular communication about everything that went on in the U.S.-Ukraine relationship. A It is fair to say that when she was ambassador, she was in regular contact with me .
 President Barack Obama has said he heard what he needs to know to protect the interest of the President . Obama has been criticized for his handling of the White House .
 25 people were willing to resume assistance with their political will to reform the prosecutor's office . We made clear 25 that we were prepared to resume help with the political will .
We were beyond having the potential leverage of sovereign loan guarantees, he says . We're now talking about late 2017, and we're now discussing late 2017 .
 A Nazar Kholodnytsky was selected by Viktor Shokin as the weakest of the three candidates to become the special anti corruption prosecutor . Shokin is the weakest candidate to become a special prosecutor .
In 13 of the first 2 weeks, he was caught trying to suborn a witness, coach him to lie, and obstruct 15 justice in a case that involved his hometown . He caught the effort on trying to give the minister of health a bribe .
 I 8 think this is part of the packet that I 9 signed in Apri1 2016. And this was the issue in the letter that I 8 thought was part of a letter I 8 thinks is part the letter .
 Ukraine's President Zelenskyy 23 raises the desire to purchase more javelins . He says Ukraine has been through a lot and Ukraine knows a lot about it .
 I believe that was the rationale for Yuriy 10 Lutsenko doing what he did. I believe it was the reason for the decision to do it .
 Mr Bakanov mentioned Giuliani when we first talked, he said he didn't remember the other name . Later he sent me the business card of Fruman and Parnas .
 Mr Bakanov gave the names of his associates, one of whom he knew, the other he couldn't remember . He asked for his counsel, as he said, someone like you who's an associate could meet and hear somebody out without making commitments .
 Mr Giuliani was not consulting with the State Department about what he was doing in the first half of 2019 .
 The president has never suggested that he was promoting U.S. policy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "To the best of my knowledge, he’s never suggested he was promote United States policy"
 It involved promoting the rule of law, energy independence, defense sector reform, and the ability to stand up to Russia . The project was designed to promote Russia's role in the Russian government .
 President Trump suggested that he would talk to Vice President Pence, and schedules willing, that he hoped it could work out . In any case, the United States would have representation at the inaugural .
 The U.N. General Assembly is held at the United Nations General Assembly in September . The two men were not in each other's presence until the end of September .
 There were several readouts provided secondhand from representatives who had been in that meeting . The documents were collected as part of your requested documents .
Office director was probably acting for me 3 that week, normally office director of Eastern 4 Europe . She gave a 2 readout to her office director who was likely acting for her .
 A You're now talking about a period leading up to his visit in December 2015 . The visit will take place on December 15, 2015 .
 Vice President's involvement with Ukraine is pretty significant at that point in time . It remained until 2016 .
 Ukraine's deputy prosecutor general demanded that the case against Zlochevsky was shut down . Hunter Biden was on the board of the prosecutor general .
 U.S. special representative for Ukraine negotiation Volker's focus is on the Donbas conflict . Volker has been in charge of negotiations with Ukraine since 2007 .
 Ukraine policy is now in charge of Ukraine policy, says U.S. ambassador to Ukraine . U.N. official: Perry, Sondland, and Volker are now in control of Ukraine's policy .
 The three officers were the ones leading the charge, he said . He said that they were working on a phone call with the President .
 Secretary Perry says he'll aim for a meeting by the end of the month, July 29 and 30 . The dates were discussed in the June 18 meeting that Secretary Perry chaired .
 This is what I'm going to 11 do, and this is why. This is my message, and it's why, I'm not going to do, I'll do this . This is why, this is what we're going to11 do, this was my message .
 Former Mayor Giuliani was an influence on the President's thinking of Ukraine, CNN's John Sutter says . Giuliani felt it was worthwhile engaging, he says, and that's when he said .
 A What I understood was Kurt was thinking tactically and I was concerned strategically . I was worried about Kurt's decision to take a decision strategically .
 Putin and 22 Orban extensively talked Ukraine down, both Putin and Orban said it was corrupt . 23 said Zelenskyy was in the thrall of oligarchs, specifically mentioning this one oligarch Kolomoisky .
 I had a 25 conversation with Fiona, I remember that, a sort of farewell call or a meeting, discussion . Again, I had 25 conversations with Fiona .
 The actress had some concerns about nonstandard actors, she said . She also had concerns about other actors .
 He made assertions about conversations that did not match with what had actually been said in the Oval Office .
 A I was not in those conversations, so -Q I'm just asking what she told you. A I'm not in that conversation, so I was just asking her what she said .
 Gordon Sondland lies about conversations that occur in the Oval Office, says CNN.com's John Sondlands . She says she may have been as direct as saying that Gordon SONDland lies .
 Q And the part that was about Ukraine, was there anything more that -A That's as much as I recall. Q And that was there any more that, he says . Q And a part of the part was that there was more that .
 A I believe I was informed by Lieutenant Colonel Vindman on July 24, the day prior. A I think I was told by Lt. Colonel VINDman, he says .
 Mr Vindman was uncomfortable talking about the call, so he wasn't comfortable talking about it, you did say . He mentioned that there was a -that President Trump had discussed the extreme narratives that had been discussed publicly .
 You were aware of 3 public narratives -4 A Yeah. But given everything that you knew, 2 and 2 and you certainly have indicated today that you were aware, 2 . But given all the information you knew.
 November 16 is the month of the inaugural in 2017 . The election is November 16 . This is the first time we've written about the election .
 "I was in Ukraine focused on that end of the relationship. Honestly, again, I was inUkraine focused on the end of that relationship," he said .
Hundreds of names, almost all of which were Ukrainian, were in the black book . I know that he was an investigative journalist .
 Catherine Croft was a director at the NSC for Ukraine . Croft has been working with Kurt Volker .
 Catherine worked at the State Department in Ukraine for a 1-year stint . Prior to her stint in Ukraine, she had worked in the Ukraine desk at State Department .
 NSC directors do not travel on their own, but they often accompany principals . The State Department director's principal interlocutor when he would go to the NSC to have conversations generally was the State Department Director .
 Victoria Nuland was Assistant Secretary, sometimes Celeste Wallander and Charlie Kupchan would travel with her to countries . It hurts me to say this, but generally people remember who the principal on the trip was .
 A centralized way of gathering documents from many people. That sounds like an appropriate way to gather documents from people .
 A Well's role as an identified record collector was to go through all of my records and identify information and provide that information .
 The first time I've had to go through all my handwritten notes and other forms of communication to find evidence that might be responsive to the subjects that were listed in the subpoena .
 It was a matter of concern that those in office were using that office not to prosecute criminals but to put pressure on civil society, media, and political opponents .
 The case of Katia Handziuk became a clarion example of failure for the country to move forward in the same way that the murder of Georgiu Gongadze in 2000 encapsulated the failure of then President Kuchma to move the country forward .
 You have a reputation of loving and 2 cherishing this U.S.-Ukraine relationship and dedicating your 3 life toward strengthening the relationship between the United States and Ukraine .
 Mr Kent, thank for your patience and 21 di1igence i today, we are nearing the end, he says .
 This past year, S250 million, there was a 11 conditionality on the second $125 million . For 10 years, there were 11 conditionals on $250 million . This year, the second conditionality was on $125m .
 The Office of Management and Budget stated in the sub-PCC on July 18th, yes . That is what the representative of the Office of management and Budget said in the Sub-P CC .
 There was great confusion among the rest of us because we didn't understand why that had happened . A great confusion. A there was great confused among the other people .
 There was planning to have a meeting on July 31st. Q Then you mentioned that there was planning for a meeting to be held in July .
 The State Department collected 25 part of the records that were collected by the State Department .
 A It was -it would have been sequential because those are three different individuals. A It would have be sequential because there were three different people .
 The National Anti corruption Prevention Council, the National Anti-Corruption Bureau, as well as the prosecutor general's office, were involved .
 Uzbekistan is a country struggling to build democracy, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he's worked in and around a lot of dictatorships in his life .
 The only two calls between President Trump and a head of government of the six countries for which he has responsibility . President Trump is the head of the government of six countries .