 The massacre of almost 50 Maidan protesters on February 20, 2014 was a turning point in Ukrainian politics and a tipping point in the conflict between the West and Russia .
 This mass killing of the protesters and the mass shooting of the police led to the overthrow of the pro-Russian government of Viktor Yanukovych . It gave a start to a civil war in Donbas in Eastern Ukraine, Russian military intervention in Crimea and Donbas .
 A conclusion promoted by post-Yanukovych governments and the media in Ukraine that the massacre was perpetrated by government snipers and special police units on a Yanukovych order has been nearly universally accepted by the Western governments, the media, and many scholars .
 Ukrainian government investigation identified members of the special company of Berkut as responsible for killings of the protesters . The investigation did not release any evidence in support, with the exception of videos.
 This paper is the first academic study of this crucial case of the mass killing . It is also the first study of the case of a mass killing.
 It uses a theory of rational choice and a Weberian theory of instrumental rationality to examine actions of major actors . It examines actions of police and security forces, and the Maidan opposition .
 The paper analyzes a large amount of evidence from different publicly available sources concerning this massacre and killings of protestors . The paper also analyzes the killings of specific protestors .
 This study also employs field research on site of the massacre, eyewitness reports by both Maidan protesters and government special units commanders . The study also uses field research.
 The study establishes a precise timeline for various events of the massacre, the locations of both the shooters and the government snipers, and the specific timeline and locations of nearly 50 protesters’ deaths .
 This academic investigation concludes that the massacre was a false flag operation . The massacre was rationally planned and carried out with a goal of the overthrow of the government and seizure of power .
 It found evidence of the involvement of an alliance of the far right organizations, specifically the Right Sector and Svoboda, and oligarchic parties .
 Concealed shooters and spotters were located in at least 20 Maidan-controlled buildings or areas .
 The various evidence that the protesters were killed from these locations include some 70 testimonies . Some 70 testimonies, primarily by Maidan protesters, include videos of “snipers’ targeting protesters from these buildings .
 The study uncovered videos and photos of armed Maidan “snipers’ and spotters in many buildings .
 The paper presents implications for understanding the nature of the change of the government in Ukraine, the civil war in Donbas, and Russian military intervention in Crimea and Donbas . The paper also presents implications of these findings for understanding what happened in Ukraine .
 The massacre of several dozen Maidan protesters on February 20, 2014 represented a turning point in Ukrainian politics and a tipping point in the escalating conflict between the West and Russia .
 Viktor Yanukovych was backed by a Maidan alliance of oligarchic and far right parties, supported by Western governments . In particular, the mass killing of the protesters and mass shooting of the police led to the overthrow of the semi-democratic government of Viktor Yanukovych .
 This massacre also gave a start to a large-scale violent conflict that escalated into a civil war in Donbas and to and Russian military intervention .
Questions include which side broke truce agreement and killed and wounded protesters and police . Whether this was a spontaneous or organized massacre is not clear .
 This paper is the first academic study of this crucial case of the mass killing that led to the escalation of the violent conflict in Ukraine . It is also the first study of Russia's military intervention in Donbas and Crimea .
 The second section presents a theoretical framework used in this study and evidence and research methods that it employs . The third section presents evidence and evidence that it uses .
 The next two sections analyze the mass shootings of the police and Maidan protesters . The next sections analyze, respectively, the shootings of police and protesters .
 A brief analysis of other major cases of violence during and after the ‘Euromaidan’ is followed by conclusion, summarizing main findings .
 The governments and mainstream media in the West generally accepted the Maidan narrative of the ‘snipers’ massacre’ as being perpetrated by the government forces on Yanukovych’s order, but did not provide evidence of such involvement .
 These conclusions were mainly based on the manifest content of videos and media reports on the Berkut special company firing live ammunition at unarmed protesters . The absence of similar evidence for armed groups of protesters was also cited .
 The dominant representation of the massacre by governments and the media in the West and Ukraine is a part of the narrative presenting ‘Euromaidan’ as a peaceful mass-protest movement and a revolution led by pro-Western parties .
 The role of far-right parties and organizations, such as Svoboda and Right Sector, is regarded as marginal .
 Violence and the presence of arms were represented as marginal, or as in the case of the December 1, 2013, attack of the presidential administration . Such violence was often attributed to provocateurs, but such violence was seen as marginal .
 EU states and the U.S. government showed little interest in an international investigation of this mass killing . EU states did not release their intelligence assessments and other information about this case .
 Russian government and media generally presented mass killing of police and protesters as part of fascist coup . In contrast, ex-president Yanukovych and his top officials fled to Russia following the massacre .
 Russian security services likely intercepted a telephone call between the EU foreign affairs chief and the Estonian foreign affairs minister . The phone call was likely to have been made by Russian security forces .
 The ‘Euromaidan’ and the change of the government were generally represented in academic studies as a popular movement, which turned into a revolution . The movement was motivated by support of integration of Ukraine into the European Union .
 Many scholars also attributed violent attacks of the presidential administration and parliament as response to government violence and political repressions or as provocations by the Yanukovych government or Russia .
 They regarded the role of the far right organizations during the Maidan as insignificant or marginal . They regarded their role as insignificant and marginal .
 Killings of Armenian, Georgian, Jewish, and Polish protesters were mentioned in about dozen stories in major US, Israeli, and Scandinavian media . They were mentioned as evidence of the diversity of the protesters, their massacre by the government snipers .
 The protesters were posthumously awarded Hero of Ukraine titles by President Petro Poroshenko . The government established February 20 as a day in their honor .
 A large group of investigators was specifically tasked with solving the massacre case . The investigation involved interrogations of more than 2,000 people and more than 1,000 ballistic, medical and other expert reports .
 The official government investigation for a year and a half since the massacre failed to bring any convictions in such a crucial case . It appeared irrational that the official government probe failed to reveal much of basic evidence .
 The Prosecutor General Office in Ukraine concluded that commanders and members of a special Berkut company killed 39 out of the 49 protesters who died on February 20 .
 The investigators announced that this was done by this police unit primarily with AKM assault rifles and with hunting ammunition used in their pump rifles .
 One out of 39 protesters that the prosecution charged the special Berkut police unit with killing was shot with pellets . 7.62mm bullets of AKM caliber were extracted from bodies of 16 protesters .
 The prosecution also reported that there were protesters killed with hunting bullets . It did not specify their number .
 It has not been revealed which ammunition killed which protesters were killed . Some exceptions were made during the trial of two Berkut policemen .
 The Simonov rifle is not a sniper rifle but a semi-automatic carbine that uses the same caliber bullets as the AKM . It was generally removed from military and police service in Ukraine and was available as a hunting rifle .
 Prosecutor General did not mention that the Simonov carbine was used and that any “snipers’ were in this hotel . However, during the first press conference presenting the investigation’s results in April 2014 the Prosecutor General, from the far-right Svoboda party
 It appeared irrational that the purported killers would remain in Kyiv and not hide from the prosecution . It appears irrational that they would stay in the country .
 The Berkut special company commander was then released and he disappeared . It was similarly puzzling that he was released and then disappeared .
 A trial of two policemen from a Berkut special company began in January 2015 .
 The evidence against the policemen relied on their presence in the area of the massacre based on mobile phones records and on videos of masked Berkut members shooting during the massacre .
 The list of the 39 protesters whose killing the prosecution attributed to Berkut was only made public during the trial of the two Berkut members almost 1 year and a half after the massacre .
 Official results from the ballistic, weapons, and medical examinations have not been made public until the trial proceedings started in July 2015 .
 The top Maidan government leaders claimed that Yanukovych and his top officials in the SBU and Ministry of Internal Affairs organized the massacre . The top government leaders said that Yanukovych's top officials were involved .
Interrogations of Yanukovych government officials who did not flee, as well as police commanders and members, produced no confessions or witness testimonies . The Berkut and other such formations were involved in the massacre of the protesters .
 The prosecution stated during the Maidan massacre trial that after an unspecified escalation of the conflict around 8am on February 20, the Berkut commander himself ordered the commander of the special Berkut company to disperse the protesters . The prosecution said that after a unspecified escalation, the commander himself order the
Only about two dozen members of a special company to disperse the Maidan . It would have been irrational for the Berkut commander to issue such an order on his own and use only about twodozen members of the special company .
 The prosecution stated that president Viktor Yanukovych and the Minister of Internal Affairs ordered to disperse the protesters on the Maidan by force close to midnight on February 18 . The prosecution said that the president and the minister ordered to dispersed the protesters .
 The head of the Security Service of Ukraine alleged in February 2015 that Vladislav Surkov, an aide of Russian President Vladimir Putin, was personally coordinating foreign "snipers" on the Maidan . Surkov presented no supporting evidence .
 The claims about Surkov's involvement in the Maidan massacre were made on the first anniversary of this mass killing . The claims were disseminated by the media in Ukraine and the West .
 The Prosecutor General stated in his interview in April 2015 that he did not have any information about Surkov's involvement . Surkov has not been charged with any wrongdoing .
 The head of it unit in charge of the Maidan massacre investigative stated that the investigation did not have any evidence of such involvement . The documents submitted by the SBU head in support of his claims were in fact unrelated to the massacre .
 None of these politicians provided any evidence in support of their claims .
 No reliable evidence has been provided by the governments and the media in Ukraine, Western countries, and Russia .
 Prosecutor General Office claimed during its press conference that its investigation produced no evidence of “snipers’ at the Hotel Ukraina, Zhovtnevyi Palace and other locations controlled by the Maidan protesters .
 The delayed trial of two Berkut members in the Maidan massacre case in July and August 2015 produced important revelations that unraveled the prosecution case but were not reported by Ukrainian and Western media .
 Saienko’s brother and his lawyer said that they in October 2014 handed to investigators a video showing a crucial moment of the killing . The prosecution charged two Berkut members with the killings of Saienko and other protesters .
 Lawyers representing two Berkut policemen stated in court on August 3d, 2015 that the prosecution case was falsified and that relatives of victims should ask Andrii Parubii and Petro Poroshenko about those who gave an order to massacre protesters .
 Parubii was the leader of neo-Nazi Patriot of Ukraine in the 1990s . He was the head of the Maidan Self-Defense during the “Euromaidan,” and is presently the first deputy head of Ukrainian parliament .
 Poroshenko, who is currently president of Ukraine, was one of “Euromaidan’s leaders. Poroshenko is currently President of Ukraine .
 A Maidan eyewitness noted several times in the prosecution investigation documents that he saw a sniper shooting from the second floor of the Hotel Ukraina . Serhii Kemsky was killed a few meters away from this protester .
 The official investigation had evidence of “shooters’ killing at least three protesters from the Maidan-controlled Hotel Ukraina or the Music Conservatory . At least 10 protesters were killed by unidentified “snipers’ from rooftops.
 The prosecution charges against the Berkut policemen for killing 39 protesters simply omitted the killings of the other 10 protesters . At least 8 of the 10 protesters were shot dead at the same time and place .
 A report by Euromaidan SOS, other Maidan organizations, and lawyers of the killed protesters in June 2015 also concluded that the government investigation was ineffective and was stonewalled .
 An edited version of a BBC interview with Yanukovych was misrepresented by BBC and Ukrainian media as an admission of his and his police forces responsibility for carrying out the Maidan massacre .
 Protesters with firearms experience distinguished “whip-like rifle shots from Kalashnikov shots by their sound. One of the main reasons that the Maidan massacre was attributed to snipers is because protesters with firearms experienced distinguished ‘whip like’ rifle shots .
Ukrainian government investigation failed even with help of specialized equipment to distinguish rifle and AK shots heard in videos . Council of Europe report noted that the Ukrainian government investigation didn't use specialized equipment .
 The government investigation claimed that the problem was poor sound quality in videos of the massacre .
 Prosecutor General of Ukraine from far right Svoboda party said he gave videos of the Maidan massacre to the FBI to enhance their quality .
Top Maidan leaders were not interrogated concerning the Maidan massacre . But the version of Maidan shooters was not pursued by the official investigation .
 The Maidan leaders deny that the killed and wounded protesters received any orders to advance or that any Maidan formations were armed and shot at the police . Some were openly carrying pellet guns and hunting rifles .
 The Hotel Ukraina, Music Conservatory, or Trade Union headquarters were controlled by Maidan during the massacre . They denied or questioned that any “snipers’ were in the HotelUkraina, or the Trade Union HQ .
 Ukrainian politicians and the Ukrainian media have often inflated the number of victims of the Maidan massacre on February 20 . The official investigation confirmed that 49 protesters died on that day .
 Theoretical Framework relies on the rational choice theoretical framework and Weberian theory of rational action . It employs interpretative and content analyses of a variety of sources .
 However, rational choice assumes that people have perfect information to make such decisions . All of their actions are rational, but all of them are rational .
 Weberian theory of social action regards instrumentally-rational type of action as one ideal type ofaction . Such actions can be interpreted and understood by scholars, says the Weberian .
 The widely accepted narrative of the massacre appears irrational from both rational choice and Weberian instrumentally rational action perspectives . However, the majority accepted narrative appears irrational .
 The same problem concerns the irrational retreat of the police from their position at Maidan and the mass killing of the protesters by the police . It was more rational to use live ammunition or snipers to deliver warning shots or target armed protesters and the Maidan leaders .
 A large number of people going under constant fire would amount to a collective mass suicidal action . The repeated attempts by protesters to advance on the very small and relatively unimportant part of Instytutska Street also seems irrational and hard to explain .
 Some of the government leaders, policemen and protesters might have been driven by value-rational actions . It would be anomalous for all different actors to do this at the same time, says the author .
 9/11 attacks in the U.S. were organized and carried out by Islamic terrorists, authors say . They dismiss the overwhelming evidence that the attacks were a false flag operation .
 There is a documented history of false flag operations in Ukraine and other countries, specifically during World War II, the Cold War, and since Cold War .
 It is difficult to come to definite conclusions if certain events constituted false flag operations or not, because of lack of publicly available data to answer research questions .
 Ukrainian Insurgent Army units often used disguises of Soviet partisans or Soviet military and security forces to carry their killings of Polish and Ukrainian civilians .
 The Soviet KGB created fake underground organizations in Ukraine as a part of its tactic against different factions of the OUN and the U.S. and British intelligence services that used the O UN during the Cold War .
 The dioxin poisoning of Viktor Yushchenko helped to mobilize popular support for the “Orange Revolution’s” 2004 presidential elections . The results were initially falsified in favor of Yanukovych, who won the election .
 The opposition and the media initially presented this as an assassination attempt by the Yanukovych side or the Russian government . The case has not been solved .
 Various separatist and Russian politicians and media claimed that a downing of a Malaysian passenger plane in 2014 was a false flag attack .
Public available evidence indicates that the plane was most likely accidentally shot down by separatists with a Buk missile . The plane was mistaken for a Ukrainian military plane, according to evidence .
 The conclusions that separatists shot down this plane were primarily based on photos and videos of a Buk with antiaircraft missiles near the time and estimated place of its missile launch and the location of the Buk and launch spot .
 Ukrainian government and media claim separatists in Donbas have used false flag attacks by shelling cities and towns .
 Similar allegations about false flag attacks by Ukrainian forces were often advanced by separatist and Russian media concerning shelling of cities and other areas controlled by the government .
 There were claims that this was a false flag attack by Islamic rebels in order to draw a direct U.S. military intervention in the Syrian civil war .
 Ukrainian politics has been a high-stakes game because the power it gives allows rent seeking for politicians and oligarchs via corruption, insider dealings .
 In addition to the use of media to increase electoral support and gains, media is used to increase support and gain votes .
 Ukraine has been able to avoid largescale political violence, but contract killings of rival businessmen and politicians were employed to eliminate the competition . The Donetsk region's governor, such as the governor of the Donetsk region, was killed .
Major cases of mass killings in modern Ukrainian history are often misrepresented by politicians and the media . Similarly, major cases in modern Ukraine are often misunderstood by politicians .
 The parties on both sides included oligarchs, and there were media reports and other evidence of involvement in largescale corruption . Some of their leaders were linked to organized crime .
 This paper employs interpretative and content analyses of various sources of evidence conceming the Maidan massacre .
 Many of the videos were unreported, misrepresented, or suppressed by the mass media . Many of these videos were unproduced, misrepresenting or suppressed .
 It analyzes not only manifest content but also latent content, which is contained in various videos but has been ignored . The video analyzes the content of various videos and videos .
 The Odessa Massacre and the Dmytro Bulatov case are briefly examined . They help to establish whether the Maidan massacre was a part of a pattern of politically motivated misrepresentations of violence .
 Study establishes specific time and location of killings of specific Maidan protesters and approximate direction of shots and entry wounds . This study establishes specific times and locations of killings .
 It provides a timeline of various events during the massacre, as well as the locations and presence of both the shooters and the government snipers, based on the synchronization of the sound on the main Maidan stage .
 It matches the identities, locations and timeline of 48 specific protesters’ killings . It also matches the locations and dates of 48 protesters' killings .
 This analysis is based on social media sources, specifically videos posted on YouTube and similar sites . It also includes many protesters, relatives of the killed protesters, and collections of materials concerning the massacre .
 The names of the killed protestors were identified based on various news reports concerning them and based on information by their relatives and fellow Maidan protesters in a Facebook group dealing with the massacre .
 This timestamped video compilation was released on February 20, 2015 . It synchronizes various videos with precision to a second with help of video editing software and sounds of gunshots .
 Video compilations omitted the first part of the massacre when the police were targeted, radio intercepts of Alfa commanders and units of the Ministry of Internal Affairs . However, these video compilings omitted the second part.
 The paper examines almost 30 gigabytes of intercepted time-stamped radio exchanges from the Security Service of Ukraine’s Alfa unit, Berkut and other government agencies .
 The files were posted by a pro-Maidan Ukrainian radio amateur on a radio scanners forum . They were never reported by the media or acknowledged by the Ukrainian government .
 The study also uses live Internet and TB broadcasts on February 20, 2014 and research on the site of the Maidan massacre .
 Brief interview requests were sent by email or via social media pages to selected journalists who covered the massacre from Hotel Ukraine and nearby areas .
 They include correspondents or photographers from BBC, Bloomberg, CNN, Itele, CNN and Itele .
 Bloomberg/Ukraina Today and TVP reporters only received answers from reporters . But responses to interview questions were only received from Bloomberg/U.S. reporters .
 The directions in each specific case are approximate or estimated on the basis of testimonies, videos, and other information . They provide a way to establish with sufficient certainty whether the fire came from the police or protester-controlled areas .
 This study uses such analysis and evidence to answer a research question concerning which side was involved in the Maidan massacre .
 The first issue to examine is which side broke the truce agreement and first used live ammunition on the day of the massacre on February 20, 2014, and whether this was a spontaneous or organized action .
 This truce agreement was signed by then-President Yanukovych and leaders of the Maidan opposition parties around midnight on February 20 . It follows clashes that turned the mostly peaceful mass “Euromaidan’s’ protests into a violent conflict . More than two dozen police and
 The Berkut tried to attack the unarmed protesters at Maidan by throwing Molotov cocktails at the Music Conservatory building in the morning .
 A Berkut member said that the shooting from the Music Conservatory building at their anti-riot police units began at 5:30am on February 20 . In a US-made documentary investigating the Maidan Massacre, a member said the shooting began in the building .
 One of the Maidan shooters said that he was firing on police from the conservatory building for about 20 minutes . He saw about 10 other Maidan shooter doing the same .
 The name he used in the interview is the same or similar to those of a Maidan shooter in a BBC interview .
 He said he used Saiga, a hunting version of the Kalashnikov assault rifle . He said that he used the hunting version.
 Another protester confirmed that the armed activists shot at the police from the conservatory building . Another anonymous protester confirmed the incident .
 The Berkut commander was told by his unit's commander that he had been wounded . Within half an hour, 21 wounded and three killed, three killed .
 Another protester, who openly used his name, stated that he was given a Kalashnikov assault rifle and shot at the police . The police started to flee shortly after the attack .
 A littleknow photo by an Italian journalist shows a protester using a cover from shields of other 14 protesters and targeting advancing police with an AK-74 type Kalashnikov assault rifle .
 A STB news report briefly shows an apparent shooter there around 8:00am . The shooter was reported to be in the early hours of the morning .
 Videos show several members of these police units carried out and put into ambulances some time before 9:00am on February 20 .
 Internal Troops units stationed at Maidan near the Trade Union building made urgent requests for an ambulance at 8:08am . They issued retreat orders at 8.49 and 8:50am .
 A Maidan shooter armed with a Kalashnikov assault rifle inside the Music Conservatory shortly after 8:00am around the time of mass shooting .
 One such recording of a live TV broadcast at 8:00 am refers to shooters at the conservatory .
 Both reports confirm that the Maidan shooters at the conservatory used large pellets to kill and wound the police . The Maidan shooter used the pellets to shoot and wound police .
 There was an announcement made from the Maidan stage at 8:45am about snipers on the roofs of buildings behind the stage .
 At the same time as the announcement about snipers was made, gunshots were heard . An apparent burst from a Kalashnikov assault rifle was heard .
 A reported shooter in the Music Conservatory around 8:00am during the mass shooting of the police . Maidan “snipers’ from this building were reported to be the shooter .
 The Maidan shooter in the BBC and Vesti interviews said he was among a group of about 20 protesters . He was asked to come forward if they had shooting skills and then given a choice of weapons, which included shotguns and Saiga rifles .
 He saw 10 other protesters shooting at the police from the conservatory building in the morning of February 20 . He saw some 10 others shooting at police in the building .
Eyewitnesses say that organized groups from the Lviv and Ivano-Frankivsk regions in Western Ukraine arrived at Maidan and moved to the Music Conservatory . Some of them were armed with rifles, eyewitnesses say .
 Andrii Shevchenko notified Parubii about the first Berkut report of shooters targeting the police . “Euromaidan” tweeted at 8:21am that a “sniper” at the Music Conservatory was caught .
 The shooter said he was “captured’s personal security unit and driven outside of Kyiv City . This is consistent with BBC and Vesti interviews of the shooter, who said that he was 'captured' by the Parubii .
Parubii denied later on the same day that their search had found any shooters there . This parliament member had informed Parubii and other opposition leaders about snipers there .
 The Berkut commander reported that his unit's casualties increased to 21 wounded and three killed within a half an hour . However, the same commander again reported that the number of casualties increased.
 Internal Troops officer said they had information that five ‘snipers’ moved to the conservatory from the Trade Union building after it was burned down by protesters . Alfa’s attempt to seize it after 11:00pm on February 18.
 He also confirmed that the shooters killed and wounded many policemen from the Trade Union building and Maidan tents . The building was occupied and used as the headquarters of the Maidan Self-Defense and the Right Sector .
 The Maidan government investigation confirmed that the first police officer on February 20 was wounded around 6:00am . One died later from his wounds there, and one died of his wounds.
 The investigation claimed that the shooters and their affiliation were not identified . But it was claimed that they were not named .
 These regular Berkut and Internal Troops units were then armed with and used anti-riot weapons, such as Fort500 pump shotguns, as well as rubber bullets, pellets and stun grenades . The units were also armed with rubber bullets.
 The police retreated because of the use of live ammunition by small armed protestor units, according to various sources .
Sources say Berkut and Internal Troops were killed and wounded by shooters from the second floor of the conservatory and from the Trade Union building .
 Doctors on February 21, 2014 mentioned that they treated policemen wounded with 5.45 and 7.62 caliber bullets, pellets, and large caliber hunting bullets . Doctors said they treated police wounded with5.45, 7. 62 caliber bullets.
 Three of them were killed by 7.62 mm bullets, four by Makarov pistols, and six by hunting weapons . Three of the six killed were shot by a Makarov pistol .
 Three police officers were killed in the morning of February 20 before the police started to retreat . Three officers were shot dead in the early hours of the day .
 They include Serhii Spichak, who was shot by pellets, Volodymyr Zubok, andSerhii Mykhailovych . They include Sherhii Spichak and Vladimir Zubok .
 Protesters whose killings the prosecution did not ascribe to the Berkut special company members highlighted in bold. Protesters whose deaths the prosecution didn't ascribe.
 Wounding of Olesia Zhukovska, a female Maidan medic, and another protestor 11.43am .
 Mykola Symysiuk, 9:16am. 19 themselves with pellets and with bullets, including foreign-type bullets .
Volodymyr Parasiuk, a special Maidan company commander, confirmed that his unit was based in the conservatory building at the time of the massacre .
 A large armed unit at Maidan could not be possible without its subordination to the Maidan Self-Defense . There is varied evidence of such links, including links to the opposition .
 Parasiuk admitted that his company was formed following negotiations with the Right Sector . He later talked with representatives of Klychko's UDAR party .
After playing a key role in the overthrow of the Yanukovych government, he served as a company commander in the Dnipro battalion . The battalion was organized with the direct involvement of the Right Sector .
Another above-mentioned shooter, who identified himself by name, also joined this battalion . Another above- mentioned shooter also joined the battalion .
 The Right Sector, an alliance of radical nationalist and neo-Nazi organizations and football ultras groups, took part in the violent attacks on the presidential administration on December 1, 2013, and on the parliament in the end of January and February 18, 2014 .
 Dmytro Yarosh, the leader of the Right Sector, announced that his organization did not accept a truce agreement with Yanukovych . He would undertake decisive actions against the government forces .
 One of the Maidan shooters based in the conservatory said he was recruited for such a mission at the end of 2014 .
 This anonymous shooter matches both the name and some key features of a shooter interviewed by a Ukrainian newspaper last fall . The shooter was interviewed by the Ukrainian newspaper.
 In both interviews, he stated that their guns were hidden at the main post office . He said they were hidden in the post office in both interviews .
 This building was located directly across the street from the Music Conservatory . It was occupied by the Right Sector at the time of the February 20th shootings .
 His political leanings might be indicated by his service in the summer of 2014 in a volunteer battalion in a town near a sea . The battalion was most likely “Azov,’ a Mariupol-based special police battalion .
 Various videos show that the Maidan side controlled the Kozatsky Hotel area the entire day on February 20 . Various videos also show that Maidan sides controlled the Maidans side .
 Both served in Ukrainian Voluntary Corps of the Right Sector during the war in Donbas . They both served in the Ukrainian Vol voluntary Corps.
 The first mass killings started when the protesters tried to break the police lines and attack the parliament on February 18, 2014 . The violent clashes of protesters with police and “titushki’s’ and ‘tushki,’ began when the demonstrators tried
 This unsuccessful attack happened during a rally organized by the Maidan opposition leaders . Oleksander Turchynov, a leader of the Fatherland party, and Dmytro Yarosh, a leading member of Fatherland, were attacked .
 The Maidan Self-Defense companies, including the Right Sector Company, were protesters . They called it a “peaceful march,” but the Maidan self-defense companies were protesters, they said .
 Serhii Pashynsky, a member of the parliament from the Fatherland party, was evacuated during the deadly clashes on February 18 . The evacuation of a masked protestor and his rifle with scopes might also indicate certain kind of involvement and knowledge that the protesters were using arms
 A person who helped Pashynsky to evacuate them became an aide to Arsen Avakov, who was one of leading members of Fatherland . Avakov became the Minister of Internal Affairs after the “Euromaidan’s”
 The car of this masked protestor with his rifle in the car’s trunk was stopped by Maidan protesters .
 Anatolii Strelchenko, the commander of the Omega unit of the Internal Troops, said they knew on February 18, 2014 before the attempted attack of the parliament . He said the Maidan shooters started to use live ammunition o that day .
 A rational explanation suggests a link of the Fatherland party to this armed protester . He de facto confirmed that he was a part of a larger group armed with hunting rifles .
 This would also explain why this incident was not investigated by the Maidan-led government . This would be the first time this incident has been investigated .
 Pashynsky became the 21 head of the presidential administration under interim president Oleksander Turchynov from the oligarchic Fatherland party . The party was founded and led by Yulia Tymoshenko .
 Crowds of protesters started to advance from their stronghold at Maidan up Instytutska and Hrushevsky streets . The majority of protesters were unarmed .
 This was around the time when the massacre of the protesters started in this general area . The massacre was in the general area of the country .
 Ariev claimed without providing any evidence that these “snipers’ were working for the Russian government . Previous sections presented various evidence that there were Maidan snipers at the Music Conservatory shooting the police .
 The most complete time-stamped version of the Alfa commanders’ radio intercept synchronized with the local time indicates that their report of shooters moving to the Hotel Ukraina was made at 9:23am . The most accurate version of Alfa's radio intercept shows that shooters were moving
 The Alfa commanders’ intercept demonstrates that snipers from this SBU unit were given an order to deploy to the Presidential Administration soon after a full combat readiness was reported by them at 7:24am .
 It also contains similar orders to get arms and deploy to other government locations to other SBU units .
Publicly available versions of these intercepts came from several different pro-Maidan sources . The intercepts were made by several different sources .
 The SBU sniper team was tasked with monitoring the Hotel Ukraina, specifically its top floors, and other neighboring buildings for snipers and their spotters .
 There are no sounds of 22 gunshots by SBU Alfa snipers or other indications that they fired in the audio clips . The clips span the most intense phase of the killings from 9:35am to 11:13am .
 No evidence was produced that the protesters were killed with German sniper rifles used by this group of snipers .
 Three SBU Alfa commanders provided information during the parliamentary investigation and in their statements to Ukrainian TV networks . This is consistent with information provided by three SBUAlfa commanders during the investigation .
 The Omega commander and an Internal Troops commander in charge of such special units said they received orders to target snipers at the Hotel Ukraina and other locations and had permission to shoot at armed protesters . The Omega Commander and an internal Troops Commander said they were given permission
 Since the beginning of the massacre, this unit commander, Maidan Self-Defense members were seen in various videos in the lobby and at the entrances to the hotel and hotel .
 A senior Hotel Ukraina staff member stated that the Maidan protesters controlled this hotel before and during the massacre and that no police entered the hotel . A senior staff member said no police were present at the hotel.
 The Berkut and Omega targeted Maidan shooters at this hotel . These shooters and their spotters and security were able to move freely to different floors and rooms . This is another indication that the Berkut & Omega targeted the Maidan shooter .
 A little-known video shows Parasiuk and some armed members of his special company walking past the stage from the Trade Union building direction during the Maidan massacre .
Sources of evidence indicate that Maidan snipers shot at the police from the Trade Union building shortly before the police units fled around 8:50am . This building remained one of the locations of the Maidan ""snipers"" or their coordinators during the massacre of the protesters .
 Armed Berkut was also firing live ammunition in the close distance at this very time .
 The Maidan "snipers" showed no visible concern about being in a shooting range of the Hotel Ukraina and Ukrkoopspilka . The Berkut special company or attempts to locate and stop the snipers are not visible .
 These "snipers" did not target these and other armed Maidan shooters . Conversely, these ""snipers"" did not targets these and others .
 The 23 Parasiuk special Maidan company "snipers" and the initial Hotel Ukraina ""snipers"" were from the same side . Such seemingly irrational actions would become rational if the 23 company's actions were rational .
 Many Maidan activists and leaders and journalists saw this group of "snipers" walking past them . But none of them reported this .
 Parastuk and this group of armed protesters were not seen in videos and photos from 9:10am to 10:19am .
 The majority of the 49 protesters were killed is a "dog that did not bark" evidence indicating that they were the actual snipers .
 The prosecution and the media did not release specific information about direction of his wounds and ammunition used . The prosecution did not give specific information on direction of the wounds .
 His mother and unidentified witnesses among the protesters reported he was shot dead in the early morning near this building . He had four wounds, a likely indication of pellets, and his mother said .
 These killings took place before the Berkut special company was first filmed advancing in that area and using live ammunition there . The killings were filmed before the company was filmed advancing into that area .
 Evidence suggests that these three protesters were most likely killed from the Maidan side . This evidence suggests that they were killed in Maidan . The three protesters died in the clashes between protesters and police .
 Video compilation and time-stamped version of over 40-minutelong video . Video shows members of Berkut anti-riot police and two snipers from “Omega’s Internal Troops elite unit .
 These Berkut members then were seen retreating and firing live ammunition rounds at the direction of the advancing protesters .
 This was presented by the Maidan leaders and activists, the government investigation, and the media in Ukraine and in the West as the primary prove that the Berkut members killed and wounded a large number of the unarmed protesters .
 The main entrance to Zhovtnevyi Palace was seized by protesters a few minutes after 9:00am .
 The limited advance of two dozen members of the Berkut special company to Zhovtnevyi Palace is seen in various videos . A large number of policemen and a car of a senior officer are seen in the videos .
 Radio intercepts of Internal 25 Troops contain a general order to retreat . This order was transmitted at 9:12am on Monday morning .
 Berkut members were ordered to use live ammunition as warning shots or to shoot armed protesters . The order was not to kill the unarmed protesters but to shoot unarmed protesters .
 This is consistent with warning or deterrent shots by the Berkut special police unit . The Berkut Special Police Unit is based in Berkut, Germany .
 Only intervals of killings of some of the protesters are established . Such an analysis cannot be indicative in some cases, because only intervals of deaths are established.
 The killing and wounding of some of the protesters by Berkut policemen during their advance and retreat there cannot be excluded . This means that the killing and wounded of some protesters by the Berkut police can't be excluded. This means the killing, wounding and death of protesters cannot be
An unidentified Maidan leader issued such a command was to provoke killing of the protesters . The order was transmitted from the Maidan stage at 9:14am for four companies of Maidan Self-Defense .
 One of the companies that advanced to this hill and suffered casualties was the Volhynian Company of the Maidan Self-Defense . The company was one of the first companies to advance to the hill .
Lead members of the Fatherland party were announced from the Maidan stage during the massacre . Similar orders to guard the perimeter of the barricades were also announced .
 Reports about snipers shooting at protesters and public displays of killed and wounded protesters appeared irrational . Such orders appeared even more irrational after reports of snipers shooting protesters .
 Another bullet stuck in Shymko’s neck was publicized as evidence of government snipers . It was not of 7.62mm caliber but of a larger caliber .
 The same video also shows the moment when Bohdan Solchanyk was killed at 9:08:16am in same area .
 Solchanyk was most likely shot dead from the Hotel Ukraina . His apparent position, the blood on the right side of his neck and louder and different sounds of several shots in rapid succession, compared to the AKMS shots fired by Berkut .
Video synchronization was made by an acquaintance of a Berkut policeman . The evidence of his killing was from a 12mm caliber Fort pump rifle .
 A medical expert determined that a 7.62mm bullet had entered Solchanyk from a relatively flat angle . One of his fellow protesters concluded that SolChanyk could not have been killed from the Hotel Ukraine .
 In the same video, Ihor Zastavny is seen in a yellow helmet falling nearby several seconds after Solchanyk was killed . The same video is also seen in the same footage of the incident .
 Zastavny said in various interviews that he felt to the ground after he was wounded there third time and his leg was severed . He said in several interviews, in particular to the Associated Press, that he was injured there third times .
 He claimed in some of these interviews that he was shot from the Berkut positions on the left . He claimed he was fired from the left position on the right .
 He made this conclusion on the basis of his brother’s position in a video at the moment of his killing . He said the entry wound location was in upper right chest area and a steep wound channel .
 A significant proportion of the protesters were shot from this Maidan-controlled hotel, says Frida Ghitis . Ghitis: This revelation alone means that a significant proportion was shot from the hotel, since this caliber bullets were extracted from 16 protesters .
 They generally omitted reports by the Maidan protesters about shooters in the Hotel Ukraina at the time of these killings .
Shymko, Solchanyk, Saienko and Shymko were killed in Maidan af protesters' deaths . The time of the death is consistent with the distance to the stage and the time when the body was brought to the Maidan .
Live broadcast by Radio Svoboda contained this Maidan stage announcement about two or three snipers on the pendulum floor of the Hotel Ukraina . Shymko, Solchanyk, and Saienko were killed in Maidan .
 Eyewitnesses and photos indicate that he was shot in the head, but direction of his wounds have not been publicly disclosed .
 Bohdan Ilkiv was fatally wounded in the same general area at 9:11am . The video compilation shows that he was fatally injured .
 Video appears to show Berkut policemen retreating from them with his back towards them at the moment of his shooting .
 He was shot in his face near spots of killings of several protesters minutes prior or after his shooting . He had been shot in the face near places of killings in the past .
 The pellets and two nearly simultaneous similar shots heard in the video at the moment of his killing indicate that he was killed from a hunting rifle .
 Symysiuk was facing protesters-occupied or 28 controlled areas at the moment of his shooting . The use of pellets indicates a shooting distance of less than several dozen meters .
 Vasyl Mojsei from the Volhynian company of the Maidan Self-Defense was shot dead in the same spot as Bratushko and Kotsuba seven minutes before .
 Whip-like sounds of several rifle shots heard during the brief interval of his killing in a video filmed by an American .
 Mojsei's apparent positions in the new photos are consistent with a shot from Maidan-controlled positions . The photos are also consistent with shots from a building near the Dnipro hotel .
 Two fellow members of his company suggested that the Berkut police killed him from a Kalashnikov based on Berkut open shooting around that time . Two other members of the company also suggested that he was killed by the police .
 His reported entry wound in the neck and an exit wound in his chest point towards a shot from a steep upper position, which matches the Hotel Ukraina . His reported injury is said to have been caused by a gunshot wound .
 Two protesters say they witnessed a sniper killing protesters from the Hotel Ukraina . One protester was killed in the neck near Zhovtnevyi Palace .
 He reported that he was wounded in a side of his torso and the bullet exited in his lower back area . He said he was shot in the torso and was injured in the back area.
 This sideways and upward direction points towards the Hotel Ukraina . Berkut officers were at that time retreating in the front of these protesters .
 The prosecution charges announced during the Maidan massacre trial confirmed that he was not killed by Berkut special company members .
 The direction of these bullet strikes from the hotel was not reported by any media .
 The government investigation and the media omitted specific warnings about “snipers’ in the Hotel Ukraina, and other indications of the deadly fire from the hotel . The hotel's facade was within meters of the killings .
 Several other Maidan protesters who witnessed these killings confirm that the protesters were shot dead from the hotel . Several other protesters, who witnessed the killings during this time period, also confirm the killings .
 A Maidan medic, who was 29 there at that time, said the protesters were killed there by snipers from the roof of the Hotel Ukraina .
 Since Butorin was seen approaching the Maidan stage at 9:30am, he referred to killings before that time . Since that time, he has been seen approaching Maidan stages .
 The armed Berkut policemen and Omega snipers retreated at 9:20am to the first barricade near the entrance to the metro Khreshchatyk on Instytutska Street . The second barricade was made of Kamaz trucks .
Analysis of the manifest and the latent content of these and other videos and their comparison with other sources reveal shooters targeting this group of protesters were based at the Hotel Ukraina .
 The video compilation and other evidence indicate Serhii Baidovsky was killed from the Hotel Ukraina at 9:24am .
 Both buildings were controlled by Maidan protesters and the concealed shooters there were from the Maidan side . These seemingly irrational decisions from a point of a view of personal safety turn to be rational if both buildings are controlled by protesters .
 Reported direction of his entry wound in his face and an exit wound in the back of his torso points to a shooter from a high position . The shooter is believed to have been shot in the face .
 A description by an eyewitness about a protester killed in his head from the Hotel Ukraina matches the circumstances, place and time of the Voitovych killing .
 A Maidan protestor said he saw a sniper shooting from the second floor of the Hotel Ukraina and killed Kemsky a few meters away from him . The prosecution case contains testimonies by a Maidan Protestor .
 The prosecution and its on-site reconstruction report simply ignored his testimony and a medical expert report in the case . It stated without any justification or any other witnesses provided that Kemsky was killed by police .
 A ballistic expert examination of a bullet found in his body did not determine a precise weapon used to kill Kemsky . The Maidan massacre trial revealed that the bullet was not used in the killing .
 It concluded that he could have been shot from some 20 different types of weapons, including rifles and Kalashnikov assault rifles . He was shot from a range of rifles and assault rifles, it concluded .
 The sounds of gunshots in the specific moments when Kemsky and other protesters were killed indicate use of rifles or shotguns . These shots resembled sounds of whips and not shorter sounds of AK assault rifles that the Berkut was shooting from .
 This direction and his apparent position at the moment of shooting also point towards the Hotel Ukraina . This direction also points towards the hotel Ukraina.
 The previously edited out part of the same video shows Oleksander Shcherbaniuk being shot a few meters away in 6 seconds after Korneev .
 The Svoboda-activist video shows a tree branch being hit by a live ammunition . The video was filmed from the Hotel Ukraina .
 The video shows that its maker and some other protesters noticed the shots from the hotel at the direction of the protesters .
 He zoomed to specific open windows on the 12th and 9th floor of the hotel . He then had to flee under a cover of threes after a bullet hit a metal pole near him .
 First references to the shots from the hotel in the video were made several seconds after Kemsky and Dziavulsky were killed .
 Ihor Kostenko was killed behind the advancing protesters when he was standing at 9:29am . It zooms on large caliber pellets near the place of his killing a minute afterwards .
 Kostenko's father saw many pellet-sized holes in the photos of his clothing after his shooting . His father during the trial said he saw many holes in his father's photos of the clothing of the Russian man after the shooting .
 The location of the shooters in the hotel was not mentioned in the Reuters story . His story was featured in the report concerning the government investigation of the massacre .
 The video shows a live ammunition impact in a wall of Zhovtnevyi Palace at about the same time as Kostenko and Bondarchuk were killed nearby .
 A laser trajectory from this impact points approximately towards the 12 or 11 floor of the hotel . The impact points towards the hotel's 11 floor floor .
 Analysis of videos and other evidence shows that these protesters were killed on Instytutska Street between the Hotel Ukraina and Kinopalats . Berkut members and Omega snipers retreated at 9:20am to the first barricade near the entrance to the metro Khreshchatyk .
 The police fired live ammunition 32 from the barricades at the top, middle, and lower parts of the hotel .
 There is no evidence that SBU snipers located in the Cabinet of Ministers, the Presidential Administration, and neighboring buildings fired shots into this area during the massacre .
 There is evidence that groups of protesters were lured into the killing zones near the Berkut barricade by several protesters who led the way and called others to follow them .
 It would be extremely irrational from the perspective of their personal safety to go there after witnessing other groups of the protesters massacred nearby. It is extremely irrational to go to the protest site.
 A bullet barely missed them and hit a tree at 9:38am. Videos show that a protester in black was leading one of these groups even after the bullet missed them .
 In a documentary and interview, a protester from the Lviv Region identified himself as that person .
 The insider knowledge of actual snipers and the knowledge of snipers in the Maidan positions make this seemingly irrational behavior rational .
 The analysis of various evidence indicates that these two groups of protesters came under fire nearly simultaneously from the back, right, and left directions .
 The evidence indicates that the massacre was organized and planned since the shooters and spotters were at the time of the shootings . The evidence suggests that the shooting was organized, planned .
 Shootings of protestors from these buildings started only after they came under Maidan control or were within the area occupied by the Maidan .
 The Maidan snipers shot the police en mass, making them flee and de facto launching the attack by the unarmed protesters . Such an operation required advance planning and coordination and knowledge of the timing of the shooting .
 Maidan snipers launched shooting of the police in the morning of February 20 . Such information was available to the elements of the Maidan leadership and to snipers .
 The Maidan leaders and the armed groups of Maidan shooters had live information about the moves of the Berkut, the Internal Troops, and the SBU units . Alfa commanders and snipers and snipers had their radio communications, including encrypted ones .
 Eduard Hrynevych was killed near Instytutska and Metro Khreshchatyk barricade at 9:41am .
 A second later, there is a sound and a smoke from a Kalashnikov shot by a Berkut policeman . A second, a second, is a smoke and a sound.
 The Berkut policemen were shooting at the 13th/14th floor stairways shortly before 9:43am . The first and second floor stairway were around the same time .
 Snipers were filmed and reported by Maidan protesters on these floors of the Maidan-controlled Hotel Ukraina .
 Facebook post by Ukrstream journalist at 9:43am local time states that journalist was shot at Ukraine hotel .
Based on content analysis of the videos and photos, this was a Ruptly reporter hit by a ricochet bullet in his bulletproof vest on the 14"" floor of this hotel .
 An entry bullet hole in the back of his helmet and a testimony of another Maidan protester show that Zhalovaha was killed in theBack . The location of the hotel is consistent with the location of this hotel .
 The group of protesters were shouting about snipers at the Hotel Ukraina . The protesters were massacred from this hotel and other Maidan-controlled buildings .
 The timestamped video compilation shows that Oleh Ushnevych was shot less than 45 seconds before Zhalovaha .
 He was shot at 9:43am when he was already beyond a wall, which completely shielded him from the government positions .
 It was physically impossible to kill him from the Berkut barricade or Alfa snipers positions. It was physical impossible to killed him from a barricade.
 The official investigation found that one of the protesters was killed from a handgun, but crucial information about his identity is not disclosed . The official probe found that the protester was killed by a handgun .
 Tityk said he and some of his fellow protesters knew that there were “snipers’ at the hotel, specifically after two protesters were wounded there near the wall . Titiesk said that he and other protesters knew there were "snipers"
 Ushnevych was wounded at 9:44am in the back and in his right leg . He was running from behind the wall along with a few other protesters, including Trapezun .
 Tityk’s position in the moment of his shooting points to live ammunition fire from the Hotel Ukraina . The hotel is located in the Ukrainian capital of Ukraine .
 Trapezun was filmed in the famous video of the massacre lying on the ground after he was wounded . He was wounded with his hand extended towards the hotel.
 Roman Varenytsia and Serhii Trapezun were killed shortly before they were killed . Serhius Trapez Un was wounded by snipers shooting at protesters from the Hotel Ukraina and other Maidancontrolled locations .
 Borys Aseev's TV interview and directions of his wounds indicate that he was shot in his feet . He was shot when he tried to hide there, and then run away because of the live ammunition fire .
 He was seen in various videos during this shooting with a black backpack . He was also seen in several videos during the shooting with the backpack .
 Volodymyr Zherebnyi was killed at 9:44am a few seconds after the Trapezun wounding .
 A single whip-like gunshot in this video at that time indicates that he was likely killed from a hunting rifle, his mother says .
 The approximate direction of the gunshot is difficult to determine with sufficient certainty . Results of criminal medical expert reports in his case are not released by the government .
 The first video and his testimonies in several interviews suggest that Oleksander Abaiev was shot while he was taking cover from the Berkut side behind a yellow shield two seconds after Zherebnyi was killed immediately next to him .
 He claimed in various interviews that he was shot two or three times, first in the neck and then in his lower back . He also claimed in his various interviews, including in 1+1 TV channel 36 special, Shuster Live, and the “Maidan massacre’
Two bullet holes on the right side in the back of his jacket indicate that he was killed from the Hotel Ukraina .
 A Zelenyi Front video shows a bullet striking the same tree near a group of protesters 10 seconds after Varenytsia was shot .
 Roman Tochyn was reportedly in a temple area near Varenytsia when he was killed . He was reportedly behind a tree shielding him from the Berkut .
 Vladyslav Zubenko was last filmed alive at 9:49:10am and a dozen of seconds later he was filmed already on the ground in the previously edited out VRT TV video .
 Such a position and the wound direction point to a shooter in one of the Maidancontrolled buildings or areas, such as the hotel or Horodetskoho street building .
 He was reportedly wounded with a special 5.45 caliber bullet used in AK-74 and hunting rifles . The bullet was reportedly used to fire a special bullet.
 The official investigation also determined that he was not shot by the Berkut. a. a, Photo 5. A, a photo 5. The official probe also found that he had been shot by a police officer .
 Gunshot impact marks from the directions of the Hotel Ukraina, Zhovtnevyi Palace/Kinopalats and Muzeiny Lane on a tree .
 Volodymyr Honcharovsky was wounded in the same area in his back at 9:50am . He said the protesters there were shot from behind and that he was injured in the back .
 His father, a former policeman, stated that his investigation based on measurements of shooting and position of the body and wounds points towards a gunshot from Zhovtnevyi Palace .
 Ivan Panteleev was killed near the same spot at 9:54am seconds after he was photographed kneeling with his back towards the hotel and a Horodetsky Street building .
 Their positions and directions of wounds indicate that they were likely shot from the Zhovtnevyi/ Kinopalats or Muzeiny Lane directions . Their positions, directions and positions of wounds suggest that they may have been shot in the area .
 About a dozen shots were fired in a rapid succession, likely from an automatic weapon such as Kalashnikov assault rifle . The two protesters were killed during the killings .
 A protester was filmed pointing Polish TVP journalists towards a sniper at Kinopalats or a Muzeinyi lane building . The shooter was ignored by these and other journalists filming there .
 The VRT TV video demonstrates a moment when Yuri Kravchuk was wounded in his leg at 9:56am . The video shows the moment he was wounded .
 A Maidan medic in the same video 18 seconds later points towards a top of the Arkada building . The video was shot in Maidan.
 Anatolii Panchuk was wounded in his back at 10:05am seconds after a photo showed him sitting with his back towards Zhovtnevyi and Kinopalats .
 Mykola-Oleh Pankiv was fatally wounded 10:07am when he was filmed sitting behind a tree protecting from the Berkut side .
 The prosecution charged the Berkut policemen with his murder . This indicates either of these two buildings in the Maidan-controlled area .
 Oleksander Labetsky was next to Pankiv behind the same tree facing Arkada . Within several seconds of his killing, he was wounded .
 He said that he was shot in his inner thigh and saw the bullet on the ground nearby . He said he was hit by a bullet in the inner thigh .
 The Ukraina TV channel video from the police side of the barricade shows that several members of the Berkut special police company and later Omega snipers were shooting from this barricade in the general direction of the protesters .
 Analysis has not found any specific corroborated evidence of killings of any of these protesters from the Berkut and Omega direction . But in contrast to such evidence in the case of Maidan snipers, it has not been found .
Multiple bullet marks from the direction of the government forces in these relatively small objects were presented by the media in Ukraine and the West as definite evidence of the massacre .
 The lack of documentation during the massacre and the large numbers of bullets in the relatively small area indicate that these bullet marks were more likely warning shots to stop the advancing protestors, missed shots at the snipers at the Hotel Ukraina .
 The videos and photos do not show any protesters killed in that spot or near it during this time period . The various videos and pictures don't show any protests.
 Other evidence, such as testimonies by numerous eyewitnesses and live ammunition impact marks, corroborate that snipers shot protesters from all these locations .
 There is no such evidence of snipers killings the protestors from these buildings or adjacent areas when they were controlled by the police units .
 The control of these buildings or territory used by shooters does not necessitate physical control over all parts of the Hotel Ukraina and other buildings .
 The Maidan side knew about specific locations of the shooters from the live broadcasts and videos . The shooting positions were concentrated in small areas of these buildings .
Live broadcasts, videos, and radio intercepts identified shooters in specific opened windows and on specific upperlevel floors . The Maidan SelfDefense was able to reach these specific areas for a period of time .
Protesters in positions to control entrances and exits to these buildings were already in these areas during the massacre .
 The concealed shooters needed to move their firing positions to change their positions . Also needed to change firing positions.
 The government side or any ‘third side’ would have meant a suicidal mission. This means that deploying snipers there by the government side would have been suicidal . This is not the first time snipers have been deployed in the country .
There is no evidence of deliberate mutual exchange of fire between shooters in the Hotel Ukraina, Zhovtnevyi/Kinopalats, Muzeinyi Lane and Horodetskoho buildings, and the Arkada building .
 At least several other eyewitnesses confirmed the presence of snipers in Zhovtnevyi Place in their media interviews and videos .
 SBU snipers report hearing gunshots and seeing suspected snipers or their fire coordinators at several other buildings then held by the Maidan side . The protesters were massacred on Instytutska Street .
 The Alfa snipers reported that a spotter left the roof of Kinopalats after he noticed the SBU snipers and then was shot at either by a Berkut policeman or some armed Maidan protestor .
 SBU snipers reported in their intercepted radio communication at 9:46am . Group of people on the roof of Bank Arkada a Horodetskoho Street building .
 The Maidan protesters seized Zhovtnevyi Palace and controlled the entrance, roof, and windows on the roof during the massacre .
 A full version of the video of the snipers was not released publicly . But a full version was not published publicly .
 They were identified as such by this eyewitness and by a Maidan stage announcer based on reports by other Maidan witnesses . They were identify as such as this eyewitness .
 The Maidan Self-Defense specifically checked Zhovtnevyi Palace for any snipers after the Berkut company’s retreat 42 shortly before and minutes after these snipers appeared .
 The appearance of these snipers and spotters in these videos and photos matches those of the protestors and does not match uniforms of the Berkut special company, Omega and SBU snipers . The appearance is not the same as those of those who are protesting against Berkut .
 There is similar evidence pointing to snipers or spotters in the adjacent Kinopalats building close to the time of killings .
 The Maidan Self-Defense reportedly found more than 80 bullet casings on the roof of Zhovtnevyi Palace . The Maidans Self- defense reportedly found the casings .
 BBC journalists shot at from Hotel Ukraina, Kinopalats, Arkada, and Horodetskoho and Muzeinyi Lane buildings around the same time .
 There is no evidence that snipers from these and other Maidan controlled buildings and areas identified or targeted each other . However, in contrast to the SBU and Omega snipers and Berkut special police company officers, there are no evidence of snipers .
 Maidan shooters and spotters involved in the false flag massacre . This is another indication that they were not government snipers, but Maidan shooter and spotter .
 A Maidan medic in BBC video referred to snipers on green building but her statement was either partly cut and mistranslated in the BBC report . The translation only referred to six protesters killed by snipers in that area .
 There were several other Maidan protesters publicly reporting snipers shooting protesters from the Arkada building in their media interviews .
 A bullet impact point suggests ABC News occupied room in the Hotel Ukraina was fired from the direction of the Arkada building .
 A protester around 10:30am in an ICTV video report pointed towards snipers in a roof window of a Horodetskoho Street building between Arkada and the Hotel Ukraina .
 Movement and a white spot indicating shooters in a roof window of the same Horodetskoho Street building can be spotted in the Zelenyi Front video .
 Some armed Maidan shooters were filmed with their left hands in white bandage for shooting purposes . Other armed protesters were with white masks, while others were with masks .
 testimonies and other evidence shows that many protesters witnessed the mass killing . Many protesters discovered specific buildings and roof areas used by snipers .
 Maidan stage announcers reported these locations to the entire Maidan area . These announcements were broadcast live by some Ukrainian TV channels, such as Espresso TV .
 Such information was passed via cell phones and radio used by many protestors .
 Many of the wounded protesters were shot from the Hotel Ukraina . Many were brought to the make-shift hospital in presence of many Svoboda deputies and numerous journalists .
 Some protestors who witnessed the killings and brought their killed and wounded counterparts to the hotel said they knew about snipers in the hotel .
 For example, Andrii Ostrozhny said snipers from this hotel were shooting to prevent them from evacuating protesters who were shot .
 He was filmed in various videos and photos carrying the shot protesters to the hotel from at least 9:55am till the most of the killings were over . He was also filmed carrying the protesters to a hotel from 9: 55am to 9:50am .
 Ostrozhny also confirmed that snipers were killing the protesters from Zhovtnevyi Palace and the top of the Arkada building .
 45 protesters near the Berkut barricade came under fire from eight or nine floor of Hotel Ukraina, says Mykola Tokar .
 He was filmed in that area of the killings in the Zelenyi Front video before and after 10:20am . He was also filmed in the area of that area.
 The analysis of media reports and social media identified some 50 such witness testimonies . Most of the testimonies were from protesters themselves .
 It would have been irrational for the Maidan leaders not to act on such information and deploy the armed Maidan groups to locate and detain or kill these snipers . The snipers continued to massacre the protesters for a relatively long time period .
 Parubii and Yarosh stated that they were during the massacre on the Maidan . This specifically concerns Parubi and Yarash, who said they were in the massacre .
 snipers were not from the government side or “third side’s side, but from the Maidan side conducting a false flag operation . But such actions become rational if these snipers were from the Government side or the “ third side”
False flag operation to succeed in mass killing of the protestors required that it was conducted in secret from the government of Ukraine and its forces .
 Parubii and Yarosh stated in media interviews that they were present during the massacre on the Maidan . There is not a single publicly available video or photo showing their specific whereabouts and actions at the time of this mass killing .
 This is another dog that did not bark evidence indicating that the Maidan massacre was a false flag operation by a section of Maidan leaders and a very small faction of the protesters . This is the dog that didn't bark evidence.
Analysis of videos shows attempts by protesters with firearms and whole Maidan units to enter the Hotel Ukraina during the massacre to neutralize or block snipers there .
 Some Svoboda deputies, the Maidan guards in the hotel, and the hotel security were prevented . But such attempts were prevented by some Svobododa deputies .
 A French TF1 46 video shows a protestor pointing at the hotel entrance towards snipers at the top of the hotel . The leader of the Khmelnytsky regional organization of the far right Svoboda party.
 There was at least another such protestor who also remains unidentified . There was also another such protester who also remained unidentified .
 Such seemingly irrational actions might be interpreted as false signals of safety to other protesters to lure them to the massacre areas .
 The protesters controlled specific floors of the Hotel Ukraina at the time when shooters were firing at both the protesters and the police .
 Ukrainian TV correspondents recorded this group entering hotel, but they either downplayed this, showed parts of the group, or did not report this at all .
 Parasiuk and most of his group appeared in the Hotel Ukraina from unknown directions . They were not filmed among the part of their group walking from the Music Conservatory to the hotel via Maidan square .
 The arrival of this armed group coincided with apparent disappearance of snipers in Zhovtnevyi Palace and Horodetskoho Street at about the same time .
 The Prosecutor General from Svoboda did the same . But they have not publicly mentioned presence of Maidan shooters in the hotel .
 Some of the Svoboda parliament members were filmed in the massacre area or in the line of fire from the shooters in the Hotel Ukraina, Arkada, and Zhovtnevyi .
 Svoboda deputies acted either with inside knowledge or orders as a part of the false flag operation . But such actions become rational if these deputies acted with insideknowledge or orders .
 A video shows protesters with one handgun, an axe, and a long bag, breaking into a hotel room on the 14 floor .
 A Spilno.tv reporter stated at 12:40pm that there were snipers on the 14"" floor and these snipers were shooting protesters on the Maidan .
 Protesters testified that there were “snipers’ on the 14th floor of this hotel . Protesters also testified that the hotel had ‘snipers' on the14th floor .
 At least two members of Parasiuk’s group were recorded in a Ruptly video . One of them was shooting from a twin barrel IZh-56 hunting rifle from the 14th floor of the Hotel Ukraina .
 Contours of towers and other buildings in this video match those on Instytutska Street .
 The approximate angle of this rifle and calculations based on the height of the building and the distances indicate that it was pointed not towards the police but towards protesters .
 It would be irrational to use such hunting rifles and ammunition against the police. In addition, it would also be irrational for such weapons to be used .
 At least two members of the Parasiuk's group were filmed at 10:20-10:22am . One of them was shooting from an IZh-56 hunting rifle towards protesters from the 14th floor of the Hotel Ukraina .
 Ruslan Koshulynsky, deputy-speaker of the Ukrainian parliament from Svoboda, was filmed with this group of armed shooters . The video shows the entrance of the Parasiuk's company members and then Koshulnsky follows them to the elevator .
 He led the crucial emergency meeting of the Ukrainian parliament in the afternoon and the evening of the same day . He also led the emergency meeting in the evening and the afternoon of the day .
 The parliament condemned the Yanukovych government forces for the massacre of the protesters . The parliament issued an order for them to retreat from the downtown Kyiv .
 Media reports of deputies negotiating with “snipers’ on the roof after presence of the shooters was reported there from the Maidan stage at 10:59am am .
 It would be irrational to negotiate with “snipers’ and then deny their presence, unless they were perceived as not dangerous by being from the Maidan 49 side .
Opposition members of the parliament went to the roof. But the ‘roof snipers’ were no longer acknowledged . Their existence was denied within hours after the opposition members went to roof .
 A protester from the Parasiuk’s group said he went to the roof of the Hotel Ukraina but saw no snipers there is another evidence that the ‘shooters’ on the roof were from the Maidan side .
 Ruslan Koshulynsky, deputy-speaker of the Ukrainian parliament from Svoboda, with Parasiuk-led group of shooters on 14 floor of Hotel Ukraina circa 10:22am .
 The Spilno TV broadcast and initial media reports stated around 11:00am that a “sniper’ was found on the 10th floor by the Maidan Self-Defense armed with Kalashnikovs .
 A protester saw similarly-dressed man who was rumored to be a sniper and was carried by Maidan SelfDefense members near the Hotel Ukraina .
 The man may have been falsely identified as the one to send a false signal to protesters who were not aware of the false flag operation . But absence of any further information suggests that he was either one of the Maidan snipers .
 The description of this person matches a man in black dress and balaklava and a handgun . He was not allowed to go to the higher floors of the hotel and neutralize the snipers there .
 The only rational target of the Maidan shooters was the police. They generally assumed that the only rational targets were police .
 The use of hunting ammunition and hunting rifles against the police would not have been rational because of the distance, in contrast to the effective distance of their use against the protesters .
 No police members were confirmed killed at that location, in contrast to dozens of police casualties caused earlier in the morning by Maidan snipers on the Maidan .
 A Polish TVP correspondent based at the Hotel Ukraina stated in his TV report on February 20, 2014 that they got photos of the Maidan protesters shooting at “people with Kalashnikovs’s. One of the protesters said that they had no weapons
 The armed protesters on the 11"" floor did not allow to film themselves . Their appearance several minutes after the Parastuk-led group entered the hotel indicates that they might have been from his unit .
 There were other unidentified groups of armed Maidan protesters at the hotel during the massacre .
Gunfire rounds followed at around 10:22am, 10:2510:27am, and 10:30am . Then such gunfire rounds followed around 10.30am and 10.22am .
 Spilno TV reporter and an English-speaking foreign reporter described seeing and hearing live ammunitions shots coming from the top floors of the hotel . The French TV crew was mentioned as being there .
 At 10:35am, this foreign reporter said that he saw a shooter hiding in a Hotel Ukraina window and firing shots .
 The Spilno TV streamer reported at 10:43am that hunters were among the protesters . At 10:50am that protesters at the hotel were armed with AKMs and rifles .
 Many protesters were shot at, killed and wounded by 7.62mm AKM caliber bullets and by hunting pellets and bullets from the direction of the hotel .
 His multiple reported wounds can be consistent with pellets used in hunting rifles . His injuries are consistent with pellets used in rifles .
 He was last filmed pointing towards a Muzeinyi Lane building two minutes before he was killed in his chest and abdomen .
 The government investigation also determined that he was not killed from the Berkut barricade positions . The investigation also found that he did not die from the barricade position .
 ICTV video shows a sniper hiding behind the curtains of a window on the 11th floor of the Hotel Ukraina . A few minutes after the first group of armed protesters was recorded, a sniper fired at protesters .
 The BBC correspondent identified the shooter as having a green helmet worn by the Maidan protesters .
 The same window on the same 11"" floor was open in that video which showed snipers in the hotel shooting the protesters one hour earlier .
 This is another evidence that the snipers used the same room of the hotel for a relatively long time . There were armed Maidan shooters on that floor at the same time .
 The snipers in these ICTV and BBC videos are either from the Parasiuk-led group or from an allied Maidan armed group . This also suggests that the snipers in the videos were either from a group or an allied armed group.
 Another protester indicated in the AFP video that there was a sniper shooting from the 9"" floor of the hotel . This was not reported by the French news agency .
 Another video showed other protesters in the same area at similar time talking about snipers shooting from the 9"" floor window .
 Leonid Poliansky was killed and another protester wounded on the Maidan side of the Hotel Ukraina at 10:3010:31am by shots from this hotel .
 Andrii Pavlenko, who witnessed this shooting and helped to carry Poliansky, said that this protester was killed in the chest from a hotel window .
 There were also media and videos indicating that other protesters were shot at and likely wounded on the Maidan square . There were snipers from the Conservatory and other buildings shooting at the protesters .
 An RT correspondent reported that a 7.62mm AKM bullet narrowly missed him at a Hotel Ukraina window . The bullet's trajectory pointed to the Conservatory building .
 The government investigation named Khrapachenko as one of at least three protesters killed from this hotel . The report by Maidan NGOs and lawyers stated that the government investigation name Khrapchenko.
 Viktor Smolensky was filmed alive in the same area around the same time . He was filmed in a similar area around same time in Russia .
 Warnings from the Maidan stage about “three snipers’ or “snipers’ “shooting to kill’s protesters from the Hotel Ukraina, specifically on Instytutska Street .
 The Maidan leaders during the massacre either denied that any shooters were there or pretended that there were no snipers there . But in many cases afterwards, the leaders later denied that they were there .
 Eyewitnesses say a bystander was killed in front of Zhovtnevyi Palace by a bullet from the Hotel Ukraina .
 One Omega sniper was filmed targeting an open window of the Hotel Ukraina . Another sniper pointed his rifle in an upward direction, likely toward Zhovtnevyi Palace .
 All these buildings and protesters on Instytutska Street were located downslope from this police barricade .
 This photo was presented by the Ukrainian media as evidence that these were snipers who massacred protesters .
 snipers and Berkut special company shooters generally did not hide, and they allowed the media and bystanders to film themselves during the massacre .
 These live ammunition rounds came around the time of the killing and wounding of many protesters . Many protesters were killed and wounded by the rounds .
 Videos show that at least a large proportion of the victims were shot at that time while taking cover behind a wall, trees, and a barricade . The victims were outside of the police barricade and the adjacent government buildings .
 Some of the protesters, including “snipers, were wounded or killed by the police fire, according to an analysis . The analysis cannot be completely ruled out because of limited publicly available information about shootings of all the protesters .
 Oleksander Baliuk was reportedly killed on Instytutska Street . The location and timing of his killings are not publicly revealed .
 Davyd Kipiani was reportedly found after the massacre close to midnight on February 20, but the circumstances of his death remain uncertain .
 He was a member of the Georgian party led by Mikheil Saakashvili, the former president of Georgia . He became the governor of the Odesa Region in Ukraine in 2015 .
 Some crucial parts of this and other waves of the killings are missing in the long and widely reported video of the massacre . It is noteworthy that some crucial parts are missing from the video .
 This video was filmed by an activist of Zelenyi Front, a Kharkiv organization . The video was uploaded to YouTube .
 This organization is associated with Arsen Avakov, one of the leading members of the Fatherland party . Avakov became the Minister of Internal Affairs in the post-Yanukovych government .
 Another pro-Maidan activist was filmed in different videos filming and taking pictures during the massacre . Many of the protesters were then killed and wounded near him .
 His publicly released videos and photos also do not include many crucial parts of the massacre . His public release of photos and videos does not include key parts of massacre .
 There were no signs of attempts to identify Maidan sniper positions in surrounding buildings, or any apparent concern about snipers .
Long video was only made public in December 2014 . It matches the position and frames of pictures taken by a Lviv journalist . The journalist was a Svoboda member and previously served as the press-secretary in the Svobota-controlled council .
 Ukrainian journalist from the 5th TV Channel, who assisted the French TV crew and was standing and filming along with the Spilno TV streamer .
 His recording of Berkut special company and an Omega sniper during their brief advance to Zhovtnevyi Palace were rebroadcast by Radio Svoboda and then numerous TV channels in Ukraine and around the world and used as primary evidence that the police Berkut and government snipers massac
 Spilno TV streams were rebroadcast live by Espresso TV but with its crucial audio, which pointed to armed Maidan protesters and their shooting, removed .
 A Maidan activist stated that his friend intercepted and recorded on Maidan this radioexchange of the group of shooters . The activist said the radio exchange was recorded by his friend .
 A Maidan Self-Defense company commander was informed about this recording . But he disregarded this information which could have enabled the shooters to locate the shooters .
Radio communication by this group of shooters was detected until the following day . The radio communication was detected by the group .
 The snipers and spotters had such radio intercepts and were able to avoid tracking by the SBU snipers or move to different positions . These intercepts, admissions by the Maidan leaders that they had such intercepts.
 This news report suggested they were government snipers by misrepresenting locations and dates of SBU Alfa snipers deployment during the Alfa's seizure attempt of the Trade Union building on February 18 .
 SBU head Valentyn Nalyvaichenko was a source of such misleading information during a joint press conference with the police and Prosecution General Office heads . He implied that the positions of SBU snipers on Kostelna Street and on Ukrkoopspilka building
 The location of the two reported snipers on the roof of the Maidan-controlled Zhovtnevyi palace faces Maidan . Their appearance indicates that these were Maidan snipers or spotters .
 The absence of any further information about this coordinator suggests that he was from the Maidan side .
 A video compilation contains a small-size video recording of a person on the top of this building at 10:02am . The full video was not made public but the full video has been released .
 An unidentified intruder broke into a radio communication of Internal Troops units in the Maidan . He told them there were people aiming a rocket propelled grenade launcher into the Hotel Ukraina from the 6"" floor of the Trade Union building .
 No snipers in these locations were captured in spite of them being in the Maidan-controlled area . However, no snipers were captured.
 Searches by the Maidan Self-Defense also failed to locate the snipers there .
 There were various reports about some snipers captured in the Hotel 56 Ukraina, Zhovtnevyi Palace .
 Such a consistent failure to locate and publicly present evidence of these snipers also suggest that they were from the Maidan side .
 The snipers on these buildings and armed Maidan protesters did not exchange in any live ammunition fire. Another “dog that did not bark’s evidence is that the snipers on this building and armed protesters, who were filmed on the Maidan around this time.
 Czech and Spanish TV reports showed these protesters openly carrying or displaying their Kalashnikov rifles and hunting guns on the Maidan square in the line of fire of snipers .
 The identity and specific affiliation of these armed protesters have not been disclosed . A Lviv protester stated that he saw a group of Right Sector members armed with rifles wrapped in cloth and with Kalashnikov assault rifles hidden under their jackets .
 There is evidence of the cover-up of the snipers by the Maidan leadership . But there is evidence that the snipers were shot by Maidan leaders .
 He said these “snipers’ laid their weapons without offering any resistance and admitted that they were hired and ordered to kill protesters . He said that these ‘sniper’s” laid their guns without offering resistance .
 A Kyiv leader of the Patriot of Ukraine, a paramilitary wing of the Social National Assembly, stated on Facebook that he had a firsthand knowledge that the Maidan Self-Defense members stormed a suspected sniper's room in the Hotel Ukraina .
 Hotel staff told him that Svoboda deputies reserved hotel rooms on the upper floors of the hotel during the massacre . He said that this sniper was shooting from one of such rooms .
 The sniper used a name common in the Caucasus region . He also alleged that Petro Poroshenko, one of the leaders of the Maidan opposition and the current President of Ukraine helped to whisk away this sniper .
 courts blocked requests by lawyers of the Maidan massacre victims to obtain lists of people who booked rooms used by snipers . The BBC investigation report stated that courts blocked request by lawyers for lists of those who booked these hotel rooms .
 The types of guns and ammunition used and the direction and types of entry wounds among both protesters and policemen also confirm that the shooters came from the Maidan side .
 The head of the medical service of the Euromaidan and other medics reported that both protesters and the police were shot by similar ammunition, specifically 7.62mm bullets and buckshot .
 This is consistent with locations of shooters on the roofs or top floors of all specified buildings . This is not the same as other buildings in the world. This is similar to other buildings .
 Precise and deadly gunshots and the 7.62mm Kalashnikov AKMS type assault rifles and various hunting weapons and ammunition used also indicate that shooters were positioned within several dozen meters from the places where both the police and protesters were killed or wounded .
 Some protesters were shooting with or openly carrying hunting and sporting rifles, Kalashnikov assault rifles and their hunting versions, Makarov, and other handguns during mass shooting .
 These weapons specifically included 1,008 Makarov handguns, 59 AKMS (folding 7.62 caliber Kalashnikov assault rifles), two SVD sniper rifles, and various other rifles and shotguns . These weapons include 2,000 Makarov rifles, 2,500
 Three ministers of foreign affairs from EU countries were to blame violence on Yanukovych government and his security and police forces . The instrumentally rational goal of the massacre of the protesters was to blame the Yanukovych government .
 Maidan leaders used an asymmetric force and delegitimized the Yanukovych government and stopped its plans to use force against the Maidan . This allowed the Maiden leaders to win a conflict by using an asymmetrical force .
 Volodymyr Parasiuk, the same special combat company commander whose snipers shot at the police from the Music Conservatory building and then at both the police and the protesters from the Hotel Ukraine, called from the Maidan stage in the evening of February 21, 2014 .
 The agreement called for investigation of the Maidan massacre with international help . The agreement was called for international help.
 Parasiuk issued a public ultimatum for President Yanukovych to resign by 10:00am of the next day . President Yanukovych has been in power for more than two years .
 He justified his ultimatum by blaming Yanukovych for the massacre . coffins of killed protesters were carried out in front of the stage . Some of the members of the Parasiuk-led company were seen along with him in the Hotel Ukraina during the massacre.
 He stated that his combat company based in the Music Conservatory was responsible for the turning point of the Euromaidan . He threated an armed assault if Yanukovych would not resign, he said .
 Parubii said that this ultimatum was a decision by “institutional bodies of the Maidan’s” and that it was adopted by a military council set up by a Maidan Self-Defense and the Right Sector .
 Yarosh statement contained reference to arms that the Right Sector could use . The Yarosh said that the right sector could use such arms .
 The Right Sector members were not visible during the February 20 massacre . None of the members of this far right organization was reported among the killed protesters .
 Orest Karakevych, a Maidan protester, said he was informed that Right Sector members 58 were absent during the massacre . He said they received advance warning from their leadership .
 The Right Sector was involved in the mass killing of the Maidan protesters and the police . Such “dog that did not bark” outcome is another evidence of the involvement of the Right Sector in this mass killing .
 The parliament voted for a statement ordering the members of the police and security services units to withdraw from their positions in the downtown Kyiv .
 At least a dozen members of the parliament had information about shooters in the Maidan controlled locations, in particular, the Hotel Ukraina . This de facto held such government units responsible for the massacre of the protesters .
 Parasiuk admitted that members of his company forced an undisclosed number of members of the parliament to participate in the votes that led to removals of Yanukovych and his government from power .
 Yanukovych fled from Kyiv to Eastern Ukraine in the evening of February 21 soon after this ultimatum was issued . Yanukovych fled to eastern Ukraine after being given an ultimumatum .
 The start of the evacuation of his residence in Mezhyhirria started a few days before and was used as evidence of his responsibility for the massacre . The evacuation can be explained by an expectation that his residence outside of Kyiv can be targeted by the Maidan protesters .
 They lost their power, which they used for their own and their personal networks enrichment, and had to flee to Russia . They had to leave Russia for Russia .
 In contrast, the far right and oligarchic organizations and their leaders benefited from the violent overthrow of the Yanukovych government .
 The Fatherland party and the People's Front occupied many top positions in the Maidan-led governments after the overthrow of Yanukovych .
 They included positions of acting president, prime-minister, head of parliament, and head of the National Security and Defense Council . They include positions of the acting president.
 Svoboda had several ministers from in the first post-Yanukovych government . The Prosecutor General Office investigated the Maidan massacre .
 The Right Sector was not directly represented in the Maidan governments . Yarosh was considered for a deputy head of the National Security and Defense Council .
Radical nationalist and far right alliance and its co-founders were able to form and lead their own police battalions and paramilitary formations . Several of their leaders were elected to the parliament in the 2014 elections .
 Such formations attained the ability to stage another violent overthrow of the Ukrainian government . Such formations were able to stage an uprising against the government .
 The Maidan massacre can account for the significant influence attained by these far right organizations in Ukraine . Their involvement in the massacre can be attributed to their influence in Ukraine.
 Study shows that the Massacre was a rational choice decision or instrumentally-rational action . Some of the protesters were sacrificed by some of their leaders and fellow protesters to overthrow the government .
 The study found no evidence of the government or any “third force” snipers massacring the protesters . The official investigation also did not produce such evidence .
 It would be irrational for the government of any “third force’s” governments to deploy snipers in the Maidan-controlled buildings and territory .
 Many of them reported about Maidan shooters or armed Maidan protesters in the hotel . They also did not produce any evidence of “third force’ or government snipers in this hotel .
 Halytski kontrakty, 5 kanal, Spilno TV, Ukrstream, Hromadske TV and Ukrainska Pravda, Liga, Ukraina TV, and 1+1/Den .
 The U.S. government did not disclose any evidence that they had about this mass killing . For instance, the President and Vice-President publicly blamed the government forces for the massacre .
 Barack Obama said that “we had brokered a deal to transition power in Ukraine” after the massacre . The United States president or other American government officials did not release any specific information about the nature of this involvement .
 U.S. Vice President Joe Biden specifically requested to put Arsenii Yatseniuk and Valentyn Nalyvaichenko in the Ukrainian government, pro-Maidan Ukrainian media reported .
 Yatseniuk and Nalyvaichenko became the Prime Minister of Ukraine and the Head of the State Security Service of Ukraine . Yatsenuk was the first Ukrainian prime minister to become the head of the state security service .
 The Yanukovych government ordered and carried out the violent dispersal that resulted in wounding of many protestors . This violent disperseal was ordered by the Yanukovych government .
 opposition leaders had advance information about this dispersal, says Anatolii Hrytsenko . Opposition was able to intercept radio communications of Berkut concerning this operation . But there is also a certain evidence, such as statement by one of the Maidan politicians .
Claims by Maidan leaders and some scholars that violent attacks on the presidential administration on December 1, 2013 and the Ukrainian parliament in the end of January 2014 were provocations by the Yanukovych government are not supported by evidence .
 The Right Sector and other far right organizations admitted their key role in these violent attacks .
Radio intercepts of Internal Troops units and Alfa commanders and snipers confirm attempts to seize the Maidan and the Trade Union building on February 18 were stopped by the burning of this building by its defenders and by use of live ammunition .
 An Alfa officer led one of the SBU groups during storming of the Trade Union Building . He said their task was to seize the 5th floor.
 The Right Sector occupied the entire floor which served as both its headquarters and a base of the Right Sector company of the Maidan Self-Defense company . The Right sector occupied the whole floor of the building .
 Two “snipers’ or spotters from the Maidan side were noticed on a Maidan-controlled building, their preparation to storm this building . An order from their superior to Alfa jointly with the Internal Troops to start this attack .
 Yanukovych government plans to use force to disperse and arrest the Maidan leaders and activists, and specifically 61 armed protesters, created another incentive to the massacre organizers and armed protesters to use live ammunition against the police and their fellow protesters .
 At least five Maidan protesters died as result of being beaten, driven over, or injured by stun grenades . Berkut, the Internal Troops, and titushki assembled by the Yanukovych government launched a counterassault .
 The ‘sniper massacre’ fits a pattern of the politically motivated misrepresentations of the mass killing and other cases of violence by the same Ukrainian political forces and the media involved . The “sniper shooting’s massacre” fits apattern of the
 At least six Maidan protesters were killed on February 18 and 19 by gunshots, mostly from hunting weapons and pellets . Three protesters killed in the end of January, 2014, in Maidan .
 The Maidan opposition and the Maidan-led government asserted without providing any evidence that these protesters were gunned down by the Berkut and snipers . The failure to find their killers suggest that this was likely a part of the same strategy of false flag violence .
 Other such cases include the beating of Tatiana Chornovol on December 25, 2013, the abduction of Dmytro Bulatov, the Odesa massacre of pro-Russian separatists on May 2, 2014 .
 The leaked investigation information and the admission of his fellow Automaidan leaders in fall 2014 provide evidence that Bulatov’s abduction was staged .
 The investigation also did not identify any suspects or collected any evidence, apart from Bulatov’s statement that he was abducted .
Pro-Russian separatists in Odesa were responsible for the deadly fire at the Trade Union building . The government blamed the separatists themselves for the massacre, but videos and other sources of evidence point to their involvement .
 The May 2 group was created by the Odesa Region governor . It confirmed almost a year after the massacre that the deadly fire started in the Trade Union building main entrance .
 May 2 group leader filmed Molotov cocktails and burning tires into the main entrance of the building when the fire started .
 The official investigation and the government leaders falsely claimed that the fire was started by separatists or by Russian agents on the roof or in a wing part of the building . But the official investigation of his case was falsified by the government .
 The police and firefighters were ordered to stand by during the massacre . Such orders came from the top echelon of the Ukrainian government, according to evidence .
 Ukrainian government claims that nearly all killings of civilians in Donbas were done by separatists . OSCE analysis indicates that the absolute majority of 62 such killings were attributable to the Ukrainian government forces and battalions led by the far right parties .
 The separatists were responsible for the most of the most deadly attacks during their advance in January and February 2015 .
 The Maidan massacre of the protestors and the police on February 20, 2014 involved the far right and oligarchic parties . It was a key element of the violent overthrow of the corrupt and oligARCHic but democratically elected government .
 The study is based on a theoretical framework of rational choice and Weberian theory of instrumentally-rational action .
 The Right Sector and Svoboda, and oligarchic parties, such as Fatherland, were directly or indirectly involved in the massacre of the protesters and the police . The various kinds of evidence indicate that armed groups and the leadership of the far right organizations were directly involved.
 This mass killing was a successful false flag operation, which was organized and conducted by elements of the Maidan leadership and concealed armed groups in order to win the asymmetric conflict in Ukraine .
 Study provides rational explanation for the failure of the government investigation to find and prosecute those directly involved in the mass killing . Study also provides a rational explanation.
 Specific nature and degree of involvement of each of these political organizations and specific leaders and armed protesters remains unclear .
 Such a false flag massacre by its nature could have been organized and successfully carried out only by a small number of Maidan leaders and protesters .
 The absolute majority of the Maidan protesters, activists, members, and supporters of the “Euromaidan’s mass protests, were not aware of the actual organizers and perpetrators of this politically motivated murder .
 Study shows that concealed armed Maidan groups started the massacre in the early morning on February 20 . They targeted Berkut and Internal Troops units on the Maidan itself with live ammunition fire .
 The armed Maidan groups, in particular, massacred the unsuspecting Maidan protestors from concealed positions .
 The analysis of circumstances, timing, and locations of specific killings of 49 protestors presents evidence that almost all of them were killed from the Maidan-controlled buildings and locations, in particular the Hotel Ukraine and Zhovtnevyi Palace .
 This study presents direct evidence, such as videos, photos, and witness testimonies, concerning groups of the Maidan “snipers’ in these buildings and their shooting from these positions . The protesters were killed and wounded from these directions from the same caliber and types of weapons .
 The Maidan Self-Defense and Right Sector headquarters, the Maidan stage, and pro-Maidan journalists become rational . Similarly, snipers kill unarmed protesters and targeting foreign journalists .
 The Maidan protesters and the police were killed on February 20, 2014 . The killings were apparently irrational from self-interest based perspectives of rational choice and Weberian theories .
 The new government that came to power largely as a result of the massacre falsified its investigation . The Ukrainian media helped to misrepresent this mass killing of the protesters and the police .
 The analysis found that Berkut was shooting at the Maidan “snipers’ and as warning to stop unarmed protesters . It cannot exclude that the police killed or wounded some of the protesters, specifically armed ones, on February 20 .
 No reliable evidence about “third force’s” foreign snipers or organizers of the massacre has been found . No evidence about the third force of ‘third force.’
 This academic investigation also brings new important questions that need to be addressed . This academic probe also brings important questions to the public .
 U.S. government backing of Maidan opposition, its involvement in Maidan government selection and policy decisions, and its past record of supporting or organizing regime change in other countries . Additional research is needed to examine if there was any involvement of the United States government in the violent overthrow of
 Study puts “Euromaidan and the violent conflict in Ukraine into a new perspective. This study puts ‘EurOMaidan’ and ‘violent conflict’ into new perspective, it says .
 The massacre of the protestors and the police was rational from a rational choice or instrumentally rational theoretical perspective . This mass killing not only ended many human lives but also undermined democracy, human rights, and the rule of law in Ukraine .
 The massacre was a key part of the violent overthrow of the government in Ukraine and a major human rights crime . The massacre of the protesters and the police was a major Human Rights crime .
 This violent overthrow constituted an undemocratic change of government, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "This violent overthrow constitutes a undemocracy," he says .
 It gave start to a large-scale violent conflict that turned into a civil war in Eastern Ukraine . Russian military intervention in support of separatists in Crimea and Donbas, and to a de-facto break-up of Ukraine .
 The violent overthrow of the Ukrainian government also escalated an international conflict between the West and Russia over Ukraine . The violence also escalated the international conflict over Ukraine.
 Examinations of Russian Terrorist Attacks at the Onset of Vladimir Putin's Rule . Examination of Russian terror attacks at the onset of Putin's rule .
 Internal Troops officer was captured without any weapons and escorted along with other captured policemen by Maidan activists . Some members of the parliament from the Fatherland party were also captured .
 A student from Poland informed me about this content of the video . I am grateful for a student from Polish student for informing me about the video. I am also grateful for the student's information .