 Ukraine's Referendums Broke The Rules May 12.
 Separatists in the eastern Ukrainian regions of Luhansk and Donetsk are claiming success following dual referendums on self-rule held May 11 .
 Donetsk and Luhansk constitute 15 percent of Ukraine's population, or approximately 6. million people . The two cities are located in the Donetsk region of Ukraine .
 No precise voter figures have been offered, nor has there been any explanation for how the polling stations' understaffed election commissions were able to tabulate hundreds of thousands of paper ballots so quickly .
 Ukraine's acting president, Oleksandr Turchynov, says turnout was 24 percent in Luhansk, 32 in Donetsk .
Journalists in Luhansk and Donetsk documented evidence of low turnout . Some polling stations remained almost completely empty throughout the day .
 Nearly all major polling stations were guarded by men wearing black balaclavas and carrying automatic weapons . Nearly all polling stations in the U.S. were also guarded.
 polling stations failed to provide individual booths, forcing voters to mark their ballots in plain view of bystanders . Some polling stations did not provide individual booth booths .
 In at least one instance, a man voted "no" but told a reporter he voted "yes" The man was apparently concerned for his personal safety .
 By Ukrainian law, election commissions in individual polling stations must be staffed by at least nine people . Ukrainian law: Election commissions in each polling station must be manned by nine people.
 Three staffers openly acknowledged they had no previous experience on election committee work . Numerous voter points had as few as three staffers, who openly acknowledged their previous experience .
 Some electoral districts had no voting lists, creating the potential for multiple votes and other forms of fraud . Some areas had no voter lists .
Ukrainian forces seize vehicle outside city of Donetsk carrying armed men transporting weapons . An estimated 100,000 preemptively marked ""yes"" ballots .
 Some journalists reported seeing separatists destroying ballots marked with "no" votes . Some journalists said they saw separatists destroying ballot marks .
 70 percent of eastern Ukrainians want the country to remain united . Just 18 support the idea of secession, according to the Pew Research Center .
 Ukraine's SBU security service last week released an audio recording of what it said was a phone conversation between a Russian ultranationalist, Aleksandr Barkashov, and a separatist group .
 Boitsov purportedly expressed concern that the regions couldn't pull off a successful referendum without military backup . Barkashov responded by saying, "Just write whatever you want"
 No international observers, not even Russian ones, were present during the referendums . No international election observers were present .
 A number of journalists reported being harassed and even beaten outside polling stations . Some photographers were forbidden to enter voter stations .
 Voters interviewed by RFE/RL appeared to have different interpretations of what that entailed . However, voters interviewed by the agency appeared to be different .
 Others say it meant remaining part of Ukraine, but with greater autonomy, a la Crimea, pre-annexation . Others said it meant staying part of the Ukraine but with more autonomy, annexation.
 Some believed they were voting for independence from both Ukraine and Russia . Others believed they had voted for independence .
 Possible long-term scenarios include the regions becoming frozen conflict regions with parallel Ukrainian and separatist structures . Moscow stirring violence as a pretext to finally cross the border with peacekeeping troops .