 Since the beginning of the Ukraine conflict in 2014, an estimated 13,000 people have been killed, and millions more have been displaced . Since the start of the 2014 conflict in Ukraine, more than 12,000 have died .
 Five years ago, the Ukrainian government decided not to sign an association agreement with the EU in favor of closer economic ties with Russia .
 Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych was ousted in 2004 . The 2004 constitution was restored, and the Russian annexation of Crimea soon followed .
 The war in Donbass between Pro-Russian forces and the Ukrainian nationalist opposition has continued . Thousands of casualties have been killed in the conflict .
 The weak international response has allowed the Russian President Vladimir Putin to continue his aggressive tactics against Ukraine and the war to carry on .
 This perspective leaves greater room for political interpretation and has been widely accepted by Ukrainian historians . This perspective is widely accepted.
 Both nations originated from the Kievan Rus state, centered in present-day Ukraine . The assertion of Ukrainian independence in 1991 was a great misfortune in the eyes of many Russians .
 Russia has long seen the Ukrainian national movement as a threat . Many Russians believe that Ukraine’s sovereignty should be limited .
 When the last Russian Tsar was removed in 1917 and the Bolsheviks took power, Ukrainian combatants fought back for several years in the Ukrainian War of Independence .
 The Bolsheviks were deeply stunned by this resolve to claim total independence . They noted it as a cruel lesson to be learned from the Soviet Union .
 The Ukrainian people resisted Russian rule once again in 1932 when Stalin decided to collectivize agriculture . In 1932, the Ukrainian people resist Russian rule again .
 Stalin responded by sending armed troops to confiscate land and livestock . When Ukrainian farmers fought back against the policy, Stalin sent armed troops.
 The Soviet government withheld the harvest from Ukrainians in 1932 . Those who attempted to steal food were executed .
 As a result, an estimated three million to eight million Ukrainians died from starvation between 1932 and 1933 in the Holodomor genocide .
 Putin's rule differs greatly from Stalin’s, but there are many notable parallels .
 Russian government today is taking action to dismantle Ukrainian national movement . Once again, the Russian government is taking actions to dismantle the Ukrainian movement .
 Putin has pursued a greater Russian “sphere of influence,’s policies of Russification, or the promotion of Russian language and culture, to increase state control .
Ukrainian President Vladimir Putin wants to legitimize Russia as a major power . Other similarities include a disdain for Ukrainian independence, enforcement of attacks against “enemies of the government’s’.
 Since 2014, war has continued on between Russian-backed separatists and Ukrainian forces, particularly in the Donbass region . The conflict has continued since 2014 .
 Many Western nations responded to Russia’s initial military intervention in Ukraine in 2014 with economic sanctions . There has been little international response to recent aggression in the Black and Azov Seas .
 The currently imposed economic sanctions have fallen short of changing Russia’s behavior, and greater intervention is needed . The current sanctions have not changed Russia's behavior, according to the Russian government .
 UN deployed peacekeeping mission in the Donbass region could provide a favorable situation for both parties . The mission could provide both parties with a good situation .
 If peacekeeping forces maintained a ceasefire, this would save thousands of Ukrainian lives at stake . This would put to rest fears of further Russian aggression, which would be favorable to the international community .
 A peacekeeping operation would also create the foundation for the beginning of positive political and economic reform in Ukraine . A peacekeepers operation would create the start of a positive political, economic reform.
 The agreement would also help Russia save face domestically as the economic sanctions that have created financial struggles for many Russians would be lifted . Russia's international reputation would be improved, according to the agreement .
 Ukraine and Russia have expressed interest in a peacekeeping mission in Eastern Ukraine . Both have different visions for what such a mission should look like . Russia prefers a smaller scale operation, with Russia preferring a smaller operation .
 Russia has veto power in the UN Security Council . Some concessions to Russia may need to occur in order for any form of peacekeeping mission to be implemented .
 Ukraine and the West should stay open to discussing the positive aspects of Russia’s proposals as the alternative is the continuation of a devastating war . However, Ukraine and West should remain open to discuss the positive aspect of Russia's proposals .
 The priority for both nations should be negotiating an agreement in regards to the deployment of peacekeeping forces . A neutral third party helping to facilitate negotiations could bring the deadlock to an end .
 elections will take place at the end of this month and the pace of domestic reform has slowed greatly in anticipation . No candidate holds an overwhelming advantage .
 It is unclear who will next assume office and what approach they will take to address the current climate in Donbass . It is evident that de-escalation in the conflict with Russia needs to be prioritized above all else .