Russian troop involvement and sovereign defection. Civil war that of external sponsorship to non-state actors. It does so by assessing the extent of Russian troop involvement .
 A theoretical framework that allows distinguishing between the different outcomes the two patterns of intervention generate. Second, it puts forward a tentative theoretical framework for the future .
 The focus is on the role of non-state actors in the two interventionist scenarios . The focus of the two scenarios is on non- state actors .
 The core argument is that the use of nonstate actors is aimed at sovereign defection . The use ofNonstate actors has been a key issue in recent years .
 The article introduces the concept of sovereign defection and defines it as a break-away from an existing state .
Outward sovereign defection is equated to the territorial seizure of the Crimean Peninsula by Russian Special Forces . The Crimean Peninsula is the territory of the Crimea .
 Inward sovereign defection refers to the external sponsorship of the secessionist rebels in South-East Ukraine . Their use as proxy forces with the purpose of creating a political buffer-zone in a frozen conflict .
 The article analyses the configuration of the dynamics of violence in both regions . To demonstrate these claims, the article suggests that violence is a key factor in the violence .
 It argues that in pursuing sovereign defection, the auxiliary and proxy forces operate under two competing dynamics of violence, delegative and non-delegative, with distinct implications to the course and future of the conflict .
 The Crimean union of Afghan war veterans decided to stand as a shield between Russian and Ukrainian troops . Half an hour later the building was blocked and Aksyonov’s1 bands led by the ‘green men’ began to storm it .
 What started as protests in late November 2013, and escalated into violent demonstrations over the course of the following months . The annexation of Crimea and the eruption of armed hostilities in the South-Eastern regions of Donetsk and Lugansk .
 The national and international media paid great attention to the issue . The issue was the subject of a series of stories on CNN iReport .
 The main interest was in the so-called ‘little green men’ and less in the self-defence forces accompanying them, or on armed volunteers .
In their investigative pursuits, accounts of the developments collapsed under the same label different types of armed groups, or employed labels in an interchangeable fashion .
 President Vladimir Putin admitted the ‘little green men’ in Crimea were Russian Special Forces . Academic research swiftly moved to correct the existing incongruities surrounding the military operations in Crimea .
Key questions on the origins and role of the local self-defence forces remain unanswered . The state-sponsored insurgents in the South-East remain unanswered.
 The puzzle concerning this article links these entities to their function in the armed conflict and to the external support they receive . The puzzle about this article relates to the fact that these entities are involved in the conflict .
 The ‘little green men’ also became involved in the armed hostilities in Donetsk and Lugansk . As groups of armed volunteers, such as the ‘men in black’ or Semen Semenchenko’s Donbas battalion, reinforced the response of the Ukrainian army
 The article develops a tentative theoretical framework that might help with ordering the variation in empirical observations on the violence in Crimea versus that in South-East Ukraine .
 At the centre of the article is the claim that the use of non-state armed actors for the projection of political violence is aimed at sovereign defection .
 The article introduces the concept of sovereign defection as a novel analytical tool for assessing the outcomes of using non-state armed actors in both interventionist scenarios .
 The latter refers to a physical, territorial breakaway, the former to a political, ideological one . The former refers to an ideological, physical breakaway .
 Outward sovereign defection equates to the territorial seizure and annexation of the Crimean Peninsula by Russian Special Forces, aided by existing criminal gangs .
 Inward sovereign defection refers to the external sponsorship of the secessionist rebels in South-East Ukraine . The purpose is to create a political buffer-zone in the shape of a frozen conflict .
 The article analyses the dynamics of violence in both regions . To demonstrate these claims, the article suggests that violence can be seen in both areas .
 The article labels delegative and non-delegative. It argues that in pursuing sovereign defection, the use of non-state armed actors frames two competing dynamics of violence .
 At the core of these concepts is the idea of delegation of the practice of violence to third parties . The concept is a way of delegating violence to the third parties.
 It originates in the Principal-Agent theory which has approached delegation as a transactional enterprise focused on maximizing utility and shifting responsibility on the basis of a contractual agreement .
 The article explains the variation in the outcomes of the situations in Crimea and the South-East by differentiating between delegative and non-delegative dynamics of violence .
 It argues that delegating violence to non-state 94 V Rauta actors is observed in the South-East . It says it is linked to promoting inward sovereign defection and operating covertly with Special Forces .
 It compares the types of intervention patterns in Crimea and South-East Ukraine . Second, it compares the type of intervention pattern in Ukraine .
 The article introduces the notion of sovereign defection as a more powerful tool to capture the differences between the intervention strategies . The article is based on the idea of sovereigndefection .
 It interrogates the validity of the concepts of outward and inward sovereign defection by analysing the chosen dynamics of violence, delegative and non-delegative . Then, it interrogates the concept of outward and inward sovereign defection .
 The Russian Federation shifted from opting for a non-delegative dynamic of violence in Crimea to a delegative one in the South-East .
 Every stone, every square meter of this land, is soaked with Russian blood . The land is covered in Russian blood.
 Former President of Ukraine, Oleksandr Turchinov spoke of the events as a clear ‘political aggression’ and international leaders followed suit .
Strong rhetoric accompanied a striking course of events that unfolded against a more complex background . The strong rhetoric accompanied the strong rhetoric of events in the past .
 Ukrainian President Victor Yanukovich's decision to abandon closer economic ties with the European Union in November 2013 . The decision was made in favour of those with Russia .
 The annexation of Crimea to the Russian Federation saw as a first step to the annexation . The transition from soft, non-military influence saw as the first step the annexation.
 In the spring of 2014, ‘little green men’ – which Putin would later admit to be Russian soldiers – entered and took hold of the peninsula with the help of local militias .
Russian Parliament approves Putin's request to use force as to protect Russian interests . Crimea officially becomes part of Russia .
 The events were quickly followed by unrest breaking out in Eastern and Southern Ukraine . The events occurred in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 As Crimea was being institutionalized into the Russian Federation, rebel separatists occupied administrative buildings, airports and radio stations in cities such as Donetsk and Luhansk .
Rebel groups initially voiced claims for varying degrees of autonomy and independence . The rebel groups initially said they wanted independence .
 The rebels' militias fused under the new United Armed Forces of Novorossiya . To further emphasize the rebels’ determination, their militias fused.
 Over the course of 2014, and into the first months of 2015, the fighting intensified with significant battle and non-battle-related casualties .
 Several European attempts to regulate violence have been successful . Currently, attempts at regulating violence have seen several European brokered truces and cease-fire agreements .
 In December 2015, the clashes continued despite the Minsk Agreement having been in place since February . It shows an overall predisposition for coercive measures at the expense of diplomatic efforts .
 There are significant differences in the type of military operations carried out in Crimea and in the South-East . The purpose of this section is to comparatively qualify the patters of intervention in both regions .
 The following paragraphs will discuss if Crimea is a clear case of covert direct military intervention . As the following paragraph will discuss, if Crimea was a clear cases of covert military intervention.
Karagiannis makes the case for understanding Crimea's annexation as a result of ‘a covert operation with Special Forces and a local Pro-Russian militia in Crimea’ and Cimbala and Galeotti .
First, classifying the situation in the South-East as a direct Russian military intervention requires caution and increased specificity of arguments . First, classifies the situation as adirect Russian military action requires caution .
 Journalistic accounts, academic research and official statements have repeatedly claimed that Russian citizens are involved in the fighting .
 This, however, erroneously adds to the argument and complicates matters significantly . This, though, complicates the argument .
Accusations of direct military intervention fail to build a strong case because this is a question of presence of foreign fighters in conflicts .
Foreign fighters should be defined as ‘noncitizens of conflict states who join insurgencies during civil conflict’ David Malet argued that they are part of the wider issues of rebel groups recruitment and organization strategies .
 Russian troops and Special Forces as servicemen on active duty, as opposed to just Russian citizens . What does build a convincing argument is the documented evidence of the presence of Russian troops.
 The Kremlin has dismissed claims of military intervention on the basis of the voluntary character of the fighting implied by the concept of ‘citizen’4.4. This underlines the fundamental citizen–soldier distinction that has allowed the Kremlin to dismiss claims ofmilitary intervention .
 Significant evidence has substantiated claims of direct covert intervention, similar to the military operations in Crimea . Significant evidence, however, has not been substantiated .
 As Ukraine's Foreign Ministry began tweeting the hashtags #UkraineUnderAttack and #RussiaInvadedUkraine, proof of troop involvement amounted considerably .
 Satellite imagery and digital detective work accompanied academic research in building a case for understanding the reality of the battlefields as a Russian military intervention .
 The core of the argument was the rising numbers of fatalities on the rebel side . Many of whom proved to be Russian soldiers .
 As evidence amounted, battle-related casualties accompanied personal testimonies . The capture of Russian soldiers as war prisoners and official statements documenting the situation .
 Independent journalism seconded the claims across all types of evidence, and the diverse nature of the reporting was proportional to the striking character of the facts .
Southeast European and Black Sea Studies 97 account produced a geographic mapping of the place of origins of the soldiers .
 The findings may be fraught with bias in the light of the controversial relationship between Khodorkovsky and the Russian administration . Other reports soon surfaced .
 It emphasized the multifaceted involvement, ranging from provision of troops, training, cross-border sanctuary, and arms and munitions . It emphasized that it was also involved in providing troops and training .
 This strengthens the relevance of previous investigations such as the one by the Open Russia organization or that issued by independent think tank, Bellingcat . This is the latest in a series of investigations by Open Russia .
 The independent think-tank analysed the origins of artillery attacks on Ukrainian military positions .
 The analysis used Google Earth satellite images, as well as videos from social media and local media .
Experts cautioned on the accuracy of such reports on grounds of replication issues and methodological validity . Such evidence is significant because, firstly, it responds to emerging trends in research in favour of using social media data .
 RUSI study documented the presence of Russian troops as well as reconnaissance and special operations units .
 The discussion on troop involvement reviewed the direct component of the interventionist strategy . But it left unanswered the question of the indirect intervention .
 Russia has provided external support to pro-Russian rebels by Russia and its impact to the projection of rebel violence. More specifically, what needs to be determined is the provision of external support for the rebels .
 If the core concept for determining Russian direct military intervention was the soldier, the role is taken by external sponsorship in the form of arms transfers, hosting and military training .
 This is of significant importance as determining the extent of support to the separatist rebel organization . This allows acknowledging the operations in the South-East as being a proxy war .
 It should be noted that it sits alongside other methods such as theft, smuggling, weapons capturing or development of war economies .
 Bourne proposes a classification of these arming patterns into ‘bottom-up’ and ‘top-down’ categories .
 The overall preponderance of domestic weapons in Ukraine is explained, in fact, as an endogenous process to the conflict . In fact, domestic weapons are used as a result of the conflict.
 The Ukrainian Army ‘has been increasingly left by the state to reform itself and to survive on its own’ The lack of control challenged its ability to defend stockpiles .
 stockpile leakages are linked to successive army defections that saw armed personnel switch loyalties . Second, stockpile leakage is linked to previous Army defections . Third, stockpile leaks linked to subsequent army defection.
 The role of transfers should not, however, be misrepresented in comparison to in-country procurement methods, for its implications are politically and militarily significant . In-Country procurement methods should not be compared with in- country procurement methods .
 arms transfers can enhance the tactical performance of the armed groups because of the potentially high quality of provided arms . In the case of the latter, arms transfers may enhance the performance of armed groups .
 External sponsorship is understood as strategically relevant because it adds the indirect component to the characterization of the intervention in South-East Ukraine .
 The supporting-state opens the front lines of a proxy war that complements the traditional, covert, covert mode of direct intervention .
 A chosen proxy becomes a ‘conduit for weapons, training and funding’ from a benefactor wishing to influence the strategic outcome of the conflict .
 In the Ukrainian scenario, the benefactor is Russia and its use of the rebels as proxies targets the Government in Kiev .
 The issue remains contentious in the light of Russian denials, but support in the form of arms transfers has been extensively documented .
First, specialist studies concluded that the rebels are in possession of arms previously known to have been exclusively in the use of the Russian army .
Second, NATO released satellite imagery reinforced claims of arms transfers . Second, NATO releases satellite imagery reinforcing claims of weapons transfers .
 Ukrainian Southeast European and Black Sea Studies has 99 official discourse statements on the conflict . Such statements have been a source of confirmation of Russian involvement. Such statements became an integrative part of Ukrainian Southeast Europe and Black sea Studies .
Draws a demarcation line between the patterns of intervention in Ukraine and the South-East . It solves only part of the puzzle .
 The second half of the article argues that the variance in patterns of performance can be assessed by integrating the role and use of non-state armed groups into the Russian Federation’s pursued outcomes .
 The Russian aim is to externally promote sovereign defection in Ukraine . This section puts forward a tentative theoretical framework that locates the situation in Ukraine within the Russian aim .
 This is defined as the deliberate pursuit of a break-away from an existing state . In this case, the state of Ukraine is trying to break away from a state .
 The latter refers to a physical, territorial breakaway, while the former to a political, ideological one . The former refers to an ideological breakaway. The latter is a physical breakaway .
 Inward sovereign defection, on the other hand, refers to the external sponsorship of the secessionist rebels in South-East Ukraine with the purpose of creating a political buffer-zone in the shape of a frozen conflict .
 Thinking theory thoroughly requires developing and applying a cumulative approach to the enterprise of inquiry .
 Cumulation refers to the growth of knowledge in a certain research area . Cumulation is a term for the development of knowledge.
 The aim of the concept of sovereign defection is to rebalance the existing discussion towards a more integrative answer . The aim is toRebalance.
 Currently, the debate on the rationale behind the Russian interventions has been generated by generic ‘identity-interest-ideology’ explanations .
 Occasionally, these have distilled into considerations of nationalism, historical irredentism or geo-strategy . Sometimes these have been distilled into consideration of nationalism and historical ir rediscovery .
 This recently emerging commentary has run the error of treating Russian interference and involvement as mono-causal, says Peter Bergen .
 It has sought to harness the individual ability of a proposed explanation to frame the event . It has tried to harness that ability of the individual to frame it .
 In doing so, it portrayed explanations as mutually exclusive and as running in opposite causal directions . In this case, the explanation was not mutually exclusive .
 Barbashin and Thoburn championed the nationalist dogma as a cause . For example, the pair championed the nationalists .
 Shlapentokh called for a closer inspection of geopolitical Duginism . The anti-Western philosopher also called for closer inspection.
 The ‘intensity’ of a factor did not outweigh another. Very few analyses, thus, proceeded with a correlative mind-frame .
 Karagiannis observed that ‘geopolitics alone cannot explain the new Russian foreign policy in region’ He proposed linking it to Russia’s ‘humiliation ’ in the aftermath of the Cold War .
 Allison framed explanations in a three layer model including geopolitical competition and structural power, identity and ideational factors, as well as the search for domestic political consolidation.
 Sovereign defection breaks away from the general tendency of providing only a fractured analysis that performs suboptimally in the face of causal heterogeneity .
 It does so because of its ability to be a predicator of the logic behind the events from the stage of input to that of output, while keeping separate the category of desired outcome .
 Ariadne’s thread walks the narratives of intervention from beginning to end through the causal maze .
 First, sovereign defection allows framing both interventions as processes aimed at a ‘lock-in’ of preferred outcomes . Second, sovereigndefection allows both interventions to be seen as ‘locked-in of preferred outcome’
Adopting the general concept of preferred outcomes moves the discussion beyond the previously mentioned generic answers as what is channelled is the flexibility of the response and not a specific category of responses . Adopting a general idea of preferred outcome moves the conversation beyond the previous mentioned generic questions .
 The situation is no longer viewed just as a function of interests defined per power, but rather the result of weighing the salience of each interest in relation to context-dependent and context-developing aims .
 A focus on outcomes within the sovereign defection framework addresses inconsistencies in the debate . Second, a focus on the outcomes of the sovereigndefection framework .
 It locates macro and micro problems of current explanations. Specifically, it locates Macro and micro issues .
 Macro failings are essentially issues of contextualizing the interventions. Macro failings have not been as well as contextualized .
 This refers to a pronounced Cold War mentality in which power and interest remind of the decades of long superpower competition . The tendency to approach the topic with a pronouncedCold War mentality is a sign of the Cold War era .
What is observed is not a preoccupation with the west, but rather a prioritizing of the east . Thus, what is observed was not a Preoccupation of the west .
 The article refers to the error of falling into the legitimation-goal trap, namely confusing narratives of legitimation with causal motivations .
 Russian foreign policy remained essentially undefined and lacking clear direction for years . This happened against a background in which Russian foreign policies remained undefined and lacked clear direction .
 Causal explanations, thus, morphed from carefully crafted legitimation narratives that referenced identity, history and nationalism . Causal Explanations, though, morphed into carefully crafted narratives .
 Crimea's symbolic significance was fundamental and its relevance was built through both positive and negative reinforcement . Crimea’s symbolic significance is built through positive andnegative reinforcement .
 Ukrainian-ism is a search of discrediting other-ness and promoting Russian values and traditions . On the other, deliberate attempts were made to vilify Ukraine-ism .
 The strings were aimed at accommodating Russian behaviour into the international legal order . However, these symbolic strings should not be automatically derived into causal determinism .
Third, and most importantly, sovereign defection provides an overall more refined analysis . Third, and more importantly, Sovereign Defection provides a more detailed analysis .
 The discussion departs from the meta-theoretical considerations of cumulation and macro-micro problems, and enters into a discussion on sovereign defection’s substantive advantages .
 In practice, this ability has been coined under the concept of sovereignty . It has been used in practice in the past.
For the purposes of this analysis, the focus is on the latter acceptations . For the purposes, this analysis is focused on the second acceptations.
Sovereign defection becomes a tool for understanding the pursued outcomes of the Russian Federation in Ukraine .
 Clem addressed the question of Ukraine's ability to legitimize its sovereignty in the present geopolitical circumstances of the Crimean annexation and of the East being engulfed by a separatist civil war .
 The Ukrainian claims for sovereign legitimacy are based on the historical association of territory with an ethno-linguistic cultural group . At the centre was the relationship between territory and nationality, and Clem concluded .
 Sovereign defection explains the Russian interventions by conceptualizing them into an attack on the territorial integrity and a challenge to national unity . Sovereign defections explain the Russian intervention by conceptualized them into a attack on territorial integrity .
 Crimea sees a total replacement of Ukrainian authority by integration within Russian authority . SouthEast observes emergence of a competing authority infrastructure through the backing of separatist claims .
 Crimea annexation removes Ukraine’s ability to exert exclusive representation over the region as a political entity of the international system . Second, the international legal sovereignty is eroded as the annexation of Crimea is eroded .
 In this way, sovereign defection formalizes official statements accusing Russia of sovereign interference . In this case, the statement accuses Russia of interference .
 sovereign defection pushes for further specificity in understanding the issue . But, sovereign defector pushes for more specificity in Understanding the issue.
 Crimea and the former to a political breakaway of the South-East into an autonomous region acting as political buffer-zone . As mentioned, the latter refers to the territorial breakaway.
 The article proposes an assessment of the role of the non-state armed groups in both Crimea and the South East . To interrogate the validity of the outward and inward types in the sovereign defection framework, the article proposes .
 The last section of the article assesses the performance of the local self-defence forces in Crimea and that of the pro-Russian rebels in the SouthEast .
 The purpose of this section is to observe the construction of inward and outward sovereign defection as strategic outputs, or goals of the Russian interventions .
 Acknowledging the differences in types of military interventions – covert, direct in Crimea, and covert, joint in the South-East – the premise of the argument is the development of two competing dynamics of violence .
 The dynamics are defined as delegative and non-delegative and the difference rests in the use of non-state armed groups . The dynamics of the non- state armed groups are defined by the definition of the dynamics .
 delegative implies transferring authority over violence to a non-state actor . Non-delegative implies a concentration of the authority and an aversion towards authority transfers .
 The South-East makes a case for a delegative dynamic of violence where the Russian-backed separatists take charge of the violence in a proxy capacity . The South East makes a point for a delegation of violence in the South- East .
 The essence of the argument is in the distinction between auxiliary and proxy forces and how they are used in the process of pursuing specific outcomes .
 The literature moved toward drawing a clear demarcation between acting on behalf and acting in conjunction . The literature moves toward drawing an apparent distinction between acting and acting .
 In a proxy relationship the proxy agent wages war against a target in the name of the benefactor . The proxy agent wage war against the target of the target .
 This effectively renders the proxy agent a third party in a conflict between the benefactor and the target where they intervene indirectly . This effectively rendering the proxy agents a third parties in a battle between the Benefactor and a target . The proxy agent is a third-party in the conflict.
 A proxy agent can carry out violence through delegation from the benefactor . The distinctiveness of the proxy agent rests on its ability to carry out Violence through delegation .
 This is in stark contradiction with the type of relationship implied by acting in conjunction, in which proxy forces are replaced with auxiliary ones . This is a stark contradiction of the kind of relationship that is implied in conjunction .
 In underlining their differences to proxy agents it should be noted that while functionally similar, auxiliaries are relationally different, their contribution is collaborative in nature .
 auxiliaries have followed a path of working ‘under and with’ the military . Their contribution to fighting should be seen as complementary and as a direct part of the military effort .
 Collaboration with auxiliaries is underpinned by outward sovereign defection. Collaboration is underpined by outward Sovereign defection .
 As an outcome, it refers to the territorial breakaway of a region and its annexation to the territory of another state . It refers to a region's annexation to a state and the annexation of another .
 Secession and annexation were pursued by applying a non-delegative dynamic of violence . Secession was pursued by application of non- delegativeynamic of violence.
 In this case, the action was carried out by Russian Special Forces in a covert military intervention . The action was conducted in a secret operation .
 The exact steps of the process were already discussed at length when comparing between types of interventions . It is not the first time the exact steps have been discussed .
 The focus here is on the local self-defence forces and their role . The focus is on their role in defending themselves and their roles .
 Auxiliaries in Crimea played the political role of justifying and legitimizing the intervention . Their actions were portrayed as supportive to the covert military intervention .
In support of this claim, first, the nature of the auxiliary forces and, more precisely, their loose organizational structure. In support of the claim is first, first. The auxiliary forces, more than their loose structure, is the reason for this .
 As documented, the self-defence forces were a patchwork of organized gangs descending from Crimea’s embroiled network of criminality . Despite having a long-standing collaboration with Russia, they lacked the stability to efficiently make use of violence in a political dimension and not just criminal .
 Inward defection is qualitatively different from outward sovereign defection because it promotes only a political breakaway . Inward sovereign defections are qualitativelydifferent from outward Sovereign defection .
 The South-East rebels have claimed various degrees of independence from administrative autonomy to secession and annexation to Russia .
 The core of inward sovereign defection is the desire for a buffer-zone in the shape of a frozen conflict . The desire for the establishment of abuffer-zone is not the core of the defection .
 The de facto state becomes a channel for blocking the activity of the ‘host’ state and thus, limiting its domestic and international manoeuvre space . More importantly, the de facto states become a channel. More importantly.
 The development of such a buffer-zone and establishment of frozen conflicts requires empowerment of local rebel forces which, in receiving support, become proxy forces . The development is the result of the creation of a buffer zone .
 Russian foreign policy to bolster frozen conflicts is a long-standing practice in Russia . The strength of inward sovereign defection to capture the attempts at fostering a zone of frozen instability is reinforced .
Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia, Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan and Transnistria in Moldova . Abkhazian and North Ossetian in Georgia and Georgia in Georgia .
 The article argued that understanding the situation in Ukraine should take into consideration the generally complex causal setting leading to the events . The article argues that understanding of the situation should be considered .
 It contended that causality should not strive for complete specification of singular explanations . Such treatment in isolation produces an artificial answer to the key questions surrounding the ongoing armed conflict .
 To counterbalance the logical fallacies of the current research enterprise, the article advanced the idea of ‘sovereign defection’ as an alternative explanation .
Sovereign defection re-framed the issue of causality of the events by using the concept of outcome as an analytical tool .
 Russia pushed for the creation of a de factor state, a significant control mechanism already in practice in regions such as Transnitria or South Ossetia .
 The article's pursuits are only tentative and, the ongoing character of the conflict diminishes any predictive attempts . The article’s pursuits are just tentative and the ongoingcharacter of the battle diminishes.
 The article has pushed the debate towards new questions about non-state actors .
 The most important question the article addressed was that on the sought outcomes of the Russian incursions into Ukrainian territory .
 This was a twofold discussion about the construction and directionality of military intervention as a foreign policy tool .
 It departed from mainstream conceptualizations of cause and refined the debate by shifting focus on purpose . It retains the obvious Clausewitzian undertone linking war to politics .
 The article's attempt at grasping finer nuances of Russian foreign policy added to the dominant narrative of interest and power a sense of regional historicity . The article’s attempt to grasping finer nuance of Russian Foreign policy added.
 The argument stresses that the ongoing situation is not an internal conflict and that Ukraine is engaging Russian regular troops .
 The article admits that ‘civil war’ carries a stigma of chaos and loss of ability to effectively control . The article also admits that 'civil war' carries a stigmatism of chaos .
 The article puts forward an objective, non-biased argument, as well as for the sake of academic consistency, the concept of 'civil war' will be used .
 Ukrainian authorities, NATO and independent sources have presented conclusive evidence. Despite vehement denials on behalf of Russia, conclusive evidence has been presented by the Ukrainian authorities .
 He specializes in indirect third party military interventions, respectively, proxy wars and proxy warfare . He specializes on indirect third parties military interventions .
 Ukraine’s arsenal matches up against the Russian-backed separatists .
 Origin of artillery attacks on Ukrainian military positions in Eastern Ukraine between 14 July 2014 and 8 August 2014 – Bellingcat investigation .
 Byman, Daniel, Peter Chalk, Bruce Hoffman, William Rosenau, and David Brannan. Byman.05.
 Vladimir Putin and military persuasion in Ukraine, 21 February–18 March 2014 . Putin and his military persuasion.
 Non-state armed actors, new imagined communities, and shifting patterns of sovereignty and insecurity in the modern world . The U.S. military says it has been involved in a number of incidents in recent years .
 Putin denies Russian troops are in Ukraine, decrees certain deaths secret . Putin says Russian troops in Ukraine are not in Ukraine .
 Putin admits invading Ukrainian Crimea, denies similar invasion of Southeast Ukraine . Putin admits invasion of Ukraine, but denies invasion of Crimea .
15.15. Embassy of Ukraine to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . The embassy is in Ukraine.
 Statement by EU high representative Catherine Ashton on developments in Ukraine's Crimea . Ashton on the developments in Crimea .
 Ukrainians call for Yanukovych to resign in protests sparked by EU u-turn . Ukraine's prime minister has been accused of failing to protect his country's stability .
 Explaining variation in Western Jihadists’ choice between domestic and foreign fighting . Explains variation in West's choice between foreign and domestic fighting .
Rebel groups’ arms acquisition and the importance of leakages from state stockpiles .
 Russia's approach to conflict – Implications for NATO's deterrence and defence . Russia’s approach to war is considered a key part of NATO's strategy .
 Russia denies that its soldiers are in Ukraine, but we tracked one using his selfies . Russia denies it is in Ukraine .
 The European Union, Russia, and the future of the transnistrian frozen conflict are key to the future .
 West faces biggest confrontation with Russia since Cold War . Urgent calls for calm as West faces largest confrontation with Russian since Cold war .