 From 2006 to 2007 he was the prime minister of Ukraine . He also served in this post from November 2002 to January 2005, with a short interruption.
 Yanukovych was ousted from office in the Revolution of Dignity in Ukraine . He rejected the Ukrainian-European Association Agreement .
 Yanukovych served as the governor of Donetsk Oblast, a province in eastern Ukraine, from 1997 to 2002 . He was elected to the post in 2002 .
 He was Prime Minister of Ukraine from 21 November 2002 to 7 December 2004 . He was PM from 28 December 2004 to 5 January 2005 under President Leonid Kuchma .
 The election was fraught with allegations of electoral fraud and voter intimidation . However, the election was rife with allegations.
Kyiv's Independence Square was occupied in what became known as the Orange Revolution . This caused widespread citizen protests and Kyiv's independence square was occupied by protesters .
 The Ukrainian Supreme Court nullified the runoff election and ordered a second runoff . The Supreme Court also nullified a runoff election .
 He served as Prime Minister for a second time from 4 August 2006 to 18 December 2007, under President Yushchenko . He was also Prime Minister of the Ukraine from 2006 to 2007 .
 Yanukovych was elected president in 2010, defeating Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko . He was elected in 2010 .
 November 2013 saw the beginning of a series of events that led to his ousting as president . The president's ousting was the first time he had been in office since November 2013 .
 Yanukovych rejected a pending EU association agreement, choosing instead to pursue a Russian loan bailout and closer ties with Russia .
 "Euromaidan" led to protests and occupation of Kyiv's Independence Square . This led to a series of events dubbed the ""EurOMaidan"" by proponents of aligning Ukraine toward the European Union .
 In January 2014, this developed into deadly clashes in Independence Square and in other areas across Ukraine . Ukrainian citizens confronted the Berkut and other special police units .
 In February 2014, Ukraine appeared to be on the brink of civil war, as violent clashes between protesters and special police forces led to many deaths and injuries .
 Yanukovych claimed in February 2014 that he had reached an agreement with the opposition . On 21 February 2014, Yanukovych claimed that, after lengthy discussions, he had agreed to a deal .
 Yanukovych was officially deprived of the title of president by the parliament . On 18 June 2015, Yanukovych was formally deprived.
Ukrainian court sentenced him in absentia to 13 years' imprisonment for high treason . He was sentenced by a Ukrainian court in January 2019 .
 After the Orange Revolution 2. 2006–2007 elections and second premiership 3 Presidential campaign and election 4 Presidency 4. 2006-2007 elections were the first two presidential campaigns .
 Crimean naval base 4. 2012 parliamentary elections 5 Background to removal 5. 2013 parliamentary elections 4. 2014 parliamentary elections 3. 2014 elections 2 . 2014 elections 1 . 2014 parliamentary election 1 .
 Accusations of police abuse and vote rigging. 6 removal from presidency . 6 Removal from presidency. 6 Removal of presidency .
 Treason trial 9 Academic degrees 10 Awards and honors 11 Personal life 12 Cultural and political image 12 . Treason Trial 9 Academic degree 10 Awards .
 Viktor Yanukovych was born in the village of Zhukovka near Yenakiieve in Donetsk Oblast, Ukrainian SSR, Soviet Union . He was also born in a village in the Ukrainian town of Yenakiieve .
 He endured a very hard childhood about which he has stated, "My childhood was difficult and hungry," he said .
 Yanukovych was born in Dokshytsy Raion in present-day Belarus . His mother was a Russian nurse and his father was a Polish-Belarusian locomotive-driver . He was brought up by his Polish paternal grandmother, originally from Warsaw .
 Yanukovych has half-sisters from his father's remarriage, but has no contact with them . Yanukovych was sentenced to three years imprisonment for participating in a robbery and assault in 1967 .
 On 8 June 1970 he was convicted for a second time on charges of assault . He was convicted in 1970 for the second time for the same charge .
 He was sentenced to two years of imprisonment and did not appeal the verdict . He was given a two-year sentence for two years in prison .
 In 1971, Yanukovych married Lyudmyla Nastenko, a niece of Yenakiyeve city judge Oleksandr Sazhyn . In 1974, Yanukovych enrolled at the Donetsk Polytechnic Institute .
 In 1976, as a second-year student, he was promoted to director of a small trucking division within the Ordzhonikidzeugol coal-mining company . He was promoted in 1976 as a student .
 His appointment as chief manager marked the start of his managerial career as a regional transport executive . He was appointed as the chief manager of the regional transport agency .
 He held various positions in transport companies in Yenakiieve and Donetsk until 1996 . He also held positions in transportation companies in Ukraine and Donetsk .
 President Leonid Kuchma appointed Yanukovych to the post of Prime Minister . Anatoliy Kinakh resigned as Prime Minister following his resignation from the post .
 Yanukovych's main base of support emerged from the southern and eastern regions of Ukraine, which favor close ties with neighbouring Russia .
 Yanukovych took second place with 39. percent of the votes to opposition leader Viktor Yuschenko . In the first round of voting held on 31 October 2004, Yanukovych took the second place .
In the second round of the election, Yanukovych was initially declared the winner . Because no candidate passed the 50 percent threshold, a second round was scheduled .
 Many Ukrainians, international organizations, and foreign governments have questioned the legitimacy of the election . The election was held in Ukraine in October 2013 .
 The resulting widespread protests became known as the Orange Revolution . The Orange Revolution was the first wave of protests against the government .
 The second round of the election was subsequently annulled by the Supreme Court of Ukraine . In the second round, Yanukovych lost to Yushchenko with 44. percent to his 51. percent in the run-off .
 Yanukovych declared his resignation from the post of Prime Minister five days after his electoral defeat . Yanukovych was elected to the presidency in November .
 In November 2009 Yanukovych stated that he conceded defeat only to avoid violence . In November2009 Yanukovych said he conceded only to avoiding violence .
 This government was marred by growing conflict between Yushchenko and Tymoshenko . This government has been accused of corruption by theoshenko government .
 In January 2006, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine started an official investigation of the allegedly false acquittal of the criminal convictions which Yanukovych received in his youth . The investigation was launched in January 2006 .
In 2006, a criminal charge was made for the falsification of documents regarding the retraction of Yanukovych's prior conviction . In 2006, the charges were made.
 Two documents had been forged regarding Yanukovych's robbery in association with rape and assault and battery . According to Rossiyskaya Gazeta two documents were forged .
On 25 May 2007, Viktor Yanukovych was appointed chairman of the Government Chiefs Council of the Commonwealth of Independent States . The signature of the judge for these documents in Yanukovych's retraction was also forged .
 Yanukovych called for supporters to go to Maidan Nezalezhnosti, Kyiv's Independence Square, in case of election fraud . Early vote returns from the first round of the election held on 17 January showed Yanukovych in first place .
 Yanukovych won the runoff election with 48.95% of the vote compared with 45.47% for Tymoshenko . After all ballots were counted, the Ukrainian Central Election Commission declared the winner .
 Election observers from the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe said there were no indications of serious fraud . They described the vote as an ""impressive display"" of democracy .
 Tymoshenko withdrew her subsequent legal challenge of the result . Tad Devine, an associate of Rick Gates, wrote Yanukovych's victory speech .
Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko signed a decree endorsing a plan of events related to Yanukovych's inauguration on 20 February 2010 . Presidency Inauguration Ukraine's parliament had fixed 25 February 2010 for the inauguration.
 Yanukovych stated during the 2010 presidential election-campaign that the current level of Ukraine's cooperation with NATO was sufficient . He said the question of the country's accession to the alliance was not urgent .
 Yanukovich announced $2 billion worth of pension and other welfare increases on 7 March 2012 . The announcement was announced on March 7, 2012 .
 Yanukovych set up the Constitutional Assembly of Ukraine, a special auxiliary agency under the President . The President then can table bills of amendments in parliament .
 A small handful of people have been plundering the country for 20 years . The whole society, the whole state and our image in the world have been suffering .
 In late 2009, a law that raised the minimum wage and pensions was passed in the Ukrainian Parliament . The law was introduced in late 2009 .
 The International Monetary Fund suspended its 2008–2009 financial crisis emergency lending programme . As a result of this, the IMF has suspended its emergency lending programme .
 The gas agreement was signed in 2009 after the 2009 Russia-Ukraine gas dispute . He wanted to "initiate the discussion of the most urgent gas issues" after the 2010 presidential election .
This led to the April 2010 Ukrainian–Russian Naval Base for Natural Gas treaty . This led to a treaty with the Ukrainian-Russian naval base for natural gas .
 Yanukovych has pledged to help Russia build the South Stream natural gas pipeline . He also promised to create a consortium that would allow Russia to jointly operate Ukraine's gas transportation network .
Yanukovych rejected accusations that improvement of Ukrainian-Russian relations harmed relations with the EU . As of June 2010, both did not happen .
 Yanukovych announced in 2010 that Ukraine would give up its 90-kilogram stock of highly enriched uranium . Ukraine would convert its research reactors from highly enriched to low-enriched uranium .
 Yanukovych said he wanted to create a free trade zone and visa regime with the EU as soon as possible . Yanukovych wants to create free trade zones and visa regimes with EU .
 He noted the importance of finding ways of reconciliation between Ukrainians fighting on opposite sides in World War II in his speech at the ceremony to mark Victory Day 2013 .
 In this speech he also expressed confidence that Nazi and Soviet totalitarianism of the past would never return . He also said that Nazi totalitarianism would not return .
Holodomor Yanukovych and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev were killed on May 17 May 2010 near Memorial to the Holodomors in Kyiv .
 Yanukovych stated in the past that he wanted Russian to become the second state language in Ukraine . Language policy in Ukraine has said he wants Russian to be the second language in the country .
 A new law on regional languages entitles any local language spoken by at least a 10% minority to be declared official within that area . The law was effective in August 2012 .
Following the Revolution of Dignity, a bill was passed by the parliament in February 2014 . It would have abolished the law on regional languages, making Ukrainian the sole state language .
This bill was blocked by acting President Turchynov, until a replacement bill is ready . This bill was blocking the bill until the replacement bill was ready .
 The 2012 law was ruled unconstitutional and was struck down by the Constitutional Court of Ukraine in 2018, 4 years after the Euromaidan . The law was also struck down in 2018 .
 We respect the choice of our citizens and guarantee everyone's Constitutional right to freedom of religion . We respect our citizens' choice of religion and respect our choice of choice of citizens .
We will not allow the use of churches and religious organizations by some political forces for their narrow interests . We will not be allowed to use churches, religious organizations for political purposes .
 This also refers to foreign centres through which religious organizations sometimes seek to affect the internal political situation in Ukraine . This is also referred to religious groups which seek to influence the political situation .
 Social policy cuts for Chernobyl rescue workers, small business owners and veterans of the Soviet–Afghan War caused fierce protests in Kyiv in October/November 2011 by several thousand protesters .
 The U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was greeted by Yanukovych in Kyiv, Ukraine, 2 July 2010 .
 Yanukovych's first foreign visit was to Brussels to visit the President of the European Council and the EU Foreign Affairs chief, Catherine Ashton .
 He indicated that he was open to compromise with Russia on the Black Sea Fleet's future . He reiterated that Ukraine would remain a "European, non-aligned state" referring to NATO membership .
Both Russian President Dmitry Medvedev and Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin soon stated they noticed a big improvement in relations with Ukraine since Yanukovych's presidency .
 Yanukovych stated that the recognition of the independence of Abkhazia, South Ossetia and Kosovo violates international law . He said he has never recognized Abkhaziia, S. Ossetian or Kosovo's independence . A day later Yanukovych said he had never
 Yanukovych's stance towards integration with the EU led him to be "seen in Moscow as a traitor" Moscow openly supported Yanukovych in the 2004 presidential election .
 Anonymous journalists stated early May 2010 that they were voluntarily tailoring their coverage so as not to offend the Yanukovych administration and the Azarov Government .
 The Azarov Government, the Presidential Administration and Yanukovych himself denied being involved with censorship . The Azov government, the President and the President of Ukraine deny being involved.
 Yanukovych's representative in the Verkhovna Rada Yury Miroshnychenko stated that Yanukovych was against political repression for criticism of the regime .
Russian President Dmitry Medvedev signed the 2010 Ukrainian–Russian Naval Base for Natural Gas treaty . The Russian lease on naval facilities in Crimea would be extended beyond 2017 by 25 years with an additional 5-year renewal option .
 This treaty was approved by both the Russian and Ukrainian parliaments on 27 April 2010 . This treaty is the first of its kind .
 Yanukovych said he did not rule out the possibility of holding a referendum on the stationing of the Russian Black Sea Fleet in Ukraine .
 Yanukovych's main priority was to integrate Ukraine "into the European mainstream" According to Yanukovych, the main priority of his foreign policy was to improve relations with Russia . He also said to be improving relations with the Russian government .
 In 2012, Yanukovych's party of Regions won the poll with 30% against 25.5% for imprisoned Yulia Tymoshenko's Fatherland party .
 The Euromaidan protests started in November 2013 when Ukrainian citizens demanded stronger integration with the European Union . The Euromsaidan riots started in February 2014 .
 The origins of Euromaidan began as a smaller protest that had started in Independence Square in the center of Kyiv on 21 November . Yanukovych abruptly changed his mind on an Association Agreement with the European Union, instead .
 The protesters refused to leave the square until their demands were met . Yanukovych signed the Agreement on settlement of political crisis in Ukraine in February 2014 .
 Yanukovych should resign and sign the EU agreement, and change the Constitution of Ukraine, according to the EU . Yanukovych should sign EU agreement and resign, among other items .
 The protestors were attacked by police, resulting in civil unrest across Western Ukraine . The protestors had been protesting against police in Ukraine .
 Yanukovych dismissed this as the work of his political opponents . Protesters called all the more for his resignation, saying he was unresponsive .
 Yanukovych signed the Bondarenko-Oliynyk laws, also known as Anti-Protest Laws, in January 2014 . Violence escalated after 16 January 2014 when the laws were signed .
 Demonstrators occupied provincial administration buildings in at least 10 regions . Police fled through rear exits in some instances .
 Verkhovna Rada lawmakers repealed nine of the 12 restrictive laws that had been passed on 16 January by a show of hands .
 Outrage ensued at the limits the laws imposed on free speech and assembly in the country .
 President Yanukovych offered to install opposition leaders in top posts in a reshaped government . But they swiftly rebuffed the offer to the delight of thousands of protesters on the streets . Mykola Azarov, the prime minister of Ukraine, resigned on 28 January .
 He claimed the members of the security forces fulfilled their duties according to existing laws .
 46% of the budget subventions for social and economic development was allotted to the Donbas region's Donetsk Oblast and Luhansk Oblast administrations – 0.62 billion UAH versus 0.71billion UAH for the rest of the country .
Yanukovych had an estimated net worth of $12 billion . He has been accused by Ukrainian officials of misappropriating funds from Ukraine's treasury .
 Arseniy Yatsenyuk has claimed that treasury funds of up to $70 billion were transferred to foreign accounts during Yanukovych's presidency .
 Authorities in Switzerland, Austria and Liechtenstein froze the assets of Yanukovych and his son Oleksander on 28 February 2014 pending a money laundering investigation .
 Yanukovych has denied that he embezzled funds and said that his alleged foreign accounts do not exist . Yanukovych has said that he has no foreign accounts .
 This number includes both cases of the so-called Family entering the corporate rights of the firms they like by illegal methods, and "assaults"
 The Anti-Raider Union of Entrepreneurs of Ukraine is based on data from the Anti- Raider Union. This is evidenced by the data of the anti-Raiders Union.
 Yanukovych abandoned his large estate, Mezhyhirya, when he fled the capital . The former president's personal excesses left him with a large estate .
 The estate is located in a former forest preserve on the outskirts of Kyiv . The estate was built in the early 1990s .
 He had acquired the property in 2007, according to critics, through a convoluted series of companies and transactions . The property was bought in 2007 through a series of transactions .
 Mezhyhirya is estimated to have been sold for more than 75 million United States dollars .
 Protesters walked unchallenged into former president's office and residential compounds . Police and security left their posts in Kyiv after police and security leave their posts .
 Protesters had free access to government buildings, and to the presidential mansion and estate .
 The story of Viktor Yanukovych and his residence highlights a paradox, says the article author .
 The cost of monitoring the mass media was reportedly $5. million just for the month of December 2010 . The cost was reportedly around $5 million for that month .
 When the former president departed, 35 cars and seven motorbikes were left behind .
 Kyiv's District Court seized 27 vintage cars in 2016 from the fleet stationed at Mezhyhirya . Some of the cars were worth more than $US 1 million .
 Yanukovych's refusal to sign a Trade Association Agreement with Western Europe led to massive protests that culminated in the murder of 88 demonstrators between the 20 and 22 February 2014 . Accusations of police abuse and vote rigging Yanukovych.
 Yanukovych has been accused of using the Berkut to threaten, attack, and torture protesters . Amnesty International among others, accused Yanukovych of using it to threaten and attack protesters .
 Individual cases of citizens grouping together and fighting back against the Berkut in order to preserve election integrity and results .
 An agreement between president Yanukovych and the leaders of the parliamentary opposition was signed on Friday 21 February 2014 . It called for early elections and the formation of an interim unity government .
 Yanukovych fled from the capital ahead of an impeachment vote . The following day, Yanukovych fled the capital .
 The vote comes an hour after Yanukovych said in a televised address that he would not resign . The vote came an hour before Yanukovych said he wouldn't resign .
 The constitutionality of Yanukovych's removal from office has been questioned by constitutional experts . The constitutional experts have questioned the removal of Yanukovych from office .
 The vote had ten votes less than those required by the constitutional guidelines . The vote, as analyzed by Sindelar, had ten more votes than required .
 She had been imprisoned since 2011, in what many saw as political payback by Yanukovych . Many saw her imprisonment as a political pay back by the Yanukovych government .
 Her release had been an unmet condition for Ukraine's signing of a European Union trade pact . She was released after her release was unmet Condition for signing of the pact .
 Kyiv Yanukovych left Kyiv during the night of 21 February 2014 and initially moved to Kharkiv . Leaving Kyiv in February 2014.
 Yanukovych "thought this was a temporary difficulty" since he believed that the 21 February deal he had signed with opposition leaders could still provide for a graceful departure of his power later in the year .
 Yanukovych claimed he did not "flee anywhere" in his press conference in Rostov-on-Don on 28 February . He was forced to move around Ukraine amid fears for the safety of himself and family .
Only 4.9% of respondents would have liked to see Yanukovych return to the presidency, according to a poll .
 Yanukovych tried to flee via a charter flight from Donetsk, Ukraine . He was stopped by border guards .
 Putin and Yanukovitch later stated that Russian forces helped Yanukovitches to fly to Russia on 24 February 2014 . Both Putin and Yanukovych later said that Russia's forces helped him fly.
 On 26 February 2014, Russian media company RBC reported Yanukovych's presence in Moscow .
 Yanukovych arrived at the Radisson Royal Hotel, Moscow on the night of 25 February 2014 . According to RBC sources, Yanukovych arrived in Moscow.
 President of Russia in Moscow Oblast moved to the Barvikha Sanatorium . Then he moved to a health resort in the health resort of the President.
 RosBusinessConsulting also reported sightings of Viktor Pshonka in the hall of Radisson Royal Hotel . Psh onka is a former Prosecutor General of Ukraine .
 The Press Secretary of the department that manages Barvikha Sanatorium denied the report . He said he had no information of Yanukovych settled in Barvik Ha Sanatorium .
 Yanukovych bought a house in Barvikha for $52 million on 26 February 2014 . According to Russian politician Oleg Mitvol, Yanukovych bought the house for $ 52 million .
 Yanukovych asked the authorities of the Russian Federation to guarantee his personal security in the territory of Russia . The Russian Federation accepted the request that they accepted .
 He accused the opposition of violation of the 21 February agreements and asked the armed forces of Ukraine not to intervene in the crisis .
 The exact whereabouts of Yanukovych when he made this statement was unclear .
 In an April 2014 poll by Kyiv International Institute of Sociology, those polled in southern and eastern Ukraine were split on the legitimacy of the then Yatsenyuk government and parliament . A majority in all regions agreed that Yanukovych was not the legal president of the country .
 Yanukovych received a temporary asylum certificate in Russia for one year; later extended until November 2017 . On the same day, Russian presidential spokesman Dmitry Peskov said that he didn't know anything about this .
 In 2017, Russian media suggested that Yanukovych is apparently living in Bakovka near Moscow . The residence is owned by Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs .
 Yanukovych stated that all his possessions had been legally declared and accounted for . In a press conference in Rostov-on-Don on 28 February 2014, Yanukovych said he had all his belongings had been declared .
Yanukovych said that an "armed coup" had taken place in Ukraine . There had been no impeachment, resignation, or death, he said . Swiss and Austrian authorities blocked Yanukovych's and his associates' assets .
 In the press conference he stated that he was still President of Ukraine . He said that he could not find words to characterise this new authority .
 He said he was surprised by the silence of Russia's president, Vladimir Putin, on events in Ukraine .
 Russia's Permanent Representative to the United Nations, Vitaly Churkin, displayed a photocopy of a letter allegedly signed by Victor Yanukovych on 1 March 2014 . On 28 February 2014 the BBC reported him as insisting that military action was "unacceptable" and as stating that he would not
 Yanukovych called Russia's annexation of Crimea "a tragedy" In an interview with the Associated Press and Russian channel NTV of 2 April 2014 Yanukovych said he hopes it will become part of Ukraine again .
 Yanukovych says he would try to persuade Russian President Vladimir Putin to return Crimea to Ukraine . Yanukovych said he would also try to convince Putin to bring Crimea back to Ukraine.
 He squarely blamed the Yatsenyuk Government and acting Ukrainian President Oleksandr Turchynov for Ukraine's loss of Crimea . He squarely blames the Yatenyuk government and acting Ukraine President for the loss.
 Yanukovych filed lawsuits against the Ukrainian parliament at the Kyiv District Administrative Court in a bid to overturn his removal of the constitutional powers as President of Ukraine . Yanukovych filed the lawsuits in December 2021 .
Ukrayinska Pravda reported that Ukrainian intelligence sources believed that Yanukovych was currently in Minsk, Belarus . Russian forces never gained control over Kyiv since the Russian army abandoned its Kyiv offensive on 2 April 2022 .
 Yanukovych's convictions were expunged 20 years earlier . He was charged with fraud in 2005 .
 In 2006, the General Prosecutor closed the case due to lack of evidence . The General Prosecutor said there was no evidence in the case .
In 2006, a criminal charge was filed for official falsifying of documents concerning the quashing of Yanukovych's prior convictions . In 2010, the Prosecutor General of Ukraine Oleksandr Medvedko claimed that Yanukovych had been unlawfully jailed in his youth . A warrant for Yanukovych's arrest was issued
 Acting Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov declared that Yanukovych had been placed on Ukraine's most wanted list . A criminal case for the mass killings of civilians had been opened against him .
 Russian prosecutors stated that they had not received such a request from Ukraine . Russian prosecutors said they did not receive any request.
 The former president of Ukraine was put on the U.S. sanction list on 17 March 2014 . The action had been previously considered by the General Prosecutor .
Ukraine's top officials were investigated as suspected bribes . This included multiple cash payments to a number of Ukraine's top official .
Ukrtelekom case against Yanukovych for using state money to establish his own private communication company based on UkrTelekom . The General Prosecutor of Ukraine has opened a new case against him .
 Kharkiv Pact allowed the Black Sea Fleet to stay in Ukraine for an additional 25 years . The treaty was signed by Yanukovych in the summer of 2014 .
 Yanukovych is being charged with abuse of power and state treason . The new procedure on creation of criminal organization that is being investigated since the summer is also being investigated .
 Mass murder at Maidan may be confusing or unclear to readers . This section may be confused or unclear.
 Yanukovych is also charged with property theft in a conspiracy with the chairman of the Nadra Ukrainy state company . The company has been under investigation since March 2014 .
 On 16 July 2015, some Russian media reported that Interpol had suspended its Red Notice.
Interpol later confirmed that Yanukovych and Oleksandr Yanukovych were no longer subject to an Interpol red notice or diffusion . This was a temporary measure due to Yanukovych's complaints that the charges were politically motivated .
 Prosecutor General Yuriy Lutsenko questioned Yanukovych via video link in connection with the former Berkut . In November 2016, Yanukovych was questioned by video link via video links .
 The Prosecutor General submitted to court documents of the Yanukovych's case on state treason . Lutsenko told Yanukovych that he was being accused of treason .
 Denis Voronenkov was shot dead in downtown Kyiv at the end of March 2017 . He was shot in the head by a man who was shot by a police officer .
 The first preliminary session commenced in Kyiv's Obolonskyi District Court under Judge Vladyslav Devyatko . On 4 May 2017 the first Preliminary session commenced.
 Prosecutors asked the court in Kyiv to sentence the former leader to 15 years in prison . He testified via video link from Russia .
 The former leader was hospitalized in Moscow days before he was scheduled to give the final statement . The judge then adjourned the trial until 13 September .
 Yanukovych was taken to Moscow's Sklifosovsky Institute of Emergency Medicine by ambulance by ambulance on 16 November . He is in an immobilized condition .
Three judges of the Obolonskyi District Court found Yanukovych guilty of high treason and complicity in Russian military intervention in Ukraine .
 He was acquitted of the other charge relating to Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . He was also acquitted of another charge related to the country's sovereignty .
 The verdict was that Yanukovych was sentenced to 13 years of jail in absentia . The verdict is that Yanukovych had been sentenced to a 13 year jail term in absenta .
 Yanukovych received the honorary title of docent of the Faculty of Automobile Transport at the Donetsk State Academy of Administration . Oleksandr Zakharov studied international law at the Academy of Foreign Trade .
 Viktor Yanukovych Personal life Yanukovych was married to Lyudmyla Oleksandrivna Nastenko . Yanukovych's personal life was honoured with a number of awards .
 Yanukovych had two sons, Oleksandr and Viktor, and three grandsons Viktor, Olekandr and Iliya . With his wife Yanukovych, he had two children and three grandchildren .
 The younger Viktor was a member of the Parliament of Ukraine . He died by drowning at Lake Baikal in 2015 .
Ukrayinska Pravda claims that during the Yanukovych presidency, his wife Lyudmyla lived separately in Donetsk . In February 2017, Yanukovych admitted that after 45 years of marriage he had divorced Lyud myla .
 Yanukovych was seen by opponents as representing the interests of Ukrainian big business . His campaigns benefited from backing by Ukrainian billionaire Rinat Akhmetov .
 Yanukovych drew strong support from Russian-speaking Ukrainians in the east of the country . Supporters of Yanukovych pointed out that the Donetsk Oblast secured unprecedented levels of investment during his time in office .
 The Orange Revolution blamed the Orange Revolution for creating broken promises, a dysfunctional economy and political chaos .
 Kuchma called the voters' choice between Yanukovych and Yulia Tymoshenko a choice between ""bad and very bad" and praised Arseniy Yatsenyuk, the candidate eliminated in the first round of the election, instead . The document dated 2 February 2010 was uncovered during
 Kostyantyn Gryshchenko said Putin had a low personal regard for Yanukovych . In another January 2009 cable then-Ambassador of Ukraine to Russia said that Putin had low personal regards for Yanukovych.
 Yanukovych and Putin during moleben celebrated by metropolitan Lazarus of Crimea in memory of 1025th anniversary of Christianization of Kyivan Rus .
 His native language is Russian, similar to the majority of the population of his power-base and native Eastern Ukraine . He is also known as a Russian citizen .
 He admitted in March 2012 that it was a problem for him in 2002 to speak Ukrainian . In March 2012, he admitted that he had a problem with speaking Ukrainian .
 Yanukovych wrote an autobiography for the Central Election Commission, in which he misspelled his academic degree . Yanukovych won the 2004 Ukrainian presidential election .
 Thereafter, he came to be widely referred to with this nickname in opposition media and opponents' speeches . He was known for his speeches .
 His autobiographic resume of 90 words contains 12 major spelling and grammatical errors . His autobiography includes 12 major words and grammar errors .
 Yanukovych stated in November 2009 that he respects all Ukrainian politicians . Yanukovych stated that he respect all politicians .
 Yulia Tymoshenko's performance as Prime Minister was compared to "a cow on ice" during the 2007 Ukrainian parliamentary election campaign .
 Yushchenko explained that he called the traitors goats during TV debates . Later, he said he called 'traitors goats' during a TV debate with Yushenko .
 In March 2013, The Ukrainian Week claimed that Yanukovych had "failed to meet" his 2010 promises .
 He continued to serve in that role through the February 2010 presidential election, even as the U.S. government opposed Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych's task was to rehabilitate Yanukovych's political career in the aftermath of the Orange Revolution .
 Yanukovych hired the public relations firm Edelman to lift Yanukovych's public image . Yanukovych's image was lifted by Edelman .
Manafort would later go on to serve as campaign chairman for Donald Trump in 2016 . Yanukovych's friends say he stopped listening to him after he became president .
 The FBI began a criminal investigation intoafort's business dealings while he was lobbying for Yanukovych . The investigation was launched while he lobbied for Yanukovych in Ukraine .
In January 2019, Manafort resigned from the Connecticut bar . He was paid more than $60 million by Ukrainian sponsors, according to prosecutors .
 Russian is however widely spoken, especially in eastern and southern Ukraine .
 Medvedchuk escaped his house arrest on 27 February 2022 . His whereabouts became unknown after he was arrested in February 2022.
W1.c1.rada.gov.ua.ua is a b "Офіційний портал Верх   " w1.
 M Janukowycz zmienia konstytucję Ukrainy, przedłuża sobie kadencj�’ i podkreśla polskie korzenie .
 Russia's first lady of Ukraine is a former Ukrainian president . She is the first woman to be named in Ukraine's history .
 "Yanukovych's removal was unconstitutional," Interfax-Ukraine says .
 A General Prosecutor opened another case against Yanukovych . The case was opened against Yanukovych.
 The Kharkiv treaty was opened in September 2014 . The treaty was signed by Ukraine's President Yanukovych .
 Yanukovych sentenced to 13 years in prison for high treason, complicity in war . unian.info.com: Yanukovych sentenced for "high treason"
 Tigipko, Yatseniuk will take top posts after presidential elections . Kyiv Post Archived 12 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine .