 Budapest is interested in escalating the situation as much as possible in order to mobilize voters in Transcarpathian Region against the current Ukrainian government at the next presidential and parliamentary elections . Despite Kyiv’s conciliatory tone, Budapest is trying to diffuse tension in
 Kyiv has only one option left, that is to cut the ground from under Budapest’s arbitrariness in Ukraine's Transcarpathian region . It is to prevent it from drawing local residents into the political games of the Hungarian authorities .
 Hungarian Foreign Minister Peter Szijjarto blurted out after his consulate in Berehove was caught illegally issuing Hungarian passports . Kyiv does not lose hope to at least take the public rhetoric down a notch .
 At first, the Ukrainian Foreign Ministry suggested that Szijjarto recalled the ""busted"" consul .
 Kyiv promised not to block the appointment of a new Hungarian ambassador to Ukraine . Then Kyiv said he would not block appointment of the new ambassador .
 They also agreed to conduct comprehensive consultations on the situation in bilateral relations at the level of heads of consular departments .
"We need to find a common language with Budapest," Klimkin said after the meeting . "But we need to finding a commonlanguage with Budapest"
 The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry's respect for diplomatic canons is admirable . The Ukrainian foreign ministry is certainly admirable .
 Hungarian side to be ready to hold them not only in words, but in words . Since negotiations are two-way street, it is important for the Hungarian side.
 The Hungarian side have signed a deal to sign a new contract with the Hungarian side . The deal is worth £1.5million and is expected to be worth more than £2million .
 Viktor Orban's government to continue to implement his real policy . But such diplomatic overtures will only be a "cover-up" for Viktor Orbn's government .
 The Hungarian community should receive dual citizenship, says Orban . "All the rights of the national community, and also it should be given the opportunity of self-government," he says .
 In this speech, he focused on potential threats to the Hungarian minority in connection with the Russian aggression and the actual relaunch of Ukrainian statehood .
 Deputy Prime Minister Zsolt Semjen confirmed his prime minister's position at the presentation of the book “Minority Rights.’s” The book was published in March 2017 .
 The Hungarian ambassador to Ukraine, Erno Keskeny, also chipped in on the issue .
 In 1991, Transcarpathian Region and Berehove District simultaneously voted on independence . Keskeny also recalled that in December 1991, when the vote on the independence of Ukraine was held.
 At the same time, 78% of residents of Transcarpathian Region supported autonomy for the region . 82% voted for autonomy of Berehove District .
 Viktor Orban's speech, remarks by Deputy Prime Minister Semjen, the Hungarian ambassador to Ukraine and statements of other Hungarian officials are far from being a slip of the tongue .
Hungary lost two-thirds of its territory and many other attributes of imperial grandeur . Orban personally, this is an ideological speech that maps the course of the current Budapest government .
 Hungarian politician Orban has been advocating a policy of building a national state for a quarter of a century . He has been implementing it for the last 7-10 years .
For others, such high-profile statements are the articulation of the current Hungarian government . For others, it is the articulating of the statist position of the government .
 The Hungarian electorate has a significant part of the Hungarian electorate . It meets expectations of a significant portion of the electorate .
 Orban's government is trying again to use the potential weakness of the Ukrainian state, intrinsic to the election period, to accomplish its tasks on the path to a strategic goal .
 Budapest does not spare money for all kinds of programmes to support Hungarian-language media abroad as well as language courses . Budapest also has language courses and language programmes .
 The Ukrainian law on education destroys Hungary’s monopoly on the consciousness of the Hungarian minority in Transcarpathian Region .
 Mass issuance of passports to Hungarians abroad is carried out in the framework of the dual citizenship programme .
 In May 2010, Orban's office approved a simplified procedure for receiving a Hungarian passport for ethnic Hungarians .
 The infamous video recently leaked online clearly shows how Budapest issues passports to Ukrainians . The video was posted online .
 Public political organizations of foreign Hungarians are called to promote and protect the interests of Hungarians in national countries .
 During the election period, they act as political parties, promoting their candidates for deputies of various levels .
 Budapest has been coordinating the work of these organizations over the past three to four years . Budapest has provided them with ideological and other support and monitoring .
 In Serbia, this is the Union of Vojvodina Hungarians, in Romania it is the Democratic Union of Hungarians of Romania . In Slovakia, it is Most-Híd, in Slovakia it is most-híd .
Josyp Borto is the first deputy speaker of the Transcarpathian regional council . He is a representative of the Hungarian community .
 One of governor Hennadiy Moskal's deputies was also appointed under the Hungarian quota . One of the governor's deputies is also under the quota .
 Representatives of other nationalities living in Transcarpathian Region have no quotas . Representatives of others living in the region have no such quotas .
There are active negotiations underway on new political alliances in the coming elections . Also, there are active talks underway on political alliances .
 The For Life political party offered the Hungarian Culture Society of Transcarpathian Region cooperation in the 2019 presidential and parliamentary elections .
 Rabinovych-Medvedchuk guarantees a representative of the Hungarian Culture Society of Transcarpathian Region a place on its future ticket for the parliamentary election . In exchange for Hungarians' support, the political force of Rabin Ukraine's political force.
 The idea of autonomy for foreign Hungarians under the patronage of Budapest is expected to bring Hungary the status of a regional EU leader in the Carpathian basin . Budapest makes no secret of this .
 Budapest introduces another factor of discord in relations between the European countries of the Carpathian region .
 This destroys an ever so flimsy unity of the EU countries on other issues on the European agenda. This destroys the flimsyunity of the European countries on the EU agenda . This is a blow to the EU's unity on the issue of immigration .
 Ukrainian elections as a chance to "make profit" Ukraine's current leadership is defending the country's territorial integrity .
 Kyiv will not allow Budapest to freely boss around in the Ukrainian territory without the knowledge of the Ukrainian authorities .
 Budapest has been actively involved in this process by directly interfering in Ukraine's internal affairs . Budapest has also been involved in the Ukraine's political process .
 Hungarian authorities consider the Ukrainian elections as a chance to change bilateral relations in their favour . Most countries in Europe and the world view the electoral cycle in Ukraine as a risk .
 Yevhen Murayev, Oleksandr Vilkul, Nestor Shufrych and even ""downed pilot" Vasyl Volga became frequent guests to Hungary . They promised Budapest to block and then abolish the language clauses of the education law .
Public statements by Hungarian officials can be easily interpreted as interference in the Ukrainian elections . Second, public statements by Hungary's government can be seen as interference .
 Usually, when foreign politicians are asked who their country will support in elections, they answer that "this is your internal affair" and that they support principles, not persons .
 Moscow openly supported Viktor Yanukovych in 2004 and 2014 . This interfering in the internal affairs of Ukraine, this interfering in Ukraine's internal affairs .
 Only "after the next presidential election in Ukraine, this situation may change," Szijjarto says .
 Ukrainian Hungarians not to cooperate with the current government by an official of the neighbouring state . Such a frank call goes against the accepted diplomatic practice and basic political decency .
 Third, Hungarian authorities continue to work in Transcarpathian Region, bypassing Kyiv. Third, the Hungarian authorities still work in the region .
 A video shows a Hungarian citizenship ceremony in Berehove, Szijjarto, Hungary . The video is a tactic of escalating the confrontation, the author says .
 Hungary's relations with Ukraine is the policy of the entire current political class in Hungary, says the writer . But one should not think that this is his own initiative, he says .
 A recent visit by a Hungarian to Transcarpathian Region included Secretary of State for National Policy Arpad Janos Potapi .
 During their visit to Ukraine, they held confidential talks on the current situation with the administration of the Hungarian Culture Society of Transcarpathian Region and the Democratic Union of Hungarians of Ukraine .
 Budapest is investigating the leak of a scandalous video from the consulate in Berehove . It shows Transcarpathian residents being issued Hungarian passports and asked to keep it secret .
Hungary special services are running thorough checks on those who apply for fast-tracked citizenship .
 The Pro-Hungarian organisations said that because of extended checks of Ukrainian Hungarians for dual citizenship at the border, they and the consulates reopened legal aid centres .
Lawyers helped Transcarpathian Hungarians dodge mobilization to the Ukrainian army in 2015 . A similar centre used to work in 2015 when its lawyers helped the Hungarians avoid mobilization .
 Further coordination of international efforts on counteracting language clauses of the Ukrainian education law was also discussed .
 Participants agreed that at international events they will insist that the law "limits" the rights of minorities .
 Laszlo Brenzovych did on 11 October 11 in Brussels at a meeting with European Commissioner for Education, Culture, Youth and and Sport Tibor Navracsics and President of European Parliament Antonio Tajani .
 Hungarian official Potapi said about Budapest's intention to pass an address to the European Commission and the EU Council . The EU Council would accuse Kyiv of violating its obligations under the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement .
 Hungarian Culture Society of Transcarpathian Region allocated 570m forints through the branches of OTP Bank to the Hungarian-speaking population .
 This amount was allocated by the Hungarian government through the Bethlen Gabor Fund . This amount has been allocated by Hungarian government .
 The plans to station a standing military contingent in the town of Berehove . It did not go without a discussion of the military and political situation .
 Democratic Union of Hungarians of Ukraine says this will upset the ethnic balance that has formed in Berehove and the area .
 Hungarian officials get very nervous when they are accused of coordinating current actions with Moscow . Moscow has been trying to change the government in Ukraine first by military means, then by terrorism and sabotage .
 Budapest is trying to avoid a "Hungary-Russia" connection because it calls into question the independence of the Hungarian authorities . Because Russia is "toxic" Budapest is attempting to avoid the connection with Russia .
 Moscow helps Hungarian authorities share information about the "oppression of Transcarpathian Hungarians" Second, it is Moscow that helps Hungary share information.
 Russian delegation distributed materials at the OSCE conference in Warsaw in September . It was the Russian delegation which distributed such materials .
 Orban closely cooperates with Moscow on economic matters as well . He intends to develop these relations further despite European sanctions and EU policies .
 Hungarian PM says Moscow should consider extension of Turkish Stream gas pipeline to Hungary . Russian President Vladimir Putin met with Hungarian PM on 18 September 2018 .
Rosatom is also building two additional generating units of the Hungarian nuclear power plant Paks . Rosatom is building two more generating units.
 Budapest will buy 4bn cu.m. of gas from Moscow in 2020, Szijjarto said in October . Budapest will also buy 4b cu. m. of energy from Moscow .
 Moscow always uses gas either as a stick or as a carrot . The cost of Russian gas for Hungary is kept in the strictest secret .
 Budapest and Moscow can not only play along on the Ukrainian issue but also coordinate their joint actions against Ukraine . So, if you take into account all these factors, it's possible to see all the factors .
Journalists have been asking experts what should be done next in the heat of discussion about recent events .
 It is naive to hope that Orban and his team will de-escalate the current situation since they are just interested in raising the degree of conflict for the reasons described above . However, it's naive to expect Orban to de- escalate the situation .
 All public offices in Ukraine should work with Transcarpathian residents . But it is much more realistic for all public offices to work with the residents .
 Ukrainian language reform needs to be rolled back in the future, as well as develop measures to help both students and teachers of the language . To do this, one needs to ensure the reform does not get rolled back.
 Roads will need to be repaired and built and an airport launched to ensure a transport connection between the region and Ukraine . Roads will be built to stimulate the flow of tourists here .
 It will be necessary to complete the formation of territorial communities in the framework of decentralization . Local authorities could receive real money to improve their infrastructure .
 Foreign Minister Pavlo Klimkin set an example by paying a trip to the region and meeting representatives of ethnic communities, clergy, Roma organizations and media .
 He was there to dispel fears that those with second passports may get imprisoned . He was at a conference in New York City to dispel concerns about second passports .
 We also need to support projects of Ukrainian, Roma, Czech, Czech and other public organizations in Transcarpathian Region . The region is a multinational region within Ukraine .
Ukrainian Hungarians over their second passports. And prevent a "witch hunt" for Ukrainian Hungarians . And prevent the hunt for the second passports .
 They receive them not because of hatred for Ukraine or because of a sudden love for Orban's new Hungarian empire, but mainly for economic reasons . They get them because of love for Ukraine and because of the new empire, they say .
 Ukraine's Transcarpathian Region is Ukraine's own territory . The ultimate goal of the Ukrainian state is to cut the ground from under the arbitrariness of the authorities .
 Residents of Ukraine's Transcarpathian Region are not involved in the political games of the Hungarian authorities . The main thing is to prevent the residents of the region from getting involved in political games .