Nation-states have become the most important form of political organisation within the international system . Nation-states are the most powerful political organisation in the world .
 states and their administration are critical to any study of world politics . Typically dominated by one particular ethnos – a people drawn together by cultural, ethnolinguistic or civic ties .
 governments form the basis for international relations and represent the constituent members of strategic alliances, International Organisations, and an international legal system . On the super-national level, governments are part of the world's most powerful legal system.
 The imbalance between states’ assets and capabilities begets global inequalities . States’ disagreements and skirmishes prompt international conflict .
 The nation-state remains the principal unit of analysis in much of the academic study of international relations . As such, the nation- state is the principal units of analysis .
 Both realist and liberal scholars hold states to be the sole significant actors of world politics . There has been comparatively little analysis of what nation-states comprise, how they come into being and the consequences of their rare fragmentation .
 This perhaps results from the relative stability of the nation-state system. This may be due to the relative instability of the country's system .
 The majority of the states most referenced in traditional international relations literature predate the organised study of international relations . The most referenced states are the most referenced state of the world .
 By the time the first International Politics Department was established in Aberystwyth in 1919, the European Westphalian system had been in place for nearly three centuries .
 The nation's stability has seen the nation-state increase its predominance as a form of polity through wars, border disputes and population shifts .
 Such constancy complicates interrogation of how new states come into being as others fall apart . Such constancies complicates the interrogation.
 Kosovo declared its independence from Serbia in February 2008 . Kosovo has been in the Yugoslav Republic's disintegration for decades .
 In Spring 2014, Crimea unilaterally broke from Ukraine, acceding to – or being annexed by – the Russian Federation . In spring 2014, following a pro-European revolution in Kyiv, Crimea broke from Crimea .
 The transfer of Crimea to Russia has been supported by a far smaller number of people . The transfer to Crimea has been support by a small number .
 Both cases fall uncertainly within the canon of international law – an uncertainty unlikely to be resolved in the near future .
 The instances of self-determination in Kosovo and Crimea share certain attributes . The instances are similar to those in Crimea and Kosovo .
 Both can be seen as long-term results of the imperfect disintegration of large socialist states in the 1990s . Both are seen as the result of the breakdown of large Socialist states .
 The Kosovan population was subject to sustained discrimination and ethnic cleansing, according to reports . Kosovan citizens were subject to more concrete and severe hardships than the citizens of Crimea .
 The NATO engagement in Kosovo was transparent, targeted, and supported by the international community represented by the UN Security Council . The Kosovo engagement was transparent and targeted, according to the UN.
 The Russian military involvement in Crimea was covert, unsanctioned, and widely internationally condemned . The Russian army's involvement in the Crimea was widely condemned .
 Crimea moved to accede to the Russian Federation . Kosovo set out to implement its own independent state system, based on the region's de facto government .
 Russian politicians have repeatedly invoked the example of Kosovo as precedent for the “accession of Crimea’s” Crimea . In spite of these differences, Russia has repeatedly invoked Kosovo.
 The two cases are insufficiently similar for the secession of Kosovo to offer a meaningful precedent to the annexation of Crimea . In this essay, I will argue – contrary to the case laid out by Putin and others – that the cases are not similar .
 The regions’ varying degrees of autonomy and structure clearly divide the Kosovan and Crimean examples . Despite their outwardly similar backgrounds as minority regions of post-socialist states, the regions' differences clearly divide .
 The two are distinguished by the level of conflict and threat endured by the regions . Kosovo's secession as compared to that of the Russian engagement in Ukraine .
 Russian claims of the two cases are similar to each other, says CNN's John Sutter . In his conclusion, he will return to the persistent Russian claims, and highlight potential political benefits from this line of discourse .
 Few areas of international law are clearly defined, universally accepted, and manifestly enforceable . Many areas of law are still not clearly defined .
Statecraft is often expressed in nebulous jargon, detached from the practice of statecraft, and unable to constrain or direct states’ behaviour .
 This extends to legislation concerning self-determination and secession . This also includes legislation concerningSelf-determination. This also extends to self- determination and secession.
 Both texts seem to point towards the right to self-determination of “peoples’’s’ – the national component of the nation-state . Both texts appear to point to the right.
 Kosovo and Crimea are characterised by the seceding territories failure to secure consent of their respective metropoles . None of these criteria lay out criteria in which secessionism can and should take place, especially in cases .
 The concept of "peoples" should be applied to people. They lack precise definitions of to which “peoples’s’ the concept should be used .
 This unclarity is compounded when weighed against states’ sovereignty and territorial integrity – also guaranteed by, inter alia, the UN Charter .
 More transparent, but more transparent, are the conditions in which states are held to be legitimate polities . More transparent is the condition in which state is held to have a legitimate polity .
 These conditions can be seen as baseline criteria for the legitimacy of any secessionist region . While also vague, these conditions are also vague .
 Kosovo met at least three conditions before its 2008 Declaration of Independence . Kosovo, in contrast to other disputed territories, met the first three of these conditions .
 One of only two such regions in Yugoslavia, this status clearly demarked the Kosovan borders and population . A population of 68% ethnically Albanian in 1948, 92% by 2006 .
 Belgrade granted significant levels of self-government and relative independence from the Belgrade regime . It further grantedsignificant levels ofSelf-government.
 1974 amendment to the constitution further allowed Kosovo to develop ‘its own central bank, education and health-care systems’ Could not be overturned without the region’s provincial assembly's consent .
 ‘Serbization’ programme was instituted, whereby ‘tens of thousands of Kosovo Albanian doctors, municipal officials, teachers and industrial workers were sacked .
 Albanian population moved to establish a ‘parallel state’ providing services in education, health, social support, justice, and human rights .
 The state building process was further accelerated by the 1998-1999 Kosovan War, triggered by the brutal attacks on, inter alia, and the villages of Drenica and Račak .
 It had demonstrated its legitimacy as a polity prior to its Declaration of Independence . It had shown its legitimacy before its Independence declaration .
 Kosovo’s clear and long-standing path to state-building and independence stands in contrast to that of Crimea . Kosovo's clear and short-term path to independence is similar to Crimea.
 Crimea’s self-determination took the path of ‘accession’ to another state, not the foundation of a new independent state . indications of the region's readiness and desire for 'accession' to Russian could have otherwise been made manifestly clear .
 In 1954, the region was transferred as an Oblast to the Ukrainian SSR . Nikita Khrushchev had an alleged mere 15 minutes of deliberation .
 Crimea was pronounced an Autonomous Republic of Ukraine during the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . Crimea was declared an Aut autonomous Republic in 1991. Crimea is now an autonomous Republic.
 Crimea has remained constant throughout its political development, Crimea’s population has not . Crimea has not had a significant population since Crimea was formed .
 The Russian Empire and Soviet Union were complicit in the ethnic cleansing and mass-deportation of Crimea’s indigenous Tatar population between 18th and early 20th centuries .
 The proportion of Russians in Russia is far from overwhelming . The proportion is higher than other regions, but it is not overwhelming .
 Its diversity certainly does not indicate the presence of a homogenous ethnos, it says . At least when considered in isolation, either independence or union with Russia.
 It contrasts unfavourably with the 92% Albanian ethnic composition of Kosovo . Kosovo is the country's most populated region .
 Kosovo is too singular to offer a precedent for the annexation of Crimea . The case of Kosovo is 'too singular' to offer precedent for Crimea's annexation .
 The political cause of Crimean independence or ‘accession’ to the Russian Federation also lacks the depth of historical support of the Kosovan campaign for independence .
 The only referendum held in Crimea after 1991 was in support of maintained federal rights, pursuant to the 1992 Ukrainian constitution .
 In Kosovo, a ballot was staged in September 1991 indicating 99% support for independence – albeit with the Serb minority excluded . In September 1991, the ballot in Kosovo was staged to show 99% backing for independence .
 Only 65.6% of Crimean population favoured ‘accession’ to Russian Federation .
 This figure is dwarfed by that in favour on Kosovan independence in 1991 . This figure was in favour in favour of Kosovanindependence in 1991.
 There was no support for the transfer of Crimea to Russia, according to reports . This is not to say that there was not support for Crimea transfer .
 The 65.6% represents substantial backing, especially when combined with a limited pro-accession protest movement led by the politician Sergei Tsekov .
 The Kosovan precedent of clearly documented and long-standing popular desire for self-determination did not apply in Crimea . The Kosovans' desire to self- determination does not apply to Crimea .
 Kosovo and Crimea have been at odds with each other over self-determination projects . It is likely that this contrast of support was directly related to the level of violence and threat endured by each territory .
 ICTY only had a mandate to prosecute crimes against humanity, genocide, grave breaches of the 1949 Geneva Conventions and violations of the laws or customs of war . The first such ad hoc court since the end of the Second World War, ICTy only has a mandate.
 Serb forces allegedly shelled several villages, confining women and children in a barn before sexually abusing and killing them . The bodies were disposed of in wells, according to reports .
 In Priština, hundreds of Kosovo Albanian residents were forced onto overcrowded buses and trains bound for the Macedonian border .
 The organised violence suffered by the Kosovar Albanian population during the war represented a brutal layer of criminality after years of state-sponsored racism and subjugation .
 It would be inaccurate to claim that the Crimean population escaped political misfortune entirely . It is inaccurate to say that Crimean people escaped politics entirely .
 The 1998 Crimean constitution, for instance, reduced its legal status and autonomy of the Crimean parliament .
 Crimea's 2014 ‘accession’ to Russia emerged catalysed by the Euromaidan Revolution . Crimea’s 2014 'accession' to Russia has been a relatively friendly political background .
 By February 2014, the fervency of the protests had risen to fever-pitch, spurred on by an attempted police crackdown . By February 2013, the protests were concentrated on the central Maidan Nezalezhnosti .
 Government offices were raided, and pressure brought to bear on the regime . Government offices in the country were raided .
 Yanukovych was forced from office into exile in Russia on 22nd February . He was replaced in time by pro-Western chocolate magnate Petro Poroshenko .
 The Euromaidan Revolution was reviled in Crimea, as elsewhere in Eastern and Southern Ukraine and the Kremlin .
 There is undoubtedly some truth to this allegation, even if claims were led by ‘nationalists, neo-Nazis Russophobes and anti-Semites’ are largely unfounded .
 A legally contested referendum, called by the newly installed pro-Russian government under Sergei Aksyonov, was held in Crimea and Sevastopol on 16th March .
 96.8% of voters are alleged to have backed union with Russia . Approximately 96.9% of those who voted for union with the Russian government .
 The peninsula’s ‘accession’ was confirmed by an 18th March Agreement signed by Crimean and Russian representatives .
 The political consequences of the Revolution 600km from Crimea are of a different magnitude to the suffering endured by the Kosovar Albanian population during the 1998-1999 War .
 The violence experienced during the collapse of Yugoslavia resulted in the 1999 UN Security Council Resolution 1244 . Kosovo, the demilitarization of the region, the establishment of UNMIK and sanctioned NATO-led peacekeeping .
 It pointed towards a future resolution of the Kosovan situation based on self-government and stabilisation . It also pointed towards the future resolution.
 The Yugoslav war crimes likely also contributed to the recognition of Kosovo’s independence . Kosovo's independence was recognized by the United States .
 The legality of its Declaration was also approved by an – albeit somewhat nebulous – 2010 International Court of Justice ruling . The ruling also approved the legality of the Declaration by an - albeit narrowly benebulous court of justice .
 In the case of Crimea, no such international acceptance has been achieved . Crimea has not been accepted by any international community .
 The alleged presence of unmarked Russian special forces in the region before and during the ballot, as well as Russian support for the unfolding conflict in the Donbas region in the East of Ukraine, further stoked international condemnation .
 A further point of difference which invalidates the relevance of the Kosovan precedent is the alternative goals of self-determination in Kosovo and Crimea . The Kosovo-Crimea conflict has been described as the most violent in the world .
 Crimean referendum calls for immediate transfer to a third-party state . The Crimean referendum went a step further, calling for secession .
 Its legality would have been uncertain even before the 2014 General Assembly Resolution . Its legality is a singularity in the modern history of statecraft .
 It is also deeply unpalatable, both to other states in Russia’s near abroad which fear similar territorial infringement, and to those in the West whose relations with the Putin regime were already tense .
 Although not legally relevant, these states’ opinions and policies are significant, they are significant . These states' opinions are significant.
 A group of Western states levied sanctions on Russia in response to the ‘annexation’ of Crimea . The sanctions include three of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council .
 Any future diplomatic resolution of the Crimean situation seems unlikely . The Crimean situation is the most important forum at least .
 The Kosovan and Crimean situations are intractably multifaceted, yet of fundamental importance to Europe’s stability . Europe's stability is at the heart of the crisis in both countries .
 The West and Serbia have erected barriers between the West and Russia respectively . They challenge the permanence of the state-based political order .
 commentators are wrong to claim that a Kosovan precedent can be applied to Crimea . Both cases are superficially similar, but commentators – particularly in Russia – are wrong .
 Belgrade's history of self-governance, violence and repression made an exceptionally strong case for remedial secession . The manifest popularity of a break from Belgrade made it exceptionally strong cases for remedials .
 The International Court of Justice was still unwilling to pass a clear verdict showing its support . Even considering these circumstances, due to the centrality of state sovereignty to the international system, the court was still unable to pass the clear verdict .
 Unlike Kosovo, Crimean population had failed to demonstrate long-standing support for self-determination . Any repression experienced was incomparable, according to the Crimean government .
 Kosovo's desire for statehood was far more agreeable to the international community than a Crimean ‘accession’ to a potentially hostile third-party . Kosovo’s desire for Statehood was more agreeable than a Crimea ‘ accession” to a
 Russian politicians continue to emphasise the salience of the Kosovan precedent, casting the West as hypocritical for its failure to acknowledge its relevance .
This seems baseless until wider geopolitical and discursive considerations are taken into account . This seems baseless. This seems to be a case for the West .
 Russia benefits from maintaining control of – and access to – Crimea without protracted negotiations with an increasingly pro-Western Kyiv .
 The seizure of the peninsula and the “annexation of Sevastopol as a Federal City represents a stand against NATO expansion in Eastern Europe, a perennial Russian preoccupation . The seizure is a stand-against NATO expansion.
 Sevastopol is also the home port to the vast Russian Black Sea Fleet . It is particularly important for its continued engagement in the War in Syria . Sevastop is also home to the Russian Black sea Fleet .
 Putin especially has highlighted the interwoven history and shared identity of Crimean and Russians citizens since the imperial era . Putin especially highlights the interWoven history.
 Russia's ‘reunification’ with Russia presented an opportunity for a ‘national rebirth’ of a more assertive post-Soviet Russia . Russia’s ‘Reunification' with Russia presents an opportunity to a 'national rebirth'
 The desire to couch the ‘accession’ in terms of precedent and legalistic norms is not surprising . It is also not surprising to see the desire to Couch the “accession.’s’S’
Ted Hopf's assertion that a ‘Liberal Essentialist’ regime is seeking legitimacy through engagement with just such international institutions. It corresponds with, inter alia, Ted Hopf’s assertion that the regime is trying to gain legitimacy by engagement with such institutions .
 Any attempt to draw parallels between the Kosovan and Russian case would have been problematic . Considering this political backdrop, any attempt toDraw parallels would have be problematic, says CNN .
 The differences between the two territories make the difference impossible . The differences make the comparison impossible .