 President Barack Obama planned to sign a piece of legislation that essentially amounts to a declaration of war on Russia . The ruble collapsed in value against the United States dollar last week .
 The Ukraine Freedom Support Act of 2014 was unanimously approved by the House and Senate . The bill is short on common sense and long belligerent ultimatums and misstatements .
 Russia demands that Russia cease destabilizing Ukraine, abandon the Crimean Peninsula, withdraw its forces from Georgia and even stop aiding Bashar al-Assad’s government in Syria .
 It designates Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia ‘major non-NATO allies’ It urges Obama to adopt more sanctions and visa bans against Russia .
 Sanctions or no, Russia’s unprecedented $375 billion military build-up proceeds apace. Sanctions are not the reason for Russia's $375billion military build up .
 Moscow continues sending its air force on provocative missions to probe NATO borders . The Baltic countries scrambled their jets to intercept Russian planes a record 21 times .
 For the second time this year, a near miss took place between a Russian military plane and a European civilian airliner . The incident is the second this year.
 Russia has twice conducted military exercises practicing a nuclear attack on Warsaw . Russia has also held military exercises in Poland .
 Russian warships and submarines have patrolled as far afield as Australia and the U.S.
 The respected Levada Center rates Putin's popularity at 85 percent . The sanctions and the increasingly charged military stand-off between Russia and NATO member countries have done little to dent his popularity .
 A majority of Russians believe their country is on the right track, according to the center’s last poll, in November .
 Russians do not blame this turbulent state of affairs on their president, but on the U.S. and its "puppets" in the European Union . They say they have had relentlessly pounded into them by state-controlled airwaves .
 The wellspring of Russian goodwill toward the West long ago ran dry. In any case, after four rounds of NATO expansion into formerly Warsaw-Pact and Soviet domains, it ran dry .
 A Russian bomber could collide with a European civilian airliner in or near NATO airspace .
Russian and NATO submarines could accidentally crash in international waters . Russian and NATO submarine could crash into international waters.
 A technological glitch could prompt either Russia or the United States to conclude the other has launched its nuclear missiles . The Soviet Union faced when it almost mistook the 1983 NATO exercise Able Archer for an actual attack .
 Such a catastrophic eventuality would be considerably reduced if the two countries had retained even basic relations of trust . The two countries would be significantly reduced if they had retained basic relations.
 Putin could decide he has nothing to gain by even minimally cooperating with the West . Or, as has been credibly suggested, he could decide to do nothing .
 No one predicted Russia would re-acquire Crimea last March through a stealth occupation . But no one predicted that Russia would return to Crimea through stealth occupation last March .
Short of a palace coup or popular uprising, the probability of his relinquishing his grip on power ahead of schedule is minuscule .
 If we accept that Putin is not going anywhere soon, we find ourselves in need of a political solution . Russia needs a way of crafting a relationship with Russia that allows for “peaceful coexistence with the West’s” Russia .
 Zbigniew Brzezinski, Henry Kissinger, Samuel Charap, SamuelCharap, and I twice in The Atlantic . The former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger is in the Washington Post .
 NATO's 2008 Budapest declaration promised that one day it would induct Ukraine . But odds are infinitesimal that NATO would seek to induct Ukraine, given the separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine .
 Ukraine's Verkhovna Rada has just passed legislation abolishing the country’s “non-bloc” status . It was established by law in 2010 .
 The legislature also made entering the Western military alliance a national goal . The legislature made entry into the alliance a goal .
 In November, the Kremlin requested a “100 percent guarantee’ that Ukraine not join NATO, presumably in exchange for helping foster peace in the Donbass . No one explored the possibility of ending the crisis that no one explored .
 Putin justified Russia’s actions in light of eventual NATO expansion. In March address on unification of Russia and Crimea, Putin justified his actions .
 NATO and European Union membership has mostly gone hand in hand . Russian leadership considers this possibility of Ukraine joining alliance credible .
 The author of the containment policy, George Kennan, warned in the 1990s that the then-planned expansion of NATO up to Russia’s borders would result in a “new cold war, probably ending in a hot one,” and kill chances for democracy .
 opposition to Ukraine’s membership is strong in Berlin and Paris. In any case, opposition to the Ukraine's membership isstrong in Berlin.
 To forestall the “Ukraine scenario from befalling other former Soviet states, NATO would also need to foreswear — in writing — further expansion to the east .
 Putin recently compared the peninsula’s relationship to Russia with that of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem for Jews and Muslims . The territory only belonged to Russia from when Catherine the Great conquered it from the Ottoman Empire in 1783 until 1954, when Soviet premier Khrushchev “gave
 The United Nations needs to oversee a new, totally transparent referendum on the peninsula’s status . The U.N. must oversee the new referendum.
Both Russia and the West would have to agree to be bound by its results . Both Russia and West would be bound to their results .
 Moscow would have to cease supporting separatist insurgents in the Donbass . In return for a guarantee of neutrality for Ukraine and carrying out a transparent, binding new referendum on Crimea .
 Russia would have to re-commit to the September Minsk Protocol that established a cease-fire between the rebels and the government in Kiev . Russia would also have to respect Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 If Ukraine opts to join the European Union, Russia must let it do so . Russia must allow it to do so if it wants to join .
 U.S. and European Union can offer prompt end to economic sanctions and visa bans . To give Russia incentive to halt support for Donbass separatists and allow a second referendum in Crimea, the United States and the EU can offer a prompt end.
 Previous iterations of such a proposed accord have received no serious consideration . Previous iterations have been rejected by the government .
 Russia helped insurgents seize part of Ukraine's east, perhaps a million of that region’s population fled to Russia .
 Obama, Merkel, Hollande, Hollande to launch a new diplomatic overture to Russia . Now is the time for the U.S. and the European Union to make a new overture .
 This may provide Putin with ample objective grounds for reaching an agreement . This may give him an objective grounds to reach an agreement.
 Western leaders will have to deal with him to get it. As unpalatable as it will be to Western leaders, they will need to do it .
 Washington policymakers and legislators in Washington seem to be pushing relations with Russia in the opposite direction . It’s unfortunate that instead policymakers and lawmakers in Washington are pushing relations.
 The latest in the West’s assault on Russia, the belligerent Ukraine Freedom Support Act that Obama himself signed, only makes the inevitable reconciliation with Russia all the more difficult .
 Russia, or the United States, or Ukraine need right now, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia is the last thing the U.S. or Ukraine needs right now .