 German election campaign saw unexpected statement by the leader of Germany's liberals, Christian Lindner .
 Lindner only expressed a view which can be heard among many politicians, diplomats, and journalists in Germany and other Western countries .
 Lindner has – at least within the German political context – not been the most accommodative towards Kremlin expansionism . In fact, Lindner is not the most accommodatingative towards Putin .
 Matthias Platzek suggested in late 2014 to “retroactively regulate, in terms of international law,’s annexation of Crimea. For instance, the former chair of Germany's oldest party, the social democratic SPD, had suggested to ‘retroactive regulate,
 Alexander Gauland, deputy chair of the new right-wing populist Alternative for Germany party, said ‘Crimea is ultimately ancient Russian territory and cannot go back to Ukraine’ Gauland said this summer that “Crimea was ultimately ancient Russia’s territory’
 The leader of Die Linke, Sahra Wagenknecht, had called for Germany to accept the result of the Crimea referendum .
 Crimea's return to Ukraine is a long-term project, Lindner said . Lindner merely stated that, in distinction to the Donbas issue, Crimea’s return to Crimea is aLong- term project .
 Moscow's attitude to Crimea is not only a reaction to Moscow’s unwillingness to return Crimea to Ukraine, but to the very high popularity of the annexation among Russians .
 Lindner's approach is symptomatic of larger trends within the EU's political establishment to go soft on Russian imperialism, he says .
 ECFR’s recent research has shown there are a number of leading parties which are mainstream but regularly incline towards giving their backing to Russia .
 As Gustav Gressel wrote, ‘These parties fully embrace the Western model, open societies, free trade, political liberties, social modernisation, and a secular state.’
 The Kremlin-supported narrative is a particularly popular argument of Europe’s Russlandversteher in business circles, armchair punditry, and radical parties .
 One of the most critical early reports on pseudo-referendum came from three representatives of the Council for the Development of Civil Society and Human Rights at the office of the President of Russia .
 One of the members of this official Russian state body had visited Crimea in April 2014 . One of this state body's members has visited Crimea since April 2014.
 The figure is not far from the results of opinion polls taken before the annexation . It is supported by analyses alleging plain falsification of the voting’s results .
 Less than a third of the Crimean population actually voted in support of annexation . Even allowing for a considerably higher turnout and larger real support for annexation in Sevastopol .
 This is far too little to even partially justify such a momentous change in Europe’s post-war borders . This is not enough to even fully justify the change in post- war borders .
 Crimea was occupied by Russian soldiers without insignia in mid-February 2014 . A mere 41 percent of the peninsula’s respondents supported unification of Russia and Ukraine into a single state .
 The various polls that have been conducted after Russia’s military and political takeover seem to demonstrate large Crimean support for annexation . The polls appear to show large support for Crimea's annexation .
 Public opinion data has limited validity for interpretation of events in spring 2014 . But for various reasons, this apparently unequivocal public opinion data is not valid .
 The more recent polling results partially reflect the effects, on Crimea’s citizens, of the shrill defamation campaign against Ukraine in the Kremlin-controlled media .
 Some of the polls also do not address the familiar popular bias towards support for the status quo in Ukraine .
 Most post-annexation pollsters seem to ignore the considerable stakes involved, for their respondents to say they support Crimea's return to Ukraine .
 Crimea has become Europe’s most problematic territory in terms of the protection of civil rights of citizens, in particular of the indigenous Crimean-Tatar population .
 Moscow and its Crimean proxies work to stigmatise any disapproval of the annexation of the Crimean peninsula . Moscow is ruthless in their persecution of political dissidents, and even of mere sympathisers with Kyiv .
 OSCE and all other relevant election observer organisations refused to attend . These conditions were not fulfilled, which is why the OSCE did not meet these conditions .
 Voting took place under conditions of psychological pressure from Russian regular troops without badges and armed pro-Russian irregulars across the peninsula .
 The valid Constitution of Ukraine’s Autonomous Republic of Crimea was adopted in 1998 . Curiously, no option was presented, on the ballot, for the preservation of the status quo .
 Crimean voters were only given the opportunity to vote either for joining Russia, or for the reintroduction of an older, invalid Crimean constitution of 1992 .
 Both of these two choices were ambiguous in their formulation and content . Both of the two choices, both of them were ambiguous .
 Crimea had never been part of a ‘Russia’ that was politically separate from the mainland territory of the post-Soviet Ukrainian state . Crimea has belonged to Crimea since 1991 .
 Most of today’s Ukraine had, for approximately as long as Crimea, been part and parcel of both the tsarist empire and the Soviet Union .
 Crimea had only been united with an empire sometimes called ‘Russia’ from 1783 to 1991 . From 1783 until 1991, Crimea only was united with a Russian nation-state .
 Ukrainian territory once belonged to this empire as much as most of the current Russian Federation . The larger part of today’s entire Ukrainian territory now belongs to the Russian Federation.
 Crimea belonged, within the tsarist empire, to the Tauric Governorate that included the peninsula, and most of today’s southern mainland Ukraine . Crimea belonged to the Crimean peninsula and Crimea .
 The 2014 ‘referendum’s’ promise of ‘reunification’ refers to the 2014 referendum . Both post-Soviet republics, the Russian Federation and independent Ukraine, are therefore successors to the ‘Russia’ to which the 2014 'ref
 Crimea could not have been separated from ‘Russia’ in 1991, and ‘reunited’ with it in 2014 . Crimea had not belonged to an exclusively Russian state, separate from mainland Ukraine before 1991 .
Until 2014, Russia's post-Soviet leadership had never officially questioned Crimea's place in post- Soviet Ukraine .
 The two most important treaties were the 1991 Belovezha Agreement on the dissolution of the USSR, under Boris Yeltsin, and the 2003 Russian-Ukrainian State Border Treaty, under Vladimir Putin .
 Both agreements were ratified by Russian parliaments and signed into law by Russia's presidents .
 Moscow's annexation to Crimea in 1783 is a deeply grounded historic justification for Russia to annex much of the territory of today’s mainland Ukraine .
 The 2014 pseudo-referendum refers to Crimea for roughly as long as Crimea . Many other territories outside today’s Russian Federation could then be also up for grabs by Moscow .
 The referendum’s second option, promising a return to the 1992 constitution, was even more confusingly formulated . There had been two constitutions in force in that year, on Crimea .
 Had this second option won, it would have been left to the powerholders to choose among these two different basic laws . The powerholders would have to choose between the two different laws .
 The choice that Crimeans were offered in March 2014 was not so much one between Russia and Ukraine than a decision between clarity and limbo . The choice of Crimeans was not as much as the decision between the two countries .
 The facts listed above are well known in Ukraine and among experts within Western academia, governments, mass media, and civil societies .
 The Russian narrative is still widespread of a perhaps somewhat roughly initiated referendum that led to a decision allegedly supported by the vast majority of Crimeans . However, the Russian narrative still remains widespread.
 The full outcome of this month’s federal election in Germany is not yet clear .
 Moscow will warmly welcome leading German politicians repeating their preferred lines . But it is obvious that Moscow will welcome leading politicians repeating its preferred lines.
 It hopes that they in time become part of standard Western discourse on Crimea’s annexation .
 Eleanor Knott, Dmytro Shulga and Frank Golczewski made useful comments on an earlier draft of this text . The text was written in the early hours of the day .