 Putin continues to advance further threats to the Ukraine through his sponsored military conflict in Eastern Ukraine . Putin celebrates the annexation of Crimea into Russia in 2014 .
 Russian troops began their attack on the Ukraine in February 2014 . The attack left most of Eastern Ukraine in the hands of  separatists and Russian soldiers . It ostensibly created independent separatist states in Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts .
 Each day the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission reports of battles between Ukrainian and Russian-sponsored troops in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions .
 Between 2014 and 2018, this military conflict between Ukrainian troops and Russian-backed separatists continued in eastern Ukraine . More than 10,000 people have been killed and thousands displaced in the conflict .
 Ukraine says it has violated Russian waters . It placed a freighter to block the port, saying the Ukraine has violated Russia's waters .
Relations between Russia and Ukraine have been violated by the Russians at almost every opportunity . As the conflicts continue, treaties and protocols which had been agreed to regulate the relations between the two countries have been broken .
 These formerly allied states of the USSR were granted or asserted their autonomy and became independent states . The former allied states were granted their autonomy or asserted autonomy .
 Gorbachev had prepared a treaty recognising the breakup of the USSR into autonomous republics . But he was prevented from signing the treaty by the attempted coup against him in August of 1991 .
 On August 24, 1991 the coup had failed and Kravchuk, the head of the Ukrainian parliament, passed a motion declaring the independence of the Ukraine with him as its first leader .
 The U.S. primary concern was strategic; the control of the Ukrainian nuclear weapons . The primary concern is strategic; it was strategic .
 At that time, the Ukraine was the third largest nuclear power in the world . The Ukraine is now the world's third largest.
 In a private letter to Clinton, Kravchuk promised that Ukraine would be nuclear free by June 1996 .
 Kiev finally settled their dispute over the Black Sea Fleet . Prime Ministers Chernomyrdin and Lazarenko signed three intergovernmental agreements .
 The two sides agreed to divide the fleet's assets and to lease port facilities in Sevastopol to the Russian Navy . The Russian Navy will lease the port facilities to the fleet .
 Under the agreement the two nations split the fleet's ships evenly . Russia agreed to buy back some of the more modern ships with cash .
 Russia ultimately received four-fifths of the Black Sea Fleet's warships . Ukraine received about half of the facilities, while Russia got about half .
 Russian Black Sea Fleet warships dropped anchor off the Georgian coast during and after the August 2008 Russian armed conflict with Georgia over Abkhazia and South Ossetia .
 Ukrainian president Viktor Yushchenko announced that Ukraine would not extend the lease of Sevastopol base beyond 2017 . He urged the Russian fleet to start preparations for a withdrawal .
 The war in Georgia was supported by NATO and the European Union . The threat by Ukrainians that Russia would lose its warm-water naval bases in Crimea provoked the Russians to retaliate against both the Ukrainians and the EU .
 The Russians threatened to cut off supplies of natural gas to the Ukraine and Western Europe . The Russian government said it would cut off natural gas supplies to Ukraine .
 The U.S. supported the Ukrainians in their defiance of the Russian threats . Europeans pressed for some sort of a compromise which would let the gas flow to their countries .
 The Europeans were desperate for the Ukrainians to do whatever it took to assuage the Russian gas threat . U.S. and its NATO allies pressed the Ukrainians on ending the Russian leases which allowed them a presence in the Black Sea .
 Russian gas was no substitute at that time for Russian gas so a compromise would have to be reached with the Russians . Despite the arguments brought forward in favour of each of these policies, a realistic assessment of the situation was made .
 Ukrainian and Russian parliaments ratified a deal to extend the lease on the Russian naval bases in the Ukraine for 25 years . The current current lease expired in 2017 .
 The Europeans then began an accelerated process to bring the government of the Ukraine under its wing and control . It could prevent further confrontations on the transport of gas .
 Ukraine was not very interested at that time in joining NATO . But it was interested in establishing a relationship within the aegis of the European Union .
 Tymoshenko met with the European Union under the terms of the European Neighbourhood Policy . The policy aimed to create a ring of friendly states allied but not members of the EU .
 The U.S. were loath to lose the opportunity of denying the Russians the use of naval bases in the Black Sea, especially after the Georgian War . The American foreign policy towards Ukraine was loath.
 Russia's main enemy was seen as Russia, and any diminution of Russian power and influence was their man concern .
 Yuschenko and Tymoshenko had just lost control of the Ukraine in the national election of a new President . Victor Yanukovych had taken office in February 2010 .
 Victor Yanukovych was the President from the Donbas region which the Yuschenko and Timoshenko governments had largely ignored or opposed during their presidencies .
 Yuliya Tymoshenko called on citizens to rise against the current leadership . Former Prime Minister Yulya Tymenko called on people to rise.
 The European Union continued to encourage the Ukraine to move closer to EU accession . The EU continues to encourage Ukraine to get closer to the EU .
 The Europeans wanted to control Ukrainian energy policy so that they could protect the European-wide price of gas . The first thing the Europeans wanted was to control Ukraine energy policy .
 In May 2010, President Victor Yanukovych promised to adopt legislation necessary for creating a free trade zone between Ukraine and the European Union .
 Further discussions in the next year led to proposals for even closer bonds between the EU and the Ukraine .
 Yanukovych arrested and jailed Tymoshenko for corruption. They were broken off when Yanukovych was arrested . They were jailed for corruption .
 The EU put the accession of Ukraine on hold until Yanukovych freed Tymoshenko . The Rada decided that before they would sign there should be a three-way trade agreement which included Russia to prevent a crisis with the Russians .
 Yanukovych refused to sign the agreement with the EU because his supporters, primarily in his Eastern heartland, were bitterly opposed to the terms of the EU accession .
 Violence intensified. Violence intensified and there were shootings and beatings on all sides .
On February 21 after negotiations between the president Yanukovych and representatives of the opposition and with mediation of representatives of European Union and Russia the Agreement was signed .
 The protestors and the U.S. government insisted on further concessions and the resignation of the President . However, this seemed generally acceptable as a compromise .
 The President felt that his time was up and that civil war was looming . Later that day, he felt that he was in the midst of a civil war .
 The Rada met the next day to impeach Yanukovych for being unable to perform his duties . Yanukovych was impeach by the Rada for not performing duties .
 The Russians began supporting the rebelling regions of Donetsk and Luhansk who had supported the ousted Yanukovych . They set a date for new elections and issued a warrant for the arrest of the ex-President .
Ukrainian army sent arms, equipment and soldiers to fight against the Ukrainian army .
 In April 2014, Russia supported local rebels who took over city halls and police stations in eastern Russia . Russia supported rebels who entered without approval .
 In July, Russia continued to strengthen its military force on the border with Russia .
 There were 19,000 to 21,000 troops, 14 advanced surface-to-air missile units, and 30 artillery batteries . There were 18,000-21,000 soldiers, including 14 advanced missile units .
 The Minsk Protocols were essentially irrelevant. Despite this, the battles continued and the Minsk protocols were virtually irrelevant .
 The Russians have sent troops and equipment to carry on a war against the Ukraine using their own troops and their surrogates in the Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Russia has a growing relationship with its newest partner, China . A formidable decline in Russia's ability to afford or achieve the modernisation of it military equipment and lack of competent manpower .
 The most developed facilities for military production were located in the Ukraine . The Ukraine has been the focus of the Russian military stance towards the Ukraine.
 The Russian Army had been starved of new equipment for over 20 years . Much of what they had available was built in the Ukraine .
 The military-industrial complex of Ukraine is the most advanced and developed branch of the state's sector of economy . Ukraine's military- industrial complex is the country's most developed branch.
 It includes about 85 scientific organizations which are specialized in the development of armaments and military equipment for different usage . It also includes about 80 scientific organizations specialized in developing military equipment .
 The air and space complex consists of 18 design bureaus and 64 enterprises . The air, space complex is the world's largest and most complex of its kind .
15 research and development institutes, 40 design bureaus and 67 plants have been brought together . In order to design and build ships and armaments for the Ukrainian Navy.
 This complex is tasked to design heavy cruisers, build missile cruisers and big antisubmarine warfare cruisers . The complex is also tasked to build small ASW ships and develop smallASW ships .
 Rocketry and missilery equipment, rockets, missiles, projectiles, and other munitions are designed and made at 6 design bureaus and 28 plants .
 Ukraine has its own scientific, technical and industrial capacities for the indigenous research, development and production of small arms . Ukraine has own scientific and technical capacities for indigenous research.
 A number of scientific-industrial corporations have started R&D and production of small arms . The arms industry is a growing trend in the past .
 The armour equipment is designed and manufactured at 3 design bureaus and 27 plants . The equipment is made from 3 design Bureaus, 27 plants and is made in 3 design plants .
 The scientific and industrial potential of Ukraine makes it possible to create and produce modern technical means of military communications and automated control systems at 2 scientific-research institutes and 13 plants . Ukraine has two scientific- research institutes.
 A total of 2 scientific research institutes and 53 plants produce power supply batteries . 3 scientific-research institutes, 6 plants manufacture intelligence and radio-electronic warfare equipment . 4 design bureaus and 27 plants make engineer equipment and materiel .
Despite efforts by Russian troops in the Eastern Ukraine many of the existing plants were attacked and damaged by the rebels of Donetsk and Lugansk. Despite efforts by the Russian troops, many of their plants were damaged .
 The skill set of the Russian factories has been degraded by the demographic crisis of Russia and the ageing population .
 Ukrainian Government decreed that it was banning all military sales to Russia . It was a challenge to Putin and his generals .
 The Russian government tallied up the costs of modernizing their aging military forces equipment . It concluded that it will total about $800 billion .
 Putin campaigned for the Presidency by calling for a rejuvenated Russian military . Putin called for the rejuvenated military .
 The arms manufacturers were in no position to use the funds even if they got them, owing to their state of dereliction and the disappearance of skilled workers in the machine-tool industry .
 Military modernisation was a key priority of the Russians but made infinitely more challenging by the loss of Ukrainian facilities, technology and skilled workers .
 Putin has consistently promised more funds for this endeavour . But he has been hampered by several key problems, some of which he cannot control .
There were about 1,599,316 births in 2018, a decline of 5.4% relative to the 1,689,884 births in 2017 . There were about 2,000 births last year, down from 1,600 in 2018 .
 There were about 1,817,710 deaths in 2018, a decline of 0.4% relative to the 1, 824,340 deaths in 2017 . There were 1,800 deaths in the same year, down 0.3% from 2017 .
 The rate of natural increase declined from -134,456 in 2017, to -218,394 in 2018 .
 The population was estimated at 146,793,744 as of Jan 1, 2019, down from 146,880,432 exactly one year ago . The population is estimated at146,793.744 .
 This implies about 131,706 in long-term net immigration, down from 172,551 last year . This implies that about 131.706 in Long-termNet immigration. This is down from172,551 in 2012 to 131,700 in 2013 .
 If accurate, this would mark the first time since 2007 that the population of Russia has declined in absolute termsvii . Most importantly there has been a mass migration of rural Russians in Siberia and the Russian East into the cities .
 The cost of the continuing war in the Ukraine and the massive bleed of Russian military resources in Syria are taking a heavy toll on the Russian budget .
 It has committed itself to a wide range of improvements in its military capabilities, despite its lack of adequate shipyards, missile factories, available conscript manpower, essential electronic and guidance systems and subsystems blocked by sanctions . It has also committed itself.
 Russia is engaged in some expansion of its intermediate range of its missile systems . Much of this is the traditional Russian policy of bluff and bluster .
Russian tanks had already had a marked effect on the deployment of tanks by the Russians and the rebels . These had already been deployed by the Russian and the rebel forces .
 In mid-December 2018 the Russians moved military convoys north on the Simferopol-Armyansk highway toward the border between Kherson Oblast and Crimea .
 Russia shifted 14 Su-27 and Su-30 fighter jets to Belbek Airbase near Sevastopol . Russia shifted fourteen Su- 27 and Su 30 fighter jets from Belbek .
 The Russians built a bridge over the Kerch Strait to bring supplies to the Crimea . The unsteady bridge is not expected to last too long because of the seismic conditions in the Strait . It is low enough to block many of the commercial vessels shipping goods to and
 The U.S. and Europeans have been pushing back against this attempt by Russia to strangle the Ukraine economically . The Russians haven't stopped their continued pressure on the Ukraine .
 Ukraine has a new dimension to the power equation with the arrival of a large Chinese presence in the Ukraine .
 China has increased its involvement in Ukraine, using development assistance through its Belt and Road Initiative as a rational for its efforts . China has also increased its participation in the Ukraine .
 China aggressively competes with Ukraine’s Western partners for a strong foothold in this important frontier economy .
 China and Chinese companies have a huge pot of money that they're largely willing to spend without explicit conditions . Europe and North America has a price-tag.
 A free trade agreement and visa-free regime has contributed to Ukraine's largest bilateral trading partner 30 billion euros per year, with 27 percent year-on-year increases . The European Union is the largest bilateral trade partner in the EU .
 Canada also has an FTA with Ukraine while trade with the U.S. is steady . Canada is also having a FTA with the Ukraine .
 China sees the Ukraine as a special area of interest, both for its location and for its agricultural productivity .
 Ukraine has access to the Danube River, the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov . Ukraine is also on the Black sea and Sea ofAzov .
 It has 170,000 kilometres of road and 22,000km of interconnected railway to Europe . It is the largest railway network in the world . It has a total of 22,500 kilometres of railway to European countries .
 The Chinese are opposing any expanded military initiatives between Russia and the Ukraine, especially those which close down its ports and rail lines . At the moment there is no open conflict between China and Russia over the Ukraine .
 China has essentially economic interests in the Ukraine . interests will disappear if hostilities break out between the two .
 The Chinese have grown to be a much more formidable military power than the Russians . The Chinese are now more powerful than the Russian .
 Chinese military history is one which demonstrates growth in Chinese power .
 The most important conflict between the Russian military and Putin arose from Putin's policy towards China .
 Putin has been making every effort to engage with the Chinese in asking their assistance to join with Russia as a consumer of its energy exports . Putin is also a builder of pipelines, ports, railroads and as a financial partner .
 Putin is in direct conflict with the Russian military who see the Chinese as a strategic enemy . This has put Putin in direct battle with the Russia military .
 There has been an intense competition between the two nations in their border regions for decades . The competition led to military confrontation between the nations along the Ussuri River .
 In May 1962 60,000 ethnic Uighurs crossed from China's Xinjiang Province into the Soviet Union . They received assistance and materiel for their separatist aims .
 The Chinese and the Soviets started talks to regularise the conflict . In an effort to restore harmony the Chinese and Soviets started talk to regularising the conflict.
 There were long-standing Chinese grievances over the stripping and annexing of Chinese land by the Russian and Soviet states since the late 1890s .
 This included the land in the Pamir Mountains and the territory of Tajikistan . This included land in Pamir Mountain and territory of the Tajkistan .
 The Treaty of Beijing in 1900 had stripped away Outer Mongolia from China and drawn the riverine boundaries of the Argun, the Amur and the Ussuri Rivers . The Chinese only controlled their own banks of these rivers .
 The Soviets controlled the water but the whole river and the islands in them . The Soviets control the entire river and islands in the water .
 On the Eastern Front, in March 1969, the Chinese PLA suddenly attacked the Soviet border guards on Zenbao Island, killing 59 soldiers .
 Chinese Marshal Lin Biao, Commander of the Shenyang Military District, generated the plan of attack in January 1969 under the code name 'Retribution' The plan was signed off by Mao Tze Tung .
 About three hundred PLA soldiers crossed over to the island on the night of March 2 . They suddenly opened fire on the group of Russian border guards that had been sent to investigate at mid-morning .
 The Russian unit evidently had no protection and was quickly destroyed .
 Soviet troops forced the Chinese off the island after about two weeks . The Soviet troops were forced to leave the island .
 In August 1969 there were further incidents in Xinjiang . This time in the West, this time in China, in August 1969 .
 The Soviets crossed the border and killed around 30 Chinese soldiers in Tieleketi, China .
 The Chinese were worried about a Soviet attack on nearby Lop Nur, the site of China's nuclear test facilities .
There continued to be further incidents during the Cultural Revolution . There continued to have been further incidents.
 Negotiations were resumed in 1991 and a partial treaty was signed on May 29, 1994 .
 Yeltsin and Jiang Zemin agreed a treaty establishing the border between the two countries in 1997 . This was completed in November 1997 at a summit meeting in Beijing .
 Relations have been strained since then as there is an increasing imbalance between the two sides . The imbalance is militarily, economically, economically and in terms of manpower .
 Even Russians admit that this work will be performed by Chinese labourers . Even the Russians admit they will perform it .
 The Russian military has no such compulsions. The politicians may think it makes sense to shift their focus to co-operation with China .
 The Russian military said that they were concerned for the naval bases in Sovetskaya Gavan and Bolshoi Kamen . The bases are not far away from each other .
 Putin worried more about NATO than they worry about the Chinese with billions of people a quarter of a mile away across the Amur and the Ussuri Rivers .
 Russia would not be strong enough to protect itself if the Chinese decided to take back some of its lost lands in the Russian Far East .
 China is trying to buy or control the vast military capability of the Ukraine which was denied to the Russians after their invasion of Ukraine . China is also trying to control the Ukraine.
 Ukrainians and its Western partners are not willing to allow what many consider a national treasure become Chinese owned . Ukrainians and their Western partners aren't willing to let what many think is a national Treasure become a Chinese owned.
 China has been buying components from Motor Sich since the 1990s . It wants to get access to their trade secrets and key personnel . China wants to know more about the company.
 Russia is nervous as well because until 2014 Russia was also dependent on Motor Sich for some key aircraft and industrial components . Russia is also nervous because of its reliance on the manufacturer .
 Russia has not been successful in creating adequate Russian suppliers for Crimea . As long as Russia is occupying Crimea and parts of Donbas those business relationships are blocked .
 We need high-precision missiles and we are not going to repeat the mistakes of the Budapest memorandum, says the government . We need to be more precise and more precise .