 Scholar Publishing House and Centre for Polish-Russian Dialogue and Understanding, 2017 .
Two recent books, one analysing the question of the Russian annexation of Crimea in 2014 directly and the other in the context of changing geopolitics and world order, are discussed .
 Parallels with war pamphlets in the 18th century, authored by Olaus Hermelin and Petr Shafirov, are drawn .
 Rein Müllerson's suggestion that the world should return to balance-of-power politics in the context of international law is rejected .
 Research for and writing of this review essay was supported by Grant no. 2 .
 IUT20-50 of the Estonian Research Council and fellowship of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars . The Estonian research council is based in Estonia and is based at the University of Estonia .
 UNGA resolutions are legally non-binding, but majority expressed predominant opinion of the international community . The majority expressed the predominant opinion. The UNGA's resolutions of the UNGA are not binding .
 Only 11 states voted against the resolution, 58 abstained and 24 remained absent when voting took place .
 China, a permanent member of the U.N. Security Council, avoided a direct answer regarding the question of illegality .
 The UNGA vote also demonstrates a certain fragmentation of the international community along geopolitical lines and alliances .
 declaring a territorial situation illegal does not in itself offer detailed guidance for how to practically deal with it . There appears to be no end in sight, especially when there appears to have been no end.
 Western states have adopted additional sanctions against Russia in recent years . The sanctions have not been controversial .
 The typical pattern has been that sanctions against Russia once adopted by U.S. Congress would then be undermined by presidential statements that were broadly understood as supportive of Russian claims regarding Crimea .
 The biannual ritual of prolonging sanctions against Russia is also accompanied by sceptical voices of influential politicians . A similar approach can also be observed in some European Union countries .
 President Vladimir Putin made Russia’s legal-political case to justify the incorporation of Crimea into Russian territory in March 2014 .
 Moscow's justifications have not been successful internationally, at least not in the short term . Based on the subsequent Western reactions and sanctions, Moscow’s justifications haven't been successful .
 Among international lawyers in the West, Thomas D Grant expressed the representative view well when emphasizing the illegality of the annexation .
In Russia, lawyers have offered legal-political justifications of the annexation . In Russia, they have been made to reassure domestic audiences . In contrast, lawyers in Russia have offered justifications for annexation .
 Elena A Lukyanova is a constitutional law professor from the Higher School of Economics in Moscow . She also publicly expressed doubts about the legality of the annexation of Crimea .
1 UNGA Res. Valery Zorkin's analysis triggered a rapid and equally spirited rebuttal by 1 UNG Res.
 Lukyanova, ‘O prave nalevo’ is the name of Novaya Gazeta . The Russian-born Russian is a former member of the Russian National Council .
 The popular approval of Crimea’s annexation has apparently been so overwhelming that even pro-Western opposition politicians have been confused about how to proceed .
Ksenia Sobchak, a presidential candidate in the March 2018 elections, admitted that the 2014 annexation was illegal . In order to solve the conundrum, one would need a new and proper referendum on the issue – in Crimea, Ukraine, and Russia itself .
 In 2001, the drafters of the ILC’s draft Articles on State Responsibility did not think of this possibility when discussing consequences of illegal annexations . We can assume that, in 2001, they did not.
 For international lawyers, the most interesting question is whether Moscow has any serious legal-political arguments for annexation . It would at least deserve our attention from an intellectual or moral standpoint .
 The deployment of Russian special forces during the takeover of power in Crimea violated Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter .
 Russia’s annexation also violated the border treaty concluded by Russia and Ukraine in 2003 . Russia had recognized Crimea as part of Ukraine. In addition, Russia's annexation also violates the treaty .
 The current debate about the legality of Russia’s actions in Crimea can also be seen from a historical perspective . But, beyond the immediate normative arguments, the current debate can be seen as historical .
 Russia’s accession to the jus publicum europaeum in the early 18th century coincided with the publication of such war manifestos and pamphlets . Russia's accession of the euro paeum coincided with such war manifestsos and papers .
 In 1700, Muscovy’s Tsar Peter the Great attacked the Kingdom of Sweden in the province of Estonia at the town of Narva . The Great Nordic War broke out in the region of Estonia in the 1700s .
 A Conversation with Russian Presidential Candidate Ksenia Sobchak’s, Center for Strategic and International Studies .
 The 11 Journal of Early Modern History 63. Legitimations of War and the Formation of European Identity in the Early Modern Period .
 Russian diplomat Petr Shafirov (1670– 1739) to respond with Russian arguments . He was tasked with responding to Russian arguments, mostly offering a different perspective on what had happened .
 Shafirov's pamphlet became Russia’s first publication related to the tradition of international law . The pamphlet is Russia's first published related to international law.
In the absence of international courts, the debate on the justness of the Great Nordic War was ultimately decided on the battlefield . Russia's victory was the triumph of Russia, according to the author .
 The Swedish and Russian war pamphlets were meant to influence the European public opinion, at least before the peace treaty of Nystad finally recognized the territorial changes in 1721 .
 Oona Hathaway and Scott Shapiro write that war manifestos were first of all a means of propaganda . They write that since at that time starting a war was not prohibited in international law, war manifesto was not .
Onethird of the historical war manifestos that those authors collected and examined charged their enemies for the disruption of the balance of power .
 balance-of-power arguments have played a certain role in legal-moral-political justifications of war . This demonstrates that, at least historically in Europe, balance of power arguments has played a role in war justifications .
 Balance-of-power considerations have been typically considered irrelevant for post-1945 discussions of jus ad bellum in international law .
 The idea of balance of power has lived on in post-1945 international relations literature . Henry Kissinger was the former U.S. chief diplomat and foreign policy theorist .
 Peevers, ‘Liberal Internationalism, Radical Transformation and the Making of World Orders’, is a European Journal of International Law 303 .
 The Case of Crimea’s Annexation under International Law is the outcome of an international conference organized in Warsaw in March 2015, one year after the annexation . The first book reviewed here is the first book published by the author .
 The Warsaw conference became one of the two prominent European conferences that focused specifically on the study of the annexation of Crimea from an international legal viewpoint . This came after the initial lively encounter of some leading Russian and Ukrainian international law scholars at the meeting of the European Society of International Law’s
 Polish editors have aimed at a diversity of viewpoints so that the Russian perspective would also be represented .
 The successors of both Hermelin and Shafirov have been given an opportunity to make their respective cases in this book .
Most authors of chapters either proceed from the assumption, or come to the conclusion, that Russia’s annexation was illegal . Nevertheless, the representation of the Russian official perspective has remained weaker, according to the authors .
 Tolstykh fails to lay out explicitly what consequences his thoughts would have in the context of Crimea . However, unfortunately, he does not explain what consequences he would have .
 Zadorozhnii does not think that the Crimean people met the criteria for a claim to self-determination in international law .
 Russia has insisted that only the UNSC can determine the existence of aggression . In this organ, it also famously has veto power . This is not an absurd question since Russia, along with some other permanent members, has insisted .
 Issaeva seems to suggest that international law experts should lead the way and seek to tell even uncomfortable truths .
 Not all international lawyers are courageous enough to take on the prevailing public opinion . But not all are brave enough to do so .
 Mindia Vashakmadze analyses the Russian practice of the forcible protection of nationals abroad . She is originally from Georgia, and is from Georgia .
 Moscow's current interpretation of what it is entitled to do in the pursuit of the protection of its nationals did not newly emerge in 2014 but was much earlier established . The previous precedents in the post-Soviet region, not the least in Caucasus, indicate that Moscow’s current interpretation
 She does not consider Russia’s actions in Crimea legal . She rejects the Western portrayal of Moscow as ‘the only guilty party’ and thinks that the illegality of Russia's behaviour did not justify sanctions .
 Russia has not recognized the annexation of Crimea by Russia . Douhan's argument reflects her country's difficult position as Russia’s close ally .
 The Crimea annexation and follow-up of the still ongoing military conflict in southeastern Ukraine are discussed . The annexation of Crimea and the annexation of the Crimea are also discussed .
 Problems of state responsibility, individual criminal responsibility under international law are discussed . The legality of the EU trade sanctions under World Trade Organization law is also discussed .
 Kane examines the ‘prudence, propriety and potential ramifications’ of the Ukrainian use of language . He says it is fighting ‘terrorism’ in southeastern Ukraine .
 This is highly relevant in the ongoing International Court of Justice case between Ukraine and Russia . The case is currently being heard in the International court of Justice .
 Stadlmeier looks in a definitive manner at the shooting down of Malaysia Airlines Flight MH 17 . Netherlands and Australia have held the Russian Federation accountable for the incident .
 The collection of articles represents the mainstream viewpoint in the sense that the reader inevitably puts the book aside with the knowledge that, in Crimea, Russia has acted illegally .
 The confirmation of this mainstream view is helpful, but, of course, it does have limits . The confirmation is helpful.
 There is no convincing legal-political argument for the 'Russian case' Despite the editors' attempts at diversity, there is no evidence of a legal argument for Russia's annexation .
 Crimean people deserve self-determination, says Amoroso . Douhan's criticism that the West has used double standards does not go deep enough in opening up reasons for and consequences of the annexation of Crimea .
 The argument for legality is a very tough one to make in the framework of existing international law, after all . The arguments for legality are very tough.
 The majority of the world's states consider the annexation of Crimea illegal . But Russia affirms that, from 2014 on, Crimea will always remain Russian .
 Some Russian international lawyers have suggested to search for a justification of Russia’s incorporation of Crimea outside the framework of existing international law .
 The Russian version of the ‘illegal but legitimate’ argument is the Russian version. Essentially, this is the Russians version of a ‘ illegal but legitimate' argument .
 The Shafirovs of today need to say something more general about international law in the contemporary world that would change our normative outlook and make Russia’s actions in Ukraine more palatable .
 Rein Müllerson undertakes an ambitious project in his book Dawn of a New World Order . This is the ambitious project which he undertakes.
Müllerson has also been active in the Valdai Discussion Club, which has privileged access to Russia’s President Putin .
 Müllerson's book is not only about international law but also about international politics and current affairs .
 In this review, I will omit the discussion of these nonlegal parts concerning the world order more generally . I will just focus on Müllerson’s international legal analysis .
 In his book, Müllerson does not explicitly admit that he is going to make the pro-Russian argument about the state of international law . In his new book, he says he is not explicitly admitting that he will make the argument .
 The author also criticizes the prevalence of ‘advocacy research’ in international law .
When discussing Crimea, we should not start with Crimea and 2014, instead, with Kosovo in 1999 . Müllerson emphasizes that, when discussing Crimea in 2014, we shouldn't start with Ukraine and 2014 .
 Müllerson's view is that if Russia's annexation of Crimea was illegal then, on the same terms, so too was NATO’s bombing of Yugoslavia and the later recognition of Kosovo as an independent state .
 There is a certain relativity of violations of international law. A certain ‘balance’ of violations emerges, says the author .
 Russia violated international law against Ukraine, but Müllerson suggests that, before that, the West had had its own share of major violations . The West, led by the USA, had a share of violations, he says .
 This is the classical Russian reproach of Kosovo 1999, Iraq 2003 and Libya 2011 as United States violations of international law . The U.S. has recently made it into Western popular culture .
 Russia violated Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter, and even committed aggression against Ukraine . Müllerson also attempts to diminish what actually happened in Crimea in 2014 .
 Müllerson refers euphemistically to the ‘tragedy of Ukraine’ seeming to evoke the classical tradition wherein a ‘ tragedy’ is referred to . The phrase is a reference to a classical tradition.
55 Western propaganda, compared to Russian propaganda, is ‘much more sophisticated, experienced and widespread and therefore it may even not look like propaganda at all’
58.58 has simply responded to attempts of containment in their various forms . However, such voices should be tamed because ‘now is not the time to let phobias to triumph over reason'
 NATO is a ‘relic of the Cold War’60 and ‘the greatest geopolitical nonsense of the twenty-first century’61 Müllerson hopes that God would ‘help us avoiding revolutions, whatever be their colour’
 Müllerson, a citizen of a small ‘border’ state himself, critically comments on international law’s ‘anarchophilia’ He sees reflected in the principle of self-determination .
 His view echoes the opinion of another Baltic international lawyer who made international legal arguments for Russia . Friedrich Martens, who in the 1880s opined that the emerging principle of self-determination of peoples was ‘capable of destroying a lot’ (as it did)
 The Russian annexation of Crimea was carried out ‘to a great extent because of the foreseeable risk of having American or NATO forces in the peninsula’ Moscow mentioned ‘historical, ethnical and religious reasons as real justifications’
Müllerson puts aside references to self-determination of peoples and suggested discrimination of ethnic Russians in Ukraine as sort of plausible pretexts .
 Martens, Sovremennoe mezhdunarodnoe pravo tsivilizovannykh narodov, at 121, is the most popular law in the world .
 Moscow has almost done international law a favour in a deeper historical sense . However, in the end, for Müllerson, it is not a favour for Moscow .
 Russia dared to resist the would-be global hegemon – the USA – and made a bold step towards the restoration of the balance of power as the underlying socio-political meta-principle . Russia's annexation of the U.S. has enabled the international
 The current Russian leadership thinks about Crimea and security matters in Europe, inter alia, in balance-of-power terms .
 contemporary international lawyers have started to forget what role balance-of-power arguments have played in the considerations of war and peace in classical international law .
 The main question in the era of the UN Charter is how any balance-of-power claim relates to the prohibition of the threat and use of force against other sovereign states enshrined in Article 2 .
 The reintroduction of balance-of-power thinking in the context of international legal theory would undermine Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter, as it was already violated in Crimea and Donbass .
 One can never be sure whether a balance has been restored or not since any such thinking on balance would be subjective . Other powers might be challenged by other powers .
 Acknowledging balance of power as the meta-principle preceding international law of the UN Charter would mean that the principle of sovereign equality of states would suffer, as Müllerson himself partly admits .
Great powers would only in the sense that an open military conflict over their territory would for that moment be unlikely . They would only if they reached a consensus about their respective spheres of influence .
 Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter cannot be killed simply by single attacks of major powers . They can be killed primarily by other, competing ideas, says the author .
In this sense, balance of power as additional justification in jus ad bellum matters is clearly detrimental to the restrictive jusad bellum settlement as it was agreed upon in 1928 and 1945 . The settlement was agreed on in 1928, 1945 .
In the 18th century, irrespective 80 Müllerson, supra note 42, at 159. We know that in the 18st century, Müllerson was at 159 .
 In any case, participating in direct lawfare come with risks and, in fact, used to be outright dangerous . The lawfare is often dangerous.
 Olaus Hermelin became a Russian prisoner of war at the battle of Poltava in 1709 and died in Russian captivity . Olaus Shemelin was a Russian soldier who died at the end of 1709 .
Personal consequences related to lawfare have become less severe. Luckily, nowadays, personal consequences have been less severe .
 Sławomir D�’bski, the co-editor of the book published in Warsaw, was declined a Russian visa in 2018 . He could not attend the games of the Polish team at the World Cup .
 Müllerson spoke at a conference in Crimea at Simferopol in 2017 . He was criticized for it by the Estonian Internal Security Service .
 Müllerson’s book raises the question of assumptions underlying the international legal order since 1945 .
Former Soviet international legal thinking has transformed into an ultra-realist analysis of the place of international law in the world order . It reveals how Russian attitudes towards Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter have changed considerably .
 The reading of Müllerson’s book also fits well in the context of the recent historical rediscovery by Western international lawyers of the history of the UN Charter and its 1928 predecessor, the Kellogg-Briand Pact .
 Hathaway and Shapiro present treaties and norms as historically progressive and revolutionary achievements . They say they divide history of international law into the regressive past and more humanistic and peaceful thereafter .
 The UN Charter’s Article 2, paragraph 4 is too much presented as a Western affair and contribution . The book by Hathaway and Shapiro does not sufficiently take into account Soviet perspectives .
Müllerson now tells us that in his view the UN Charter was, among other things, also a balance-of-power arrangement . In this sense, it is useful that Müllerson says that in this sense.
 Hathaway and Shapiro write in the context of the Kellogg-Briand Pact in 1928 . The point was that past conquests would be protected, but future conquests wouldn't .
 The Soviet Union had already conquered the Soviet Union in 1945 . It was saturated in 1945, even though it had already been conquered . The USSR was a successful state, but it was also heavily saturated .
 Joseph Stalin had earlier made a pact with Adolf Hitler on 23 August 1939 in order to achieve territorial changes in Eastern Europe . The Soviet 83 Estonian Internal Security Service, Annual Review 2017, is available at 9, available at www.kapo.
 The Plan to Outlaw War, Review’, The Guardian, is available at www. theguardian.com/books/2017/dec/16 .
 In 1945 the Soviets led by Stalin approached the prohibition of the use of force also in terms of realpolitik and balance of power . In 1945, the Soviets conducted a pacifist normative revolution in international law .
 The main principles of international law were agreed upon in 1945 when the Soviet Union had a different territorial composition from today’s Russian Federation .
 Post-Soviet Russia’s jus ad bellum doctrine has changed quite drastically compared to the Soviet approach . The Soviet approach was similar to that of the Soviet era .
 The Soviet Union preached full adherence to Article 2, paragraph 4, and heavily criticized powers like the USA, UK and Israel for their too liberal interpretations of humanitarian intervention .
 post-Soviet Russia’s jus ad bellum doctrine started to emphasize that military force could be used in defence of Russian-speaking minorities abroad .
 The only way to explain this is through realism – in 1945, the Soviet Union was territorially oversaturated, and after 1991, Russia felt an existential threat . In 1945, Russia was territorialized, and in 1991, it felt a threat to Russia .
 The text of the UN Charter remained exactly the same; yet from one of the ‘conservative’ pillars of the United Nations came the challenger of the territorial order .
 The international community should not currently even discuss the possibility of recognizing Crimea as part of Russia . This also applies to Ukraine, which is also part of Ukraine .
 Changes in territorial status can take place only in the agreement of Kiev and Moscow . Any foreign direct pressure on Kiev would not just be immoral but also probably illegal .
 Former Soviet republics gained full sovereignty in 1991 . Any attempts to undo this run contrary to their rights as sovereign states under the UN Charter .
 balance of power as a historical meta-principle related to international law can only be reintroduced at the cost of relativizing the prohibition of threat and the use of military force .
 It is a dangerous idea and should be rejected lest the international community risk losing the constraining effects of Article 2, paragraph 4 of the UN Charter . The UN should reject the idea, says the author of the article .