 The Ukrainian Naval Forces is the navy of Ukraine and part of the Armed Forces of Ukraine . The Ukrainian Navy is the Navy of the Ukraine .
 In 2007 and prior to the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea 15,470 people served the Ukrainian Navy . In 2007, 15, 470 people served in the Ukraine Navy .
 The headquarters of the Ukrainian Naval Forces was, until the 2014 Crimean crisis, situated at Sevastopol in Crimea . The Crimean crisis took place in 2014 .
 The Naval Forces of Ukraine were highly affected by the Crimea Crisis . Most of their units were stationed in Ukraine .
 Ships that did not escape or were not deployed at the time lowered their flags and were interned . Ships that didn't escape or weren't deployed are interned.
 Russia began a process of returning the vessels but stopped, citing inability of Ukraine to retake possession and continued violence against Russians in the Donbass . Russia began the process of return the vessels.
 The ships that were returned were the older models of the fleet that were deemed obsolete . The ships were returned to the fleet were the old models that were considered obsolete .
 Russia chose not to return the corvettes Ternopil and Lutsk, both of which are some of the newest ships of the Ukrainian fleet . For example, Russia chose to not return the ships.
 None of the Ukrainian naval units retained were absorbed into the Russian Navy . However, none of the Ukraine naval units were absorbed in the Russian navy .
 Ukraine had been scheduling to rebuild its naval forces since 2005 . The first Ukrainian designed and built corvette, 58250, was built by Willard Marine in 2013 .
 Ukraine has also restarted production of its Gryuza River Armed Artillery Boat . The boat has been previously exported to Uzbekistan .
 Distant operations of the Ukrainian Navy are limited to multinational activities . Operation Active Endeavour and Operation Atalanta in the Mediterranean and Horn of Africa .
 The Ukrainian Naval Forces trace their history to the Zaporizhian Sich Cossacks . They would frequently raid Ottoman settlements along the Black Sea coast .
 Cossacks utilized small ships called ""chaikas" which were similar in design to Viking long ships . Cossack used small ships known as "chaos" which are similar to Viking ships . The ships were similar to those used by the Vikings .
 The Cossacks had great success against their opponent . Although technologically inferior to the Turks the Cossack were technologically inferior .
 In 1615 the Cossacks were able to mount a raid on Istanbul itself . The raid destroyed several suburbs of the city .
 In 1616 a Cossack fleet was able to reach the Bosphorus, once again raiding the surrounding countryside . The fleet was also able to raid the surrounding area in 1616 .
 A Turkish fleet sent to destroy the Cossack forces was defeated in 1617 .
 The Cossacks once again managed to mount an attack on Istanbul in 1625 . The Sultan was forced to temporarily flee the capital .
 The Cossacks used several strategies to attack the larger Ottoman forces, such as positioning their ships during battle in a way that sun was always at their back .
 The Cossack ships are small with a low profile, making them hard to hit by cannon . The ships were small with low profile.
 Cossacks were typically armed with small arm muskets . During battle had the goal of killing the crew and boarding the ship to take it over, rather than sinking it .
 The origins of the contemporary Ukrainian Naval Forces intertwined with the fate of the Soviet Black Sea Fleet and with the modern history of the Crimea . The modern Ukrainian naval forces are based in the Crimea.
 The administration of the Soviet Armed Forces passed to the Joint Armed Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States for a transitional period pending agreement on division of the ex-Soviet military between members of the former Soviet Union .
 Marshal of Aviation Yevgeny Shaposhnikov became commander of the Joint CIS Armed Forces command on 14 February 1992 . He was commander of Joint CIS armed forces command .
 On 6 December 1991 the Supreme Council of Ukraine adopted a resolution on the laws of Ukraine . The resolution also included the text of a military oath .
 Minister of Defense of Ukraine, Kostyantyn Morozov, became the first person to take the oath . On the same day, in the parliament of Ukraine chamber, the minister of defense of Ukraine was sworn in .
 On 10 December 1991 the Supreme Council of Ukraine ratified the Belavezha Accords . The Belavezh Accords were signed in 1991 . It was the first time Ukraine had ratified the Accords.
 President of Ukraine issued ukase #4 on 12 December 1991 . All military formations based in Ukraine to pledge allegiance by 20 January 1992 .
 On 1 January 1992 the newspaper Vympyel of the Black Sea Fleet Filipp Oktyabrskiy Training unit published the military oath and the anthem of Ukraine in the Ukrainian language .
 On 3 January 1992 Ukraine started the practical formation of its national armed forces . Ukraine's armed forces were formed in 1992 .
 On 8 January 1992 the Officers' Assembly of the Black Sea Fleet appealed to all leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States to recognise the Black sea Fleet as an operational-strategic formation and not subordinate to Ukraine .
 On 12 January 1992, the brigade of border troops in Balaklava became the first military formation to pledge allegiance to Ukraine .
 The Governor of Sevastopol appealed to the Supreme Councils of both Ukraine and the Russian Federation, urging faster adoption of the Black Sea Fleet .
 On 16 January 1992, an agreement between the participants of Commonwealth of Independent States was signed on the oath in strategic formations . The agreement was signed in 1992 .
 On 18 January 1992, the 3rd company of the divers school became the first formation of the Black Sea Fleet to pledge their allegiance to Ukraine . The Maritime Department of the Sevastopol Institute of Instrument Engineering was the first company to pledge allegiance to the Ukraine .
 Forty-six naval pilots pledged their allegiance to Ukraine at the central square of Mykolaiv .
Black Sea Fleet military personnel previously under oath of the Soviet Armed Forces did not pledge allegiance to the newly formed state . Black Sea Fleet members did not hasten to pledge allegiance.
 The 17th Brigade of Ships for the Guarding the Water Area of the Crimea Naval Base followed the example of the divers in 1992 .
Right before the Soviet Army and Navy Day on 22 February, the 880th Independent Naval Infantry Battalion of Black Sea Fleet pledged allegiance to Ukraine . Right before the Soviets Day, the battalion's members pledged allegiance.
 The battalion had been recognized as the best formation of the fleet in 1991 . The battalion was recognized as best formation in 1991.
 The Main Navy Staff in Moscow issued an order to dissolve the battalion . The order was issued by the Main Navy staff in Moscow .
 After the incident, all military units of the Black Sea Fleet recruited exclusively Russians . All military units recruited exclusively Russian .
 From the beginning, relationships between the newly formed states of Russia Federation and the Republic of Ukraine were tense .
 In 1992 the Supreme Soviet of Russia raised the question of the political status of Crimea . In January 1992 it raised the issue of the constitutionality of the 1954 decision to transfer of Crimean Oblast to the Ukrainian SSR .
 Many Russian parliamentarians refused to recognize the legal document, pointing out procedural errors during its adoption .
 The Ukrainian side issued reminders of the number of international treaties and agreements between the two countries . Both sides recognized the territorial integrity of the other, as well as the Belavezha Accords of 8 December 1991 .
 In September 1991, an office of the Society of Ukrainian Officers was opened in Sevastopol . It was the initiative of Major Volodymyr Kholodyuk and captains-lieutenant Ihor Tenyukh and Mykola Huk .
 The Ukrainian Naval Forces become the initiator and nucleus of the organization of the Ukrainian Naval forces . The society becomes the initiators and nucleus.
 On 7 April 1992 at 17:00 37 officers of the administration and headquarters of the Crimean Naval Base pledged their allegiance and loyalty to Ukraine .
 Rear Admiral Borys Kozhyn was not present at that time of the event . He was in charge at the time .
 Ivan Yermakov accepted a proposition of the Supreme Council of Ukraine to become the commander of the future Ukrainian Naval Forces . He was in the office of IvanYermakov, who was in his office in Ukraine's presidency .
 On 13 April 1992 an organizational group was established on creation of the Ukrainian Naval Forces . It upset the command of the Black Sea Fleet, which upset the Navy's command .
 SKR-112 – effectively the first Ukrainian Navy ship – was the first ship to be built in Ukraine .
 The crew of SKR-112 declared itself a Ukrainian ship and raised the Ukrainian flag . On 20 July 1992, the crew of the ship declared itself an Ukrainian ship .
 The Navy headquarters in Moscow considered this a mutiny and attempted to act accordingly . The Navy's headquarters considered this an attempt to act. The Navy HQ in Moscow tried to take action .
 The ship left its base on the Crimean peninsula bound for Odessa, causing a chase and ramming attempts by ships still loyal to Moscow . The ship is still on its way to Odessa .
Several other ships, auxiliary vessels, and coastal units of the Black Sea Fleet followed SKR-112's decision . Several other ships and auxiliary vessels also followed the decision .
 In 1997, the ships and equipment of the Black Sea Fleet were officially divided between the two countries . It was only in 1997 that the ships, equipment and equipment were officially separated .
Under a negotiated lease agreement it was also granted rights to use the majority of its bases on the Crimea Peninsula, Ukraine on a renewable ten-year lease basis .
 The newly established Ukrainian Naval Forces received dozens of vessels and some shore-based infrastructure . The new Naval Forces are the first of its kind in Ukraine .
 The Russian Navy lost several important facilities, most notably the NITKA naval aviation training facility in Saky, and the special forces base in Ochakiv .
 Many aspects of the two navies' co-existence were under-regulated, causing recurring conflicts . The process of fleet division remained painful since many aspects of their co- existence were not regulated .
 Since 1997 due to lack of financing and neglect most of the Ukrainian naval units have been scrapped or poorly maintained . Since 1997 most of Ukraine's naval units were scrapped or badly maintained .
Only the frigate Hetman Sahaydachniy, originally built to be a Soviet Border Guards ship, was capable of long endurance missions . By 2009, only the ship had been able to carry out long-distance missions .
 Most of the Ukrainian naval assets, as those of the other branches, comprise mainly Soviet-era equipment . No major plan for modernization has yet emerged, except for a new corvette design completed in 2009 .
 If built, the ship was supposed to operate in the Black and Mediterranean seas . It would be 30 days, displacement 2,500 tons . If built.
 Leading European arms manufacturers like DCNS, MBDA, and EuroTorp were to deliver weapons for the project . The project was part of a joint effort by European arms companies .
 Ukraine's corvette construction program approved by Ukrainian government in March 2011 . Overall amount of program financing till 2021 would be about UAH 16.22 billion .
As of 2016 the completion of this project is uncertain . Given the bankrupt state of the Ukrainian economy, as of 2016, it's uncertain .
 Ukraine maintained a very modest naval force for a nation that lacked shores with any of the world's oceans . Prior to the Crimea Crisis Ukraine had a very small naval force .
 In the 2014 Crimean crisis, Russia annexed Crimea, where the majority of the bases of the Ukrainian Navy were situated . In the Crimea crisis, Russian forces annexed Crimea .
 Twelve thousand of Ukraine's 15,450 Navy personnel were based in Crimea . 12,000 Navy personnel are based in the Crimea region .
 The naval base north of Odessa became the main operational Ukrainian Naval base . The Ukrainian naval base was the first naval base in Ukraine to become a naval base .
 Ukraine also lost control of its Navy's main underground ammunition-storage site at the Inkerman valley, outside Sevastopol, as well as of its helicopter-repair facilities .
 Ukraine temporarily lost 51 ships, mostly auxiliaries, to Russia as the majority were stationed in Crimea . The majority of the ships were in Crimea.
Main fleet force consists of one frigate commissioned in 1993 and four corvettes . The main fleet force is one frig ship, one ship, and four ships .
 Russia also returned a Polnocny-class landing ship to Ukraine restoring Ukraine's amphibious assault capabilities . Russia also also returned the PolnOCny- class landing ship .
 Russia returned 35 ships but unilaterally suspended the return of Ukrainian Navy materials from Crimea to Ukraine proper . Ukraine did not renew its unilaterally declared ceasefire on 1 July 2014 in the War in Donbass . minor auxiliary ships are hence yet to return to Ukraine properly .
 Ukrainian Navy servicemen left the service for Russia when Crimea was annexed by Russia .
 Among those were members of the upper echelon of command of the Ukrainian Navy . The Ukrainian Navy is the largest navy in the world .
 The Ukrainian Navy compiled and released a list of the officers who left the Ukrainian Navy for Russia . The list calls their actions treasonous .
 Rear Admiral Dmitriy Shakuro is a first deputy commander and chief of staff for the Ukrainian Navy . He is the first chief of Staff for the Ukraine Navy .
 Rear Admiral Denis Berezovsky, commander-in-chief of the Ukrainian Navy for one day, is now a Black Sea Fleet deputy commander and chief of the combat training directorate .
 Colonel Sergei Tarkhov is a chief of staff assistant in organization and sustainment of international relations . He is the chief of Staff assistant in the organization andustainment of International relations .
 Three Ukrainian navy vessels attempted to redeploy from the Black Sea port Odessa to the Sea of Azov port Mariupol in November 2018 . The Russian FSB security service captured the vessels during the 2018 Kerch Strait incident .
 The navy has been highly affected by Crimea's occupation by Russian Federation . The majority of Ukraine's ships were stationed in Crimea .
 Ukraine had developed plans to rebuild their naval capability even before the crisis . Ukraine had planned to build 4-10 new corvettes at the Mykolaiv Shipyard .
 This was one of the Soviet Union's largest shipyards and it built Russia and China's only operational aircraft carriers . This was the largest shipyard in the world and it was built in the Soviet Republic .
 Ukraine refused to import arms from Russia for its newly developing ships . It is unclear whether weapons for project 58250 will be built internally in Ukraine or imported from another country .
 The United States recently offered Ukraine some of its Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigates from its reserve fleet . The U.S. recently offered some of the frigates.
 The Ukrainian Naval Infantry is a part of the Ukrainian Navy's coastal guard . It is part of a Ukrainian naval patrol force .
 It is used as a component part of amphibious, airborne and amphibious-airborne operations, alone or in conjunction with formations and units of the Army in order to capture parts of the seashore, islands, ports, fleet bases and coast airfields .
 It can also be used to defend naval bases, vital areas of the shore, separate islands and coastal facilities . It can provide security in hostile areas and provide security for the military .
Based in Mykolaiv it is organized into a full division with 2 brigades, 1 coastal and field artillery brigade and 1 multiple rocket launcher artillery regiment . Based in MyKolaiv, the regiment is based in the city of Mykolasiv .
 Two Ukrainian vessels departed from Odessa in September 2018 . Mariupol, late September 2018, passed the Crimean Bridge and arrived Mariupsol .
 "The Navy of the Armed Forces of Ukraine" is the name of the Ukrainian Navy . The Navy is based in Ukraine .
 The U.S. Navy has a history of the Ukrainian Navy . It is the first time it has been published that the Navy has been involved in a major military operation .
 Captain lieutenant or captain-lieutenant is a military rank, used in a number of navies worldwide and formerly in the British Army .
 It is generally equivalent to the Commonwealth or U.S. naval rank of lieutenant . It has the NATO rank of OF-2, though this can vary .
 Denis Valentinovich Berezovsky is a rear admiral and the Russian Black Sea Fleet deputy commander . He is a Rear admiral. He is also a Russian Black sea Fleet Deputy commander .
 He was appointed commander-in-chief of the Ukrainian Navy by Interim President Oleksandr Turchynov on March 1, 2014 . He served for just one day before defecting to the self-declared pro-Russian Crimean government during the 2014 Crimean crisis .
 Russia's Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu appointed Berezovsky as the Russian Black Sea Fleet deputy commander on March 24, 2014 .
 On March 5, 2014, the Office of the General Prosecutor of Ukraine issued an order to detain Berezovsky on suspicion of treason . The order was issued in March 2014 .
 The Grisha-class corvette was a series of anti-submarine corvettes built by the Soviet Union between 1970 and 1990 and later by Russia and Ukraine . It was built in the USSR from 1970 to 1990 .
 They were equipped with a variety of ASW weapons and an SA-N-4 surface-to-air missile launcher . They were also equipped with an ASW weapon and a surface- to-air launcher .
 The Project 58155 Gyurza-M class is a series of small armored artillery boats in service with the Ukrainian Navy . The project 58155Gyurza M class is an armored artillery boat with the Ukraine Navy .
 The first two vessels were laid down at the Kuznya na Rybalskomu shipbuilding plant in October 2012 . The first three vessels were built at the plant .
 In mid-2014 construction of the Gyurza-M class was revived and the first two vessels were launched in late 2015 . The first two ships were launched this year .
 The new military contract for twenty vessels is to be completed by 2020 . The new contract for 20 vessels is expected to be complete by 2020.
 The Krivak class, Soviet designation Project 1135 Burevestnik, were series of frigates and guard ships built in the Soviet Union since 1970 . The Soviet Navy is primarily for the Soviet Navy .
 The Nerey was designed for coastal patrol by the KGB Border Troops . Later some sub-branch, like the Nerey, was designed by KGB .
 These ships are commonly known by their NATO reporting class name of Krivak . They are divided into Krivaks I,Krivak II, Krivk IV, and KrivAK III classes .
 The design started in the late 1950s and matured as an anti-submarine ship in the 1960s . The design was designed in the early 1950s .
 40 ships were built, 32 ships for the Soviet Navy and 8 modified ships of the Nerey subclass for the KGB Maritime Border Guard .
 2 vessels of the Nerey subclass are in service with the FSB Coast Guard and one is part of the Ukrainian Navy . Currently 2 vessels are currently in service.
 According to some sources Russia has four units in service and the Ukrainian Navy, one in service . The Ukrainian Navy is one of Russia's four units .
 The Indian Navy has ordered six frigates of upgraded Krivak III class as the Talwar class . The Navy has also ordered six of the new frigates as part of the upgrade .
 The Yantar Shipyard at Kaliningrad has won a contract for construction of three new warships for the Russian Navy . The shipyard is in charge of construction of the new warships .
Construction of the Russian Navy frigates will be carried out in parallel with the construction of the same-type frigates for the Indian Navy . The Russian Navy's frigates are being built for the Russian navy .
 It includes main naval ships and cutters which are in service or were recently unlisted in the Ukrainian Navy as well as the auxiliary fleet . The Ukrainian Navy is the largest navy in the country .
 Some 20 years after the fall of the Soviet Union, the main warships of the Ukrainian Navy are former Black Sea Fleet vessels . The vessels were designed and built in the USSR .
 Ukraine had several shipyards on its territory . The shipbuilding industry was mostly stalled after the fall of the Soviet Union .
 Following the Orange Revolution, the Cabinet of Ukraine allocated some funding for the first major national program "Corvette" that was initiated by Minister of Defense Anatoliy Hrytsenko .
 The first warship-class built in the independent Ukraine was expected to produce its first vessel in 2016 . The vessel is expected to be built in 2016.
 As of 24 March 2014, all of the larger ships but one of the Ukrainian Navy were captured by the Russian Black Sea Fleet .
 Ukraine received 5 small Willard Marine patrol boats in 2015 . The original order was placed in 2013 .
 Following the 1997 Black Sea Fleet partition treaty all Black sea Fleet Matka class boats were passed to Ukrainian Navy .
 The Natya-class were a group of minesweepers built for the Soviet Navy and export customers during the 1970s and 1980s . They were built for Soviet Navy.
 They were built in Poland between 1967 and 2002 . They were designed in Poland in cooperation with the Soviet Navy .
 Some navies now serve in several different navies, and some have been converted to civilian use . Some are now serving in various navies .
 In 2002, one ship of a modernised design NS-722 was built in Gdynia for Yemen .
 Serhiy Anatolyovich Hayduk is a Ukrainian Vice Admiral and a former commander of the Ukrainian Navy . He is a former Commander of the Ukraine Navy .
 The Sonya class are a group of minesweepers built for the Soviet Navy and Soviet allies between 1971 and 1991 . They were built for Soviet allies from 1971 to 1991 .
USS Forrest Sherman is an Arleigh Burke-class guided missile destroyer . See USS Forrest Sherman for other ships of this name .
 The ship is named for Admiral Forrest Percival Sherman . It is the second United States Navy ship to bear the name .
Built by Northrop Grumman Ship Systems Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula, Mississippi, Forrest Sherman was launched on 2 October 2004 .
 Admiral Sherman's daughter, Ann Sherman Fitzpatrick, is the ship's sponsor . The ship's captain's daughter is Admiral Sherman Fitzpatrick's daughter .
 She was commissioned on 28 January 2006 at NAS Pensacola, Commander Michael VanDurick in command . Six days later, she departed for her homeport in Norfolk, Va. to join the Atlantic Fleet .
 She circumnavigated the continent of Africa as part of Task Group 60.5, the U.S. Navy's Southeast Africa task force . She also conducted Reliant Mermaid 2007 with the Turkish and Israeli Navies .
 During breakup of Soviet Union, significant portions of Soviet Naval Aviation were based in Ukraine . It was intended to support the Black Sea Fleet, which was based in Kiev .
 Ukraine and Russia finally agreed on how to split the Black Fleet in 1997 . Ukraine received 12 planes and 30 helicopters from Russia .
 Hetman Sahaydachniy is a frigate of the Ukrainian Navy . The ship was originally built at the Kerch Shipyard as a Project 1135 .
Homeported at Odessa since March 2014, she is the flagship of the Ukrainian Navy . She has been homeported at the city's naval base since March 2013 .
 Most of the Ukrainian personnel, among them the captain of the submarine, had left the vessel . The others had chosen to begin their service in the Russian Black Sea Fleet with the submarine .
 Subsequent events in the Crimean Crisis have revealed that the vessel is barely seaworthy and too obsolete for active service of any type .
 Yuriy Ivanovych Ilyin is a Ukrainian Admiral and former Commander of the Ukrainian Navy . He is a former commander of the Ukraine Navy .
 Colonel General Volodymyr Zamana was dismissed by the President during the February 2014 Euromaidan riots . He was elevated to the position of Chief of the General Staff by President Viktor Yanukovych .
 Ilyin was dismissed from the post of Chief of the General Staff by interim President Alexander Turchynov on 28 February 2014 . Ilyin had a heart attack on 27 February 2014, and was admitted to hospital following the attack .
 The Zhuk-class patrol boat, also known as Project 1400M ""Grif" is a small border patrol vessel of less then 40 ton displacement built in the Soviet Union and later in Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Ukraine .
 Exact numbers are unknown, but they were widely exported by the Soviet Union . They were also used in home waters as harbor patrol .
 The vessels were excellent for this task thanks to a cheap design for mass production . The vessels are good enough to be used to make mass production.
 With only a single radar unit and manually-aimed machine guns, they made ideal patrol boats . With only one simple radar unit, they were able to make the boats.
 The KGB Maritime Guard was taken over by the Russian Federal Coast Guard in 1991 . It was the main user of the Russian Coast Guard . The Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991.