Every day, our teams collaborate around the world to actively uncover, discuss and debate investment opportunities, which leads to better decisions for our clients .
 What the English really think about their northern neighbours, page 50 .
 America's Supreme Court seems nervous about a new term . The Supreme Court is expected to make a decision soon .
 Investors take a century-long bet on boomand-bust Mexico, page 61 .
 Vladimir Putin corrupts the memory of victory over Nazism to justify his warin Ukraine, page 43 .
 As the anniversary approaches, Germany draws the right lessons, page 44 . Page 32 DrugwarAsonewaron drugs ends, anotheris starting .
 Now is the time to think about how to detect them and knock them down safely, page 69 .
 The Economists is a registered trademark of The Economist Newspaper Limited . The Economist is a trademark for The Economist newspaper .
 At least 6,000 people were killed when an earthquake of magnitude 7 struck Nepal, one of Asia’s poorest countries .
 Aid agencies struggled to reach remote areas in Gorkha district, near the border with Tibet, where many more bodies are expected to be found . Aid agencies have struggled to find bodies in remote areas .
 Sabeen Mahmud, one of Pakistan's leading liberal activists, was shot dead in Karachi by unknown gunmen . She left an event to highlight the cases of the 5,000 people thought to have been abducted and killed by security forces .
 Australia recalled its ambassador to Indonesia after the Indonesians executed two convicted Australian drug smugglers . Six others were also executed, along with six others, in Indonesia .
 The gang was arrested in 2005 trying to take 8kg of heroin out of Bali .
 The governor of Maryland sent the National Guard to Baltimore to quell rioting . The worst in the city since 1968 was the worst since 1968 .
 Six police officers were seriously injured and hundreds of rioters arrested when violence broke out hours after the funeral of a black man who died from spinal injuries that he sustained while in police custody .
 Rioters burned down their own neighbourhoods, torching buildings and looting shops . Rioters torched buildings and looted shops in their neighbourhoods .
 America’s Supreme Court heard arguments about whether gay couples have a constitutional right to marry .
 Jerry Brown, the governor of California, set new and tougher state targets on curbing greenhouse gases . Brown set new targets for cutting greenhouse gases.
 He called for carbon emissions to be cut by 40% by 2030 from what they were in 1990 . In 1990, carbon emissions in the United States were 40% higher than in 1990.
 Shinzo Abe visited Washington, where he became the first prime minister of Japan to address a j oint meeting of Congress . Abe is the first Japanese prime minister to address the Congress .
 New guidelines were unveiled for Japan’s alliance with America . New guidelines will allow Tokyo to take on a more assertive role in international security .
 Royals flushed King Salman changed the line of succession in Saudi Arabia . His nephew, Muhammad bin Nayef, was named crown prince and named his son, Muhammad, as second in line .
 Interior ministry says 93 people arrested since December on suspicion of being members of Islamic State . Separately, the interior ministry says that 93 people, most of them Saudi citizens, have been arrested .
 Iran seized a container ship in the Strait of Hormuz, which connects Gulf states to the open sea .
 Iran said the vessel, registered in the Marshall Islands, had been taken because of a commercial dispute .
 It has previously threatened to close the strait in protest at international sanctions over its nuclear programme . It is negotiating with six other countries over the nuclear programme.
 Binyamin Netanyahu is poised to complete the formation of his new cabinet . Netanyahu won Israel's general election in March .
 French government is investigating allegations that French peacekeeping troops raped boys as young as nine years old in Central African Republic last year .
 The claims were first made in a classified un report that was leaked to the press .
 In Burundi, protests against President Pierre Nkurunziza’s bid for a third term met with a violent response by the army and police .
 At least six people are reported to have died, and there have been hundreds of arrests . Hundreds of arrests have been made .
 The protesters say the constitution bars Mr Nkurunziza from seeking re-election .
 A summit in Kiev between the European Union and Ukraine produced no new pledges of support from the EU .
 Ukraine wants more generous bail-out funds for its economy, military aid, and Eu peacekeeping mission . Ukraine wants to secure its ceasefire line with Russian separatists .
 The eu declined to provide any military help and said aid would be contingent on reforms . The eU declined to give military help .
 Finnish naval vessel dropped two small depth charges after detecting what is believed to be a Russian submarine in Finnish waters .
 Nordic countries are increasingly concerned over Russian intrusions into their territorial waters and air space . Nordic countries have become increasingly concerned about Russian intrusion into their waters .
 The Greek government sidelined its controversial finance minister, Yanis Varoufakis, removing him from responsibility for negotiations with finance ministers from the euro zone .
 Mr Varoufakis’s mercurial style had been blamed for a loss of trust in Greece's government . Greece is scrambling to come to an agreement to unlock billions of euros in bail-out financing .
 Britain's political parties began a frantic last week of campaigning ahead of an election on May 7th . New data showed the economy growing in the first quarter at its slowest pace in two years .
 No party will hold a maj ority on May 8th, meaning another coalition government will have to be formed . If the polls are correct, no party will be in power for the first time .
 The new constitution includes eliminating anonymous donations to political parties, state financing for parties and the writing of a new constitution . The constitution will also eliminate anonymous donations.
Ms Bachelet’s son has been at the centre of an influence-peddling scandal . Ms Bachelets' son was at the center of the scandal.
 Venezuela’s government decided to shorten the workday for public employees, from eight or nine hours to five-anda-half, to save energy . Venezuela's government decides to shorten workday from eight to nine hours .
 Bureau of Economic Analysis America’s economy grew by just 0.2% in the first quarter at an annualised rate compared with the previous three months .
 There was no single explanation, though bad winter weather and a labour dispute at California’s ports played a part .
 energy firms curtailing their exploration activities, investment in wells and mines slumped . Energy firms have curtailed their exploration activity, with energy firms cutting exploration activities .
 The Federal Reserve blamed ‘transitory factors’ at its latest meeting . But the timing of a rise in interest rates looks ever more uncertain .
 Brazil raises its benchmark interest rate by half a percentage point to 13.25%, the highest level in six years . Brazil raised its benchmark rate by a percentagepoint to 13%.
 It was the latest in a long series of consecutive rate rises from the central bank . The central bank is trying to tame soaring inflation .
 Sweden’s Riksbank stepped up its fight against deflation by enlarging its quantitativeeasing programme .
 Thailand's central bank reduced its key rate to 1.5% to boost the country’s flagging economy . The central bank's key rate has been reduced by a quarter of a year .
 Sans Ferdinand Ferdinand Piech shocked corporate Germany by resigning as Volkswagen’s chairman .
 Martin Winterkorn went after the carmaker’s board backed him in a spat between the two . The carmaker's board backed the chief executive in the spat .
 Mr Piech has been the driving force behind vw for the past two decades . He is the grandson of the inventor of the Beetle, who invented the Beetle .
 His family retains considerable clout through its share holdings, giving it a say in choosing a new chairman . The new chairman will be announced on Monday .
 Deutsche Bank presented its long-awaited reorganisation plan, which involves shrinking its investment bank, selling its Postbank retail subsidiary and trimming its debt load .
 Deutsche’s leadership insisted that it would still compete with the titans of Wall Street . But investors expecting something more ambitious, sent its share price down .
 Deutsche paid $2. billion to settle claims by U.S. and British authorities that it manipulated libor, a benchmark interest rate . It is the biggest such fine to date, the biggest to date .
 China's authorities accuse Sinopec president of “serious violations of discipline and law’s code for corruption’.
 A drug triangle Mylan, a drug company in Pennsylvania, roundly rejected a $40 billion takeover bid from leva . The drug company is based in Israel .
 Mylan wants to pursue its own takeover of Perrigo, which is incorporated in Ireland . Mylan raised its offer this week to $36 billion-an approach that immediately spurned . The Irish company wants to take over the company .
 Revenue grew by 74% in the first quarter, to $43 6m, but this was less than investors had hoped for .
 Twitter also lowered its annual profit outlook. With growth tepid in its user base, Twitter also lower its annual growth outlook .
 Time Warner Cable rumoured to be seeking a new merger partner . Comcast pulled its $45 billion takeover offer in the face of opposition from regulators to a deal .
 A combined company would have carved out roughly 30% of America’s cable-Tv market . It would have provided almost 60% of broadband connections, which was a concern to Netflix and others .
 Comcast was not the only company to have its ambitions thwarted by competition regulators this week .
 A merger between Applied Materials and Tokyo Electron was called off because of antitrust concerns in America . It would have created the world's biggest producer of chipmaking-equipment .
 Apple sold more iPhones in China than in America for the first time in the latest quarter . Apple's net profit was up to $13. billion .
 Samsung reported another drop in quarterly profit, to 4. trillion won ($4. billion) Samsung continued to be squeezed in the smartphone market between Apple and lower-cost Chinese rivals .
 BP kicked off the earnings season for big oil firms, reporting a profit of $2. billion for first quarter .
 Brent crude averaged $108 a barrel, compared with $54 in the first three months of 2015 . This was 20% lower than in the same period a year earlier, when Brent crude average $108 .
 Ben Bernanke has joined the ranks of workers with multiple part-time jobs . Bernanke retired as chairman of the Federal Reserve in 2014 .
 Having already taken a position at Citadel, a hedge fund, this week he j oined pimco, an investment firm, as a senior adviser .
 Despite the risk on Europe, the coalition led hy David Cameron should have a second term B ritain . It is a midsized island with outsized influence .
 British elections matter beyond Britain’s shores, says David Cameron . The City's parliamentary tradition, the union of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, membership of the European Union and history of leading revolutions in economic policy mean that British electionsmatter beyond Britain's shores .
 May 7th is the day when all these things are at stake . But few have mattered more than the one on the day .
 The U.S. is heading for profound and potentially irrevocable change . The country is headed for profound change .
 The Tories have promised to renegotiate Britain's relations with the eu . They will put the result to an in/out referendum on membership by 2017 .
 Ed Miliband wants to remake British capitalism in pursuit of a fairer society . The Labour leader wants to reform British capitalism to be fairer .
 If he had his way, he would be the most economically radical premier since Margaret Thatcher . He would be most economicallyradical premier since Thatcher .
 If the stakes are high, the trade-offs are uncomfortable, at least for this newspaper . A balance of risks is a balance of risk and risk, the paper says .
 In 2010 we endorsed David Cameron, seeing in him a willingness to tackle a yawning budget deficit and an ever-expanding state .
 The Tories' Europhobia, which we regretted last time, could now do grave damage . The Tories’ Europhophobia, which they regretted last year, may now dograve damage .
 A British exit from the eu would be a disaster, for both Britain and Europe, says David Cameron .
 Britons feel towards Brussels that a referendum on Britain's membership of the EU is probably inevitable at some point . But such is the suspicion many Britons feel toward Brussels that the referendum is inevitable .
 The Lib Dems share our welcoming attitude towards immigrants and are keen to reform the voting system .
 The electorate, and this newspaper, face a choice between a Conservative-dominated government and a Labour-dominated one .
 Despite the risk on Europe, the better choice is Mr Cameron’s Conservatives .
 Our decision is based on the economy, where the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition has a stronger record than many realise and where Labour poses a greater risk . Our decision was based on economy, which is where the Tories have a strong record, and Labour poses greater risk.
 The budget deficit, at 5% of gDP, is still the second-highest in the 07.7-07 . The deficit is still at 5%.
Living standards have suffered and productivity is weak, living standards are weak . But employment is high, but living standards have also suffered .
 The Tories have made this squeeze on British living standards more painful, particularly for young people . The Tories are making this squeeze more painful.
 They have protected pensioners from budget cuts and showered them with tax giveaways, forcing bigger sacrifices elsewhere . They've protected them from cuts and showed them with giveaways .
 A failure to boost housing supply has led to soaring prices, also hitting the young . The young have been hit by a lack of housing supply and lack of support .
 Some of the Tories' election promises-to spare houses worth up to £im from inheritance tax and to sell social housing at a discount are economically indefensible vote-buying gestures .
 The coalition has cut the deficit more pragmatically than it admits and more progressively than its critics allow . The coalition is cutting the deficit even more pragatically than the coalition admits .
 The richestio% have born the greatest burden of extra taxes . The poorest Britons have been hit hard by spending cuts, but the richest are the worst .
 Eull-time workers earning the minimum wage pay a third as much income tax as in 2010 . The minimum wage pays a third of the income tax in 2010.
 Government spending has fallen from 45-7% of gdp in 2010 to 40.7% in 2010 . Public satisfaction with police and other services has gone up .
 Britain has a higher share of people in work than ever before . Almost im public-sector jobs have been cut, but Britain has more people in the job than before .
Public services are being revitalised with new free schools and academies . Erom extra competition in education is being added to the system .
 Some innovations have failed, including a rejigging of the National Health Service . But Britain’s reform of the state has been energetic and promising .
 Britain's weak productivity is the corollary of a jobs-rich, squeezed-wage recovery . In the short term, Britain’s weak productivity.
Wage stagnation, as our briefing explains, is not an exclusively British malaise .
 It is preferable, both in economic efficiency and social equity, to the Erench or Italian disease of mass joblessness . It is also preferable to Erench and Italian joblessness, says the writer .
 Better to recover from a financial crash and deep recession with a flexible labour market . Better to recovery from financial crash than through unemployment .
 Britain will be a model for Europe if the Tories can boost productivity, say the Tories . They aim to do so by improving schools and infrastructure, giving power and money to cities .
 Labour has a different way to tackle what it calls the “crisis’s in living standards’.
 Mr Miliband promises deficit reduction at a pace that makes more macroeconomic sense than the Tories’ plan . But Labour’s record makes them harder to believe, and his numbers are vaguer .
 Labour plans tax increases for the wealthy, including raising the top rate of tax back to 50%, from 45% to 50% . It will also impose a “mansion tax’ on houses worth more than £2m .
 London's top 10 leaders risk chasing away the most enterprising global talent that London attracts . But, taken together, these plans risk chasing the most entersprising .
 Mr Miliband believes that living standards are squeezed because markets are rigged . He believes that the government can step in to fix them .
 He would freeze prices while “reviewing’s energy markets, clamp down on the most flexible ‘zero-hour’ labour contracts . He would also limit rent rises and freeze prices.
Private markets are an aversion to competition in the public sector, leading to proposals for a cap on profit margins when private companies contract to provide services for the nhs .
 Mr Miliband is fond of comparing his progressivism to that of Teddy Roosevelt, America's trustbusting president .
 Mr Miliband wants a heavier state hand in markets which betrays an ill-founded faith in the ingenuity and wisdom of government . Miliband wants the state to boost comThe Economist .
 Even a brief, limited intervention can cast a lasting pall over investment and enterprise-witness the 75% income-tax rate of France’s president .
 The danger is all the greater because a Labour government looks fated to depend on the snp, which leans strongly to the left .
On May yth voters must weigh the certainty of economic damage under Labour against the possibility of a costly eu exit under the Tories .
 The best hope for Britain is with a continuation of a Conservative-led coalition, says David Cameron .
 In America and the other rich countries that fought by its side, the campaign meant strict laws and harsh sentences for small-time dealers and addicts .
 In poor, chaotic countries that supplied cocaine and heroin, it meant uprooting and spraying coca and poppy crops, and arming security forces .
Anti-drug warriors are wearying. Billions of wasted dollars and many destroyed lives later, illegal drugs are still available .
 In America and western Europe addiction is increasingly seen as an illness . In America, addiction is becoming an illness. In Europe, it is also seen as a disease .
Several countries may follow Portugal, which no longer treats drug use as a crime . Several countries may also follow Portugal .
 China's president has called for “forceful measures to wipe out’s drugs . His Indonesian counterpart has declared drugs a ‘national emergency’ and sent six traffickers to a firing squad .
 This week Indonesia executed eight more, despite international pleas for clemency . The executions are the latest in a string of executions in Indonesia .
 Iran is executing five times as many drug-smugglers as it did a few years ago . Iran is executed five times more than it did in the past few years .
 Russia is arguing for spraying of opium-poppy fields in Afghanistan . It is trying to get its neighbours to follow it in banning methadone, an opioid used to wean heroin addicts .
 Earlier this year China lobbied the UN’s drug-control body to place tighter restrictions on ketamine . It failed-for-now, though it failed- for now, at least .
 Prohibition suits criminal gangs, which enjoy exclusive control of a global market worth roughly $300 billion annually . The global market is estimated to be worth $300billion annually .
 It is convenient for corrupt politicians and officials, who can extract rents for turning a blind eye . It is also convenient to extract rents from corrupt officials for turning the blind eye.
 Several of those whom Indonesia executed this week claimed that judges offered them clemency in exchange for huge bribes . Some of those who were executed claimed that they were offered clemencies in exchange.
After the Caribbean cocaine-trafficking route was sealed, new, bloodier ones sprang open in Mexico, and then in Central America .
 A shortage of one drug caused by a big seizure seldom lasted long . In the meantime addicts turned to alternatives, sometimes more dangerous ones .
 The drug war turned Latin American ‘cartels’ into bands of sadistic, well-financed killers . They reach into governments, security forces, judiciaries and jails .
 Rules meant to stop opioids leaking to the black market have left the innocent to die in avoidable pain .
 Multiple-sclerosis sufferers and cancer patients have been denied the relief that cannabis can bring .
 Drug laws have made trials close to impossible. But nobody knows, because drug laws are making trials impossible .
 A safe, orally administered anaesthetic, it can be used outside hospitals, even for caesarean sections and amputations . It can be administered with anesthetic.
 If China succeeds in tightening restrictions on the drug, poor people in countries with weak health systems will suffer and even die unnecessarily .
 In the West few politicians have been ready to admit the drug war's failure-even as they quietly moderate their policy .
 They need to be honest with their own voters about the misery it has caused . They must be honest about what they have caused .
Drug addicts need treatment, not prison, and that supply should be managed, not suppressed . Only then can they make a good case to the rest of the world that they need treatment .
 A un meeting next year to take a fresh look at the international conventions that shape national drug laws would be an excellent place to start .
 satellite pictures show Chinese barges pouring sand onto disputed reefs . In the past few months these fears have been amplified by satellite pictures .
 China appears to be building airstrips and harbours to accommodate jets and warships . Many remote outcrops are unsuited to civilian habitation .
 China is asserting a longstanding, if outrageous, claim to ownership of virtually the entire sea . With this show of military force, China is asserting a longtime, if outlandish, claim of ownership of the sea .
 China still claims to believe in settling territorial disputes by diplomacy . China still believes in settling disputes by diplomatic means .
 America is ignoring protests of its neighbours, not to mention America . Yet, by going ahead and planting its flags, it is ignoring the protests .
 China has been trying to win friends in South-East Asia for years . This change is even more unsettling, given that for years China has tried towin friends in the region .
 The ten-country Association of South-East Asian Nations is usually reluctant to criticise the giant next door .
 President Barack Obama says China's muscle-flexing was "wrong way" to go about things . Japan's prime minister, Shinzo Abe, is the leader of Japan .
 There has always been a risk that rivalries in the South China Sea could flare into military conflict .
 In 2002 China and ASEAN agreed that disputants should resolve differences peacefully, “exercise self-restraint’ and adopt a formal code of conduct .
 The Philippines has challenged the basis of its territorial claims before a UN-backed tribunal . The Philippines is fed up with its obduracy .
 If it sticks together, it stands a better chance of persuading China to embrace a code of conduct . If it stands together, China could be persuaded to embrace it .
 China has signed up to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, which sets the rules for territorial claims . America has yet to ratify it. But asean is weak and will become weaker if Indonesia fails to play a leading role .
Greening the way to peace Security is not the only concern in the South China Sea . Greening is a key issue in the region of South China.
 An ecological catastrophe is taking place, as reclamation destroys reefs, agricultural and industrial run-off poisons the water and overfishing depletes fish stocks .
 The dispute over sovereignty fosters the fear that any collaboration will be taken as a concession . The littoral states ought to be working together to manage the sea .
 regional states must urgently put aside their differences to save the sea . If they are to save sea, they must put aside differences .
 If they could only co-operate over the environment, they might just find territorial disputes easier to settle, too .
 The family cannot formally adopt each other’s children . There is no guarantee that if one of them dies, that the rest of the family will be allowed to stay together .
 Mr DeKoe, a soldier, finished serving in Afghanistan, but moved to Tennessee, which does not recognise his union . He and his wife moved to the state after he finished serving.
 Both couples are suing to have their states’ bans on same-sex marriage struck down . Both are suing for their states' bans to be struck down.
 Many expect the justices to make gay marriage legal throughout America . The Supreme Court is expected to make it legal throughout the country .
 Marriage has long been a matter for the states to regulate, not the federal government . Marriage has been a subject of controversy for years .
 In several liberal states lawmakers have given the go-ahead to same-sex unions . In conservative states they have not . In some liberal states, lawmakers have not given thego-ahead .
 If voters do not like this outcome, they are free to elect different politicians . If voters don't like this result, they will be able to choose different politicians.
 advocates of gay marriage want to rewrite rules of an ancient institution in Michigan or Tennessee . They should persuade Michiganders and Tennesseans of the justice of their cause, they say .
 In general, big social controversies are better settled democratically than by judicial fiat . In general. Big social controversies have been settled democratically, rather than by courts .
 The court's first duty is to uphold the constitution, which means striking down laws that violate it . However, the court’s firstduty is to upholding the constitution .
 In 1973, when abortion was legal in some states but not in others, the court ruled in Roe v Wade that it should be legal everywhere . It cited a right to privacy that is nowhere mentioned in the constitution .
 In Roe the justices invented the law rather than interpreting it, substituting their preferences for those of voters . This newspaper favours legal abortion.
 That power-grab has poisoned the debate on abortion in America ever since, says CNN .
 Opponents of same-sex marriage worry that the court is planning to do the same thing again .
Limiting marriage to heterosexuals plainly denies such equality to gay people . Limiting marriage is a form of equality to gays and lesbians, says the law .
 The court should strike down all remaining bans on same-sex marriage. So the court should also strike down the remaining bans .
 The backlash will be nothing like as severe or long-lasting as the one that followed Roe V Wade . But the backlash will not be as severe as the ones that followed the Wade .
 Some Republicans in Congress are threatening to cut funds for any federal enforcement of a court ruling they do not like . The right to be smug and boring will not get far.
 Many in their party will be glad to see the issue taken out of their hands, for they know this is a battle they will lose sooner or later .
 Public opinion has changed fast, and in a relentlessly liberal direction, says John Sutter . Sutter: Public opinion is now more liberal than ever .
 The most religious and conservative states are now less hostile to gay marriage than the most secular, liberal ones were a decade ago . The most liberal states were the most religious, religious states in the past decade .
With luck, they will reach a decision they will not be ashamed to explain to their grandchildren . With luck, the decision will be made in the future .
 The country's stockmarket is just 3% of the world's total, down from 5% a decade ago . The country’s stock market is just 2.5% of world's overall stockmarket .
 An American activist fund, psam, has just mauled Vivendi, a media firm .
 Flagging Gallic contenders, among them Alstom, Alcatel and Lafarge, are being bought by foreigners . The Gallic is being sold by a group of French companies .
 Peugeot has sold a stake to Dongfeng, a carmaker from Wuhan . The carmaker hopes to take control of the carmaker .
 Club Med, a holiday firm managed by the son of a French president, is now in the hands of a billionaire who began by selling bread in Shanghai . Club Med is a holiday company managed by a French President's son .
 French government has legislated to strong-arm firms to give souped-up voting rights to loyal shareholders .
 It reckons this will protect firms from speculators and raiders, and allow them to punch above their weight . It says this will allow firms to fight back against speculators, raiders .
 The "Florange law" was passed in 2014 and will come fully into force in March 2016 . The law will be fully into effect in March 2015 .
 Shareholders who have owned stock in a listed French company for more than two years will then see their voting rights double . Shareholders will also see their rights double if they own a listed company .
First, it will add clout to elite of insiders whose record is mediocre . First, it would add clout. First. It will add power to those with a mediocre record .
 Two-thirds of firms in the CAC-40 index have a long-standing anchor investorusually the state, a family or a mogul .
 The government will probably get more sway over Renault, to the irritation of its boss, Carlos Ghosn .
 Supporters say anchor investors allow firms to plan for the long run . Supporters say that such anchor investors let firms plan for a long run.
 Google, for example, is controlled by its founders and can ignore Wall Street’s whims .
 Orange (formerly France Telecom) and Bouygues, a conglomerate, are protected by the state and a family respectively . The two have drifted since the 1990s .
 Bosses in Italy are adept at creating fiddly capital structures that fortify their control and feeble at building competitive multinationals . Bosses are also adept at building new capital structures.
 France is attempting to impose double voting rights as a default option . Second, France is trying to imposeDouble Voting rights as an option .
 One-share-one-vote is not a divine right; nor is a wholly free market for takeovers . One- share-one vote is not the divine right, nor a whollyFree Market for Takeovers .
 Firms should be allowed to issue whatever securities they want, if they want to protect themselves . Firms will pay a higher cost of capital and may perform worse if they do not protect themselves, says John Sutter .
 Even countries that think an open approach to ownership breeds more ruthless and valuable firms will block deals that genuinely threaten the public interest .
 When a country systematically tries to enforce unequal shareholder rights, there are high costs . But when already-listed firms are targeted, there is high costs for shareholders .
 French firms will find it harder to issue shares to pay for expansion or takeovers . The higher cost of capital will apply to all French firms .
 Internet voting does not increase voter participation, according to the study . Internet voting doesn't increase voter turnout, the study says .
 A recent study in British Columbia concluded that it has increased turnout in some elections . But when other factors such as the closeness of the race are taken into account, internet voting does not generally cause nonvoters to participate .
 A security hole in the system was discovered and patched in New South Wales, Australia . 66,000 people voted online before a security hole was found and patched .
 No one knows if those votes were tampered with . It is impossible to determine whether or not electronic versions of the ballots accurately reflect the will of those 66,000 people .
 Voters' computers can also be targeted by election-rigging malware that could modify their selections without their knowledge . Voters’ computers can be targeted.
 The idea that election officials can protect their computing systems from attacks when large organisations such as Google and the Pentagon are unable to do so is ludicrous .
 There is a consensus within the computer-security industry that all the current online-voting systems are insecure and are subject to hacking .
 The Economist recommends replicating Estonia's online-voting process . It was disappointing to see The Economist recommend replicating the process .
 An election in which online voters buy and sell votes would be a disaster for democratic legitimacy . A hacked election, or worse still, an election would be worse than a hacked election .
 Even in this digital era, the secret paper-ballot is still the way to go. Even in the digital era.
 Your leader on 'Europe's boat people' contains sound analysis of the crisis in the Mediterranean and the lack of action by European Union states .
Almost 1,000 commercial ships have already been involved in the rescue of 40,000 distressed people from small boats .
 The obligation to come to the aid of anyone in distress at sea, whatever the circumstance, runs very deep in our industry, says the author . "The obligation to help someone in distress is very deep" says author .
 The source of your unsubstantiated claim does the world’s merchant seafarers a great disservice, says the author .
 Mr Najib set out a vision of a diverse and united country under his “iMalaysia’s’ liberal economic plan . He also promised to tackle corruption .
After six years we are witnessing the return of discriminatory ethnic-based economic policies . But after six years, we are seeing the creeping return of discrimination, says the author .
 Mr Najib made glorious promises of reform, but he forgot to transform his own party . He has now become a big obstacle to his plans .
 UMNO has made an explicit policy of favouring ethnic Malays through affirmative action in everything from education to public-sector jobs . Since enacting the UMNO-led New Economic Policy in 1971.
 30% of shares set aside for Bumiputras. Even private-sector ipos have not been left untouched .
 suspicion and mistrust of the umno among Malaysia’s ethnic Chinese and Indian minorities runs deep . It is unlikely to be overcome unless the party makes a radical break with its past .
 There would have been no post-referendum bounce for the nationalists. If reiteration of the truth were all that was required, there would be no bounce .
 A recent survey commissioned by Scotland In Union found that 14% of Scots are voting tactically . The survey was commissioned by Scottish In Union .
 Many would back a leading non-SNP candidate anyway, and we might just be spared the outcome which many want to avoid . Add those who would back the lead non- SNP candidate.
 British politics is littered with wouldhave-beens who were arguably better than those who eventually became party leaders, but who lacked the spark or organisation needed .
 Its mandate and vision is to ensure that people everywhere have access to the essential medicines and health products that they need . The medicines and products are safe, effective and of assured quality .
 The Odgers Berndtson Global Magazine Gartenstrasse t9* 8002 Zurich . The magazine is based in Zurich .
 UNITAID catalyzes improvements for the larger response through forward -looiung and time'limited investments to increase access to belter, more effecbve and more affordable solutions .
Price reductions, improvements in quality and supply, can include price reductions and improvements. These can also include the introduction of innovative products suitable for the populations in need .
 UNITAID has a unique funding model, based on an air ticket levy and long-terTn contributions from governments .
 UNITAID has received $2. billion of contnbiitions from donors . Since its establish nnent in 200S, UNITaID has been given more than $2 billion .
 The organisation currently has a portfolio of 23 active grants across the three diseases in more than 90 counliies .
 Leads and manages UNiTAiO's Operations department in the development and implementation of grants, bi^ng of partnarships, and the management of risk .
 UNiTAlO's Strategy 4 Results department is responsible for leading the strategic approach arvd identification of innovative global health interventione .
 COL promotes innovation and works with national and international partners to facilitate learning in support of development goals . COL is headquartered in British Columbia, Canada, and is based in Vancouver .
 This three-year initial appointment is renewable for a further term by mutual agreement . This three year initial appointment will be renewable for another term .
 The person must be a citizen of a Commonwealth country, with the ability to work with governments, multilateral organisations and with people from different cultural backgrounds . The person will be able to work in the Commonwealth with a range of countries .
 A full job description is displayed on COL’s web site at www.col. org/opportunities .
 Interested applicants must provide a resume and cover letter highlighting their professional background . Applicants must provide their resume, cover letter.
 The E(B group has been a key partner in unlocking liquidity for European investment projects since the onset of the crisis . It has been providing more than EUR SOObn since 2007 .
 As a resuft, we are growing rapidly and are keen to recruit qualified and highly motivated people to help us take initiative, seize opportunities and share expertise . We are growing fast and are looking to hire qualified andhighly motivated people .
To everyone. ...like sustainable energy, dependable transport, innovation and entrepreneurship . To everyone. To everyone .
 We promote diversity and inclusion among our staff and candidates, irrespective of their gender, age, nationality, race, culture, education and experience, religious beliefs, sexual orientation or disability . We promote and value diversity and include candidates in our team .
 The African Export-Import Bank is a pan-African Multilateral financial institution established in 1993, for the purpose of financing and promoting intra and extra African trade .
 We are seeking to nn the position of Director, OfHce or Communications at the D2 level . The position is based at our Headquarters in Rome, Italy .
 Cor^tructive, open and able to develop and empower staff to communicate strateglCBlIy and effectivelv. Cor^Tructive and open and can be developed and empowered .
 E^ead Technical Specialist Rural Markets and Evnierprises, P-S, Policy and Technical Advisory Division. E.S. Rural Markets, E.E. Rural markets and EvNierprises are part of the E.A. Technical Specialist Specialist Rural markets Division .
 ItAl offers a competitive remuneration .and benefits package that includes tax-free salary, de|iendency allowance education grant up to university level .
 II AD is committed to achieving diversity and is seeking a balanced workforce from its Member States . Women are particularly encoumged to apply .
 The Global Director, Human Resources is a seasoned global leader with experience in managing a diverse human capital population . He is also capable of working effectively across borders, languages, cultures and working conditions .
 The successful candidate should have a proven track record in Executive Leadership, Talent Selection, Development & Retention, HR Infrastructure and Performance Management, Compliance and Relationship management .
LUCN's Leadership Team residing in Gland, Switzerland, with regular international travel . This position is part of lUCN’s Leadership Team living in Switzerland .
 The Director of Custom Prograrnmes will lead client devetopment, strategic account management and income growth . Few other business schools in Europe can match this level .
 Candidates will be successful leaders with records of setting and implerTrenting strategy, building businesses, growing and retaining high pedorming teams and high impact, high quality executive education and/or leadership advisory services .
 We seek highly regarded arxJ trusted advisors working at board level, with the agility of their core skills in the academic community .
 Candidates could come from a business schcxil, major cor^ultancy firm, corporate university and/or executive recruitment firm with experience in adjacent or similar fields .
 This is a full-time appointment and will be made by Oxford Said Business School Limited . This is the first time the appointment has been made .
 The JDBG is searching for a strategic Executive leader for the most senior position of Ehe consolidated private sector development entity, that of IK General Manager . The J DBG is looking for a Strategic Executive leader.
 Chairman of the Board of Executive Directors is also the IDB President, the ItC General Manager Irnplernernents the NCs business and development objectives and strategy .
 The General Marrager is responsible for the day-to-day business of the IIC . He is also responsible for implementing the strategic direction and long-term vision for the institution .
 S/he provides executive leadership and policy direction to the organization . The Chairman of the Board who represents It vts-l-vls its shareholders.
 S/he oversees all IIC operations, forges and forges partnerships and maximizes synergies with the I DBG ar^d externally . S/ he oversees allIIC operations.
 The ideal candidate is a seasoned executive with experience in Latin America and the Caribbean . He has a track record of success as a CEO, COD, or equivalent of an organization with similar scale and complexity .
 Proven track record of IS* years of relevant experience at slgnlfkant public or private corporation, financial and/or development Institution, or similar enterprise required .
 In English and Spanish required, as well as advanced degree tri finance, business admlnlstratfon, economics, or relevant field . Excellent oral and written professional proficiency in English andSpanish required .
Public policy, development finance, and financial and operational risk on a global scale is sought. Extensive understanding of the role of the private sector in developmerrt is sought .
 Also required is an understanding of the multilateral role as a partner and catalyst in private and public sector development . Also needed is a understanding of multilateral role as a partners and catalyst .
 The SIC offers a d/verse and itKloiivt wofk eov/ronmenf. The Sic also offers ad/verse.
 The EITI has become the pre-eminent global standard for the governance of extractive resources . Almost 50 countries are implementing the EITi across all major continents .
 This is an outstanding opportunity to lead a high-level Board that seeks to ensure that natural resource wealth becomes a key engine for sustainable growth for economic development and poverty reduction .
 S/he seeks to maintain collaborative relationships between members and key participants, including governments, companies, civil society, and members of the Board .
 The term of the Chair is the three year period between ordinary Members' meetings . The whole Board is appointed at the end of the year .
 Ability to moderate a large meeting effectively and build consensus between shareholder groups. Ability tomoderate a large Meeting effectively and building consensus between shareholders groups .
 availability to travel both short and long-haul minimum 2 days per month . Availability to travel short and short to travel long and short .
Previous Chairs have worked pro-bono but alternative arrangements could be considered . The previous Chairs had worked Pro-Bono.
 A dedicated office including an executive assistant and necessary office and communications equipment could be considered . The office could also be considered as a dedicated office.
 More details, including liow to state interest, are available from Eddie Ricli via ericli@eiti.org.org .
 Join m thi# asthIot rol* based ol Muncfui^iter Airport, and you'll p*l kOTRS of th* mosi inf|y#Fitiai ord-innavoti^T; strgt ^ pej in j
 Yoa'II creot^tjraiyfl* ckrF* lorword our framework, evolve otir+rtrnt-Hne processes andmakc busmese-defintog dedskms wk#n ii matteft .
 economics has a new villain. They may struggle to improve things-and could make them worse . The rich world’s politiLcians, economics have a new villains .
In America workers have been demonstrating for higher pay and stronger union rights in the profitable but poorly paying food industry . In America workers are demonstrating for more union rights.
 Shinzo Abe has sworn to lift salaries, and cajoles, and threatens to deliver on his promise . Abe has promised to lift wages and cajaoles in Japan .
In most places the recession that followed the financial crisis had dire effects on wages . In most places, the recession had dire effect on wages in most places .
 Despite five years of growth American real wages are still 1.2% below what they were at the beginning of 2009 .
 In Britain, real wages fell every year between 2009 and 2014, the longest decline since the mid-i8oos . In the UK, wages have fallen every year since 2009, according to the figures .
 Germany has done better, but wages are still 2.4% below their 2008 level . Germany has been a haven during the euro-zone crisis, but has done worse .
median pay has risen since 2008 in Canada and France-these have generally been bad years for wages . There are exceptions, but there are exceptions .
 Across the G7 group of rich countries household consumption ranges from 55% to 68% of gdp . G7 household consumption is 55% of G7's household consumption .
 Low pay across the economy as a whole threatens to put a lid on growth that one would otherwise expect after a recession .
 If it does not there’s a chance it will be because households are again borrowing to spend in an unsustainable way .
 The political heat also has a concerning side. But if there is good reason to be worried about wages, there is also a good side to worry about .
 To design sound policies it is vital to understand why wages have stopped rising, what the implications of a flat-wage world would be, and the likely impact of pay-propelling policies .
 Economics is still only just getting to grips with these questions . But economics is still just getting into grips with the questions .
More and more goes to labour, more and more has been going to the people who earn the highest salaries . The share of the share is going to people who make the highest salary .
 Scholars seeking to explain this decline in the labour share reckon a number of big forces are at work . Scholars seek to explain the decline in labour share .
 The income from capital-especially from housing has been increasing more than the income from labour .
Capital goods have become a lot cheaper and/or better in many industries . In many industries, capital goods are cheaper and better than they are in many cases .
Isting machines get cheaper or because new ones can do more-reduce demand for labour. ONS; OECD; BLS; Federal Reserve. Insee ► isting machines are getting cheaper.
 The usual assumption is that once unemployment gets below a certain rate, idle labour becomes scarce . Competition to hire already employed workers heats up .
As firms outbid each other for talent, new workers get better starter salaries and valued staff secure juicy raises . New workers get a better starter salary and get better start salaries .
Estimating the unemployment rate at which wage-driven inflation kicks in the nairu (non-accelerating inflation rate) is part of the core business of central banks .
 Matching quandaries Eollowing a major recession, the nairu often goes up . Eollows a major economic recession .
 Periods of unemployment have lingering effects on workers, from a loss of vim to clinical depression .
 Time out of work can mean skills dwindle or become mismatched to the needs of the market . The skills needed by industries that flourish in the recovery may differ from those central to the industries which laid people off in the slump .
 OECD presence on the unemployment rolls does little to hold down wages . OECD presence is little to keep down wages, says the OECD .
After a big crisis the nairu rises; inflation should kick in sooner rather than later. So after the big crisis, inflation should start to rise sooner than later .
 median hourly wages were the same in the first quarter of 2015 as a year earlier . But joblessness has fallen by more than two percentage points since then .
 Realterms wages might now be shaking off their sloth. There is evidence that realterms wages may now be shake off their Sloth .
Average salaries up by 1.7% in a year, with inflation close to zero this is a decent real-terms rise . The latest British data show average salaries up 1.8% in the year .
 If unemployment falls it would mean a return to pre-crash normality, with sustained wage inflation eventually triggering central-bank interest-rate hikes . If this continues as unemployment falls, it would be a return.
 The recent hints of a wages bump are largely an artefact of unexpectedly low inflation, and that the underlying wage stagnation continues . There is, though, another possibility, that there is another possibility .
 Average pay data in America and Britain may be hiding the continuing plight of the median worker behind success of the most sought after .
 The loss of skills and mismatch between industries where workers have experience and those where there are vacancies-is not in the form of long-term unemployment but as lasting low pay . It may be that the damage this recession did to the labour market.
 If low pay locks in, sustained inflation might not return even with low rates of unemployment . If that is true, it may not return with low unemployment .
 labour-market shift would chart a very different course for central banks, which would keep rates low . That labour- market shift would be very different to central banks .
 More flexible labour contracts make it easier to fill posts without raising wages . In many places, more flexible contracts makes it easier for people to fill jobs .
 In Germany “mini jobs’-positions with pay under €400 per monthare rocketing. In Germany, ‘mini jobs-pos positions’ with pay below €400 a month are ‘rocketing.’
 In Britain, neither employer nor employee commits to a fixed number of hours . "zero hours" contracts are becoming more common in Britain .
 By making it easier to fire workers, these contracts aim to take the worry out of hiring .
 The ever larger ‘staffing industry’ may be having a similar effect . Not for the long haul .
Kelly Services, Adecco and Randstad mainly supply light manufacturing and industrial workers . It is important across a much wider swathe of the economy than is often realised .
 In 2013 Kelly Services was America’s second largest private-sector employer, after Walmart, with 750,000 staff . Walmart is America's secondlargest private- sector employer, following Walmart .
 In Japan, once the land of the shushin koyd, or job for life, transient employment is ever more common . In 2014 Recruit, the coun►►► 20 Briefing The economics of Low wages The Economist, The Economist.
Labour aggregators that compete for business on the basis of helping lower clients’ staff costs have an incentive to keep pay low . But labour aggregators are not allowed to compete for businesses that help lower staff costs .
 In 2014 a report by Rebecca Smith and Claire McKenna of the National Employment Law Project, an American lobby group, claims that staffing agencies cut temps’ bargaining power .
 Across the Gy politicians are mulling three ways to overcome the problems low pay poses .
 The first and least appealing is re-regulating the labour market so as to limit flexibility . The labour market will be re-regulated to limit the amount of flexibility .
 In Germany trade unions are critical of mini jobs, arguing that they cannibalise higher-paying ones . In Germany, they say they are more likely to work in a lower-paying job .
 The evidence suggests that mini jobs are growing fastest in industries where full-time jobs are up strongly too, a government research institute says .
 Many workers like the twoway flexibility temping provides. For one thing many workers like it provides .
Temping is popular with some Japanese workers, allowing women with young children and retired workers to enter the workforce . Temping is also popular with women who are seeking a pension top-up .
Making the market less flexible raises the risk that an economic downturn will cause mass layoffs . Making the market more flexible increases the risk of mass layoffs, experts say .
 France has the Gy’s least flexible labour market, and a 10% unemployment rate . France's unemployment rate is 10% .
 In a wounded economy, a low-paying job is better than none at all, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 In 2010 a worker in Britain earning the minimum wage-then £5.93 per hour was liable for tax on £5,900 of the £12,300 he would have earned that year .
 Today's equivalent total is £13,520, but increases in the tax-free allowance mean only £2,920 is taxable . Today the equivalent total was £13.520 .
 The problem is that such tax cuts are untargeted, so the betterand indeed best-off gain too . The better and indeed best off gain too.
 Many countries use tax “credits’s, like the Working Tax Credit in Britain or the Earned Income Tax Credit, which provides refunds to those on the lowest pay .
 Someone earning £13,100 or less receives a top-up of £1,960 . In Britain, for example, someone earning £12,000 or less gets a top up of £10,000 .
 Since there is no cost to the employer any urge to hire remains robust . Since there are no costs to hire, there's no cost for employers to hire .
Some worry that stingy bosses are able to rely on tax credits rather than raise pay . Some worry that they can't raise pay.
 Low-paid workers flipping burgers at McDonald's, Burger King or Wendy's will get substantial tax credits . JD Wetherspoon, Britain’s biggest pub group, will be getting substantial tax Credits .
 Critics point out that these outfits are profitable and returning cash to their shareholders . But critics point out they are also profitable and return cash to shareholders .
 Walmart plans to raise its minimum wage from $ 7.25 to $9 . The move should be easily manageable given profits of $2y billion and dividends of $6 billion in 2014 .
Studies of Britain's economy find that lEvarsjtfF Temporary solutions higher pay helps firms retain workers .
 Two major outlays-tax credits and food stamps ($71 billion)-aim to pep up purchasing power directly . The $71 billion-a-year plan is aimed at pep-up purchasing power .
 The other-Medicaid ($83 billion)-offsets the fact that companies provide less health insurance than they did . coverage fell from 67% to 59% of workers between 2003 and 2013, according to the report .
 Third approach-higher minimum wages-would shift burden back to firms . A third approach- higher minimum wages would shift burden to firms.
 Barack Obama wants minimum wage boosted by nearly 40% to $10.10. In America, Obama wants the minimum wage to be boosted by almost 40% .
 Energy-price caps can stop firms investing in power stations, wage floors can stop them from hiring workers . The caps can also stop firms from investing in energy stations .
 Most studies suggest that at moderate levels they do little to worsen unemployment . Yet most studies suggest the moderate levels of unemployment are not to worsen .
 Study of San Francisco, Santa Fe and Washington, DC, found that this had no impact on employment . U.S. cities often demand wages well above the federal minimum .
 New political interest in stagnant and falling pay is welcome if it really boosts what poorly paid workers take home while not deterring job creation .
 The Supreme Court ponders the biggest case of the decade N in 19 years after a district court first allowed gay couples to marry in Hawaii . The Supreme court could be poised to do so nationwide .
 If so, its ruling will be final, unlike the one in Hawaii, which was swiftly rejected by voters . Hawaii's ruling was quickly rejected by its voters .
 Everything hinges on how the nine justices respond to the two-and-a-half-hours of oral argument they heard on April 28th .
 Two-thirds of Americans live in states where same-sex marriage is legal . Over two-thirds live in the states where it is legal.
 Only 13 states still ban it, including Ohio, Michigan, Kentucky and Tennessee, which are parties to the four cases before the court collectively known as Obergefellv Hodges .
 These cases involve gay couples who have suffered because they live in the state where they live frowns on same-sex marriage .
Eor example, Pam and Nicole Yorksmith were married in San Erancisco but live in Kentucky . Eor example: Pam andNicole were married and live in San Erancisco .
 The hospital did not recognise that a child can have two mothers . Nicole’s name was already in their records .
 Pam was not allowed to give a parent’s permission for doctors to treat her child . She was not given a parent's permission to give her child's parents permission .
 It took an hour for hospital staff to reach Nicole, as the baby coughed and wheezed .
 Such stories are now common, as is inevitable when some states allow marriage equality and others don't .
 The argument for striking down state bans on same-sex marriage is simple . The argument is simple.
Gay marriages performed legally in one state should be valid in other states . This suggests that gay marriages performed in one states should be legal in others. This suggests the same thing should be done in another.
 John Bursch, a lawyer for Michigan, argued that changing the definition of wedlock would bring undesirable consequences for society .
 A child who grows up “believing that marriage is about keeping that couple bound to that child forever” might fare better than a child whose parents’ marriage “is more about their emotional commitment to each other,’ he says .
 Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg: By opening marriage to same-sex couples, “you’re not taking anything away from heterosexual [onesl.’sl. ‘You’'re not taking any away from homosexual couples,’ she said .
 Justice Stephen Breyer noted that plenty of gay couples have kids . He noted that “a very high percent’ of heterosexual couples do not or cannot procreate .
 Gay marriage is illegal in Georgia, and only spouses can adopt a child jointly . Ms Wurz’s son has two mothers, but only one is legally recognised .
 If permission was needed to perform some tricky operation, she could not give it . If permission were needed to do some tricky operations, she would not be able to give it.
 The harm that gay marriage might cause to heterosexual families is entirely theoretical . The harm is theoretical, but it's not entirely theoretical.
 The harm that continuing to ban it does to gay people is real and palpable. The harm is real, palpable, and the harm that continues to be banned is real .
 Same-sex couples in the 13 states where they cannot marry are denied the rights and benefits that wedlock confers on straight couples . Same- sex couples in 13 states are denied rights to marry in the same-sex states .
 They lose out on big tax breaks, inheritance rights, health insurance that covers spouses and custody of jointly raised children if one of them dies . They also lose out.
 Shelton Stroman and Christopher Inniss, a Georgian couple, are bringing up a son together . The couple's son will be born in September .
Several justices seemed nervous about tinkering with an institution that has existed for millennia . Still, several justices seemed worried about tinkers with the institution .
 Others worried that it would be presumptuous for the court to overrule voters .
 Mr Breyer says it would be wiser to wait and see whether gay marriage does cause some kind of harm .
 Donald Verrilli delivered a thundering rebuke to such arguments . The solicitor-general was the attorney general of the United States .
 It is “simply untenable,’ he said, that “they can be required to wait’ for equal protection. It is "simply unenable’s, he said .
 A decision is expected in June . The boy's dad tried to pick him up early from school .
 Mr Stroman recalls that he walked out of the court and wept . But the judge to whom he presented his case described this wish as a 'mockery'
 Horrified executives at the company’s national headquarters in Salt Lake City, Utah apologised and offered to print them without charge .
 Georgia’s attorney-general, Sam Olens, has fought to defend the state's ban on same-sex weddings . Georgia's attorney- general has been fighting the ban for years .
 The Supreme Court is expected to overturn the decision on April 22nd . But if the Supreme Court overturns it, ‘it’s not time for criticism,’ he said .
 The economic boost from lower oil prices is smaller than you might expect I N 2014 oil prices crashed . The economy Oil be damned. The economy is damned .
 The oil price does not much affect government spending, but has a big impact on the other three . The price of the oil price is not much affected government spending .
 Thomson Reuters Net exports have certainly been boosted by the lower oil price . The oil price has also been boosted.
 With the oil price roughly $60 below its peak, Americans now send $500m less abroad every day . Americans send about $200 billion a year, or about $500 million less a year .
 Americans have received a windfall, akin to a juicy tax cut. Add to this the lower price of domestically produced oil, and Americans have gotten a tax cut, like this .
 Consumers reluctant to splash out, perhaps because wage growth has been so miserable . But consumers are reluctant to splash out because of wage growth .
 The monthly growth rate of retail sales-not including those at petrol stations-has stumbled in the past few months . Retail sales- not including those in petrol stations - have stumbled in recent months .
 Investment in mining structures shrank at a 60% annualised rate in the first quarter of 2015, says Capital Economics . Capital Economics subtracts 0.8% from overall growth.
 In March Texas saw its largest month-on-month drop since 2009 . The state has seen rapid job growth in recent years .
 At a meeting on April 29th, it decided to keep interest rates at rock bottom . It has done since late 2008 .
 In the past few weeks, the oil price has stopped falling, but this deflationary effect is wearing off . The price of the oil has dropped, but the price has continued to fall .
 Economists are left wondering how what seemed like a big bonus for the U.S. economy could have had so little effect .
 Baltimore exploded into violence on the evening of April 27th after several days of peaceful protests against Mr Gray’s treatment .
 Angry teenagers began attacking a mall in the north-west of the city after the funeral .
 By sunset, large areas of West Baltimore had descended into lawlessness .
 Groups of young men and women looted bars and corner shops, set fire to buildings and joyrode through the streets . The streets were filled with young men, women and young men .
 National Guard, state police and cops from neighbouring counties had flooded the city to enforce a city wide overnight curfew .
 The riots were the most dramatic unrest in a large U.S. city since 2001 . The riots occurred in the largest city in the country since 2001.
 Some see it as an outpouring of understandable rage at police brutality . Others see them as a show of anger at police officers .
 Others wonder how torching the local pharmacy could possibly be the answer to anything .
 In the neighbourhood where much of the violence took place, a third of homes were already vacant . More than half of working-age residents do not have jobs .
 The median household income is $25,000, less than half the national average . The median income is more than $30,000 .
 More businesses will flee, making j obs even harder to find and groceries even more costly .
 In Wonderland Liquors, a local store that was looted, volunteers sweep up the broken glass .
 The store is insured but it will take time to reopen and premiums will probably soar . The store will probably take a few weeks to reopen but it is insured .
 Baltimore’s tragedy has intensified the national soul-searching about the relationship between African-Americans and the police that began with similar disturbances in Ferguson, Missouri last August .
 Hillary Clinton called for an end to mass incarceration . She called for police officers to be equipped with body cameras and for reforms intended to rebuild trust .
White city leaders constantly fined black residents for minor infractions . White city leaders essentially treated them as a source of revenue by fining them for minor violations .
 Stephanie Rawlings-Blake is a black Democrat . Her police chief is black, and most police officers are non-white .
 Police scanners reported carjackings, robberies and one murder-none of them connected to the protests . Thousands of cops enforced a curfew on April 28th .
 In the aftermath of the riots, young men in the uniforms of the Bloods and Crips gave interviews claiming to have done a better j oh than police of preventing looting .
In many north-eastern and midwestern American cities, black migrants seeking industrial jobs in the 1950s and 1960s faced violence and racist housing policies .
 Middle-class whites fled, particularly after the riots that followed the murder of Martin Luther King in 1968 .
 In the 1980s, heroin and crack cocaine filled their place. In the 1970s deindustrialisation sucked away jobs . In the 80s, cocaine and heroin filled the place .
 As police adopted tough tactics to try to stop the drugs trade, violent crime instead flourished .
 An investigation by the Baltimore Sun in September revealed that between 2011 and 2014 alone, the city paid out $5.7m to settle lawsuits over allegations of brutality .
 One case was of an 87-year-old woman who was pushed over by a police officer after calling because her grandson had been shot .
 In 2012 the fbi found 51 of the city’s cops involved in a corruption racket . The fbi also found 51 police officers involved in the corruption racket.
 Under the orders of the then mayor Martin O'Malley, police adopted a “zero tolerance’ strategy . O’Malley seems likely to run for president .
 Few AfricanAmericans trust cops to enforce the law fairly, so many crimes are not reported . Police struggle to get witnesses to testify, and many crimes aren't reported .
 Graduation rates in the city’s public schools have climbed in recent years . A 60year population decline has finally been stemmed .
 A few days of delirious mayhem could set the city back for a decade or more .
 The evolving workplace is an undeniable reality of global business today, says Takeshi Numoto . "The evolving workplace" is a key part of Microsoft's future .
 No longer constrained by office walls, employees expect to have access to the necessary tools, resources and information to be productive while working from any location .
 To understand the potential, first consider the proliferation of connected devices . To see the potential for connected devices, consider the use of smart phones and smartphones .
 The number is staggering on its own, but the value ultimately comes down to empowering employees with anytime, anywhere .
Businesses need to think of mobile and cloud as equal parts of a larger whole . This is a new world of cloud-based solutions that impact how we live and work .
 Today, it's not just about phones, the band on your wrist or the billions of other Internet-connected devices, says Takeshi Numoto, corporate vice president .
 Companies can begin by consolidating their various structured and unstructured data sources . Companies can also consolidate their data sources by combining their structured and Unstructured sources .
 Using business intelligence and advanced analytics, they can extract insights from that data to drive better customer experiences, improve produaion and operations, and lower costs . Then, using business intelligence, they use advanced analytics to extract insights. Then, they are able to use those insights to improve production
 Companies can facilitate knowledge-sharing and collaboration by making data and analytics tools more accessible . Companies can uncover “small patterns’s’ in big data to drive innovation .
 Numoto cautions that data access and selfservice business intelligence are only part of the equation . But, Numoto says, data access is not the only factor in self service .
 Microsoft's answers to these challenges include enterprise-mobility solutions . They include integrated data and application protection, as well as 99.95% availability, tech suppoa round-the-clock service health monitoring .
 The Microsoft Cloud empowers Real Madrid to create a more personal connection with every fan from Madrid to Mumbai . The cloud will help employees be productive from anywhere by connecting them to intelligence .
 Using Microsoft Azure, Dynamics CRM and Power Bl, the team can deliver a unique experience that ignites everyone's passion as if they were all there .
 Roland Fryer was a teenager who hung out with a bad crowd . He was a hotshot economist with lessons for Baltimore and other trouble spots .
 Surrounded by drug dealers and getting into fights, he used to sell counterfeit handbags to make a bit of extra cash .
 Asked by a friend where he would be at 30, he replied that he would probably be dead .
 In 2008, he became the youngest African-American to win tenure as an economics professor at Harvard . At that age, he was the youngestAfrican-American professor in Harvard history .
 The American Economic Association announced that he had won this year's John Bates Clark medal-the profession’s second-highest honour after the Nobel prize .
Research has sought to explain why black children do so much worse in life than their white peers . The research has also sought to understand why relatively few have overcome their rough backgrounds .
 One of his early studies asked why black kids do worse than whites at school . The study was part of a series of studies on black kids at school.
 He found that, after controlling for such things as income, there was no gap in kindergarten . He says that after controlling such things, there is no gap.
 By the middle of third grade, whites were 20% less likely to be able to perform tasks such as multiplication .
 One explanation was that black pupils do not study hard because they are accused of “acting white’-and ostracised’s .
 He measured how popular pupils were by asking them to name their friends . He measured the popularity of pupils by asking their friends to name them .
 Both children named each other. To guard against fibbing, he counted a friendship as real only if both children named one other .
Black high-school students with good grades had fewer friends than those with mediocre ones . Black high- school students had less friends with mediocre grades than those who had good grades .
 Mr Fryer suggested offering small cash rewards to children who meet certain goals . He also suggested offering rewards for children who memorise their times tables .
For every 10% increase in incentive payments, pupils worked 8.7% harder . For every 10%. increase in incentives, pupils work 8.6% harder.
 Roly polymath Mr Fryer’s next challenge is to study racial inequality outside classroom .
You have to show that they are more likely to shoot blacks than whites under the same circumstances . You have to prove that they're more likely than whites to shoot black people under same circumstances.
 It should be possible to use police data to control for things that might prompt a cop to open fire, such as whether a suspect was holding a gun .
 The results may help the police figure out how to reduce the death toll . The results, Mr Fryer says, may help them figure out what to do .
 With Baltimore in flames and Ferguson still reeling from riots over police heavy-handedness, such dispassionate research is urgently needed .
 Rahm Emanuel shut down 47 public schools that were halfempty and had atrocious results . Emanuel's decision sparked protests that nearly cost him the next election .
 Parents, teachers and activists held rallies and candlelight vigils to protest . Parents and teachers held rallies, rallies and vigils .
 Thomas Fordham Institute report suggests that bad schools are good for students . However, it may encourage future closures of bad schools, it says .
 Researchers looked at 23,000 displaced pupils from shut-down district and charter schools in eight Ohio cities between 2006 and 2012 .
 Critics argue that shutting schools destabilises and derails the academic progress of pupils .
 Once a school had closed, most of the children ended up in better ones, where they eventually got higher grades . The children eventually got better grades.
 Three years after closure, children gained the equivalent of at least an extra month of learning in their new schools .
 Those who went from a failing charter school to a high-performing one did even better, gaining 58 more days of learning in reading and 88 days in maths .
 Nearly three-quarters of the children were black and more than 90% were poor . More than 90 per cent were poor, according to the report .
 The National Assessment of Educational Progress periodically tests sample-groups of America’s children on various subjects . This week it released disappointing results for history, geography and civics for 13-year-olds .
 Most didn't understand time zones, and a quarter thought Canada was a dictatorship . Most did not understand time zone, and most did not think Canada was dictatorship .
 More than half thought that the government should guarantee everyone a job . More than a third thought that everyone should have a job.
 That was the wrong answer as far as the examiners were concerned, but perhaps an accurate reflection of what a lot of voters think .
 Brigham Young, the polygamist leader of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, chose a plain fringed Wasatch mountains deep in the desert West as the place to find his Zion, Salt Lake City .
 Mormons' insistence on polygamy stopped their homeland being fully accepted into the United States . Only after the practice was formally renounced in 1890 could the Utah Territory become a state .
 The U.S. may be looking for lessons for the rest of America .
 Its governor, both senators and the entire congressional delegation are all Republicans . The governor, the entire delegation, is a Republican .
 Utah is quietly forging a model of constructive Republicanism . In several aspects of policy, Utah has quietly forged a model for constructive GOPism .
 Utah's state legislature passed a bill that banned discrimination in housing and employment on the ground of sexuality . The bill was passed in March .
 The state also passed a bill which changed many drug offences from felonies to misdemeanours . The bill redirected money towards treatment for the mentally ill and persistent drug users .
 Utah has reduced the number of people living permanently on the street by giving them homes without first insisting that they quit alcohol or drugs or solve their mental-health problems .
 Gordon Walker, the head of Utah’s housing division, says the policy was controversial .
 On immigration, Arizona has long been fairly tolerant, and much more so than its neighbour Arizona . Arizona has been more tolerant on immigration than its neighbours .
 Utah became the first in America to issue a special class of driving licence available to illegal immigrants . Arizona passed a law compelling police officers to check immigration papers in 2010 .
 The state is among 18 which allow certain illegal-immigrant students to claim in-state tuition benefits . The state also takes in refugees under the federal resettlement programme .
This year the state passed a law reintroducing the firing squad for murderers . This year the law was passed by the state's legislature .
 It has not yet accepted Obamacare’s expansion of Medicaid, the federal-state health programme for the hard-up . It may do soon, though it may do.
 Spencer Cox is Utah's young lieutenant-governor . But he argues Utah is different, he says .
 Mr Cox reckons that Mormons, long persecuted themselves, are tolerant of other people’s opinions .
Because many serve overseas as missionaries, they are more open to foreigners, he says . He says many serve as missionaries. Because many serve Overseas, they're more open.
 The Mormon church has a direct influence on the state’s politics, according to the Mormon church .
 The state is 92% white; and yet, because Mormons marry young and have large families, it is the youngest state in America . The state has the highest percentage of white people in the country .
 It has the lowest level of income inequality and one of the lowest poverty rates . It also has the highest level of inequality and the lowest levels of poverty rates.
 Salt Lake City is a more liberal, less religious place than most of Utah . In recent years, Salt Lake city has become a magnet for finance and tech companies .
 In Texas and the Deep South, politics is more raw and fiercely fought . In other equally Republican-leaning places, such as Texas and Deep South.
 Some billionaires relish flying political chums around, which is even handier than others .
 Sometimes, when all else fails, flights end up being cadged from frankly unsavoury jet-owners . But sometimes, when they fail, flights are cadged.
 This does not matter much once a political leader has left office and hit the global-grandee circuit-a lucrative world of paid speeches .
 The private-jet conundrum sheds light on the challenge facing Hillary Clinton . Hillary Clinton is facing a challenge of flying private jets .
 Bill passed through what might be termed the ‘money door’ to become a rich man . His wife Bill has been married for more than 20 years .
 Americans do not necessarily think it outrageous that a former head of government should become rich . Unlike the Brits, who treat Tony Blair as a pariah, Americans don't think it is outrageous .
 Mr Clinton's allies add that personal wealth holds little interest for him .
 Given a pile of money, he might buy an expensive watch, but that is about it . admirers maintain that it's about it.
 Mrs Clinton is focused on her family's financial security . She is described to put it politely-to-put it politely.
 Even her friends thought this was an unconvincing show of solidarity with the working stiff .
 News outlets posed awkward questions about her family's pursuit of wealth since leaving the White House 15 years ago .
 She served as secretary of state from 2009 to 2013 . She has been asked about foreign governments that showered speaking fees, philanthropic donations and private jet flights .
 The Untold Story of How and Why Foreign Governments and Businesses Helped Make Bill and Hillary Rich . Peter Schweizer.
 Some of the most pointed concern donations made to the Clinton Foundation, the family's philanthropic arm, by a group of Canadian businessmen at the same time as they struck politically sensitive deals .
 The uranium holdings were later sold to the Russian state-a sale which required approval by the State Department led by Mrs Clinton .
 Clinton's campaign staff say there is not a “shred’s of evidence that the former secretary of state used her office to help donors .
 Clintonland sounds defensive. To be sure, no smoking gun has been found .
 The Clinton Foundation seeks to reduce childhood obesity, lower the cost of hiv drugs and other good things . While Mrs Clinton is running for office it will accept donations from foreign governments that are already funding programmes .
 Mrs Clinton's use of a private e-mail server throughout her time as secretary of state allowed her to delete tens of thousands of e-mails as she saw fit .
 Republicans say all this is evidence that the Clintons are calculating and corrupt . Republicans say this is proof that they are corrupt .
 Mitt Romney says Hillary Clinton was bribed to grease the sale of 20% of America's uranium production to Russia . e-mails were later erased to cover up the scandal .
 Democrats loyal to the Clintons closed ranks, telling media outlets that partisans are confecting allegations out of nothing . All charges will prove unfounded, they say .
 Among diehards on the right and left, this latest fuss will probably change few minds .
 The approximately 40% of Americans who would not dream of voting for Mrs Clinton will scorn her a little more .
 There are Americans whose support cannot be taken for granted by either party . But there are Americans who can't be given support by both parties .
Young people and minorities only sometimes vote, as well as several million working-class whites who stayed at home in 2012 .
 Extended discussion of the Clinton family’s wealth is likely to exhaust and alienate voters .
 When they hear Mrs Clinton complain about bosses’ pay or money in politics, they will roll their eyes .
 The former first couple are estimated to have earned from speechifying . This problem will persist even if no vast scandals are unearthed by further digging into the Clinton Foundation .
 America has spent years listening to the Clintons defending themselves against charges of greed, and of sticking to the letter rather than the spirit of rules and undertakings .
The prospect of another 18 months arguing about such things is not a happy one . The prospect of a 18-month battle is not happy one.
 Harvard-educated head of an ngo that uses analysis, statistics and cheeky social-media campaigns to agitate for clean government . She is also the head of a ngo.
 The woman is part of a movement of civilsociety wonks who are gaining big influence in Mexico .
 In recent months, after the murder of 43 students in the south-western state of Guerrero, these organisations have come into their own . In September, widespread allegations of corruption have been made against them .
 Enrique Pena Nieto has gone further than he originally wanted in a constitutional reform to tackle corruption . The government has persuaded the government to go further than they originally wanted .
 In April, ngos and think-tanks lobbied successfully for laws opening up greater access to government information . In April ngos, think- tanks lobbied to open up greater information access .
 Mexicanos Primero, headed by a member of a prominent industrial family, is taking legal action to force interior ministry not to cave in .
 The ngos’ methods include “name and shame’s’ campaigns that play well on social media . They include ‘name and Shame’ and ‘ name and shame' campaigns .
 It shows in real time which states have and not approved the anti-corruption reform that will, for the first time, subject them to federal audits .
Ten of the 32 states had ratified it in a week of approval in the federal Congress .
Two ngos, the Mexican Competitiveness Institute and Transparencia Mexicana, created a platform called Three out of Three . It encourages candidates in mid-term elections on June 7th to go beyond legal requirements .
 He urges voters to send tweets to candidates, offering to vote for them only if they provide information . Voters can vote for candidates if they give the information .
 The technocratic elite used almost automatically to join the government, says Economist . Latin America's rural dream is a dream for many .
 The 1985 Mexico City earthquake produced an upsurge of grassroots activism after the earthquake . Its mishandling of rescue efforts after the 1985 earthquake produced a surge in grassroots activism .
 Civil-society groups gained further prominence by fighting fraud during elections in the 1980s and 1990s . The pri finally lost its 72-year-old grip on power in 2000 .
 Once Mexico had become more democratic, the American foundations that had bankrolled some of these ngos moved elsewhere, says Shannon O’Neil .
 New law in 2004 gave charities more access to government support . But tax authorities have slowly made it easier to make tax-deductible donations .
 By one estimate, donors such as the Ford Foundation account for more than half the funding of large ngos .
After a lull, the number of ngos grew again as Mexico’s domestic security troubles increased in the late 2000s .
 Some, supported by Mexican business groups, became highly effective in getting the government to deal with drug-related violence in such northern cities as Ciudad Juarez and Monterrey . Some, backed by business groups.
 There was, however, a social split, says Juan Salgado of cide, a government research institute .
Violent crime affected both rich and poor, well-heeled victim-support groups emerged with powerful government connections . Because violent crime affected the rich and the poor, these groups emerged.
 The grassroots anti-crime organisations tended to be poorer, more ideological and more focused on the causes of crime and on human rights . The grassroots organisations tend to be less ideological and less focused on crime and rights .
 The Americas The Economist finds a stronger echo in street protests than in the government . They find a strong echo in the U.S.
 The grassroots organisations can be dismissive of their more technocratic brethren, labelling them neoliberal and government stooges .
 Itam is one of Mexico’s most prestigious universities, which spurns the ideological biases that afQict most others . Some of their leaders are graduates of itam .
 It instils an evidence-based approach to learning that often leads students to Ivy League universities in the United States .
 The technocrats have a pragmatism that makes their agenda hard to pin down . The technocrat's agenda is often hard topin down .
 The food industry is partly blamed on the food industry . But it also campaigns against obesity, which is also blamed for obesity .
 Mr Pena's wife's role in a potential conflict-of-interest scandal is being investigated . mass movements have put the government on the defensive, as in the street protests last year .
 Such incidents forced the government to come out of its bunker, says Luis Rubio, head of cidac, a think-tank .
 He says the ngos’ job is not just to help write good laws but also to make sure they are implemented . He says ngos' job is to ensure good laws are written and implemented .
 J IM PRENTICE had every reason to feel confident when he called an election for May 5th . The opposition may end the longest winning streak in Canadian politics .
 His Progressive Conservative party has governed Alberta without interruption since 1971 . He has governed the province since 1971.
 A political scientist puts it, conservative in every sense of the word, in the province . Its victory would be a shock for a province that is, as one political scientist says .
 Alberta’s economy will barely expand this year and may even shrink this year . After several years growing faster than the national average, Alberta's economy is expected to barely expand .
Organisers of Calgary Stampede fret corporate sponsors will serve hot dogs rather than steak . Organisers of this summer’s Calgary Stampse fret that corporate sponsors are serving hot dogs .
 The province is projecting deficits of almost C$5 billion ($4. billion) in this fiscal year and C$3 billion in the next one . The province's budget is expected to be $4 billion in next year .
 He called elections a year early because he needed a new mandate to enact such big tax increases . He called election a year earlier because he said he needed the new mandate for such big increases .
 The real reason may have been to avoid a vote next year, when the economy could be even weaker . The economy could have been even weaker.
 Mr Prentice’s tax plans have given new heart to Wildrose, founded by disaffected Conservatives .
 Hostility to tax increases seems to be the party’s only deeply held belief . But it resonates with Albertans, according to the party .
 Wildrose wants to raise taxes on companies and the rich . It has split the rightof-centre vote.
 He became premier in September after his predecessor was felled by scandal . They were found in the lagoon where rowers will race .
 He wants to reduce Alberta’s dependence on oil . He has tried to improve relations with indigenous people whose co-operation is needed .
 Mr Prentice has hurt himself with policy u-turns and campaign gaffes . But he has also been criticised for campaign gaffees .
 His government at first exempted religious institutions from a law obliging schools to tolerate clubs supporting gay students . His government then reversed itself, angering social conservatives .
 The pollsters were wrong in 2012, when they predicted a Wildrose victory . The pollster was wrong in 2013, when it was predicted a victory .
 A three-month strike starting last year by workers in the judicial system further tarnished its image . The strike began last year.
 The Constitutional Court won their gratitude by securing access to health care and upholding the rights of 5m displaced people .
 The Supreme Court prosecuted politicians who had colluded with right-wing paramilitary groups .
 Jorge Pretelt faces allegations he solicited a bribe of 500m pesos to issue a ruling . Fidupetrol, an oil company, is in a dispute with the government .
 Mr Pretelt denies the charge and has temporarily stepped down as the court's president to defend himself before a congressional commission .
 Two-thirds of Colombians say they mistrust the high courts, according to a poll taken in March .
 Some critics called for the resignation of all high-court magistrates . Others proposed a constitutional assembly to overhaul the judiciary .
 The scandals should not lead Colombians to “go to extremes and demonise’s judiciary, he advised . Colombia's judiciary should not go to extremes.
 The bill was already making its way through Congress . Instead, he added new provisions to a grab-bag constitutional reform bill .
 These would strip high-court judges of their role in choosing other senior officials, such as the comptroller-general, a government spending watchdog .
 The reforms would also end the practice of judges from one high court naming judges on another, which encourages cronyism . The reforms will also end a practice of naming judges.
Jose Manuel Acevedo leads sos Justice, a group that campaigns to make the judicial system more accessible and transparent . This does not address the biggest problems, he says .
 These stem from a “crisis of values’ among lawyers, prosecutors and judges, according to a report .
 American lawyers must pass a bar exam, says American lawyer . One solution, he thinks, would be to require lawyers to pass the bar exam .
 Mr Santos’s reform takes a first step, by providing for the creation of a bar that lawyers would have to j oin .
 The government is holding peace talks with the farc, a leftist army, to end their half-century war . The farc and the government are in talks to end the half- century war .
 If they reach agreement, the courts will have to consider whether to bring criminal charges against thousands of demobilised guerrillas .
 ‘La Oculta’ is a new novel by Hector Abad Faciolince, one of Colombia’s leading writers . Pilar Angel is one of three siblings who are the narrators.
 Mr Abad’s finely crafted novel expounds its narrators’ contrasting attitudes towards sex, rural life and tradition in a modernising country .
In doing so, it throws an evocative light on the enduring pull of the land in Latin America . In doing so it throws a light on what has gone with it .
 Conflict over land is the region’s oldest story, dating to before the Iberian conquest .
 This installed an unequal pattern of landholding, sustained by serfdom and slavery . This installed a uniquely unequalpattern of landholds, which is sustained by Serfdom.
Land reform made land reform one of the big ideological battles of the 20th century . That lies at the root of the region’s inequality, and it makes land reform a big ideological battle of 20th Century .
 reform too often destroyed efficient farms without creating a workable alternative . It was too late to stop poor peasants from flooding into the cities .
 In the 1850s two merchants to whom the government had granted the area in repayment of bonds gathered together young families and offered them plots in return for communal labour .
 Most of Colombia’s coffee has been grown by small and medium-sized proprietors . Unlike in Central America or Brazil, most of Colombia's coffee is grown by a small and small proprietor .
 The hills of Antioquia and the provinces to the south are studded with flowerdecked, brightly painted farmhouses .
 For the past seven decades rural Colombia has seen persistent violence, partly a battle for land . Farc guerrillas and kidnappers use chainsaws as murder weapons .
 Since the 1980s some 5m Colombians have fled the land to escape threats or violence . Some 5m people have fled to the land in the past.
 For centuries, they drew their identity and only hope of economic security from the land . The still-venerated pachamama of the Incas are the still-VENerated Pachamamas .
 If they moved to the cities, it was because they wanted more than subsistence . If they wanted to move to the city, they would have to do more than just move to a city .
 Latin America's low rate of saving is its people's preference for land, bricks and mortar . Latin America’s low rates of saving are the reason for its low rates .
Farming is rooted in Latin America’s past but it is also part of its future . Farming is a key part of Latin America's future .
Study by World Bank in 2005 found that 42% live outside big cities in what could be classed as the countryside . 76% of Latin Americans are urbanites .
Many countries have enjoyed agricultural revolutions in the past two decades . Many countries have applied technology to commercial export farming .
 There is scope for this to benefit smaller-scale farmers as well as agribusiness . There is also scope to benefit small-scale farming as well.
 The main things missing are good transport, public services and security in the countryside . The main thing missing is good transport.
 In Peru a burst of rural roadbuilding and the spread of mobile phones are transforming poorer parts of the country .
 Rural incomes rose by more than 7% a year betweeni994 and 2011, according to a study by Richard Webb .
Peace talks between Colombia's government and the farc. It is also the biggest potential prize from peace talks between the two countries .
 A CLOUD of brown dust filled with rock .doves rose over Kathmandu, the Nepali capital, when the earthquake struck on April 25th .
 As the Indian tectonic plate lurched three metres northward, the ground shook so violently that people struggled to stand .
 The earthquake rattled windows in Delhi, India’s capital, 1,000 kilometres away .
 More buildings fell down in Durbar square, a unesco world heritage site that is home to old temples . Durbar Square is one of the world's most popular tourist attractions .
 The city's glass-and-concrete structures stayed standing, despite notoriously poor enforcement of building codes . But for the most part, the city’s glass and concrete structures remained standing .
Experts’ worst fears of a big earthquake flattening three-fifths of the capital and killing 100,000 were not borne out .
 Most victims were in the Kathmandu valley, which has seen rapid and haphazard urban growth over the past couple of decades . A civil war that ended in 2006 pushed villagers towards the capital .
 The valley's buildings are especially vulnerable since they rest on sediment layers that are prone to liquefaction . The valley’s buildings are particularly vulnerable since the sediment layers rest on.
 Rebuilding the stricken areas could cost $10 billion-a huge bill for one of Asia's poorest countries .
 Three days after the quake, the roads from Kathmandu were thronged with people taking food and tents to nearby villages . Three days later, people were taking food, tents and food to villages .
Villagers camped in fields under plastic sheets in Kavrepalanchok district . The area is home to many of the poorest people in the world .
 Two parents digging in the rubble for the body of their 16-month-old daughter said local police would not help .
 Every mud-and-stone house in Sindhupalchok district was cracked, and many had collapsed outright .
 The government guesses that 530,000 houses were damaged in all, and over 70,000 destroyed . The government estimates that over 70k homes were destroyed .
 The UN says 8m people in a population of nearly 30m are affected in some way . The UN said 8m in the population of almost 30m people are affected by the situation .
 The epicentre was 80km north-west of the capital, in a steep and mountainous area . It was 80 km north- west of the city, in the mountainous area.
 Unseasonal rain and cold, and continuing aftershocks, including one with a magnitude of 6.9, have left many exposed . The Economist May 2nd 2015 Asia 33 survivors exposed .
 On Mount Everest, east of Kathmandu, tremors set off an avalanche that crushed at leasti9 climbers and Sherpas . At leasti 9 climbers were killed in the avalanche on Mount Everest .
 A tourism industry that is vital to the economy looks to be in trouble. Nothing puts off determined climbers, but a tourism industry is in trouble .
 In India the quake killed over 70 people, but concern was directed largely at the neighbour . In India, the quake kills over 70.
 India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, vowed to ‘wipe the tears of every Nepali’ He added that Nepal’'s pain was also India's pain .
 Millions of Nepali migrants live and work in India, sending remittances home . Millions of migrants live in India and work there .
 He appears to be guiding the relief effort better than Nepal’s own leaders . Nepal's own leaders appear to be leading the relief efforts.
 Mr Modi has twice visited Nepal since he came to office a year ago . No Indian prime minister deigned to pay a bilateral visit for 17 years during that period .
 Nepal is a main beneficiary of India’s trebling of aid over the past three years, to 94 billion rupees a year . India is a major beneficiary of the country's treble of aid in three years .
 China sent a rescue team and promised $3m in immediate aid after the quake . China sent the rescue team to the scene of the quake.
 Several countries and un agencies quickly promised financial and other help . Several countries quickly promised money and other assistance .
 So many donors rushed search-and-rescue teams, field hospitals, blankets, tents and medical equipment to Kathmandu's main airport .
 Rescue and relief operations are now making way for more sustained help for survivors . Rescue and immediate relief operations have begun to help survivors .
 Distributing materials for proper shelter and ensuring good sanitation are urgent priorities before monsoon rains arrive in a couple of months .
 The sowing season also starts soon, so distributing seeds and farm supplies is pressing . The sow season also begins soon .
 Jamie McGoldrick, who leads the un in Nepal, worries that the poorest, lowestcaste Nepalis live in remote areas are at risk of neglect .
 The lion's share of foreign attention and aid goes to Kathmandu, home to the political elite . The bulk of foreign workers and much of the country's rich cultural heritage.
 He sees bureaucratic rivalries as well as sloth as impediments to the country’s relief efforts . He sees bureaucracy as an obstacle to relief efforts.
 Others point out that politicians have long been interested mainly in their own well-being, fruitlessly debating a new constitution for the past seven years . Others say politicians have been more focused on their own health than governing .
 effective local councils would be the most useful form of administration to have in place now . Effective local councils are the most effective form of local councils to have.
 Many are notorious for being unaccountable, corrupt and prejudiced towards the lowest castes . Many are known for being unaccountable and prejudiced at the lowest castinges .
 Donors are in a quandary, wondering how much to trust questionable partners while rushing to help . Donors want to find out how much they can trust questionable partner .
 It is more readily thought of as a pit of instability than as a source of opportunity . It's more readily considered as a place of instability. It's not as a potential source of opportunities as it is a pit.
 The IMF reckons that the economy will grow by 4.7% next year, the fastest rate in eight years . The economy is expected to grow by 3.5% in the next year .
 Consumer prices rose by 2.5% in the year to March, the smallest increase for more than a decade . It was the smallest rise in more than 10 years .
 Twice already this year the central bank has lowered its benchmark interest rate . The central bank's benchmark rate has been lowered twice this year .
Cement sales rose by 5.5% from July to March. Compared with a year earlier, cement sales rose 5.6% . Cement sales are a guide to how much construction is taking place .
 The country’s import bill can easily overwhelm the foreign-exchange earnings from textile exports . Pakistanis working in the Middle East and Europe send home their remittances .
 Pakistan’s net import bill for oil came to $12. billion, or around 5% of gdp. In 2013-14 Pakistan”s net imported oil bill came to a total of $12 billion .
 Money could be spent on things with more local content and give the economy a lift . The money could be used to spend more on local content .
 The government of Nawaz Sharif takes some credit for the economy’s new stability .
 It has stuck to an imf programme agreed to in 2013, a few months after it came to power in Pakistan’s first-ever handover from one civilian government to another .
 Electricity tariffs have been raised, and some unpaid bills collected, easing the cash burden on hard-pressed distribution companies .
 Tax receipts have risen, albeit from pitiful levels, in response to efforts to broaden the base and cut exemptions . Tax receipts are up, but they are still low, despite efforts to cut exemptions.
 The government sold its stake in Habib Bank, the country’s largest lender, for $1 billion . A privatisation drive that stalled last June resumed in April .
 Pakistan’s stockmarket has doubled in dollar terms since the start of 2012, thanks in large part to such foreign interest . Pakistan's stock market has doubled.
 Listed companies are highly profitable, although in part because they often face too little competition . Listed firms often face little competition.
 Visitors to Pakistan are surprised to discover good roads and a strong business culture . Visitors to the country are also surprised to find good roads, business culture.
 The country is mid-table in the World Bank’s ease-of-doing-business rankings . India is well above India in the ease of doing-business ranking .
 Pakistan needs sustained growth of 5-7% a year if it is markedly to cut poverty-at the last count . Nearly a quarter of Pakistanis were below the poverty line .
There are doubts to whether Mr Sharif has the strength and authority to implement deeper reforms . There are doubts about whether he has the power to implement reforms .
Despite a better electricity industry, power shortages remain a bugbear . Despite a better energy industry, there are still power shortages in the country .
 Andrew Chan married his fiancee in his island prison on Nusa Kambangan . Andrew Chan was sentenced to death for drug executions .
 Myuran Sukumaran, his fellow Australian on death row, spent his last days painting self-portraits and an Indonesian flag dripping with blood . His fellow Australian is on the death row for his work in Indonesia .
 The two men were executed by firing squad on April 29th . Four Nigerians, a Brazilian and an Indonesian were also executed .
 A Filipina, who was also due to be executed, won a lastminute temporary reprieve .
 Australia swiftly withdrew its ambassador from Jakarta, Indonesia’s capital .
 His Liberal-National coalition government has suspended ministerial contacts . His government has also suspended ministerial contact with other ministers .
 It has pushed the relationship with Australia’s closest northern neighbour into yet another trough . It has push the relationship into another trough.
 Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran were the alleged ringleaders of the so-called Bali Nine . They were arrested in Bali in 2005 and convicted of trying to smuggle heroin into Australia .
 Australia called on Indonesia to recognise their rehabilitation and their work with other prisoners as a reason to spare their lives . Australia called for Indonesia to recognise their rehabilitation.
 Mr Abbott account for over half of Pakistan’s exports . Pakistan has long taken to generating their own electricity .
 A textiles executive says buyers need to look at and feel the products for themselves before they buy .
Representatives of big European retailers are often too scared to visit Pakistan .
 Australia tried to tap the phone of Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, Joko Widodo’s predecessor as president . Indonesia's relations with Indonesia were rocked by revelations that Australia had tried totap the phone.
 Indonesia is angry over naval incursions into Indonesian waters in fulfilment of Mr Abbott’s campaign promise to turn asylum-seekers packed in boats back to Indonesia .
 Mr Abbott called for clemency for Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran . He asked Indonesia to remember the A$i billion that Australia sent after the 2004 tsunami .
Aaron Connelly, of the Lowy Institute in Sydney, argues withdrawing the ambassador could prove counter-productive . He says withdrawing ambassador could be counter- productive .
 Bodies of Mr Chan and Mr Sukumaran handed over to their families . Mr Abbott spoke as he handed over the bodies of the two men .
 The latest flounder in the relationship will last long after they have been put to rest . But they will be back together again after the break-up .
 Joko Widodo did not help dine in recent years in the number of deaths from terrorist attacks . A school massacre in Peshawar in December was among the most recent attacks .
 The army is stepping up operations in regions bordering Afghanistan that harbour the Pakistani Taliban and other militants .
 Indonesian president's fates have strained Indonesia’s foreign relations . Indonesia's foreign relations have been strained by their fates .
 The executions may throw light on how Jokowi, as he is known, intends to conduct his foreign policy . The executions will be the first in the history of the country .
 Only a few months ago, pundits said the chief risk under Jokowi was that handling foreign matters would hardly feature .
 In terms of its population and its economy, Indonesia is the giant of South-East Asia . Indonesia is one of the world's most populous countries .
After the fall of Suharto in 1998, it has punched below its weight diplomatically . But geographically disparate, chronically underdeveloped and wracked by political instability after the fall.
 Jokowi's predecessor, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, began to change under his predecessor . That began to be changed under Susilo.
 Indonesia joined the G20, took an increasingly assertive role in climate-change talks and encouraged pluralism among developing countries at the Bali Democracy Forum .
 By the end, it came to look less like an expression of universal goodwill than an excuse to avoid hard choices . The end of this year's election was more than a sign of goodwill than a problem .
 Indonesia began to play a role on the world stage that was more commensurate with its size . Still, Indonesia is still playing a role in the world world.
 Mr Yudhoyono seemed a foreignaffairs heavyweight compared with Jokowi, a former mayor with no foreign-policy experience .
 Jokowi had signalled a break with the past before the latest executions . Mr Yudhoyono introduced a moratorium on capital punishment .
 He abandoned the “thousand friends’ policy after returning from his first foreign trip as president . He left the ‘th thousand friends” policy.
 He said that he would favour those countries “who give the most benefit to the people’ He would favour countries who give most benefit.
 He seems to have little patience for its consensual, process-driven flummery. He seems not to be interested in the process- driven flummeries .
 Millions of Indonesians live off the sea, mainly from fishing . Much of the vast archipelago’s trade moves by sea .
 Jokowi wants to spread prosperity by making fisheries more productive, assert control over Indonesia’s sovereign waters and build marine infrastructure to help bring Indonesia's poor and far-flung eastern islands into Java's relatively prosperous orbit .
President says crackdown on illegal fishing by other countries includes 5,000-a-day crackdown .
 Jokowi has promised to boost the naval and coastguard budgets as he doubles the share of gdp spent on defence (to 1.5%) over the next five years .
 Jokowi has plumped for theatrical displays of deterrence. In the meantime, he has plump for theatrical shows of deterrence .
 Since he took office in October the navy has blown up 30-odd foreign boats fishing illegally, most of them from Thailand or Vietnam . Most of them are from Thailand and Vietnam .
 Indonesian foreign-policy hand calls boatburning ‘the act of an insecure power’ designed to appeal to domestic audience . Even an Indonesian foreign policy hand calls the boat burning “an insecure power.’
 Indonesian authorities have seized Chinese vessels, but they have not sunk them . The Indonesian authorities say they have seized them .
 Jokowi cares deeply about a drugs scourge and the damage to national interests caused by illegal fishing . It is true that JokOWi cares very deeply about drugs scourge .
 His prescriptions of executions of drug-traffickers and blowing up fishing boats are more the outward manifestations of a domestic nationalism than anything more considered .
 He was jailed, like dozens of ethnic Uzbeks, after unrest in southern Kyrgyzstan in 2010 . He was sentenced to prison in 2010.
 He left for Syria, where he died fighting last May . After continued harassment by security forces and another jail term, he left for the country .
 There is plenty of disaffection in poor, nominally Muslim, but largely secular Kyrgyzstan . There is lots of dis Affection in the poor, but mostly Muslim, Muslim and largely secular country .
 As in much of the former Soviet Union, the courts are a sham and jobs rely more on connections and kickbacks than merit .
 Authorities say that most of those from Kyrgyzstan are ethnic Uzbeks, who account for 14% of the population . Authorities say most of the country's population is ethnic Uz beks .
 Central Asian leaders use claims of extremism and instability engendered by Afghanistan to justify repression and requests for military aid, from Russia and the West .
 Russia wants to expand its military and political influence in a region that, economically, is drifting towards China . This suits Russia, which wants to expansion its military, political influence .
 Hardly a week passes without a report that alleged extremists have been arrested . Sometimes for “plotting to join’s’ is sometimes for ‘plotting’ to join, says CNN.
 Uzbekistan has jailed ovem,ooo Muslims on vague charges related to their faith . Human Rights Watch says neighbouring Uzbekistan also has been jailed .
 The charges referred to a sermon he had given eight months earlier . It came days after he publicly accused the secret police, the gknb, of using bogus charges of extremism to extort money from Uzbeks .
 The authorities say that he encouraged jihad . Mr Kamalov had denounced IS and urged his followers to stay home .
 The gknb raided the office of Khusanbay Saliev, in Osh, Kyrgyzstan’s second city, as well as his home and that of a colleague .
 Mr Saliev says they seized files and computers, including his only recording of the sermon in question and records detailing three cases of alleged gknb abuse .
 American journalist Bir Duino was arrested, threatened with charges of extremism and deported . The journalist had called on his ngo to be deported .
 Activists ‘exaggerate’ when they complain of abuses, says a senior police officer in Osh, Osh . The aim is to please foreign donors, he says .
 Many believe security forces are behind a push in parliament to impose restrictions on ngos which receive foreign funding . Many believe the government is behind the push.
 Similar rules in Russia are used to harass government critics and shut them down . Similar rules are used in Russia to shut down critics of government .
 silencing conversations about terrorism is not the same as fighting it. But silencing talks about terrorism isn't the same. It's the same way fighting it is fighting it .
 South Korea faces a serious military threat from a third party, its bellicose and now nuclear-armed neighbour . But unlike Japan, South Korea enj oys excellent relations with China .
 The tension in South Korea between reliance on China's economy and America's armed forces can be acute .
 Japan's prime minister, Shinzo Abe, visited Washington, DC this week . He agreed with Barack Obama's administration on a revision of guidelines covering the two countries’ defence co-operation .
 Japan's territorial dispute with China may lead to a confrontation . That is reassuring to Japan, given the risk that it might lead to confrontation .
For South Korea, managing the alliance with America is more delicate . South Korea has nearly 30,000 troops on its soil .
 Both America and China harbour suspicions about the other’s intentions . Both countries harbour suspicions.
 South Korea, close to both, at times finds itself at odds with one or the other . South Korea is close to each other at times at odds.
 This year South Korea has defied America as one of several allies that ignored advice to shun the new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank that China is setting up . South Korea is one of many allies that has defied the U.S. in recent years .
 America’s suggestion that it might deploy a new missile-defence system in South Korea is known as Terminal High Altitude Area Defence .
 South Korea has plenty of reasons not to anger China, which takes a quarter of its exports . China is also its biggest source of imports and is its biggest export source .
 Park Geun-hye and Xi Jinping have blossomed relations between South Korea and China . South Korea's relationship with China has blossomed in recent years .
 Both sides are united in their suspicion of Mr Abe . They accuse him of trying to rewrite the history of Japanese militarism in the first half of 20th century .
 China's traditional ties with North Korea increase its importance as a partner for the South . China’s traditional ties to North Korea increased its importance in the region .
 China has yet to receive the young dictator, Kim Jong Un, for a visit . No longer are China and North Korea ‘as close as lips and teeth’
 It remains the only country capable, in theory, of exerting any restraining influence on his erratic regime . But it remains a country capable.
 Last year it conducted 19 missile tests involving at least m projectiles . Last year, the U.S. conducted 19 tests involving m projectiles.
Test firings into the sea have continued this year, including of two missiles in early April . Ashton Carter arrived in Seoul, the South’s capital, in April .
 A senior American military officer has postulated that North Korea may now have the capacity to launch intercontinental missiles from a mobile launcher . A senior U.S. military officer said the North Korea could now be able to launch its own intercontinental missile .
 North Korea may already have as many as 20 nuclear warheads, a Chinese expert told a seminar in Beijing . In Eebruary in Beijing, the expert told some American counterparts .
 The debate in South Korea about how the country should defend itself is not resolved . The debate about how to defend itself has not yet been resolved .
Both South Korean and American officials say formal talks on thaad have not yet begun . Both South Korea and U.S. officials say talks have not begun .
 It will be controversial, needing a lot of land, and an exclusion zone because of the dangers to health and the environment of the radar that the system uses .
 China should have made such a public fuss about THAAD now, it is puzzling that China should be making such a fuss about it now .
 China knows thaad will have no impact on the effectiveness of its missiles, say analysts .
 North Korea's reaction is likely to provoke more than the usual hysterical reaction from North Korea .
 China has decided to pick a fight-to-show that in the emerging Asia which China expects to dominate, it wants a say in decisions that it reckons affect its own security . Some suspect that it is for symbolic reasons that China has chosen a fight to show that in emerging Asia
 The U.S. seems to have overplayed its hand, antagonising South Korea by bullying it . America blundered when it tried to stop its allies joining the aiib .
 The moral seems to be that China’s economic clout can win it commercial acquiescence . But that when it comes to arm-wrestling over matters of national security, America still has the muscle .
 It opened a think-tank in Arlington, Virginia-an outpost of its National Institute for South China Sea Studies on Hainan, a tropical island .
 China's vaguely backed assertion that most of the strategically vital waters are within its domain-despite rival claims by South-East Asian countries . The new think-tank is to make an academic case for China’s vaguely backed claim .
 The Institute for ChinaAmerica Studies held a conference at a hotel in Washington on April 6 .
 Henry Kissinger spoke in a pre-recorded video about the importance of ties between Beijing and Washington . Kissinger is a former secretary of state whom Chinese leaders much revere .
 Mr Cui told participants that his country would act with “restraint’ in the South China Sea . He also said it would vigorously defend its interests there .
 China’s efforts to put a scholarly gloss on its claims are unlikely to convince many in America or in South-East Asia .
 China’s recent construction spree on more than half a dozen reefs has caused widespread alarm among other claimants . Brunei, Malaysia and Vietnam, as well as the Philippines, an American ally, are among the claimants .
 On April 28th leaders of the ten-member Association of South-East Asian Nations issued a strong statement . The statement was unusually strong for the group.
 In Beijing a foreign-ministry spokesman retorted that China’s actions were ‘beyond reproach’ and not targeted at anyone . A foreign- ministry spokesman retorts that China's actions were not targeted by anyone .
 China's construction activities have been remarkable. But the pace and scale of China’s construction has been remarkable .
 ihs Jane's, a consultancy, published satellite photographs showing China's rapid building this year of installations in the sea that could have military uses .
 The reef is now three times bigger than the largest natural island in the Spratly archipelago . The reef has become three times larger than the biggest natural island .
 satellite images published by IHS Jane’s and the Centre for Strategic and International Studies showed similar activity on Mischief Reef, also in the Spratlys .
 China’s behaviour is striking for its inconsistency with other recent trends in its foreign policy . China's behaviour is also striking for their inconsistency with recent trends.
 Japan has been trying to mend fences with Japan since late last year . It has a separate maritime dispute with Japan .
 China will give India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, a warm welcome in Beijing next month . India disagrees over long stretches of their land border .
 Chinese authorities say they are catching up with what others are doing in the South China Sea .
 Officials in South-East Asia complain that China’s construction activity breaks the spirit of an agreement that it reached in 2002 with ASEAN to exercise “self-restraint’ in the area .
 Analysts see it as part of efforts to give China more room to project its power in an area previously dominated by the Americans . Many analysts say it is part of effort to give the country more space to project power .
 China's reclamation efforts conform to a pattern of assertive behaviour in the South China Sea . China’s reclamation effort conform to the country's 'reclamation efforts'
 In 2011 Chinese patrol boats harassed Vietnamese and Philippine oil-exploration vessels near the Spratlys . In 2011, Chinese patrol vessels harassed Vietnamese, Philippine and Vietnamese oil-Exploration vessels .
 In 2012 China occupied Scarborough Shoal after a stand-off with the Philippines . The Philippines also has a claim .
 Last year a Chinese state-owned company sent an offshore oil rig into waters claimed by Vietnam . The move led to violent anti-Chinese protests in Vietnam .
 China has responded angrily to a case challenging the basis of its claims in the South China Sea . The case was filed in 2013 by the Philippines at a UN-backed arbitration panel .
 China has refused to co-operate with the hearings . A defeat will make China even crosser, some experts acknowledge .
 America’s so-called “pivot’ to Asia (now referred to as a “rebalancing”) has often been seen as something of a fiction-will become more of a reality . It appears prepared, however, to accept the consequences,
 America signed a new defence agreement with Japan that would allow greater military co-operation between them .
 America has also been establishing closer military ties with its erstwhile enemy, Vietnam . The U.S. is also establishing closer ties with Vietnam .
 The Chinese state-controlled media dutifully respond with stridently worded screeds, which appear to enjoy the approval of China’s online nationalists .
 The new think-tank in Virginia is part of an effort to make China's case more persuasive abroad .
Recent reclamation work in the South China Sea has come to light. It is only thanks to foreign satellites that the recent reclamation works in the sea have come tolight .
 There is a broader message that China is trying to convey, beyond simply simply (as it sees it) the correctness of its claim. There is also a wider message.
 The term describes people who have moved families and assets abroad in readiness for escape themselves . The term is used to describe people who are prepared to move their assets abroad .
Anti-graft officers are trying to extend their reach beyond China’s borders .
 Officials have been stepping up efforts to persuade foreign countries to send back those who have fled with their ill-gotten gains . Since late last year, officials have been stepped up efforts.
 The operation involves other agencies such as police, the central bank and the foreign ministry .
Interpol has issued arrest warrants for 48 wanted fugitives . 48 were the most senior officials in their workplaces .
 Deputy head of a provincial construction bureau accused of fleeing to America with 250m yuan in embezzled funds . One was the deputy head of the provincial construction agency .
 County-level finance official allegedly took 94m yuan to Singapore . Another was a county-level Finance official who allegedly taken 94m Yuan to Singapore.
 A further 61 people suspected of ‘dereliction of duty’ had been arrested after spending time on the run .
 Jeh Johnson, America’s secretary for homeland security, visited Beijing in April . State media said America “actively” supported China's efforts .
 The Americans say they have agreed to a more “streamlined’ procedure for handing back Chinese nationals whom they decide to repatriate .
 China says it has sent 61 agents abroad to “persuade’s accused fugitives to return and face justice . China says its agents have been sent abroad.
 State media last month reported one fugitive in America who dared not even see a doctor . He was worried that his identity might come known .
 Binyamin Netanyahu puts the finishing touches to his fourth coalition after an election in March . He is preparing for an unprecedented fight to muzzle the court .
 The outcome of the contest-between politicians and judges could tear his government apart . The outcome could determine the future character of Israeli politics .
 Five of its six parties are committed to vote for new legislation . It would fulfil the long-held aspiration of right-wing and religious parties .
 The Knesset would be able to push the law through with another vote . Even then the Knessets would have to vote again to pass the law .
 He also plans to expand the judicial appointments committee, which chooses all of Israel’s judges . He will also expand the Judicial appointments committee.
 The legal profession currently has a majority, with three Supreme Court justices and two members of the bar association . By adding a minister and an additional Knesset member, politicians would gain the upper hand .
 Just how interventionist the Israeli Supreme Court has been is open to debate. Just how Interventionist the court has been? The Supreme Court is now open to Debate .
 Some civil rights groups think it is too timid, especially on security-related issues . Some civil-rights groups say it's too timid.
 Two weeks ago, the court upheld a law that allows cases to be brought against Israelis who call for any form of boycott against Israel and its settlements in the West Bank .
 The court struck down a clause allowing compensation to be awarded without proof of damage . The court, however, struck down the clause.
Ruling in favour of the government and security forces has not endeared the court to the right . But such rulings have not ended up in the right.
 Likud and its allies were incensed by two rulings in recent years that struck down laws allowing the authorities to hold African migrants in long-term detention without trial . The ruling was part of a series of rulings by the U.S.
 The ultra-Orthodox parties see the court as a secular enemy, because of its rulings on issues of state and religion . Yeshiva students should not be exempt from serving in the army.
 Without Kulanu’s ten members, the prime minister has only 57 votes, four short of a majority .
 Mr Netanyahu made it clear this week that he was resolved to pursue his campaign . In discussions this week Mr Netanyahu said he was resolving his campaign.
 One option is to keep up pressure on Kulanu’s leader, Moshe Kahlon, to accept judicial changes in return for greater freedom to reform the economy .
Likud was historically the party of both Jewish nationalism and deep respect for the judiciary . Likud's party was historically a party ofBoth Jewish and Jewish nationalism .
 Today Likud is run by a leader who has sworn to break the power of the “old elites’s’ power . His colleagues see the Supreme Court judges as remnants of a privileged left-wing establishment .
 The struggle to limit the powers of the Supreme Court is part of a broader contest over the nature of Israel-pitting religious and nationalist activists against advocates of more liberal and secular-minded country .
 The Supreme Court’s president, Miriam Naor, also departed from protocol . Naor: “The court is the last barrier preventing harm to human dignity and other basic rights.
 Israel faces potential indictments for war crimes at the International Criminal Court . Israel can ill afford to tarnish the image of its Supreme Court .
 Egypt, after the counter-revolution of Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi, is a close friend that shares Israel's loathing of Hamas movement in Gaza .
 Syria has imploded, and Israel has given up enough of its chemical weapons for Israel to halt distribution of gas masks . Israel has stopped distribution of the gas masks.
 The jihadists who have filled the vacuum are too busy fighting Arab foes to worry much about the Zionist enemy .
 Israel is convinced that the Islamic republic is seeking to build nuclear weapons under the guise of a nuclear-power project . Israel believes the Islamic Republic is trying to build a nuclear power project .
 If a nuclear accord is signed, the threat of an Iranian bomb should be delayed by a decade or more . But if a nuclear deal is signed it should be signed, a decade more than a decade later .
 The second, more immediate, concern is Iran’s Lebanese client, Hizbullah . The second is Iran's Lebanese client.
 Israeli intelligence reckons the Shia militia-cum-party is armed with around 100,000 missiles of various ranges .
 Israel is anxious to stop it acquiring more accurate missiles which can target strategic installations and might be armed with chemicals . Israel is also worried about sowing fear in Israeli towns .
 Hizbullah has long cast itself as the leading force of resistance against Israel . But it is now fighting fellow Arabs in Syria and Iraq .
 Once a proxy of Syria, it has become the main guarantor of President Bashar Assad’s regime .
 Israel's northern border with Syria on the Golan Heights has become unstable . This means that Israel’s northern border, which used to be the quietest, is unstable .
 In January an Israeli drone strike hit a convoy near the border, killing the commander of Hizbullah operations on the Golan . A general from Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, among others, was also killed .
 Hizbullah retaliated with a missile attack on an Israeli patrol, killing two soldiers . Two soldiers were killed in the attack .
Tensions are rising again after a series of incidents near the border . Tensions have been rising in recent weeks .
 On April 24th a Syrian army missile base in the Qalamoun mountains near the Lebanese bor was hit by an air strike .
Moshe Yaalon, defence minister, all but acknowledged that Israel had carried out the attack . Two days later, Yaalon said Israel carried out attack .
 Aircraft attacked and killed four men who were laying explosive devices along the Israeli side of the Golan border . A second attack took place at another Syrian base on Oalamoun .
 Israel takes responsibility for the first strike, but sources say it was the work of local rebels . Israeli sources deny involvement in the second strike .
 Israeli government has little desire for a wide-scale military campaign so soon after the Gaza conflict of last summer .
 Lebanese militia is embroiled in other wars and is suffering many casualties . It may have lost 1,000 fighters, some Lebanese sources reckon .
 Hizbullah’s battlehardened fighters could be back home in a few years’ time . Hiz Bullah's battlehardening fighters could return home .
 If trouble on the Golan serves to present Hizbullah's actions in Syria as destabilising, it could strengthen Israel’s campaign to portray any nuclear deal with Iran as a menace .
 The turbulence of recent years, starting with the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak in 20U, has left many longing for order and stability . Muhammad Morsi was himself toppled in 2013 .
 Mr Sisi has kept Egypt from descending into mayhem, he has unremittingly repressed critics .
 Several thousand dissidents, both secular and Islamist, have been jailed . At least a thousand have been killed .
 Mubarak's authoritarian habits leave Egypt looking a lot as it did before the Arab spring, when he ruled with an iron first . But his authoritarian habits left Egypt looking like it did in the past .
 The Muslim Brotherhood of Mr Morsi has borne the brunt of the crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood . Mr Morsi is the leader of the Brotherhood .
 Mr Sisi, the power behind the coup, has stripped the Islamist group of power and crushed it . He labelling it a terrorist organisation, he says .
 Hundreds of supporters have been killed by state-security forces during protests . Hundreds of its supporters have also been killed.
 The politicised judiciary has handed down death sentences to hundreds more . Many since commuted have been given death sentences .
 Mr Morsi got off relatively lightly on April 21st when he received a 20-year sentence for inciting the killing of demonstrators .
Several opposition parties decided to boycott parliamentary elections that had been scheduled for March . Bemoaning the dismal political climate, several opposition parties decide to boycott .
 The vote was postponed after the law governing it was found to be unconstitutional . Vote was postponed following the law's ruling.
 Critics say that it was designed to create a parliament in thrall to the president, who continues to rule unchecked .
 Few think the new law, expected by the end of the year, will be fairer . But few think it will be fairr .
 Mr Sisi has urged all parties to form ‘one inclusive coalition’ that he could back . He could back him, presumably, would back him .
 In portraying himself as Egypt’s protector, he has turned his critics into enemies of the state . But in portraying him as Egypt's protector, his critics have become enemies.
 His government’s less public appeals for solidarity sound rather more like demands .
 Most of the private media, controlled by a small elite, have refrained from criticising the government . Some have parroted its views, while parroting its views .
 Some outlets have grown more assertive, and they have also come under the cosh . That said, some outlets have also grown moreassertive, but some have also become more assertful .
 Several papers, both private and state-owned, have recently criticised abuses by police and interior ministry .
 Under Mr Mubarak ngos, they were tolerated, so long as they trod lightly . Under Mr Morsi they were largely ignored .
Under Mr Sisi “there is no hope,’ says Muhammad Zaree of the Cairo Institute for Human Rights Studies .
 His group has moved most of its staff to Tunisia after receiving threats . The group has received threats from his group's staff .
 Other groups, such as Human Rights Watch and Carter Centre, have left the U.S.
 Those that remain have been obliged to register with the aptly named ministry of social solidarity under an old but rarely enforced law that gives the government broad authority over their activities and funding .
 Vaguely worded bans on protests and terrorist groups have been used to harass NGOS and imprison staff . NGOS have also been used by terrorist groups to harass staff .
 Most big civil-society groups in Egypt get money from abroad because it is hard to raise at home . Egypt's biggest civil-Society groups get cash from abroad .
 The government has aroused ordinary people’s fear of foreign meddling-supposedly by America, Europe and Israel . Egypt asks many of the same foreigners to invest in Egypt's economy .
 Activists complain of a lack of pressure on Mr Sisi from abroad . In fact, activists complain of the lack of Pressure on him.
Many foreign governments see him as a bulwark against Islamic extremism in the region . Many foreign governments view him as an anti-Islamic extremism bulwark .
 America could influence the government by withholding military aid . The U.S. is still sending arms .
 He emphasised the stability that his rule has brought. Wooing foreign investors at an economic conference .
 Security and prosperity, he argues, are necessary precursors to greater liberty . He argues that security and prosperity should be considered a key part of liberty .
 Often he appears more interested in enhancing his own power, and his actions may be selfdefeating . But often he appears to be more focused on enhancing his power .
 Some have found other, often violent, ways to express their opinions in the past . Some have also found other ways toexpress their opinions .
 Bombings by radical groups are becoming more frequent, giving Mr Sisi even more reasons to tighten his grip .
 King Salman has appointed a new heir to the throne, and the successor to that heir . The state media announced the appointment at 4am .
 Muhammad bin Nayef, the interior minister and second-in-line to the throne, was elevated to crown prince . He was appointed crown prince by the government .
 He replaces Muqrin, the king’s half-brother and the youngest living son of Abdel Aziz al-Saud, who founded the modern kingdom in 1932 .
 The new deputy crown prince is the 30-something son of the king, Muhammad . He is the son of Muhammad .
 Muhammad bin Nayef's elevation means the crown will pass to the next generation on the king’s death . It ends a 60year tradition of rule passing between brothers .
 Many Saudis will welcome this, since the ruling generation is ever more remote from its youthful population . Many Saudis are likely to welcome this.
 Salman’s branch of the royal family-the Sudairis, the seven sons and their descendants of one of Abdel Aziz's many wives-at the expense of the rest . They shore up Salman's branch.
 Salman has relentlessly promoted his favourite child, Muhammad, despite his lack of experience . Since Salman came to the throne in January he has promoted Muhammad .
 He has been appointed head of his royal court, defence minister and head of a powerful new body overseeing the economy . He is also head of the royal court and defence minister .
 Muqrin has been the face of the war in Yemen . He has been a former air force pilot, but has barely appeared in the media .
Saudi Arabia announces arrest of 93 militants for ties to Islamic State . Two whom it alleges were planning to bomb the American embassy in Riyadh, the Saudi capital .
 Saud al-Eaisal, who has been foreign minister for 40 years, was replaced by Adel al-Jubeir, a non-royal who until this week was ambassador to America .
 The House of Saud needs to make sure that it, not Iran, remains the Americans’ main ally in the region .
Burundi's president v term limits Apres moi is the latest in a string of African presidents to risk a conflagration by refusing to step down when the constitution says their time in office is up .
 His announcement on April 25th that he would seek a third term in an election due at the end of June sparked riots in Bujumbura .
 So far at least six people have been killed and 25,000 are said to have fled across the border . So far, at least 6 people have died in the violence .
 The UN, the African Union and Western governments have urged Mr Nkurunziza to think again before things spin out of control .
 The president's loyalists are arguing that his first term in office, starting in 2005, does not count . He was elected to his first stint by parliament rather than directly by the people, as the constitution requires .
 Since independence in 1962 it has been plagued by coups, massacres and the killing of several presidents . The country's Tutsis make up a tenth of the lom-plus population, and the Hutus, who comprise most of the rest .
 Mr Nkurunziza, a Hutu, came to the fore as a rebel leader in the 1990s . Many thousands of Burundians, including his father and his siblings, had been murdered .
 A fragile peace has been more or less held since 2000, initially thanks to mediation of South Africa . South Africa has been mediating since 2000 .
 Mr Nkurunziza’s fate will be watched warily across Africa . The issue of presidential term limits is increasingly fraught .
 At least 34 of Africa's 54 countries (55 since South Sudan was recognised in 2011) have put term limits on their presidents . They usually give them a maximum of two five-year spells, as in Burundi .
 Erederick Chiluba, Bakili Muluzi and Olusegun Obasanjo all stepped down after trying in vain to wangle extensions . Malawi’s Bakili muluzi in 2004 and Nigeria's Oluse Gun Obasaanjo in 2007
 Last year mass protests prevented Burkina Easo's Blaise Compaore from hanging on . He was forced to flee .
 At least half a dozen presidents have cajoled their legislatures by foul means or fair, into ditching the limits .
 King Goodwill Zwelithini made anti-foreigner remarks recently that whipped up attacks on black migrants . The traditional head of the Zulu traditional head made the remarks .
 The response was similar when King Goodwill called homosexual relationships “rotten’s a few years back . The response is similar to that of King Good will when he called gay relationships ‘rotten'
 King Goodwill's pronouncements clash with the country's progressive constitution . Some South Africans wondered why he continues to be bankrolled by taxpayers .
 King Goodwill is just one of ten traditional kings, and one queen, each receiving a yearly public stipend of about $110,000 . The king is one of 10 monarchs, and the queen is a queen .
8,000 other traditional leaders, including chiefs and headmen, get smaller amounts . Some 8,000 others, including chief and headman, get small amounts .
 In April, his household bought seven Mercedes-Benz sedans-six for his wives . He also bought a backup vehicle for his wife .
In rural areas, chiefs and headmen play a practical role in mediating disputes . In rural areas far from the courts, chiefs play a real role in mediation .
 South Africa's Bill of Rights protects women and minorities, among others . But customary law often stands at odds with South Africa’s Bill of rights .
 The Traditional Courts Bill, proposed in 2012, would have handed greater judicial powers to male leaders . The traditional Courts Bill would have given greater judicial power to men .
 In some cases, women would have had to rely on male relatives to speak for them .
 It was sharply critiyears in office by the constitution of 1995, has now served 29 years in all . The constitution of the 1995 constitution was sharply Critiyears.
Paul Biya, another rule-changer, has presided over Cameroon since 1982 . Paul Biya has been in charge of the country since 1982.
 Togo’s Eaure Gnassingbe was re-elected to a third term this month . He extended his family's unbroken tenure to 48 years . Togo's president has been in office for 48 years.
 Others suspected of wanting to stretch their terms in defiance of the constitution include Joseph Kabila in the Democratic Republic of Congo . Denis Sassou-Nguesso, who has ruled for most of the past 31 years, should retire next year .
 South Africa's communally held rural land is also the richest in minerals . Much of South Africa’s communallyheld ruralland is also rich in minerals.
 When traditional leaders strike deals with mining companies, the danger is that chiefs and their families will benefit most .
 Last year the Restitution of Land Rights Amendment Act made it easier to lodge land claims . Last year it was made easier to lodge land claims.
 Under black-majority rule, traditional leaders-in particular King Goodwill-have become a valuable link between the ruling African National Congress and rural voters .
 Zwelithini's Zulu style veneer of constitutional propriety even while flouting its spirit . Zwelsithini is a South African-born South African.
 Paul Kagame is Rwanda’s dynamic but authoritarian ruler . Kagame's supposedly final term as president as president ends in 2017 .
 Meles Zenawi ran the show for 17 years as prime minister, until his death in 2012 . In Ethiopia the presidency is limited to two six-year terms .
 Robert Mugabe signed a new constitution in 2013 that limits the head of state to two terms-but only from that date . Mugabe has held power since 1980 .
 He will talk about Russia’s continuing struggle against fascism (in Ukraine) and attempts by its sponsor (America) to impose its dominance on the world .
 Western leaders’ decision to abstain will be seen by Russians as confirmation of their continued struggle against the West .
 The feelings of isolation and aggression stoked by the Kremlin in the build-up to Victory Day could hardly be more different from the early hours of May 9th 1945 .
 Fighting against fascism was a liberating experience for people who were terrorised by Stalin . Fighting against fascist fascism was an experience for those who were terrified by Stalin.
 The dictator himself, possessed by paranoia, was too scared to come out onto Red Square .
 In the evening a vast illuminated banner with his face appeared in the sky . The banner was seen in the evening.
 The feelings of freedom and compassion inspired by the victory were not to be encouraged . The feeling of compassion and freedom was not encouraged by victory .
 The limbless veterans who once dotted Moscow’s streets were shipped off to a former monastery on an island .
 Stalin feared celebrations would enhance the popularity of Soviet military commanders . Marshal Georgy Zhukov signed Germany’s surrender along with the allies .
Official celebrations resumed only in 1965, a year after the fall of Nikita Khrushchev . Official celebrations resumed in 1965 .
 By that time, most military commanders were too old to pose a challenge . But now, most commanders are no longer that old .
 The Soviet leaders who came to power as a result of the coup against Khrushchev used Victory Day to boost their legitimacy .
 The Soviet holiday caused no disagreements between the people and their leaders . It was the only unifying Soviet holiday that caused no disagreement .
 The memory of the war was used by the Kremlin to assert Soviet power . It also served as a common denominator between the Soviet and American leaders who belonged to the war generation .
 Mr Putin has appropriated the iconography of Victory Day to assert the dominance of the Russian state .
 Western leaders used to oblige him, taking part in celebrations meant to mark the country’s resurgence after the Soviet collapse . The celebrations were meant to celebrate the country's resurgence.
 The memory of the second world war was cynically exploited by the Kremlin as a pretext for the annexation of Crimea and the war in Ukraine . A decade later, the memory was used as an excuse for Crimea's annexation .
 Ukrainians ended up on both sides of the lines during the second world war . During the second World War, Ukrainians were on the opposite side of the line .
 Western Ukrainian nationalists sought independence allied with Nazi Germany and fought against Ukrainians serving in the Soviet army . Western Ukrainians sought independence from the Soviet Army .
 The failure of the Ukrainian government in the past quarter-century to build a nation-state has allowed the Kremlin to use history as a weapon .
 Russian state television described the modern pro-European Ukrainians who ousted their corrupt and authoritarian president Viktor Yanukovych as nationalists and Nazi collaborators, planning to annihilate Russians in Crimea . Russian state TV described the pro- European Ukrainians as nationalists.
 It planted fake stories about Ukrainians crucifying children, while showing a Russian soldier in Crimea holding a small child in his arms . It was a reference to the giant statue of the Soviet Liberator Soldier erected in Berlin in 1949 .
 Ukraine is fighting for its own right to celebrate the Soviet victory . But after a year-long war against Russian aggression, Ukraine is now fighting for a right to celebration the Soviet win .
Ukrainian advert opens with shot of model Soviet plane in soft light .
 A boy at a modern-day military base calls to speak to his grandfather, a Soviet Red Army veteran .
 Petro Poroshenko announced this year the country will honour both the Western victory celebration on May 8th and Soviet Victory Day on May 9th .
 The traditional Russian orange-and-black St George’s ribbon has been swapped for the British crimson Germany's war remembrance poppy .
 Alexei Navalny the Russian opposition leader says Mr Putin’s ‘project’ has destroyed any hope of a larger world built on common memories .
 Even Alexander Lukashenko, the dictatorial president of Belarus, decided to celebrate Victory Day separately . The Belarusian president celebrated Victory Day on his own .
 The display of Russia’s newest weapons is expected to be followed by a procession of 100,000 people holding photographs of those who died in the war .
 The ideas propagated by the Kremlin seem eerily similar to the ones which Soviet soldiers defeated 70 years ago . Yet the ideas seem similar to those of Soviet soldiers who defeated Soviet soldiers 70 years earlier .
 The 70th anniversary of the second world war's end is the opposite of Russia’s grandstanding . Germany draws the right lessons G ERMANY’S way of remembering the 70th year of the war .
 Germans see the occasion as an exhortation to humility and moral honesty . Germans see it as an exercise to humility and honesty .
 The Allies commemorate their own suffering, including mass rapes of German women by the Allies . They commemorate the mass rapes.
 Germans accept responsibility for the suffering that Germans inflicted on so many others . But mainly they accept responsibility, but mainly accept responsibility .
 Angela Merkel will strike a similar tone on the anniversary of Dachau’s liberation on May 3rd .
 commemorations coincide with what may be the last big trial of a former Nazi . By chance the commemoration coincides with what could be the final trial.
 Oskar Groning, 93, was a bookkeeper of sorts in Auschwitz-Birkenau . Groning was also a book-keeper in Auschwitz.
 His job was to count the money of the arriving inmates and transfer it to Berlin .
 He says he sometimes stood at the ramp where the trains disgorged the victims, but only to guard luggage . He said he sometimes stands at the ramps where the victims.
 Mr Groning is accused of being an accomplice in the murder of about 300,000 Jews who arrived on trains from Hungary . He is now accused of the murder.
 Eva Mozes Kor is one of the 65 co-plaintiffs of Auschwitz survivors . She is a survivor of the Auschwitz camp . She was one of 60 Auschwitz survivors who died in Auschwitz .
 She was ten when she was brought to Auschwitz, but survived because she had a twin sister . She was kept alive for medical experiments by the infamous Josef Mengele .
 Impressed by Mr Groning’s honesty, she approached him in court and embraced him .
 49 of the other co-plaintiffs said that Ms Mozes Kor was speaking only for herself Germany will thus observe May 8th .
 Mr Gauck says Germany will put an end to injustice wherever we can . This ‘civilised humanity’ is only civilised to the extent that the Soviet people and the Soviet soldier forced it to be in 1945 .
 Russian culture has been packaged into patriotically-themed consumer entertainment . Eor all the uniqueness of Russian culture, the celebration of Victory Day, just like the war in Ukraine, has been created .
 Opinion polls show that 90% of Russians are prepared to discuss the possibility of nuclear war .
 57% of older Russians say that such a war cannot have any winners . 40% of younger people are convinced that Russia would defeat America and nato .
 Ukraine wants commitment from the Eu; the eu wants proof that Ukraine has really changed . Ukraine wantscommitment from Eu .
Eu officials visited Kiev on April 27th for a joint summit . They snubbed Ukraine's requests for a peacekeeping force in the Donbas, for additional military aid .
 European leaders want to see Ukraine implement its new laws and decentralise governance, as agreed in the Minsk peace plan .
 Some worry failure to do this will invite Russia to relaunch the war . Some worry that failure will invite Russian to re-launch the war in Russia .
 ready violence is ticking up near the rebel capital of Donetsk and the Ukrainian-held port of Mariupol .
 Petro Poroshenko, Ukraine's president, takes umbrage at charges that reforms are lagging .
 Lawmakers recently passed legislation to break up gas monopolies, increase energy-sector competition, and unbundle the state gas conglomerate Naftogaz . Lawmakers also passed bill to unbundle state gas company Naftogsaz .
 Mr Poroshenko picked a head for the newly created National Anti-Corruption Bureau last month . The new bureau was created by the President of Ukraine .
 The latest battle pits the country’s richest man, Rinat Akhmetov, against the country's richest man .
 The government wants to end Mr Akhmetov’s coal and electricity monopolies . He may let his holding company, dtek, go bankrupt .
 Coal miners have taken to Kiev's streets, banging their helmets and calling for the energy minister to resign .
Mustafa Nayyem, a reformist legislator, published leaked documents allegedly issued by dtek that set out plans to engineer protests . dtek said it “did not know the source of the documents’s source, but did not deny that they were genuine
 Mr Poroshenko boasted of taking down Ihor Kolomoisky an oligarch forced to resign as a regional governor . He deployed armed guards to protect his oil-industry assets from government reforms .
 Europe does not want de-oligarchisation to become a game of whack-a-mole led by Mr Poroshenko, who is himself an oligarch .
 Ukraine wants Ukraine to transform the oligarchs’ empires into law-abiding big businesses .
 Ukraine may feel itself to be in a relationship with the Eu, one that could even lead to membership-hut the eu . Until that happens, Ukraine may not be in relationship with Eu until that happens .
 Former official in Castile and Leon had secured lucrative windfarm licences from his ex-colleagues . His companies netted regional contracts for state-subsidised worker-training courses .
 The Divorce in Italy was legalised in Italy in 1970 . It followed a titanic parliamentary battle .
 conservative Catholics secured a referendum on the issue . Unwilling to accept defeat, conservative Catholics secure a referendum .
 Only after that vote finally went against them four years later was the issue settled . The issue was settled four years after the vote .
 Italian deputies voted to liberalise the divorce laws recently . They did so by a crushing maj ority and amid little controversy . So it is a sign of changed times that, when it is changed times, it is .
Avvenire, a newspaper owned by the Catholic church, railed against the reform . Avvenire is owned by Catholic church .
 Other critics termed it another blow to an institution fast losing its appeal in Italy .
 More and more young Italians opt for cohabitation and have children outside marriage . More young Italians are more likely to have children out of marriage .
 In 2012 the number of marriages peri,ooo inhabitants was the fifth-lowest in the European Union . The number of married people in the EU was the highest in the world .
 Under the new law, couples can untie the knot after 12 months of separation if the divorce is contested, or six months if it is not .
 Some critics felt the reform could have been more radical . But amending it might have endangered its passage through parliament .
 Rodrigo Rato, a former pp finance minister, was arrested two weeks ago . Rato went on to run the imp in Washington.
 Police searched Mr Rato’s office and home in investigation into unexplained income .
 He was already under scrutiny over freewheeling use of company credit cards . Bankia needed a €22 billion rescue under his stewardship .
 Mr Rato was seen as one of the architects of Spain’s economic miracle in the early 2000s .
 Unemployment is running at 23%, and the number of divorces peri,ooo has risen in recent years . In 2012 it was still the second-lowest in the eu.
 The most-cited reasons are complexity and high legal costs, especially when a divorce is contested . Most-citing reasons include complexity and legal costs .
 This was part of a package of measures devised by Matteo Renzi’s left-right coalition government to speed up civil justice .
 In a country plagued by bureaucratic delays, a rise in the divorce rate may perversely be encouraging .
 Eurostat says it will take nine years, until 2017, to return the economy to its pre-crisis size . Eurostat: It will take 9 years to return economy to the pre-Crisis size.
 Researchers are beginning to see links between Spain’s excessively cronyistic and corrupt public administration and the defects that have made it so hard for the economy to recover .
 From 1995 to 2007, the Spanish economy was growing at 3.5% per year, but productivity declined by 0.7% . Overall EU productivity grew at an average of 0.4% a year, according to the EU .
 Blame has traditionally been pinned on a housing bubble that fostered distorted growth in the construction industry . Blame is traditionally pinned on the housing bubble .
 A recent paper by a team headed by Manuel Garcia-Santana of the Universite Libre de Bruxelles finds that the productivity fall was spread more evenly across all sectors .
 It had little to do with skills, innovation or innovation, says the Economist . The Economist has been in the news for more than a decade .
 Productivity falls were greater when the government was heavily involved, through contracts, licences or regulations . Productivity fall was greater when government was involved in contracts and licences .
 Luis Garicano, the economics adviser of the liberal Ciudadanos party, says this points to an economy dependent on contacts, corruption and cronyism . He says the economy is dependent on contact and corruption .
 Banks may have been happier lending to companies with public contracts . Some more productive businesses may have limited their growth to avoid losing fiscal, labour or social-security advantages .
 Either way, those who successfully negotiated their way around the public administration. Whether through luck, knowledge, cronies or backhanders-did best, they did best .
 Popular anger over cronyism helps to explain why the government and its prime minister are likely to take a hammering in elections to regional governments and municipalities on May 24th .
 Over the past year 500,000 jobs have been created and growth is forecast at 2.9% this year . Yet the pp has shed half its support .
 The Socialists are also low in the polls, while Ciudadanos and the left-wing Podemos party have risen .
 A poor result on May 24th could force Mr Rajoy to bring forward a general election due at the end of the year .
 The European Commission trumpeted the latest economic-sentiment figures from the European Commission . It put Spain ahead of other big euro-zone economies .
 Voters are less concerned about the latest figures than about the underlying rot of decades of kickbacks and insider dealing . But if voters are less worried about the current figures, that may not count for much .
 In 2012 Ms Ismailova received a package containing stills from a secretly filmed sex tape of her . She warned that unless she stopped digging it would be published online .
 Tural Mustafayev was arrested on charges of inciting a fellow j ournalist to attempt suicide . In December, she was arrested for trying to commit suicide . She was also charged with inciting another man to try suicide .
In Eebruary more charges were added, including tax evasion and abuse of power . In Eeb February more were added to the list of charges .
 There is growing concern about Leyla Yunus, a leading human-rights activist, and her husband Arif, a historian .
 The men have been in jail since last summer on charges of treason and tax evasion . They have been charged with treason, tax evasion, and have been jailed since last year .
 Mr Gogia tried to visit Azerbaijan in March to attend the trials of two activists . He was trying to visit the country to attend trials of the activists .
 The oil-rich former Soviet republic will be hosting the inaugural European games next month . The games will be held in the former Soviet Republic .
 Human-rights groups are demanding that world leaders boycott the whole affair . Human- rights groups are calling for world leaders to boycott the affair .
 Azerbaijan’s authoritarian president, Ilham Aliyev, apparently fears his critics will seize the occasion to air their gripes .
 Azerbaijan has used its energy riches to enlist powerful friends in Europe and America . Azerbaijan's energy riches have been used to enlist the world's most powerful friends .
 Russia, Georgia, Armenia, Turkey, Turkey and Iran are strategic prizes . Azerbaijan is a strategic prize .
 Determinedly pro-secular, it has allowed the Americans to use its bases to attack Muslim extremists in Afghanistan .
 Azerbaijan was allowed to act as chair of the Council of Europe, a Strasbourg-based human rights body, for six months in 2014 . It jailed dissenters, even as it jailed dissenter. This may help to explain why Azerbaijan was able to act on behalf of a human rights
 The dollops of caviar and other perks used to oil Azerbaijan’s lobbying machine don't hurt .
 Energy makes up around 95% of the country’s exports and 40% of its gdp . Energy is the biggest source of energy production in the world .
 Inflation is rising and the government’s attempts to prop up the local currency have largely failed .
 Another worry is tensions with neighbouring Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh . The two countries have been involved in the conflict in the past .
 The mainly Armenian-populated enclave in Azerbaij fell under Armenia’s control after a nasty three-year war that broke out in 1991 when the Soviet Union collapsed .
 Clashes between Azeri and Armenian troops along the border have become worryingly frequent .
 Mr Aliyev uses Karabakh to drum up nationalist sentiment and divert attention away from corruption at home .
Margrethe Vestager has made ambitious moves against formidable adversaries for three weeks in a row . The European competition commissioner has been in Brussels this month .
 Ms Vestager thinks Google unfairly privileges its shopping service over rivals . She says it unfairly privileges Google's shopping service .
 A week later she trained her sights on Gazprom, Russia’s mostly state-owned gas giant, accusing it of unfair pricing and market meddling .
 Ms Vestager announced a probe into the subsidies European governments provide to electric utilities . She thinks some of the subsidies may amount to illegal state aid .
 Ms Vestager’s shows of strength are a reminder that Brussels has bite .
 Ms Vestager previously served as Denmark’s economy minister .
 Her impact has as much to do with European law as with her personality, she says . But her impact on European law is as much as her personality .
Commissioner can block mergers, launch surprise raids on private offices and threaten multinationals with vast fines . Unburdened by the constraints that shackle most of her 27 fellow commissioners, she can Block mergers and surprise raids .
 The perception of Ms Vestager’s power is reflected in the parody Twitter accounts set up in the names of different commissioners .
 Her colleagues are lampooned as propeller-headed nincompoops or scheming mini-Rasputins . Her colleagues have been dubbed 'nincompoops'
Ms Vestager is portrayed as a medieval warrior queen sporting two giant battleaxes . Ms Vestager, by contrast, is portrayed by contrast as a warrior queen .
 For some, the power vested in the competition job is a model of how Europe could work if it took rules seriously . For others, Europe could be a model for how it could work in the future .
 Wolfgang Schauble once suggested endowing the economics commissioner, who oversees the euro zone’s fiscal rules, with powers comparable to Ms Vestager .
 Others, though, worry about political appointees wielding regulatory authority . Others, however, worry that they will be wielding regulatory power .
 Jean-Claude Juncker has described his administration as the most “political” in history . Juncker is the president of the commission president, who has been criticized for his policies .
 Such concerns have inspired calls for an independent agency to enforce competition law . The independent agency should be able to enforce law.
 In speeches she links her work to the commission's pledges to jump-start Europe’s economy . In speeches, she links work to European Commission's pledges.
 Ms Vestager bats away charges that her office may unfairly tilt towards one country or another .
 Some suggest that she launched the cases against America's Google and Russia's Gazprom . Both begun by her predecessor to fend off any allegations of national favouritism .
 Competition law pays no heed to a company’s ownership, she says . She notes that the sequencing shows that competition law pay no heed.
 In effect, she has deployed a politician's sense of timing to deflect allegations of political bias .
Ms Vestager cuts an unusual figure in Brussels. Charming, thoughtful and armed with a functioning sense of humour, Ms Vestager.
 Even Gazprom’s officials have been impressed by her matter-of-fact approach .
 American officials are careful to point out that they do not see the Google antitrust probe in this light . Fears are growing in Washington that Europe is bent on erecting protectionist barriers against Silicon Valley .
 Joaquin Almunia is said to have a distaste for backroom deals . She prefers to see cases taken to court if necessary .
 New rules might be a snappier way of bringing tech firms to heel than the heavy weaponry of antitrust law .
 Ms Vestager has inherited a set of cases inherited by her daughter . The case is one of many inherited by Ms Vestagers .
 Four multinationals-Amazon, Apple, Starbucks and Fiat-face allegations of beneficial and discriminatory tax treatment by authorities in Ireland, the Netherlands and Luxembourg .
 Ms Vestager has pledged to investigate, and says she will wrap up her work by June . Her findings could prove awkward .
 Mr Almunia is widely seen as a failure for his thricethwarted attempts to settle with Google .
 Ms Vestager did not choose to take on most of the cases that have made her name .
 Tearing the union Fo r dai Ly a n a Lysis a n ebate 0 n B ri tai n , vi sit Economist.com/britain Politics Wooing white-van man .
Every day between yam and 9am, a man in a peaked cap perches on a small chair by the dual carriageway, beams at the oncoming traffic and gives drivers the thumbs-up sign .
 He has won admirers from across the political spectrum by fighting a series of campaigns on consumer issues . He has also fought taxes on bingo halls and surcharges on electricity bills .
 He is best known for persuading Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition government to cancel every planned fuel-duty increase since 2010 .
 MP calls his brand of politics “white-van Conservatism’-a reference to aspirational working-class voters .
 Margaret Thatcher voted for Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s and Tony Blair in the 1990s . Tony Blair voted for Thatcher in 1990s and Thatcher in 1980s .
 Tories must hold almost all of their seats in the House of Commons. In order to form another coalition with the Lib Dems, the Tories need to hold all their seats .
 Nigel Farage re-elected as UKIP Leader after a debate with seven party Leaders . Farage was re- elected as UKIP leader after a series of debates .
 Nicola Sturgeon triumphs Satisfied minus dissatisfied . The party for UKiP detests the European Union and immigration .
 Lynton Crosby, the Tories’ campaign chief, reckons that the party’s typical target voter earns £15,000 a year-40% less than the national average-reads the Sun on Sunday .
 The Tories have courted white-van man in their manifesto and in the promises they have made on the campaign trail .
 Prime Minister has pledged to create 50,000 new apprenticeships, expand free child care and take those earning minimum wage out of income tax . The prime minister has also pledged to expand free care for children .
 He even promises to legislate against any increases in the government’s main revenue-raising taxes until 2020 .
 He has revived Margaret Thatcher’s totemic bid for working-class support . He has promised to extend the “right to buy” social housing to tenants of housing associations .
 Stuck in a lay-by Mr Halfon reports that voters are now raising the issue on the doorsteps .
After the election, he plans to frame the newspaper coverage of its manifesto . He declares himself delighted at his party’s campaign .
 On April 30th the Sun newspaper endorsed the Tories-though, its Scottish edition went for the snp .
 Labour has not achieved the long-expected “crossover’ with Labour in the polls . The party has not squeezed ukip enough, mainly because it hasn't squeezed uKip enough .
Matthew Goodwin, an expert on UKIP, estimates that the party could indirectly cost Tories around 30 seats .
 Labour must pick up about 40 English seats to lead the next government . Labour must win about 40 seats in the next parliament .
 Many voters still doubt that the Conservatives understand their lives and interests . The best explanation is that many voters still don't know what they want .
 P OLITICIANS have tried desperately hard to divine the Scottish mood over the past year . And at times the party has helped to rein our opinion poll Scotland .
 Scotland is home to 57m people, with 57m inhabitants of England and Wales . Scotland is the most populous country in the UK and Wales. Scotland has a population of 57m .
 A poll conducted for The Economist by YouGov on April 25th and 26th tells us, starkly, the poll tells us . The Economist's poll was conducted for the Economist by The Economist.
 By 48% to 34% more Britons believe Scotland will be independent in 20 years’ time than think it will remain part of the UK .
 Only 20% think Scottish independence would be good for England, Northern Ireland and Wales . 49% think it would be bad for England and Northern Ireland, while 20% say independence is good .
 Britons tend to think the union would be worse off with Scotland gone . But they are absolutely clear on the benefits to Scotland of the current set-up-in .
 70% to 8% more people think Scotland gets a good deal out of being part of the United Kingdom than think it gets a bad deal . By the enormous margin of 70% and 8% to 70% of people think the UK is better than Scotland .
Voters outside Scotland are disinclined to sweeten an already tasty deal .
 Britons would pay less than £250 a year, £250 to £500 a year and more than £500 as hypothetical sums .
23% of Scots would pay something to stay in, and 26% would pay to leave . It turns out that 23% of Scottish would pay for a stay in .
 In England and Wales, only 10% would pay for Scotland to stay and 6% would see the back of it . Only 10% of Scotland would pay to stay, though, and 10% to pay to see back it .
 People divided evenly on the question of whether they would be better off under Cameron or Miliband . 32% thought the former, 30% the latter, and 29% reckoned it would make little difference .
 Mr Cameron holds a decent nine-point lead on the question of whether Britain as a whole would be better off . But Mr Cameron still holds a good nine- point lead over the whole of Britain .
 His difficulty in translating broad economic credibility into votes is the great story of this campaign . He has been a key figure in the campaign's success .
 More damagingly low-income voters are not feeling better off than they did in 2010 . In 2010, more people were feeling better than they were in 2010, according to a report .
 Unemployment has fallen steeply, but this is partly the flipside of insecure work and stagnant wages . This is the flip side of insecurity and stagnant wage rates .
 Tories protest, with reason, that low wages are better than none at all . At least things are not going backwards, they say .
 The van drivers can be forgiven for not being overwhelmed with gratitude to the governing party . But the van drivers are also forgiven for being overwhelmed by gratitude to their party .
 Mr Halfon’s roadside vigil demonstrates it can take extraordinary efforts to persuade such voters that Conservative mps are truly on their side .
 It may be doomed T his ill-tempered, promiscuously focused election should be about the economy . If the Conservatives pull off the win that their ratings on the issue seem to warrant, it may yet be .
Future historians may prefer to recall the existential questions that accumulated in the campaign, little-noticed, like toxic mercury in a dolphin's liver .
 Politicians on all sides are talking on that theme but the real issue of Britain’s future is being warped or ignored .
 Conservatives warn Labour will be able to form a government only with support from a party dedicated to dismembering Britain . The Conservatives, discreetly revelling in Schadenfreude, warn that Labour will have support from the party .
 The SNP looks likely to become Britain’s third biggest party, with over 40 seats .
 Some in Labour mystifyingly imply the Tories' fault for fulminating on the issue, thus driving Scots into the nationalists’ embrace . But that would not be, as some in Labour imply, somehow the Tories’ fault .
 Scots voted by 55% to 45% to keep the union in September last year . Labour counters would make Scots much likelier to hive off than they were last September .
 Theresa May argues for Labour to use SNP's support to sustain a government . But Theresa May says it would not in any way be ‘illegitimate’ for Labour .
 Opinion polls suggest there has in fact been no post-referendum surge in support for Scottish independence .
 Scottish Labour voters who plumped for independence in September are sticking with the party that promises it . The snp may be about to win twice as many votes as it did in 2010 .
 nationalists may have 8% of seats in Parliament-reflects the unfair workings of the first-past-the-post electoral system, which both Labour and the Tories love . This will improve the nationalists’ fortunes absurdly with only 4% of the national vote .
 For Labour to take advantage of this would not be illegitimate, but simply a reflection of British democracy . For Labour, it would be a reflection on British democracy.
 David Cameron predicts for it. The snp, in or near power, would be able to carry out quite the wrecking job .
 Ridding Scotland of the Tories was the main slogan of the independence campaign . It remains thp snp's battle-cry.
 The ‘Nats’ could make havoc for a Labour government, but they would almost certainly not bring it down .
 The last time they did that, in 1979, was when they annoyed their leftist followers mightily . In 1979, they annoyed the leftist followers mayily .
 The result would probably be the same. It might not, because even if it could deliver another plebiscite the polls suggest the result would be same .
 Most Scots under the age of 50 are believed to want independence . But most Scots under 50 are thought to want to be patient . The nationalists can afford to be Patient, they say .
 Almost half of Britons think Scotland will be independent in 20 years' time . Evidence of Scottish opinion suggests they may be right, according to YouGov poll .
 Bagehot’s travels around Britain during this campaign have thrown up a dismal litany of nationalist and regionalist complaint .
In Belfast, he heard middle-class Catholics-who would have recoiled from Republican violence during the Troubles-declare their support for the Irish nationalist party .
 Plaid Cymru leader Leanne Wood is a minor star in the Welsh nationalist party's campaign . She wants to ape the snp’s success by dropping cultural nationalism .
 Great Britain has never been in such an all-round querulous state .
 The Scottish Nats are a common source of Scottish wrestling . Some of this wrestling is inspired by the Scottish NATS .
 British identity is not nearly as old as, and has never been as strong as, the identities of its constituent parts .
 England predates the Act of Union that bound Scotland to England and Wales by almost a thousand years . England predated the Act by almost one thousand years.
 Farage's demand to make St George's Day a public holiday is popular. No wonder Mr Farage’s demand is popular, he says .
 British identity is how Britons dress up for the world-to unite in their common defence, to build an empire . By contrast, Britons have tended to dress up to build their shared values, to assert shared values .
 Britain is no less valuable than it ever was. But, properly understood and argued for, Britain is more valuable than ever.
 England, Scotland and the rest retain any ambition to have a say in the world, culturally and commercially if to a diminishing extent militarily, Britain is their beautifully appointed tool .
 Britons, almost uniquely among their European peers, have remained stolidly immune . And it will remain, as it always has been, a comfort blanket against the intemperate nationalism .
 unionist politicians cannot clinch that argument, against the populists and disaffected, they had better move aside .
 The impending defeat of Scottish unionists will at least provide that opportunity . The impending victory of Scottish Unionists will provide that chance .
 Half of Americans want to lift the ban on cannabis, the world’s favourite illicit drug .
 Latin American presidents now openly wonder if prohibition was a mistake . Uruguay has legalised weed. Latin America's presidents once battled narcos with helicopter gunships .
Heroin addicts in Western countries usually have access to clean needles, substitutes such as methadone and in parts of Europe, heroin prescriptions . Heroin addicts are often given clean needles and substitute drugs such as heroin .
 Many governments are starting to believe that managing drug use causes less harm than trying to stamp it out .
 On April 29th eight convicted drug offenders, seven of them foreign, were executed by firing squad . Seven of them were foreign, seven were executed .
 Joko Widodo, the president, became convinced of the need for a hard line on drugs as mayor of Solo, a city in central Java .
 His seven months in office have seen 14 executions, more than twice as many as in the previous 15 years . He has been in office for seven months, with 14 executions in total .
 Indonesia is only the highest-profile example of a trend across Asia and the Middle East . Indonesia is the only region that routinely executes drug offenders .
 Saudi Arabia is not conclusively linked to a single fatality among the 200m or so who use it each year .
 In the first five months of 2014 nearly 40,000 people were sentenced for drug offences in China, 27% more than in the same period in 2013 .
 In June most countries will mark the UN’s ‘international day against drug abuse’ with speeches . China often celebrates it with a round of executions .
 Iran is increasingly alarmed about high rates of addiction . More enthusiastic still is Iran, where the government is concerned about addiction .
Possession of as little as 30g of some drugs has been a hanging offence since 2011 . Since 2011 possession of up to 30g has been an offence .
 In 2008 Iran executed at least 96 people for drug crimes . According to Harm Reduction International, a drug-focused NGO, in 2008 Iranian people were executed for drugs .
 Drug offenders account for a “large majority of all those put to death in Iran, says hri . Iran may execute as many drug traffickers as China, despite having a population only 6% as big .
 Afghan smugglers of heroin, some as young as 15, have been hanged near the border as a cautionary spectacle .
 Singapore has reduced its drug executions from several dozen a year to one or two . Malaysia is using the death penalty less than two years ago .
 It is not known whether drug offenders among the 8,000 on its death row will have their sentences carried out .
 A person lighting a legal joint in Colorado or Washington might not care that a person selling same substance could suffer beheading .
 Saudi Arabia executes people for adultery and sorcery without impeding extramarital flings or witchcraft elsewhere . After all, Saudi Arabia executed people for sorcery and adultery .
Cross-border nature of the drug trade means countries have tried to reach basic agreement about what to ban . But countries have failed to reach a basic agreement on the issue .
 Nearly all UN members have signed conventions in 1961, 1971 and 1988, which mandate prohibition of the main recreational drugs . Nearly all of the world's most popular recreational drugs have been banned .
 In the early 2000s it helped fund Plan Colombia, a multi-billion-dollar military-focused crackdown on Andean coca growers . Colombia is now the third-largest recipient of American aid .
 Failure to co-operate has meant “public shaming, economic sanctions, or back-channel punitive uses of American influence with international funding agencies like the World Bank and IMF, writes Moises Naim .
 Each year America names the countries it regards as having fallen short of their counter-narcotics obligations . Each year the U.S. names the nations it regards to have fallen short.
 In 2006 Mexico’s congress voted to decriminalise the possession of fairly large quantities of drugs .
George W Bush vetoed decriminalisation after George W Bush made clear that decriminalisation would jeopardise longed-for-for immigration reform in the U.S.
 America's own inconsistent drug laws are forcing it to soften its line . Now America’s own inconsistent drugs laws are forced to soften their line .
 Marijuana is prohibited by the federal government, but legal according to a growing number of states . Marijuana is banned in many states, but it is legal in some states .
 William Brownfield has performed linguistic acrobatics in an attempt to reconcile America's legalisation of cannabis with its obligation to uphold the UN conventions that ban it .
 We are allowed to interpret them so long as our interpretation is still consistent with our universal desire to reduce the misuse and abuse of harmful products throughout the world, he said last year .
 Increasingly America is turning a blind eye to measures elsewhere that it once would have excoriated . America is now turning to measures other countries to take to the streets .
 America’s change of heart has led many to wonder if the un conventions might be reformed to legalise some drugs and treat the use of others as a problem requiring health measures .
 As America has drawn back from prohibition, new drug warriors are stepping up to defend it . But as America has drew back from Prohibition, new drugs warriors are step up to defending it .
 Russia does not apply the death penalty for drugtrafficking or any other crime . But it is ultrastrict in other ways, including for drug trafficking .
Most countries with enough money give to heroin addicts to stop them overdosing and to prevent diseases spreading via shared needles . It bans methadone, a drug taken orally which most countries give to addicts .
 Undeterred, it is trying to persuade east European countries also to ban methadone . It is hoping to persuade other European countries to also ban the drug .
 Russia has sent intelligence agents to disrupt production of heroin in Afghanistan . America once believed that the best way to stop crack-cocaine epidemic was to eradicate coca in South America .
 At the UN it has argued loudly for an aerialspraying programme, similar to those used in the Andes .
In March, backed by fellow Asian hardliners, it successfully lobbied the UN to put forward a motion to ban ketamine, a widely abused anaesthetic . In March, the UN successfully lobbied for a ban on ketamine .
 The World Health Organisation lists it as an essential medicine . But the UN’s own rules should put it beyond any attempt at a ban .
 The motion was withdrawn at the last minute, but the possibility of tighter restrictions rattled African countries that rely on it for emergency surgery .
 Other emerging drug warriors include Egypt, where addiction is treated as a form of insanity . South Africa has panicked the authorities into a crackdown on a vicious new home-cooked drug called “whoonga’s”
 India has aggressively campaigned against a proposal to license Afghan opium farmers to supply the legal medical market . In part because its own licensed opium farmers would see their business threatened .
 Fifteen years ago almost all funding for the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (unODc) came from “major donors’s, dominated by America and eu countries .
 Colombia's biggest donor pays the unodc to run programmes to persuade farmers to grow crops other than coca . Colombia, for instance, now the biggest donor, runs programmes to encourage farmers to produce other crops .
 Last year $28im out of a total donated of $288m was earmarked for such country-specific projects .
 Some believe that the agency has become too quick to do whatever governments will pay for . Some believe the agency is too quick.
 A deal to help Iran catch traffickers, many of whom would later be hanged, has attracted particular criticism . The deal has been criticised for being too lenient .
 UNODC acknowledges “a significant diversification of our portfolio over the previous years’ But says all projects fall within “clear and substantiated mandates’ set out by its governing bodies .
 UN bigwigs deny that earmarked donations give countries more power to shape policy . The UN says earmarked donation gives countries more control of policy .
 A senior un official admits. But persuading countries to cough up non-earmarked cash is hard, he says .
 In the same year a Russian candidate, Yury Fedotov, was appointed its new head . The new head of the Russian government was appointed in 2013 .
 The three previous directors had come from Italy, which often used to be the agency’s main source of non-earmarked donations .
 A war of two halves Western countries will find it hard to wind down the war on drugs without wide consensus . The war is being fought in two halves of Western countries .
 Most decisions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, the UN’s policymaking body, require unanimity among 53 members .
How best to treat addicts has proved impossible. That is why updating its position on such matters has proven impossible .
 It has yet to pass a resolution mentioning harm reduction . It has been part of everyday drug-policy language for years in many countries .
 The difficulty of agreeing on change has left the UN’s drugs authorities out of step with other agencies .
 Last year the World Health Organisation endorsed the decriminalisation of drugs . Last year it was endorsed by the WHO .
 Next April a special session of the un General Assembly will offer the best chance in years to consider new approaches .
 Latin American countries frustrated over the ineffectiveness of present policies . It will review the drugcontrol system from first principles .
 At the most recent such session, in 1998, America blocked serious debate . In 1998, U.S. blocked serious discussion .
 New drug warriors will condemn the world to decades more fighting an unwinnable war . It remains to be seen whether next year’s will be more productive-or whether the new drug warriors are more productive .
 The last such meeting, in 2010, produced agreement over a 64-point action plan . The last time such a meeting was in 2010 .
 RevCons are high both on obscure technical discussion, and on diplomatic grandstanding . Revcons are high on obscuretechnical discussion and on diplomacy .
 The npt has often been under stress since it came into force in 1970 .
 A framework agreement to overcome the decade-long crisis over Iran’s nuclear programme was announced on April 2nd of a four-week conference .
 If a comprehensive deal can be reached by the end of June, it will go a long way towards vindicating the NPT and the tools it provides to bring those who violate its safeguards back into compliance .
 The agreement has strengthened two of the npt’s pillars by upholding the right to a civil nuclear programme . It confirms the role of intrusive inspections to ensure that all related activity is indeed peaceful .
 The five countries that do not have nuclear weapons are most concerned by the failure of the five that do to take further steps to reduce the size of their own nuclear arsenals .
 The RevCon was held in the afterglow of a New start deal between America and Russia to limit the number of deployed strategic nuclear weapons to 1,550 on each side . Since then, despite the establishment in 2009 of the so-called P5 process as a forum for discussing
 The main reason is the chilling of relations between Russia and the West, which predated Russia’s annexation of Crimea . Russia's annexation of the Crimea led to the annexation of Ukraine .
 Obama in 2013 of new negotiations to reduce each side's stock of warheads by a third was met with stony silence .
 The Russians are also refusing to attend next year’s Nuclear Security Summit, a meeting to prevent fissile material falling into the wrong hands .
 China, the most opaque of the P5 powers, will block attempts to get multilateral disarmament talks going . Without further cuts in U.S. and Russian nuclear forces, China will block multilateral talks .
 Rose Gottemoeller, America’s undersecretary of state for arms control, praises China for its leading role in producing a common glossary .
 This may not sound much, but it is seen within the P5 as essential for future negotiations . It is seen as a key part of the negotiations for future talks .
Despite Russian impasse, America has tried to meet its obligations, says Ms Gottemoeller .
 It is eliminating “excess’s warheads at the rate of almost one a day and closing down old bits of nuclear infrastructure . It is also eliminating ‘excess' warheads.
 In December it launched a scheme to bring together nuclear and non-nuclear weapons states to develop new approaches to verification .
 Humanitarian Impacts of Nuclear Weapons Initiative is a movement supported by Austria, Norway and Mexico . It is doubtful whether these modest, incremental efforts will cut much ice with the Humanitarianimpacts of nuclear weapons Initiative .
 The P5 are modernising their nuclear forces to maintain their long-term effectiveness . Some backers want to make nuclear weapons illegal, but some may question whether it serves any purpose .
 Nobody disputes the horror of nuclear weapons, but moral fervour is not a policy, says author .
 Progress on nuclear disarmament must take account of the complex deterrence relationships between the P5 and P5 . The P5 is the most powerful nuclear weapon in the world .
 The conference on creating a wmdfree zone in the Middle East was promised in 2010 . Another source of friction is the failure to hold the conference on Creating a Wmdfree Zone .
 Israel, an undeclared nuclearweapons state, has joined preparatory meetings at a high diplomatic level . Israel is attending the RevCon as an observer .
 Egypt says the first step is for Israel to accede to the NPT-a non-starter . But it insists that regional security arrangements must precede any talks on disarmament .
 It is possible that Israel’s new chumminess with the Gulf Arabs may provide some impetus . The verification measures will ensure the civil nature of Iran's nuclear programme .
 RevCon to rediscover the spirit of 2010, says RevCon . RevCon: What is needed is an outbreak of realism among countries without nuclear weapons-and a willingness by the P5, above all Russia .
 Most of its signatories know that keeping it alive is better than any alternative . That may be a tall order, but, imperfect though the npt is, most of it is, it's not an alternative .
 The B-3, as it is likely to be named, will be a nuclear-capable aircraft designed to penetrate the most sophisticated air defences .
 The contract itself will be worth $50 billion-plus in revenues to the successful bidder . There will be many billions more for work on design, support and upgrades .
 The stakes could not be higher for at least two of the three industrial heavyweights that are slugging it out .
 On one side is a team of Boeing and Lockheed Martin; on the other, Northrop Grumman . On the other side is Boeing, Lockheed Martin .
 The result could lead to a shake-out in the defence industry . One of the competitors had to give up making combat aircraft for good .
 The F-22 and f-i8 Super Hornet will be more than a decade away . The B-3 contract will be the next big deal for combat planes .
 Richard Aboulafia of the Teal Group believes it will be hard for the loser to stay in the combat-aircraft business .
 If Northrop were to miss out, its investors may press for it to be broken up . Northrop may be forced to make a decision to break up .
 Mr Aboulafia thinks it may seek to buy Northrop’s aircraft-building business . If Boeing were to lose, he thinks it might seek to purchase it.
 The production line in St Louis that makes Boeing’s f-i8 is due to close in 2017 . The carrier version of the new F-35 in numbers is expected to be launched in 2017.
 Northrop could leave Lockheed Martin as the only American company with the ability to design combat planes . If Northrop were to depart the field, that could leave the company as the biggest winner of the three .
 Usually in a contest of this kind, particularly this close to its end, a clear favourite emerges . Usually in this kind of contest, the winner emerges .
 The degree of secrecy surrounding what is still classified as a ‘black programme’ has remained high . That is partly because of the level of secrecy around the “black programme,’s still classified by the government .
 Only the rough outlines of the aircraft’s specification have been revealed . The aircraft's specification has been revealed.
 It will be stealthy, subsonic, have a range of around 6,000 miles and be able to carry a big enough payload to destroy many targets during a single sortie .
 Most of all, picking a winner is hard because both competitors are highly credible-and each has different strengths . But most of all it's hard to pick a winner because of both competitors' strengths .
 When innovative firms flout the law, they cancelled two years later because its excessive technological ambition was causing costs to soar .
 The air force quietly released a request for proposals for proposals last summer . They decided to team up again in 2013 to prepare for a new request for the air force .
 Boeing is the team leader and will build the aircraft if their bid is successful . Lockheed will take the main responsibility for its design .
 Lockheed can draw on its “skunk works’s, an autonomous design team that works on radical new aircraft technologies . Lockheed is developing radar-beating stealth technologies for the F-22 and F-35 fighter planes .
 Northrop built the revolutionary b-2 stealth bomber that entered service in the early 1990s . Northrop, on the other hand, built the stealth bomber.
 It was conceived as a deep-penetration nuclear bomber at the height of the cold war . The nuclear bomber was conceived in the 1950s as a nuclear bomber .
 Only 21 aircraft were built, leading to a ‘death spiral’ in which declining orders pushed up the unit price of an aircraft to absurd levels .
 Once its development, engineering and testing costs were added, each b-2 ended up costing more than $2 billion .
 Northrop's cold war ended sooner than expected. But it was hardly Northrop’s fault that the cold war end sooner than predicted .
 The plane it built has since proved its capabilities in numerous conflicts, from Kosovo to Libya . The plane has been used in many conflicts.
 Updated versions of the once-radical technologies that made the b-2 so expensive will find their way into the new bomber .
 Northrop may be better for the air force in choosing Northrop . The air force might be better to choose Northrop than the UK .
 Boeing is also struggling to deliver the K-46 tanker plane by the target date of 2017 . Boeing is not only grappling with its hugely demanding, and rapidly expanding, civil-aviation business .
 Lockheed also has its hands full ramping up production of the late and over-budget F-35 . Lockheed, for its part, also has their hands full ramps up production.
 The target for the plane to come into operation is the mid-2020s-if possible, even earlier . The target is to be able to launch the plane in mid- 2020s, if possible .
 The average age of America’s current bomber fleet, consisting of 76 geriatric B-52S, 63 b-is and 20 B2 S, is 38 years . In part this is because of fast-emerging new threats and in part because the average age
 None of these can penetrate firstrate air defences without carrying cruise missiles-and the missiles are of little use against mobile targets .
 In the kind of one-sided wars that America and its allies fought in the years after the September nth 2001 attacks, such deficiencies were not a problem .
 China has invested heavily in “anti-access/area-denial’s capabilities. But during that period China, in particular, has spent heavily on anti-access and anti-area-Denial capabilities .
 Thousands of precision-guided missiles of increasing range could threaten America’s bases in the Western Pacific .
 The Pentagon is planning to buy 2,457 aircraft at a cost of around $10 om each . Critics of the huge F-35 programme argue that its limited range was a growing problem .
 A new long-range bomber that can penetrate the most advanced air defences is seen as vital in preserving America's unique ability to project power anywhere in the world .
 The new bomber is a priority, so too is keeping the price low enough to build it in sensible numbers, and thus keep it safe from political ambush .
 B-3 will be the first major weapons system to be designed and produced in this new era . Budget caps imposed by Congress in 2013 have ushered in a decade of defence-spending austerity .
 To stay on budget and avoid the risk of having its orders cut, the programme will have to rely on technologies adapted from earlier projects .
 The B-3 will be a bit smaller than the b-2, and be able to use the same engines as the F-35 . The F- 35 will be the same engine as the B-2 .
 The option of being able to fly the bomber pilotlessly by remote control seems to have been dropped . Some highly sophisticated surveillance sensors that were proposed earlier have been proposed .
 The Pentagon’s acquisitions chief, Frank Kendall, describes an “open architecture and modular approach’. Companies will compete to provide upgrades that can be easily plugged in as and when needed .
 The B-3 will be fully connected to a range of “offboard capabilities, such as electronic countermeasures and the collection of targeting data, provided by other aircraft and orbital reconnaissance satellites, instead of having to carry everything on board .
 Neither of the two competing teams is prepared to discuss their bids or A BATTLE over voting rights . Pitting the state against company boards and many investors is raging among French companies .
 The biggest fight of all involves Renault, a carmaker with global ambitions . Renault has a global ambitions and a global ambition .
 French firms must begin granting double voting rights to investors who have held registered shares for at least two years . Two-thirds of shareholders have voted why they should prevail in any detail .
 Neither Boeing nor Northrop is likely to take defeat quietly . The air force is striving to make its decision as protest-proof as possible .
 Northrop is still smarting from Boeing’s lobbying triumph over the ic-46 tanker programme . A plane that many military analysts considered superior ended up losing .
 The Pentagon likes to share work around so as to ensure there is continued competition for contracts to provide military gear .
 B-3 has explicitly ruled out taking such concerns into account when choosing between the two contenders . In the case of the B-2 it has ruled out.
 Whatever it selects, it will deal a devastating blow to the other. That may be because it realises that whichever it selects will be the worst blow .
 The days when America had a choice of combat-plane suppliers are coming to an end. ■ against this rule.
 The provision aims to counter ‘short-termism’ by encouraging more loyalty between investors and companies . The provision is aimed at counter “short- termism.’
 Government intent on selling down some of its stakes in domestic companies to retain influence over them while banking the cash .
 Nissan's Japanese partner, Nissan, holds 15% of Renault’s capital but no voting rights . PARIS Enhanced rights for loyal investors are increasingly touted as a way to make companies think for long term .
 Renault has temporarily raised its stake from 15% to 19.7% in time for a meeting of shareholders on April 30th . The government is determined to defeat the board’s resolution to retain one vote for one share .
 22 of the CAC-40, the French blue-chip index, had such arrangements . PhiTrust, an investment fund that, along with Proxinvest, has helped to organise opposition to the Florange law .
 Many pundits, and most institutional investors, think this short-changes some shareholders . Various ways of altering the proportionality between voting rights and the underlying share of ownership are common across Europe and elsewhere .
 double voting rights are suddenly the default position in France . What is new in France is that double voting Rights are suddenly default position .
 The remaining French-domiciled CAC-40 firms are scrambling to sort themselves out before the law’s provisions come into force .
 Of those firms in which the state has no stake, only one has so far ended up with double voting rights for long-term investors .
 On April 17th over half of the shareholders in Vivendi, a media conglomerate, voted to stick with one vote per share . They were short of the two-thirds majority required to stay in the company .
 Vincent Bollore increased his holding from just over 10% to almost 15% for the event . Vivendi’s chairman, Bollore, increased his control over the group . Bollore's holding increased from just ten% to nearly 15% .
 shareholders have seen off the introduction of double voting rights, bnp Paribas and Credit Agricole . Air Liquide, an industrialgases company, and Capgemini, a consulting firm, are likely to do the same in May .
 The state can throw its weight around to ensure its new law is applied . Things are different at companies where the state has a stake .
 Veolia failed to secure the supermajority needed to override Florange on April 22nd . Shareholders at Veolia, a water utility, failed to win a supermajority of votes .
 Engie, an energy giant that is changing its name from gdf Suez, went the same way on April 28th . The state owns a third of the capital and Engie is thought to be near the top of its assets-for-sale list .
 Few expect Orange, France's biggest telecoms company, to vote down Florange at its shareholders’ meeting on May 27th .
 French government is pursuing double voting rights and its own interests, especially at Renault . French government has thrown off its old interventionism in appointing a more liberal economic team .
 France is not alone in questioning whether governance rules in their current form are producing robust companies . But France is also questioning whether the governance rules are producing strong companies .
 Italy adopted its own, much milder Florange law in 2014, removing a decades-old prohibition on multiple voting rights . Italy allows companies to give long-term shareholders extra voting power .
 The decree was designed mainly to persuade owners of family firms that they could list on the stockmarket . It was designed to persuade family firms to list and raise capital to expand without giving up control .
 A number of Italian companies have changed their statutes to give extra votes to long-term investors . Campari, a drinksmaker, has changed its statutes to help investors .
 A committee of the European Parliament will debate changes to the Shareholders’ Rights Directive of 2007 .
 Mylan dislikes its suitor and runs away to declare its love for Perrigo, while seeking a poison pill in case it is forced to marry Teva . But Mylan runs away from the suitor to declare it's love for perrigo .
 The unfolding drama featuring three generic-drug makers could well run until then . With many suitors, Perrigo is holding out for a better offer .
 To be on the safe side it has enacted a poison-pill defence against hostile takeover . The poison- Pill defence is designed to prevent hostile takeover.
 Teva is the world’s largest generic-drug maker, Teva, with the third-largest .
 Teva would create a company with around $30 billion in annual revenues and $2 billion in cost savings . Teva says it would create company with $30billion annual revenues .
 Mylan has made three successive takeover offers to Perrigo, a smaller Irish rival, only to be spurned each time . As part of its plan to escape Teva’s clutches, Mylan have made three consecutive takeover offers .
 Teva's merger would allow it to put more effort into copying hard-tomake “biologics’- an increasingly important class of drugs that are manufactured inside animal cells .
 The merger proposals have triggered speculation that consolidation could cause the price of generic drugs to rise .
 All around the world, health-care providers are keen on buying cheaper generic copies of branded drugs . The patents on generic drugs have expired.
In big emerging markets such as India, spending on drugs in general is growing fast . In big emerging countries such as China, spending is growing rapidly .
 Prices are a topic of great concern in the rich world, too, especially in America . Some generics have seen some surprising spikes in cost of some generics .
 The price of digoxin, a treatment for congestive heart failure, went up by 1,127% last year .
 Pricing concerns have triggered a recent congressional investigation as well as a forthcoming review by the Department of Health and Human Services .
 Risk of consolidation leading to higher prices for generics is low, says Michael Waterhouse . barriers to entry are too small, he says .
 The overall trend for generics prices has been downwards . So far, at least, the overall trend has been downward .
 Express Scripts’ prescription-price index shows that the average price for branded medications in America has risen by 127% over the past seven years . The average for generics is down by 63% over that period .
 W HY Volkswagen’s chairman, Eerdinand Piech, failed to remove its chief executive, Martin Winterkorn, is unclear .
 Mr Piech's obsession with making it the world's biggest and best carmaker has left it with some significant weaknesses, in its original brand and in the American market .
 Bernd Pischetsrieder got rid of the group’s previous CEO in 2006 . Mr Piech probably reckoned the same trick would work again .
 In a recent interview in Der Spiegel, a news magazine, he said he was “at a distance’ from Mr Winterkorn .
 Mr Piech's defeat leaves Mr Winterkorn in pole position to succeed him as chairman of the supervisory board . The body appoints the carmaker's executives and must approve big decisions on strategy .
 consolidations in the generic industry are an effort to create both scale and negotiating power with purchasers of drugs . By building factories across the globe and making a string of acquisitions, from Bentley, a maker of luxury Perrigo, says Bentley .
 markets have rewarded consolidators through increases in their share prices, says analyst . This is why, he says, they are rewarded by consolidators .
 Teva-Mylan merger has potential to lead to higher generic prices in the short-to-mid term . Ms Davenport thinks a merger could lead to lower generic prices .
 Generics have succeeded in bringing down the overall cost of medicines by providing competition to branded drugs .
 The barriers to entry for new generics are low, they are not non-existent . But the barriers to enter for new firms are low.
 Getting approvals needed to make and market drugs is not a trivial matter . Getting the approvals needed for making and market drug drugs is a matter of not being a trivial issue .
 Volkswagen is the second-largest vehicle maker in the world, behind only Toyota . It is important for antitrust authorities to keep an eye on the generics firms .
 vw relies heavily on its premium Audi and Porsche ranges for its profits . The company is vulnerable to a downturn at the top end of the market .
 operating margins on humbler cars that bear the vw badge were worse-than-expected 2%. Vw hopes to boost these margins to 6%, around the group’s average .
 A €5 billion cost-cutting plan for vw-branded cars is under way . The company is introducing across the group the mob, a modular ‘platform’ that will allow it to make the underpinnings of two-fifths of all its cars from one
 That should eventually save money, though it is proving more expensive than expected to implement . That should finally save money.
 Mr Winterkorn has been in charge of vw’s German factories for more than a decade . But shifting work from vw's German factories to foreign ones would be almost impossible for him .
 The state of Lower Saxony has a 20% share of the votes on the supervisory board . It has a veto on strategic decisions under a law passed when the firm was privatised .
 Vw’s share of the world‘s second-biggest market, already paltry, is falling . Eixing its problems in America will be just as tough as America's problems .
 Changing perceptions of the brand in America will be a longer and more difficult task . Changing perceptions will be more difficult than ever .
 Investors hoping that Mr Piech’s departure signals an even more radical shift in strategy look set for disappointment .
 The board may have chosen to back Mr Winterkorn, in his late 60s, rather than Mr Piech, over a decade older . The younger man is a better longterm bet on things carrying on as before, according to the board .
Campaigners for “real food and an increasingly sceptical public are under pressure from comedians and policymakers .
 In February Michelle Obama said she had long banned processed food from the presidential family's table . Kraft's macaroni and cheese is one of its biggest sellers .
 Last month the company said it would remove the artificial colouring that gives the product its neon-orange glow .
 On April 28th it announced flat sales and a 16% fall in net profits, year on year, in first quarter .
 McDonald’s, having replaced its boss in March because of poor sales, said on April 22nd that they were still falling .
 Kraft and other processed-food makers have lost out to smaller food firms peddling healthier fare . McDonald's has been winning customers from McDonald's in recent years .
 PepsiCo has just finished a three-year process to cut up to 8,700 jobs, or 3% of its global workforce . The company has been in the process for three years .
 Americans’ growing interest in healthier, simpler fare is providing opportunities for all sorts of startups .
 Family farms had been going out of business for decades . Now new ones are being founded, promising organic, locally grown produce .
 Kind, which makes fruit and nut snacks, has gone from nothing to annual sales of more than $ioom in ten years . Kind's annual sales have gone from $iooms to $ioos in 10 years .
 Chobani, a maker of Greekstyle yogurt, has gone from nowhere to sales of $1. billion in the same period .
 processed-food giants are reformulating their products to answer worries about synthetic ingredients .
More recently PepsiCo said it would remove aspartame, an artificial sweetener, from Diet Pepsi sold in America . More recently, PepsiCo has said it will remove as partame, a sweetener.
 Coke Life is a fizzy drink that contains stevia, a natural, no-calorie sugar substitute . Its arch-rival Coca-Cola is promoting Coke Life.
 Stevia has a slightly bitter aftertaste that may put off some drinkers . Stevia is a very popular drink with some drinkers. Stevia also has a bit of a taste for a drink .
 Campbell's reduced the salt in its soup, customers rebelled, forcing it to add some back . In 2010, Campbell’s reduced salt in the soup.
Food giants have been to buy small but fast-growing healthy-food brands . The food giants are now buying small, albeit expensive, alternative brands .
 Campbell’s bought Bolthouse Farms, which makes organic juices, in 2012 . A year later it took over Plum Organics, a maker of baby food .
 If the decline in processed foods’ popularity continues, two further strategiesconsolidation and cost-cutting-will become more prevalent .
Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway and 30 Capital have swung the axe at its head office and factories . Since they bought Heinz for $28 billion in 2013, Warren Buffett’s Berkshire Hathaways have been in charge of the company .
 Buffett and 3G announced in March that they were buying Kraft for $50 billion to merge it with Heinz .
 Kraft has undergone same “zerobased budgeting’s’ approach to cost-cutting at Kraft that Heinz has undergone .
 Heinz and 3G say they are planning to cut the debt on their balance-sheet to three times ebitda in two years . Heinz says they will cut debt on the balance sheet to 3 times a year .
 Nestle’s chairman, Peter Brabeck-Letmathe, told his shareholders that the two investors have ‘pulverised the food-industry market, particularly in America, with serial acquisitions, he said .
 processed-foods are not the only ones showing how much scope there is for trimming financial fat . They are also the culinary sort from the processed food business .
 Two years ago Dean Metropoulos and Andy Jhawar bought Hostess, the collapsed maker of Twinkles cakes . The two entrepreneurs bought the cake maker two years ago .
 They got rid of inefficient factories and pumped investment into automated production and an improved distribution system . They also invested in automated production .
 Americans are stuffing their faces with the gooey snacks once more. Now Americans are eating more snacks than ever .
 Hostility from regulators, campaigners and the media; declining popularity; consolidation and cost-cutting . Hostility. Hostilities from regulators,. campaigners and media .
 The tobacco industry has been shrinking for more than 50 years . Processed food has much to learn from tobacco .
 As cigarette-makers have consolidated and cut costs, they have managed to keep profits up and share prices rising .
 Processed food may also be declining but still lucrative business offering guilty pleasures to those who cannot resist . Processed foods may also become a steadily declining business offer guilty pleasures .
 America’s ruthless 19th-century ‘robber barons’ believed it was easier to go ahead and do something, than to ask permission first .
 The first carmakers had to battle against rules of the road that had been designed for the horse and cart . The rules were designed for horses and cart and were designed to be used on the road .
 Britain’s “pirate’ radio stations in the 1960s had to retreat to international waters to bring pop music to the masses .
 The tension between innovators and regulators has been particularly intense of late . The tension has been especially intense ofLate .
 Uber and Lyft have had complaints that their car-hailing services break taxi regulations . People renting out rooms on Airbnb have been accused of running unlicensed hotels . Tesla, a maker of electric cars, has suffered legal setbacks in its attempts to sell directly to motorists rather than
 It sometimes seems as if the best way to identify a hot new company is to look at the legal trouble it is in .
 Many innovative companies are using digital technology to attack heavily regulated bits of the service economy . The first is that many innovative companies use digital technology.
 Uber and Lyft let people turn their cars into taxis; Airbnb lets them rent out their spare rooms . Prosper lets them lend out their free cash . Uber lets people use their cars as taxis .
 Conventional taxi firms, hoteliers and banks argue, not unreasonably, that if they have to obey all sorts of regulations, they must obey all kinds of regulations .
 Benjamin Edelman of Harvard Business School argues that YouTube owes its success in part to this strategy . Edelman says YouTube is the result of a successful strategy .
 When it launched in 2005, it was one of dozens of video sites competing for both content and viewers . It is now one of the most popular video sites in the world .
 Some, such as Google Video, diligently screened each video for copyright infringement . Some videos were screened for copyright infringers .
 YouTube was more risk-taking, waiting for copyright owners to complain before taking down videos . YouTube is more risk taking, waiting to take down videos.
 Google bought it for $1.65 billion in stock in 2006 . YouTube has just celebrated its tenth anniversary . Many early rivals have faded away .
 Advocates of the strategy calculate that by providing a better service than incumbents, they can mobilise public opinion and get the rules changed .
 Last year Eric Pickles announced the scrapping of restrictions on short-term lettings in response to the rise of Airbnb and similar services .
 Innovative companies that put growth before legal niceties have money to spend on pr and lobbying .
 Napster, an early music-sharing site, was crushed by lawsuits, even though its efforts paved the way for Apple’s legal downloading service, iTunes .
 It is particularly perilous in financial services, where regulators will crack down at the merest whiff of impropriety . It is especially perilous in the financial services.
 Prosper was once America’s biggest peer-to-peer lender, and Lending Club a distant second .
 Prosper dashed for growth, initially ignoring the sec’s warnings . Lending Club shut down its operations for months while its founder figured out a way to comply .
 Lending Club, which is now a listed firm, was founded by Prosper's founder . Prosper's fortunes revived only when its founder was ousted . That helped Lending club to overtake Prosper, which now has a listed company .
 Those who do business with the ruleflouting companies may suddenly decide that it suits them to uphold the law after all .
Companies need to be capable of pivoting rapidly to a new strategy if they cannot get the law changed in their favour . Such legal perils mean that companies need to have to be able to pivot rapidly to new strategy .
 There may be a lot of such pivoting ahead as disrupters are forced to explain themselves in court . There may have been a lot to do in court, but there may be more to do.
Uber and Lyft are now well-enough to compete on the basis of convenience and quality . Uber and Lyft will be able to compete even if they are forced to treat their drivers as employees .
Law-testing firms are adapting their rule books for the digital age . But for more fragile firms, it would be better still if regulators responded to the emergence of so many innovative, law-testing businesses .
 The first bet was that the euro would still exist a century from now . No bookie would give short odds on that .
 Mexicans, whose country has, as one economic historian puts it, lived longer in moratoria than with access to capital markets, reacted with bemusement . Mexico's economic history puts it on the verge of collapse .
 Mexico will have to sell off the country's extremities to repay the bondholders . Mexico will run out of oil by 2115, says columnist .
 It is the only country to have tapped the so-called centennial market since China and the Philippines in the 1990s . It has done so at relatively low yields-of 6.1% on its dollar bond in 2010 and just 4.2% on euro bond last month .
 Mexico’s distinctly spotty credit record raises two questions . Those are extraordinarily good terms given Mexico's extraordinarily good record .
 The answer to the first question is a combination of salesmanship and timing . The answer is to salesmanship, salesmanship.
 The finance ministry's bright, Americaneducated technocrats know how to attract attention from investors who may not have considered Mexico before .
 The eurodenominated bond, for instance, was sold largely to insurance companies and annuity firms . The bond was sold mostly to insurance firms, but was sold to annuity companies .
Mexico's debt crises in 1982-83 and 1994-95 contributed to Mexico’s debt crises . One advantage of long life, for borrower and creditors alike, is that it helps avoid overcrowded redemption schedules .
 Mexico's main selling-point is a relatively high return for a borrower that last year received an “a” rating from Moody’s . But in an era when the yields on the bonds of many rich countries are negative, the yields are negative .
 Switzerland sold a tenyear bond at a negative yield-a first . Mexico issued its euro-denominated centennial bond on the day of the bond's release .
First new bond issued for 50 years 62 Finance and economics . The Economist May 2nd 2015.
 Although the halving of the oil price has hurt the public finances, the peso has done better than many of its peers . The peso is one of the biggest economies in the world .
 Agustin Carstens, the governor of the central bank, says Mexico has an “arsenal’ of $195 billion of international reserves . Mexico has a $70 billion credit line from the imf in case of financial market volatility .
 The government has further impressed investors by tightening its belt before times get tougher . The government is further impressed by tightening the belt.
 It has cut spending in an election year and is attempting to implement a string of reforms aimed at bolstering competition in areas like energy and telecommunications .
 Aberdeen Asset Management is a big investment fund . It is one of the few countries that has been fixing the roof while the sun shines .
Gerardo Esquivel of El Colegio de Mexico describes the government's approach with a different home-improvement analogy .
Mexico's economic stability and flexible exchange rates have been accompanied by meagre, he says . The problem is that the 20 years of macroeconomic stability has been followed by meagsre, narrowly based growth .
 President Enrique Pena Nieto initially promised his reforms would bring annual growth of 5-6%. His government has since had to lower its forecasts repeatedly .
 Fifteen years of hurt Tech stocks were a bubble in 2000 . But they are not this time-yet S tocks are the best investment for the long run .
 The recent record high for the nasdaq, America’s tech-heavy equity index, ought to give investors pause . The Nasdaq is America's biggest equity index .
 Japan’s Nikkei 225 still trades at only half its 1989 peak . Even so, that counts as a sprightly performance compared with Japan's NikkeI 225 .
 Such statistics make it hard to argue that “there are no such things as bubbles,’s an economist still contends .
 A very high stockmarket valuation implies the expectation of rapid growth in future profits . A veryhigh stock market valuation implies a very high risk of a rapid growth.
 The average price-earnings ratio of the nasdaq back in 2000 was more than 150 . The average cost-earning ratio of a nasdaq stock was 150 .
 A shareholder would have had to wait for well over a century to recoup his original investment . In other words, if profits did not rise, a shareholder would be forced to wait .
 Investors were thinking of their great-great-grandchildren, but that was not how it seemed at the time .
 Technology companies were expected to take over the world and drive “old economy” firms out of business . Their profits would soar as a consequence .
 Apple’s latest set of bumper profits show. Some tech companies have performed fantastically well, as Apple's latest report shows .
 The problem in 1999-2000 was that everyone thought they were going to make money out of the internet. The problem was that people thought they would make money from the internet .
Bright graduates set up their own dotcom company with a plan to exploit some niche . This prompted lots of bright graduates to set up a company.
 Some sectors were extremely crowded and competitive . But it also meant that some sectors were very crowded and very competitive .
 Earnings crashed after 2000, rather than rising as investors had anticipated, instead of rising .
 earnings per share at nasdaq companies regained the level recorded back in 1997 . It was not until 2010 that the level was recorded back at the time .
 Ealtering firms were bought up by their competitors . Three-quarters of the companies that made up the nasdaq at the end of 1999 are no longer listed .
 Two of NASDAQ’S current giants, Google and Eacebook, had not even gone public by 2000 . Two of the NASDAQ's current giants had never gone public .
 Investors are prepared to accept lower returns going forward, as values revert to the mean . Another “rational’s explanation for high stockmarket valuations is that investors are prepared.
 The nasdaq rose by 86% in 1999 and investors piled in, hoping to get a piece of the action . In 1999, the Nasdaq rose 86% .
Tech stocks comprise only 20% of the overall American market by value, compared with 30% back in 2000 . Russ Koesterich, a strategist at BlackRock, points out that tech stocks comprise just 20%.
 Biotech is one sector where there are signs of overenthusiasm (up by more than 50% over the past 12 months) But this in part reflects the emergence of some genuinely promising new drugs .
 Many of these drugs are specifically intended to replace expensive alternative treatments . Many of the drugs are not intended to be used to treat expensive treatments .
 The maker of one such drug, Celgene, told investors that its earnings would increase by 23% a year all the way to 2020 . The maker said its earnings will increase by 25% to 23% in a year .
 It may already have emerged in the world of startups and venture capital . It may have emerged as a way to make money from startups .
 A few more years of zero interest rates and negative bond yields will force investors to seek higher returns from riskier assets like equities, and who knows what might happen .
 There is nothing like the sense of euphoria that marked out 19992,000 . But as yet, there is no euphoria in the history of the world .
 Investors are not focused on financial news (cNBC’s 2014 ratings were the lowest since 1995). Workers are not quitting their jobs to indulge in day trading, they say .
 Economists think growth will average 3.8% over the next decade, according to a poll from the central bank .
 The strength of Mexico’s exports to America-especially cars-has not translated into booming domestic demand . A huge, unproductive informal sector and general lawlessness also drag the economy down .
 The “pressure cooker effect’s effect of low growth, low wages and rising inequality of income and opportunity could explode, says Esquivel .
 The lessons learned from Mexico’s past booms and busts are so embedded among politicians and officials that there is little chance of a slide back into financial chaos .
 He points to Mexico’s independent central bank, open financial markets and free-trade agreements as guarantors of stability .
 Luis de la Calle, an uncharacteristically upbeat Mexican economist, says Mexico could become one of the world's biggest economies within the next few decades .
 Whether countries repay their debts comes down to questions of political will as much as economic performance, however . Whether countries pay their debts will be down to political will, however.
 The Spanish empire reneged on its debts more than a dozen times between the 16th and 20th centuries . The country inherited a habit of default from the Spanish empire .
 Mexicans have alternated between an embrace of globalisation and a reversion to an inward-looking nationalism . Mexicans have also alternated repeatedly between a embrace ofglobalisation and an inward looking nationalism .
For the first decade of the 20th century, international bankers threw money at Mexico because of its macroeconomic stability, its railway boom and a global liquidity glut . For the first 10 years of the 21st century, for instance, bankers threw cash at Mexico .
 Then came the murderous revolution of 1910, which erupted partly because the fruits of that prosperity had not been shared . Then came a murderous revolution in 1910.
Mexico must defy its history and remain open to trade and foreign capital . For bondholders to get their money back in 2115, Mexico must defy history .
 If consumers were even more demanding, they could earn tens of billions of dollars in extra returns . If consumers are even marginally more demanding they could make tens of billion of dollars .
 MaxMyInterest is a year-old electronic service aimed at slothful but yield-hungry savers . The service is aimed at users who want to make sure they get the best out of their gadgets .
 It offers to move money from banks that want to shed deposits, and that therefore pay savers low interest, to ones in need of them, and so willing to pay more .
 At the same time, each account holds no more than $250,000, the maximum amount insured by the government . The government makes sure that each account is insured for $250k .
 The average interest paid on deposits in America is a microscopic 0.09% a year, according to BankRate .
 $2,000 a year for every $250,000 account, and should rise considerably whenever the Federal Reserve starts to raise rates . That may seem small, but it should rise significantly whenever rates start to raise .
 JPMorgan Chase, Citibank, First Republic, Wells Fargo and Bank of America are working with MaxMyInterest to shift excess cash out of the accounts of willing customers .
 MaxMyInterest allows them to raise money cheaply, and therefore to make more loans without having to build a network of branches . Max myInterest lets them make loans without building branches .
 The incentive to co-operate for the banks relinquishing cash is more complex. The incentive for banks to relinquish cash is also more complex than the incentive to do so .
 A customer with more than $250,000 in his account might open a new one to benefit from deposit insurance . They fear that a customer with over $250k in his bank account may open another one .
 The second bank, in turn, might start offering the customer lucrative services such as wealth management .
 The first bank would rather steer the extra cash to less threatening internet-only outfits .
 Regulators require big banks to hold especially high amounts of liquid assets against uninsured deposits . Regulators need to hold more liquid assets to protect uninsured deposits.
 Banks earn next to nothing on these investments, making such deposits unprofitable . But banks earn nothing on such investments .
 Big banks have begun discouraging them by levying fees and the like . In response, big banks have started discouraging them.
MaxMyInterest allows the banks to save money while appearing more concerned with their customers’ fortunes than their own .
 The idea of getting around the cap on deposit insurance is not a new one . The idea is not new one, but it's not new.
 A firm called Promontory Interfinancial Network distributes companies’ cash in $250,000 chunks to banks throughout America .
MaxMyInterest is trying to steer deposits to specialist lenders in need of them . But it could spell trouble for money-market funds in particular .
 The caps on deposit rates applied until the 1980s . They only came into being, after all, thanks to the caps on deposits .
 They are not explicitly insured, and currently offer minuscule returns . They are currently offering minuscules returns . The company is not currently insured .
 The spread of such services will make it easier for savers to shop around for higher rates . They may benefit at the moment, but they may benefit from the spread .
 That would squeeze banks’ margins, and perhaps even change their funding models . That would be a change in the way banks are funded .
As oil prices collapsed and Western sanctions bit, export revenues slumped . As oil prices fell, Western sanctions hit, export revenue slumped .
 The Central Bank of Russia has been cutting interest rates-an unthinkable prospect just a few months ago . The central bank has cut interest rates in the past few months .
 All this, some say, is proof that investors are too pessimistic about the Russian economy .
 That's helpful for an economy where the stuff provides half of all exports . That's good for the economy where things provide half of the exports .
 A new deal to end the Russian-backed insurgency in Ukraine, signed in February, has also made investors less jittery . The new deal also makes investors less Jittery.
 The rouble's strength is a puzzle, since in many ways the Russian economy looks worse than it did in December . Nonetheless, the rouble’s strength remains a puzzle .
 Inflation, at 16.9%, is 5.9% higher than the average rate of inflation . The jump would normally spur depreciation, but it's 5% higher .
 The foreign-exchange reserves of the CBR have fallen by about $30 billion so far this year, and by $130 billion since this time last year .
 The imp thinks that the economy will shrink by 4% in 2015-and it is a relative optimist . The imp believes that the country's economy will grow by 3% in the next year .
 Economic fundamentals cannot explain the rouble's strength, but the cbr’s behaviour may do .
 Last year, as the rouble collapsed, it launched a $50 billion scheme to lend dollars to companies at a concessionary rate . The scheme was launched last year as the Russian economy collapsed .
 Russian firms faced a mound of debt repayments in December .
 This year Russian firms have used the cheap dollars to invest in much higher-yielding Russian assets, says Timothy Ash of Standard Bank .
 The CBR put a stop to this ‘carry trade’ by making the loans more expensive, halting the rouble’s appreciation . On April 20th, the CBR will make the Loans more expensive .
 Russian firms still have around $100 billion of external debt maturing this year . Russian firms have $100billion of external debts maturing.
 Since the rouble remains weak, and their cash reserves have dwindled, repayment may be difficult . The rouble is still weak, but it's not easy to repay .
 The Russian state will have to help out again, says Capital Economics consultancy .
 Peterson Institute estimates that the cbr only has about $150 billion of liquid foreign-exchange reserves at its disposal .
Add in a big government deficit and high capital outflows, and within a few months reserves will be much lower . Add in a large government deficit, high capitaloutflows and big government outflows will be lower .
 The Kremlin may then be tempted to try to pay off foreign debt by printing roubles to buy foreign currency .
 Neither upheaval in the Middle East nor the travails of the euro zone are brightening the spirits of those who swear by bullion .
 The price has sagged to about $1,200 an ounce, a third below its peak in 2on . The price is a third above its peak.
 The biggest pressure on the gold price comes from the expectation that interest rates in America will rise later this year .
 low interest rates cut the opportunity cost of owning gold, says Matthew Turner of Macquarie, a bank .
 Higher interest rates, by contrast, raise the cost of holding non-interest-bearing assets . Higher interest Rates raise the costs of holdingNon-interest assets .
 Mr Turner thinks expectations of rising rates are already built into the gold price . If they do not materialise as quickly as expected, there could even be a rally .
 Nordgold boss says half of all producers have negative cashflow . Nordgold has mines in Africa and the former Soviet Union .
 production could fall on a scale not seen since the two world wars . If the price does not rise, production could drop on the same scale since the wars .
 Gold is priced in dollars, so the fact that it stayed stable while America’s currency was rising is cause for cheer .
 Chinese consumers are buying more gold, after a sharp decline sparked partly by an anti-corruption campaign .
 Indians are the world’s biggest consumers of gold . The government removed restrictions on imports last year .
Humble citizens who distrust their own currencies can buy assets ranging from shares to bitcoins . Humble citizens can buy shares, shares and bitcoins .
 Laurence Fink, the chairman of BlackRock, said in March that gold had ‘lost its lustre’ thanks to the wider availability of property and contemporary art .
 Russia has been a notable buyer of gold since 2005, tripling its holdings since 2005 . The main exception to the trend is Russia's central bank, where the central bank has been notable buyer .
 It bought 30 tonnes in March alone, bringing its hoard to 1,238 tonnes . It bought its hoard of 30 tonnes, bringing it to a total of 1, 238 tonnes .
 The Kremlin's growing stockpile does not so much reflect a belief in gold’s prospects, however, as a distaste for the American dollar .
 Most investors would hesitate to take him on as a financial adviser . Putin's other qualities would be his other qualities .
 Yields on ten-year government bonds average 7.8% for Indonesia, 6.7% for Vietnam, and around 4% for Malaysia and the Philippines . The Philippines-far above what is on offer in the rich world .
 Inflation is low and budget deficits are either manageable or non-existent . In inflation is low, budget deficit is not a problem, but it is a problem .
Local currencies have lost less value against the dollar than most in emerging markets . Local currencies have been losing less value in the past few years than most emerging markets.
 Erom 2005 to 2014 annual bond issuance from Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, the Philippines, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam rose from $38 billion to $109 billion .
 Corporate-bond issuance more than tripled, from $20 billion to $78 billion . Most firms in the region still rely on banks for borrowing .
Home-grown institutions such as pension funds and insurers are starting to emerge and invest . Home-grown industries such as insurance and pension funds are beginning to emerge .
 A strengthening dollar will make servicing dollar-denominated debt more expensive . It could push foreign investors in local-currency bond markets to demand higher yields to offset any losses from sliding exchange rates .
 Germany’s biggest bank tweaks its strategy C ORPORATE bosses hope for a bump in their share price .
 Postbank, a German retail bank it only finished buying in 2012, will be spun off through a relisting . Postbank only started buying the bank in 2012 .
 regulators have pushed lenders to isolate ‘casino-like activities from their deposit-taking arms .
 Postbank's refusal to allow Deutsche to use Postbank’s deposits to fund its investment bank undermined the entire rationale for its purchase-hence the reversal .
Regulators do not seem to like the idea of a European version of Goldman Sachs, either . But regulators don't seem to want to see a similar version.
 Stand-alone investment bank would probably have struggled to pass stress tests . Even fans of the idea admit that a stand-alone bank would likely have struggled .
South-East Asian firms issuing dollar-denominated debt tend to be well hedged, says Moody's rating agency .
 Many issued bonds without trouble over the past few months, even as the dollar leapt . Many have issued bonds with no trouble without trouble.
 The average emerging-market corporate bond currently yields 5.6%, according to Bloomberg . A full percentage point below last year’s high .
 In 2013, after Ben Bernanke raised the prospect of tightening monetary policy, emerging markets saw sell-offs, sharply higher yields, volatility in their currencies and reduced capital flows .
 Regulators are not keen on banks with too little diversity in earnings, and income from investment banking is especially volatile .
 Jurgen Eitschen is among those facing prison for allegedly misleading a court over the bank’s role in the collapse of the Kirch media empire in 2002 .
 Deutsche agreed to pay $2. billion to settle U.S. and British regulators’ claims it had fiddled libor, a key interest rate, for six years until 2010 .
 Deutsche’s other boss, Anshu Jain, was a higher-up at the investment bank at the time . Jain was not ousted as part of the deal, as other bank bosses have been .
 Deutsche's fine does not mean a rosier financial future for Deutsche. But putting the fine behind it does not means a ro'sier financialFuture for Deutsche .
 The bank is cutting its target for return on equity by about a third . It is also giving it less leeway in the way it assesses the riskiness of its assets .
 Regulators' desires are trumping those of managers and investors . Whichever way you look, regulators’ desires are being trumped by those of investors and managers .
 Indonesia was hit particularly hard in 2013; its heavy reliance on external finance and declining exports due to weak commodity prices leave it vulnerable .
 Indonesia’s foreign-currency reserves are higher and its current-account deficit lower now than they were then . Indonesia's foreign- currency reserves are now higher than they are now .
 The Eed has given ample warning that rate rises are coming . But it has signalled that they will probably be modest and gradual .
 JPMorgan Chase says there will be less disruption than in 2013 . Jahangir Aziz of JPMorgan Chase, a bank, believes there will not be more disruption .
 Yields on Indonesia’s ten-year bonds have risen from 6.9% to 7.5% since March . Foreign ownership of government bonds in general has fallen by two percentage points .
 The state government invoked a colonial-era law to forcibly acquire the plot from 13,000 landholders . Many of them were unwilling sellers, many of them unwilling sellers .
 Protests against the purchase continued even as the factory was being built .
 Narendra Modi, then the chief minister of Gujarat, offered it a way out by providing it a factory-ready plot there . Modi was then the prime minister.
 The Singur protests have come back to haunt Mr Modi, who is now India's prime minister .
 A new law in 2013 set arduous terms for coercive land purchases . They led to a new law which led to new laws in 2013 .
 Mr Modi is trying to relax the rules for certain categories of project, such as rural infrastructure, industrial parks and low-cost housing .
 India needs to be able to build roads and factories. India is to become richer, it needs to build factories and roads .
 The Coase theorem says private bargaining should produce ideal results for society if property rights are well defined . The economic case for allowing the state to acquire property by coercion starts with the Coase theory .
 This is all the more so where property is fragmented, as it was at Singur . This is where property was fragmented, like it was in Singur. This is also where property has been fragmented .
 ‘patent thickets’ is a term coined in the 1970s to denote clusters of intellectual-property rights . New medicines and electronic gadgets can also be delayed or never made because of the thickets .
 Economists and legal scholars have justified forced purchases when the transaction costs of stitching together small properties are too high for a deal to be reached by consensus .
 More precisely, it can be used to overcome the power of so-called holdouts. More precisely. It can also be used in the future to overcome power of holdouts .
Landholders know the project cannot proceed unless the buyer acquires all the plots he needs . Landholders know that the project can't proceed until the buyer buys all the plot he needs.
Investments that have big public benefits will often be stymied unless a sale is forced. Because of the holdout problem, investments that have large public benefits are often stymies .
 Laws in many countries allow for the compulsory purchase of property . As long as those affected are justly compensated, they can buy property .
In developing countries, land markets for land are often more regulated, less liquid and more corrupt than in the rich world . But in developing countries it is difficult to determine the appropriate compensation .
 A transaction is efficient in the strictest sense only if it makes some better off while leaving no one worse off . A transaction can be an efficient way to make a transaction better off .
 shareholders are usually paid a premium to give up their rights in company takeovers . In company takeover, after all, shareholders are often paid a price for giving up their right to leave .
 India’s current land-acquisition law is simultaneously too strict to pave the way for desirable projects and too lax to protect property owners . India's current land acquisition law is also too strict for desirable developments .
 Eorced land purchase requires the consent of at least 70% of affected landholders and must also pass a social-impact test . The land purchase must also be approved by the government .
 compensation must be twice the market value for urban plots and four times for rural land . Compensation must be two times the price of urban plots, four times as rural land.
 Mr Modi wants to ditch the consent and social-impact clauses for certain projects because of delays involved . Mr Modi has been criticised for the delay in some projects .
 If farmers are adequately compensated, consent is largely irrelevant, says Maitreesh Ghatak of the London School of Economics .
 The price is wrong, but compensation in India is based on recent land sales, which are likely to be far lower than the true value of a property .
 The direct sale of farmland to industry is banned in several states and tricky in many others . Instead, land is often sold by a farmer in distress to another farmer .
 A study of Singur purchase by Mr Ghatak found that compensation was on average close to market value . landowners with superior plots were offered too little, the study found .
 protests against land purchases by the state are likely to continue . As long as farmers in India believe they might be ripped off, protests will likely continue .
 Messrs Ghatak and Ghosh are to invite offers to sell from landholders in plot required for development . They say they will also offer offers from land holders close by .
 A farmer who did not accept the price determined by such an auction could instead be given a nearby plot as compensation . A farmer within the bounds of the development could be given the nearby plot.
These nearby plots would not be subject to the holdout problem as they are not essential to the project . These nearby plots are not subject to a holdout issue as they're not essential.
 I bathroom detoched off plan vtia kxated between holes 1 0 & 1 8 within the Apes Hdl Oob . I bathroom. The Apes Oob is located in the south side of the city .
 West Coast & Coribbeari Sea viewi on rdeol vocouon home or investment opportunity . With ponofamic West Coast and Corib beari Sea views, the viewi is on the West Coast .
 Grand Cayman from $2,950,000 Unique to Cayman, an intimate community of 3-tt bedrocm detoched villos riestled oround 0 pnvotebeochcove .
 Bnnging the best of Conbbean livinig & Tuscan inspired orchitectufe. Residents enjoy on idylhc blend of beochfiont bUss St prtvocy of lush londscoped grounds. 20 3040 8210
 London's largest portfolio of new homes before they even exist . London has the largest number of new houses in the capital .
 Our privileged members enjoy the privacy and comfort of home, plus the lifestyle benefits associated with one of the most desirable addresses in London .
 Marriott Vacation Club International and the programs and products provided under the Grand Residences by Marriott brand are not owned, developed, or sold by Marriott International, Inc. Marriott Vacations Club International .
 Marriott Vacation Club International uses the Marriott marks under license from Marriott International, Inc. and its affiliates .
 The Economist May 2nd 2015 69 Dealing with rogue drones . In the hands of criminals, small drones could be a menace .
 A drone carrying radioactive sand landed on the roof of the Japanese prime minister's office in Tokyo . Now is the time to think about how to detect them and knock them down safely .
 It was the latest of a string of incidents involving small drones around the world . It is the latest in a series of small drones that have been involved in a number of incidents .
 In February and early March several were spotted hovering near the Eiffel tower and other Parisian landmarks .
 Later in March someone attempted to fly one full of drugs (and also a screwdriver and a phone) into a British prison .
 The employment of drones for nefarious, or potentially nefarious, purposes seems to have begun in earnest .
 It is only a matter of time before somebody attempts to use a drone, perhaps carrying an explosive payload, to cause serious damage or injury .
 The other sort was quadcopters-miniature helicopters that have four sets of rotors, one at each corner, for stability . The other kind of helicopter is quadcopter- miniature helicopters .
 Such drones are slow-moving and often low-flying, which makes it awkward for radar to pick them up . The drones are often used in the clutter of busy urban environments .
 You might be able to jam its control signals, to direct another drone to catch or ram it, or to trace its signals to find its operator and then “defeat him’s” instead .
 Drones are often controlled by Wi-Fi, and it would have to avoid any risk of injuring innocent bystanders . But all of this would need to take place, as far as possible, without disrupting local Wi- Fi systems .
 DroneShield thinks itself up to fulfilling the detection part of the process . DroneShield, in Washington, DC, is a company which thinks it is up to fulfill the detection process .
 Mr Franklin crashed a drone he was flying into his neighbours’ garden by accident .
 He realised how easily drones could be used to invade people’s privacy . He realised then how much demand there might be for a system that could warn of their approach .
 DroneShield’s system is centred on a sophisticated listening device that is able to detect, identify and locate an incoming. Also in this section 70 Drones and the law 71 Germ-line gene therapy 71 Genes and the placebo effect 72 Tracking baseball games with radar .
 The system runs every sound it hears through a sonic library . It contains all the noises that are made by different types of drone .
 If it finds a match, it passes the detected drone’s identity and bearing to a human operator, who can then take whatever action is appropriate . If a match is found, the drone will then pass its identity to the operator .
 Blighter Surveillance Systems, based near Cambridge, Britain, is having a go .
 Conventional radars, which search for things by looking for shifts of position, are not good at spotting slow-moving objects .
 Blighter’s approach is based on a radar developed to spot human intruders who are crawling along the ground to evade detection . The Doppler effect instead employs the Dopplers effect instead .
 It can tell how fast, and in which direction, something is moving by comparing the frequency of the radar beam it emits with that of any reflection it receives .
 The Doppler effect means the beam’s frequency rises when it bounces off an approaching object and falls when it returns from a receding one .
 Once the radar notices something moving, it passes the information to a human operator . The operator can take a look with a camera or a thermal-imaging device to determine whether the object is a drone or a bird .
 A crude but effective one is to flood the radio frequency the drone is operating on-or even the entire radio spectrum with a signal of high enough power to cancel out the drone’s control signal .
 Such a crash, though, would be uncontrolled and so might result in damage or injury . such a crash would be controlled and so may be uncontrolled, but so might be uncontrolled .
 A more sophisticated approach, drone spoofing, involves the spoofer sending fake GPS signals specifically to the drone .
 If these are more powerful than the real thing, they can be used to feed false navigation information to the drone’s computer, causing the craft to change course or crash .
 An even cleverer idea is to hijack not just a drone’s navigation but its entire control system .
 More than 700,000 Parrot quadcopters have been sold . Skyjack subverts the controls of one of the most popular sorts of drone .
 It is a Parrot modified by the addition of a specially programmed Raspberry Pi (a commonly available miniature computer) It has a battery and two wireless transmitters .
 It hijacks drone's wireless connection by issuing a command to disconnect from the device controlling it . It seeks the signals of any other Parrot in the neighbourhood .
 The hijacker can then fly the zombie wherever he wishes, and also watch its video feed . He can also fly the zombies wherever he wants, and then watch their video feed.
 If a target drone’s controls prove unsubvertible, it may be necessary to apply brute force to control it .
 "killer drones" come up, once more, against the problem that you do not know where a disabled drone is going to land .
 Net benefits an alternative is to try to catch and retrieve the target .
 Malou’s hexacopter, the mp200, can be fitted with a dangling net that entangles its prey and brings it back for examination .
 Malou has set up a drone school to train people in the art . The school is based in Malou, near the city of Paris .
 eca Robotics, in Toulon, is trying to retrieve the human operator behind a drone . Even better, it would be to retrieve a drone operator behind it .
 Even if the operator is able to make a getaway, there will still be evidence that may identify him . This means that even if he is arrested, there is still evidence that can be used in court if he's prosecuted .
 Whether any or all of these ideas will prove good enough to set up real air defences against drones remains to be seen .
 The only other approach on offer at the moment is to create areas of restricted airspace around obvious targets . manufacturers must incorporate them into the software of commercial drones as prohibited GPS locations .
 The irregular use of drones seems to have been intended to carry out slightly anarchic protests . So far, prison-smuggling aside, it seems to be aimed at carrying out protests .
 The use of a drone to commit a felony is an aggravating action . In part of the United States, politicians propose to go after drone operators too .
 Mrs Roach’s proposal has passed votes in both houses of the legislature . So far, her proposal has won the support of Democrat representatives and senators .
 If she can succeed in attaching it to a forthcoming vote on the state’s budget, it could become law within weeks .
 Anyone convicted of using an unmanned aerial vehicle to plan or carry out a felony would automatically have a year in prison tacked onto his sentence . If that happens, it would automatically be added to the sentence .
 Mrs Roach fears drones may be used to smuggle drugs into prisons . She fears they could help burglars scout empty houses or enable poachers to track the state's protected herds of Roosevelt elk .
Local defence lawyer Paul Strophy says drones do not create much additional risk to the public . He says their mere involvement in a crime should not be a reason for additional punishment .
 Nor would the penalty apply to crimes that were misdemeanours, rather than felonies, instead of felonies .
 Drones could be used to record conversations. But they could also be used for recording conversations . Drones are not allowed to be used in such conversations .
 Law could have perverse effects in some not particularly serious offences that happen to count as felonies . Conversely, the law could have a perverse effect in some cases .
 At the moment, peeping toms in Washington typically get a sentence of ten weeks . At the time, for example, they typically get 10 weeks .
 Mrs Roach’s answer to the misdemeanour question is that she hopes, if her proposal does pass, that it will be extended in the future to cover them .
 Drone operators whose aircraft inadvertently take pictures of skinny-dipping neighbours had better be prepared for the worst .
 Scientists in China have just crossed one of biotechnology's red lines ABOLISHING beta thalassaemia is a no/^ble goal . The Economist May 2nd 2015 Science and technology.
 This inherited blood disease is a scourge to those who suffer it . It can cause severe anaemia and consequent organ damage, sometimes fatal .
 The broken gene that causes it, called hbb and encodes part of the haemoglobin molecule, could be abolished . And abolished it could be, if it were itself to be abolished.
 A newish DNA-editing technique called crispr/ Cas9 is able, at least in principle, to make precise changes in genes .
 A zygote is a fertilised egg that develops into a human being . It is also known as the ‘germ line’ - the line of descent . The disease is not only in the resulting individual but also in his or her “ger
 A real experiment has just been the subject of a real experiment. That controversial prospect is just a real test .
 It yielded lessons that might make a subsequent try more successful. But it may not be the first time it has done so .
 CRiSPR/Cas9 is a large bit of molecular machinery derived from a bacterial defence system that chops up the DNA of invading viruses .
 In nature, it recognises DNA sequences that are foreign to the bacterium . But the recognition mechanism can be modified to search for any given sequence and cut the dna there .
 If this is done to a gene in an animal or plant cell, the cell will try to repair itself using the other copy of the gene present as a template . The cell will attempt to use the same gene to repair its own.
 The process can be subverted by injecting an artificial template of the desired dna sequence . That process is then used as a model for repair .
 Dr Huang and his colleagues tried this on HBB with 86 zygotes they had obtained from local fertility clinics . Dr Huang had obtained 86 Zygotes from local clinics .
 These zygotes were unviable because each had been fertilised by two sperm . Each was fertilised with two sperm, but each was not viable .
 Of the 86, 71 survived the procedure and 54 of these were tested to see if it had worked . Of the 71, 71 survive the procedure.
 The dna had indeed been cut by CRiSPR/Cas9 and then repaired by the cell . In 28 the dna was cut and repaired by a cell .
 In only four of these cases, the artificial template was used for the repair .
 Dr Huang found that there were many “off-target’s mutations in other parts of hbb, or in other, similar genes, which would have caused serious damage if expressed in an actual human being .
 Knowing which bits of DNA are susceptible to off-target modification, for example, might allow the approach to be refined . Knowing which parts of DNA can be altered might allow for off- target modification .
 A report in Nature says at least four groups in China may be working on human germ-line modification .
 The controversial nature of the work also led to the paper’s actual publication being a cloak-and-dagger matter . The paper's actual publication was a cloak and-Dagger matter.
Rumours suggest Dr Huang offered it to Nature and Science, but both turned it down . Neither journal has commented .
 Protein & Cell, the work’s eventual home, labels it as having been received on March 30th and accepted on April 1st .
 The eflfectiveness of a placebo may depend on someone’s DNA G ive someone who is sick a sugar pill that you have told him is a powerful drug .
 The placebo effect, as this phenomenon is known from the Latin for “I shall please’-is one of the strangest things in medical science . It's known from Latin for "I shall Please"
 It is a boon to doctors and a bane of those running clinical trials, who must take account of it in their designs . It is also a boon for those running trials.
 If placebos could be exploited rationally, perhaps in conjunction with functional drugs, better treatments might be effected . If there is a need for placebos to be used, there could be more effective treatments .
 Drug testing, too, would be simplified, as trial designers were able to select those more and less susceptible to the effect of the trial . Drug testing would also be simplified as the needs of a trial dictated .
 The placebo effect involves several brain systems, each under the control of a particular type of messenger molecule, called neurotransmitter .
 These systems, like everything else in the body, are regulated by genes . These systems are regulated in the human body by genes.
 Dr Hall looked for links between the placebo effect’s strength and certain mutations .
 Altogether she found 11 genes, in four neurotransmitter systems, where snps made a difference . Altogether, she finds 11 genes in four systems .
 Eive were in the system mediated by dopamine, which includes the brain’s reward centres . The brain's reward centres are the reward centres.
 These two systems are affected respectively by opium and its derivatives, and by cannabis and its derivative . As their names suggest, these two systems may be affected by opium.
 The other two are affected by cocaine, which blocks the retrieval of dopamine into nerve cells, thus increasing its power as a messenger . Prozac, which has the same effect on serotonin, is used as an antidepressant .
 It is not hard to imagine a similarity between the workings of these drugs and what happens in the brain . The placebo effect is operating.
 SNP genes encode enzymes called catechol-o-methyltransferase and monoamine oxidase . The genes for which most placebo-related SNP evidence exists exist .
 Both of these are parts of the dopamine system, and both are responsible for metabolising dopamine, and thus regulating the amount of it around .
 People with different versions of either of these genes experience the placebo effect to different degrees . People with the same genes experience placebo effect in different ways .
 Harvard economics graduate Paul DePodesta crunched candidate players’ numbers . He and his deputy Paul dePodesta, a statistically astute economist, crunches candidate players' numbers .
 Baseball is awash with such numbers, and the two men applied simple statistics to them to identify valuable players who scouts had rejected .
 Major League Baseball has one of the lowest payrolls in the league . It qualified for the post-season tournament run by the game's organiser, for four years running .
 The success of a book called ‘Moneyball’ caused others to copy the method . The method was the subject of the book “Moneyball,’s book, which was called “ moneyball”
 Before long, teams had extracted all the information they could from the game’s traditional statistics .
 To produce even more accurate predictions, they would need better data . To produce better predictions, the world would need more accurate data .
 Statcast has been developed specifically for baseball by mlb . The system was developed to gather numbers for baseball .
 Statcast can, pretty much, follow and record everything that happens in a baseball game .
 It builds on earlier game-tracking technology, such as the Hawk-Eye system used in cricket, but is far more sophisticated . It is much more sophisticated than the Hawk Eye system used for cricket .
 It constantly logs the position of the ball and of every player on the field . It also logs the positions of the players on the pitch .
 It calculates the speed and curvature of a pitch, how rapidly the ball spins and around what axis, and how much faster or slower than reality that pitch appears to be to the placebo perception may be widespread .
 The studies Dr Hall drew on are all preliminary, so they are better regarded as pointers for further investigation than as prescriptions for action .
 If such investigations confirm results, it may be possible to predict whether someone will experience a strong placebo effect or not .
 A strong placebo effect is expected. That could allow a doctor to lower the prescribed dose of a drug, if a strong placebo Effect is expected .
 It could also permit drug companies conducting trials to exclude the placebo-susceptible, and thus get a better sense of the underlying efficacy of what is being tested .
 When the ball is hit, the system measures how quickly it leaves the bat and how its path is affected by atmospheric conditions . When a ball is struck, it is hit by a system that measures the speed of it being hit .
 It then tracks how long fielders take to react before moving, and the efficiency of their routes to the ball’s eventual landing spot . It then measures how long players take to move before moving .
 Statcast captures the information it needs by fusing data from two pieces of equipment . The data is used to create the Statcast.
 The player-following system is a stereoscopic camera array that, developed by ChyronHego, an American graphics company . Track is a player- following system that uses a camera array .
 baseballs (which are white) are hard to see when they fly in front of similarly coloured backgrounds . It cannot, however, track the ball as reliably as it tracks the players .
 TrackMan is a Danish radar firm . It uses the Doppler effect to follow the ball, including measuring its spin .
 The giant video screens without which no major-league baseball ground is complete were jamming it . Their system had a hiccup.
 In theory, following the players and following the ball in this way should provide all the data needed for statistical purposes . In theory. Follows the players to the ball and follow the ball.
 Statcast is designed, in part, for television, and for that purpose yet another camera needs to be added to the mix . But Statcast was designed for television and is now being used for a new camera .
 This watches the field as a whole, providing coordinates that map the radar and optical data onto broadcasters’ video feeds . This is the first time the field has been used to provide coordinates for broadcasters' video feeds.
 It permits commentators to illustrate replays with dazzling visual displays . It also allows commentators to show replays of the world's most beautiful scenes .
 mlb Network, the sport’s proprietary cable channel, used this way for the first time on April 21st .
 Statcast’s all-seeing eye delivers about how players play that most interests teams . It is, though, the trove of information Statcast's all- seeing eye delivers .
 Players can use such data to make players better-for example, such as moving a fielder with lightning-quick reflexes to third base, a position where such people are particularly valuable .
 In 2013, the Houston Astros employed an analysis based on the TrackMan system to acquire an unaccomplished pitcher called Collin McHugh because of his fast-spinning curveball . The Houston Astros used the analysis to acquire McHugh.
 He was told to throw that pitch far more often during the next season, and he blossomed into a star . They then told him to throw it more often . He then became a star, and became an international star .
 Who will have the opportunity to dig into Statcast’s numbers does, though, remains to be decided . Who will be able todig into the numbers?
 When a prototype version was launched in 2007, mlb allowed anyone to download the raw data . When the prototype version of mlb was launched, it was able to download raw data.
 That open-source approach led to a flurry of discoveries, many of which have become accepted wisdom . Many of the discoveries are now accepted wisdom.
Good analysts have an incentive to pull up the ladder. Now, those teams with good analysts have a chance to pull it up .
Amateurs fear weaker rivals will free-ride on the work of the next generation of amateurs . They fear they will reduce the edge that employing professionals gives .
Rob Manfred has promised fans “very good access’ to Statcast . The commissioner has also promised fans "very goodaccess"
 All Republican candidates must pay homage to President Obama . He shrank the state, rescued the economy and won the cold war .
 The left dismisses him as malign and moronic-a B-movie actor who floated into the White House on an updraft of phoney charm .
 Brands' new biography tells the story as well as you could ask for in a single volume . Brands’s new biography tell the story of the company .
 Mr Brands lays out the facts in short chapters that bounce along like one of the "bare-fisted walloping action" films that Reagan once starred in .
 Reagan's children were as neglected as those of any famous parent . They include not only politicians and Reagan himself, but also his children .
 Reagan failed to recognise his son under a mortar board. Invited to speak at his adopted son Michael’s boarding school .
 The book covers Reagan’s acting career-a love affair with the camera that lasted a lifetime .
 Reagan grew up a Democrat, in the Irish tradition, before drifting to the right .
Film star was paid to host a television series sponsored by America's biggest industrial firm . He was paid for speeches at ge factories and to give speeches at factories .
 As he toured the country by train, he read books about economics and history .
 everywhere he went, people told him stories of government meddling and how it hurt their businesses . Everywhere he went he went. People told him about government meddling, he said .
 He incorporated these stories into his act, and eventually came to realise that he was a Republican . He eventually came out of his act as a Republican.
 Reagan was 69 years old when he became president-slightly older than Hillary Clinton . Hillary Clinton will be in January 2017 .
 He was a more experienced politician, having run for president three times and served two terms as governor of California . He was, if anything, an experienced politician .
Jimmy Carter presided over stagflation at home and humiliation abroad . Jimmy Carter beat Jimmy Carter in 1980. Carter was the sitting president he beat.
 In California he compromised with Democratic lawmakers to pass a moderate budget, welfare reform and a bill legalising abortion . He compromised with Democrats to pass the bill .
President Obama raised taxes when he had to, despite vowing to cut them . As president, he raised taxes on the basis of his desire to reduce them .
 He tussled with Democrats in Congress but eventually reached deals to patch up Social Security, reform the immigration system and simplify the tax code . He also reached deals with Democrats to fix Social Security .
 James Brady was crippled by an assassin's bullet meant for Reagan himself Reagan's foreign policy was straightforward . After leaving the Oval Office, he even backed a gun-control bill named in honour of his press secretary, James Brady .
 He knew that the Soviet state was rotting from within, and understood the power of ideas to hasten its demise . He also understood that the state was decaying from within .
 The killing in Lebanon was about local grievances, both ancient and modern, and could not be fitted neatly into a cold-war template . The killing was aboutlocal grievances.
 Without his attention to detail, the Camp David peace deal would never have been signed, he says .
 The Life’s "The Life" contains little that will surprise professional historians, but lay readers will find it illuminating .
 Mr Brands recounts Reagan's triumphs and scandals even-handedly . He concludes that the Gipper’s achievements were comparable to those of Eranklin D Roosevelt .
 Between 1776, when America declared independence, and 1804, when Haiti at last threw off the yoke of Erench rule, the compartments and divisions of established power became everyone's target .
 This book assiduously describes how the doctrine of the universal rights of man seized the Western world . It is an irrepressible iconoclasm .
 She ranges from Paris to Sierra Leone, Poland, Sierra Leone and the Caribbean . She is known for her wayfaring revolutionaries .
 Instead of confining herself to the deeds of valiant men, she also gives the stage to women and slaves . She also gives her stage to men and women .
 The result is a spectacle that conveys the thrill of the Enlightenment as well as the delirium of revolution . The result of the spectacle is the result of a revolution .
 Ordinary people were hungry for new ideas and many of those ideas travelled on paper . Many ideas travelled to the world on paper.
 Ms Polasky loosely marshals her material by type-one chapter . Another draws on newspapers, a third is taken from diaries and so on .
 In 1788 politics filled only 5% of Erench journals; a year later the share was two-thirds . The share of the Erench journal was just 5% .
 News was sought after, but it would take weeks or months to reach far-flung outposts, which fuelled rumour and insubordination .
 Ms Polasky demonstrates how wandering radicals were also vital to the spread of ideas . She shows how wanderers were also important to spread ideas .
 Thomas Paine, the Englishman who fomented revolt in the Americas before returning across the Atlantic to fight the good fight in continental Europe, also lesserknown figures, such as Equiano Olaudah, who bought his freedom and wrote about the slave trade .
 This book is at its best in describing the effect of revolution on slaves and free men and women in the Americas and the Caribbean .
 Slaves were not literate-the only one in Guyana who could read and write was executed in 1796 . The historical record comes down from whites .
 Some whites tried to find reasons why universal theories did not apply or, failing that, lived in stunning contradiction . Some whites found reasons why they didn't apply .
Non-whites, although free, enjoyed fewer rights than white landowners . But notions of liberty and of the rights of man were intoxicating both to those suffering in bondage and also to non-white .
 Most of the slaves in Saint-Domingue had been on the island for less than a decade . Many had fought in African armies .
 When they rose up in 1791, they seemed to be alarmingly well organised . The whites seemed to have been well organised.
 Chapters based on novels and intimate letters are designed to show how the revolutionary spirit also spread inward-to-to marHitting back riage and family life .
 The Erench Directoire ruled from 1795 until it came under the sway of Napoleon Bonaparte . It dispensed with the revolution's universal character .
 Its armies in parts of Belgium, Germany, Italy and Switzerland became just another occupying force . The armies in Belgium, Italy, Belgium and Switzerland were just another occupied force .
 In America the counter-revolutionaries ensured that the country was hostile to figures like Paine .
 As the walls went up again, Ms Polasky's wandering revolutionaries were left with nowhere to call home .
 Soft Oksanen’s accomplished new novel. Atlantic; £12.99 B etrayal, secrecy and memory are the haunting themes of the new novel .
 "Purge" features the history of Estonia at the moment when it was caught between Stalin's hammer and Hitler's anvil in the second world war . Like her previous work, “Purge’s” is based on Estonia's history .
 Most readers will start the book with only a hazy grasp of the intricacies of Baltic history . The book is a brief but traumatic Soviet annexation followed by a selectively lethal German invasion .
Political and personal dilemmas are elegantly echoed in a subplot involving sexual identity . The political and personal dilemma is elegantly echo in the subplot of sexual identity.
 The title comes from the bitter winter when hungry German soldiers ate even the pigeons in the capital, Tallinn .
 The abandoned and sex-starved Juudit takes a seemingly sympathetic Nazi lover .
 The ghastly and mendacious Edgar starts life as an anticommunist resistance fighter . Then becomes a Soviet propagandist, expertly libelling the anti-communist emigres for crimes which they did not commit, but which he did .
 Unlike “Purge, “When the Doves Disappeared” does not stretch to the present day. Unlike ‘Purge’, ‘When theDoves Disappear’ doesn’t stretch to a present day .
 Readers are left wondering what happened to the surviving characters, and whether justice and truth ever triumphed . The surviving characters are still alive and well .
 Ms Oksanen is fast becoming one of the foremost voices in the ex-communist world . Some Estonians regard her rather sniffily as an outsider, but her insights and intuition mean she's fast becoming a voice .
 Grandiose openings are often a warning sign in popular science books . The author is trying to gussy up a collection of unremarkable observations .
 His latest book is a persuasive, demanding attempt to answer some of the most fundamental questions in biology . The book is published in the UK and the UK .
 Science offers a broad overview of how life works, but many intriguing details remain unclear . Many intriguing details are unclear .
 Mr Lane tackles some of them, including the origins of life, the connections between sex and death and what, if anything.
 The book’s overarching argument is that life is a natural, chemical process, and therefore faces constraints imposed by the iron laws of physics or chemistry .
 Despite its spectacular surface diversity, those constraints restrict its chemical underpinnings . That affects how life develops, and that affects how it develops .
 Mr Lane can shed light on some of biology’s most profound questions, he says .
 The most accessible of those is how life got started in the first place . The mostaccessible of those are how life began .
 Mark Essig, a historian residing in the hoglands of North Carolina, would agree . He would agree with Essig .
Farmers can turn a profit only by selling every inch of their animals to adventurous chefs and gourmets .
 Mr Essig's broad, well-researched book highlights that this is merely the latest stage in man's on-off-and-on-again relationship with pigs .
 The curly-tailed animals have proven extraordinarily useful to human development . They have been present from the earliest permanent dwellings to modern metropolises .
 The porcine can eat almost anythingensured that in the ancient Near East, Anglo-Saxon England and the Americas it was the perfect beast to sustain rapidly growing and colonising populations .
 The idea of consuming a beast fed on communal waste has appalled societies . Egypearly oceans contained enough organic chemicals to form spontaneous self-replicator .
 Mr Lane gives a convincing account, based on basic chemical principles, of why this theory is almost certainly wrong . But biology has moved on, he says, and biology has changed .
 There is simply not enough energy available in such a system, he points out . There is just enough energy to produce complicated chemicals at anything like the required rate, he says .
 Mr Lane's preferred idea is that life got its start in warm vents at the bottom of the ocean . Hot, mineral-infused water wells up from beneath the sea floor .
 As the water cools, the minerals precipitate out, forming intricate, honeycombed structures .
 Pigs have also been beset by snobbery, given that pork has regularly provided calories to the poorest members of society .
 After the Black Death carried off a third of Europe, demand for meat plummeted and so did prices .
 Peasants started eating pork; uppity nobles chewed on birds and beef instead . Peasant nobles ate meat instead of pork .
 Mr Essig’s main point is that the better people treat pigs, the more they like them .
 Romans lavished love and attention on their pigs, allowing them to wander in the woods, eating nuts and grains . Romans lavish love and Attention on their animals .
 Post-war America industrialised pig production, inventing indoor cages and “a litany of horrors’ for their sows, and found the meat was mushy and tasteless .
 For him, such intelligent, efficient companions should command a much higher price . For him he should command much higher prices for such intelligent companions .
 That, in turn, allowed the formation of a strong voltage gradient across their boundaries . That's in turn allowed the creation of strong voltage graders across their borders .
 The voltage differences that enable modern cells to manufacture the thousands of chemicals they need to function and therefore provide the vital spark for every living thing on the planet .
 The other questions are perhaps more obscure, they are just as profound as the others .
 "eukaryotic cells" are complex, with nuclei, tightly packed chromosomes and all kinds of specialised compartments .
 Mr Lane posits that the crucial step was the unlikely development of symbiosis between an archaeon and a bacteria .
 The mitochondria form the ‘power plants’ inside the cells of all complex life today . The hyper-specialised descendants of those ancient bacteria form the 'power plants'
 The universe is not pregnant, but it’s getting there first that counts, says author .
 The history of modernism is often viewed as a series of discoveries with the glory going to whomever made the next conceptual breakthrough .
 For the first half of the 20th century Europe was Europe, before the old world was overtaken in the aftermath of the second world war by America .
 It was founded in 1954 by Jiro Yoshihara, a Japanese painter who encouraged his followers to challenge the conformity that had contributed to the authoritarianism of the preceding decades .
 Like Dada, an artistic and literary wave that began in Switzerland in 1916, Gutai was a movement formed in response to the trauma of war .
 The radical approaches it favoured include a preference for non-art materials, spontaneity over mastery, ephemeral performances, and a with the idea of ourselves, he writes .
 His ideas are somewhat simplified for a lay audience, but never dumbed down . But his ideas are never dumbing down .
 Erequent trips to the glossary in the back may help those without a biological background to make sense of some passages .
 Mr Lane never patronises his readers, and those willing to make the effort to think about what he is saying will be rewarded with one of the deepest, most illuminating books about the history of life to have been published in recent years .
 Given Gutai’s Utopian philosophy, the current market buzz about its work is not without irony .
 A new exhibition now at the Dallas Art Museum, ‘Between Action and the Unknown: The Art of Kazuo Shiraga and Sadamasa Motonaga’ Prices for work by the best-known Gutai practitioners have increased dramatically .
 The most spectacular example has been Shiraga, who died in 2008 . His paintings have become the object of something of a feeding frenzy .
 Since 2009 the average price of Shiraga’s work has risen more than six times .
 ‘Gekidou Sum Aka’ sold at Sotheby’s in Paris for $5.3m. Last June one of his most famous paintings, “GekIDou Sum aka” (‘Dynamic of Red’-
 The sudden star power of Shiraga is both understandable and a little disquieting . Shiraga's sudden power of the country has been surprising .
 His paintings are an almost perfect combination of radical aspiration and traditional form-high-mindedness that can easily be packaged and hung on a wall .
 Shiraga painted with his feet, manipulating gloopy puddles of pigment while suspended by ropes over paper, canvas and more exotic materials like the hide of a wild boar .
 Pollock's ethereal drips or Kline's slashing brushwork into cosmic geological formations that writhe and bubble as if extruded from a volcanic caldera . But Shiraga pumps up the volume, turning Pollock’s drips into geological formations .
 The media has a presence that blows away much of today’s thin, ironic, media-saturated confections . They have a presence.
 They ooze authenticity-a precious commodity in an increasingly jaded global art world . They are a precious commodity.
 The spectacle of a Utopian movement seduced by market capitalism is an old one, says the author . The U.S. movement is seduced with market capitalism, says author .
 The chasm between Gutai’s antimaterialist goals and the world of luxury commodities is made explicit by a video of Shiraga's famous performance, ‘Challenging Mud’ which was first realised in 1955 .
 In it the almost naked artist battled with a recalcitrant pile of sticky goo to create a work that was both temporary and emphatically unmarketable .
 Artist refuses to succumb to the demands of capitalism, throwing himself fully into something that could not possibly be bought or sold . The artist's work is an inspiring affirmation of an artist refusing to succumb.
 It seems that many wellheeled collectors today find such total commitment irresistible . It seems to be that many of them today find it irresistible .
 The World Gold Council is the market development organisation for the gold industry . It is the world's biggest market development group for gold .
Working within the investment, jewellery and technology sectors, our purpose is to provide industry leadership, whilst stimulating and sustaining demand for gold .
 The primary focus will be on promoting the role of gold as a reserve asset to the world's central banks . A rigorous analysis of the way gold interacts with other reserve assets and macroeconomic variables .
 World Gold Council will support an orderly gold market, free fair and unfettered access for all individuals and transparency and good governance . You will assist the World Gold council in developing public policy positions .
 You will monitor the global financial, macro-economic, and regulatory environment to help identify new roles for gold . You will also continually monitor the world's economic, financial and regulatory environments .
 Rethinking change is a new way of thinking, says SAilJ KhOPi . It's time for a change in the way you think .
 Private Banking, Investment Banking, Asset Management and Corporate Banking is the bank's four business divisions . The bank is able to offer a broad range of services into corporations, investment institutions and private individuals .
 Last date and time for submission of EOls is 1600 hrs 1ST on 30.05 2016 . Last date for submission is 1600 hours 1st on 20th birthday .
 High Commission For The Development Of Arriyadh invites tiJorld Class Operators to apply for Prequalification for the Riyadh Metro Operation and Maintenance Tender .
 The Economist May 2nd 2015 Economic and finandal indicators 81 Markets % change on Dec 31st 2014 Index Apr 29th one week in local in $ currency terms United States 18,035 .
 Global soyabean stocks have risen by 55% from last season, after an 11% increase in output . The rise in output is due to an increase in production from last year .
 Other markets % change on Dec 31st 2014 Index one in Local in $ Apr 29th week currency terms United States 2,106. -0.0 .
 The Pakistani Taliban denied all responsibility The Inter-Services Intelligence, isi, promised all possible help to the police . The Taliban denies all responsibility .
 Nawaz Sharif’s government ordered the police to find the perpetrators within three days . The police will be able to arrest the perpetrators.
 Karachi was a woman who was even more anarchic, crazy, noisy and in-your-face . Karachi is a city in the midst of a dysfunctional, dysfunctional, crammed, crazy and noisy.
 She was at the heart of every disturbance, from supporting rank outsiders in the local elections to organising flash protests on social media . She spiced up every organisation she belonged to, which was committed to challenging discrimination or injustice .
 She'd give you a straight, cool stare, equally straight talk, an easy laugh, and a philosophy of absolute fearlessness . She’d give you the same cool stare and a cool stare.
 Second Floor is the cafe/bookshop/ performance space she founded in 2007 . The centre of all she did was the Second Floor .
 She had a pittance in the bank at the time, but a reckless dream of copying the old Pak Tea House in Lahore where radicals met .
 Karachi is a place where talk-about art, science, politics, anything-could flow freely, and citizens could get online and organise .
 The cafe had become such a lifeline for Karachi’s freethinkers that she easily found a better place . Two years later, the nervous landlord kicked her out .
 There, in a comparatively shabby street in the posh Defence district, poets on open mic advocated revolution . People sat around for hours discussing life on Mars, musicians tried out their pieces, artists hung weird stuff on the walls, home-made films were screened .
 In 2007, when President Pervez Musharraf fired some SuThe Economist judges, Ms Mahmud invited lawyers to plot their protests there .
 In 2013 she organised a hackathon, Pakistan’s first, where people brainstormed new ideas and apps to make Karachi work better .
 No one paid to belong to t2f, though you could buy good coffee and brownies, as well as alternative books . You can buy coffee, brownies and alternative books.
 Those takings covered about half the costs and gave her a salary, not that she cared much .
 She ran her own media-and-tech consulting firm and was president for a time of the Karachi outpost of an organisation that fostered tech entrepreneurs . She didn't want to make money.
 The point was to fight the "horrible stuff" going on in Pakistan and the world, he says . The point is to fight 'horrible things' going on, he adds .
 She blamed her mother, Mahenaz, for instilling ‘mad ideas at a young age’ and supporting her ever after . Her mother also blamed her.
 She was spurred on just as much by anyone who told her she could not or must not do a thing. But she was spurred by anyone telling her she couldn't or didn't do anything .
 When a computing teacher belittled her at school, she decided to master computers by herself . She fell in love with a Macintosh Plus that had Pink Floyd and Lenny Bruce in it .
 She believed that formal education was stultifying, and second that computers, especially Macs, could shake everything up .
 Karachi Grammar's school didn't let girls play cricket . She played it at home with any spare passing males she could find .
 A bat, stumps and proper hard ball went with her to the office to whack assailants over the head, apart from anything else .
 Other dissidents left Karachi, but she loved it too dearly to live anywhere else . Other dissidents also left Karachi .
 Friends said she should put a security guard on the cafe door . She preferred to invite her enemies in, to eat panini and join the conversation .
 In 2007, she hosted a talk by an author who had uncovered army finances . ISI people were invited, and some came .
Baluchistan is Pakistan's most neglected and separatist province . Hundreds of activists and students had been abducted, probably killed . On April 24th she had just held a meeting to "un-silence"
 Not half as sorry as the artists, poets and thinkers of Karachi, who suddenly found it hard to breathe .