 Ukraine’s navy will take possession of the two U.S. patrol boats .
 Ukraine now aims to occupy the Sea of Azov between Ukraine and Russia, Poroshenko says .
 The Russian harassment operations became so pervasive that by July many Ukrainian and American officials said it was tantamount to a blockade . By July many Ukrainians and U.S. officials said the harassment operations were so pervasive.
 Moscow denies any wrongdoing and claims it has a legal right to conduct such naval operations to defend its “exclusive economic zone in Crimea’s Crimea . For its part, Moscow denies wrongdoing and says it has the right to do so .
 The twin American Island-class cutters are due for delivery to Kyiv . They are typically armed with a 25 mm machine gun, two .50-caliber machine guns, and other small arms .
 The U.S. Coast Guard used the patrol boats for myriad operations, including drug interdiction missions .
 The Coast Guard cutters will undergo an extensive five-month refurbishment at the Coast Guard yard in Baltimore, Pentagon spokesman Eric Pahon says .
 The Coast Guard will provide approximately three months of training, including at sea, for two Ukrainian crews . About 35 sailors will be trained at sea for about three months .
 Williamson said the move was meant to help train the Ukrainian military as well as build up its naval forces .
 The U.K. will conduct more naval patrols in the Black Sea in 2019. The defense secretary also said the U.S. would conduct more patrols in 2019 .
 Nolan Peterson is a former special operations pilot and a combat veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan . He is based in Ukraine .
 Ukraine faces the challenges Ukraine faces in defending itself against the aggressions of Russia. Read the remainder of this article for a better understanding of the challenges the country faces .
 Ukrainian forces have been in daily combat against a combined force of Russian regulars, Russian-backed separatists, and foreign mercenaries . There, for four and a half years, Ukraine has been fighting Russian regulars and separatists .
Despite a 2015 cease-fire, the war stills simmers with daily shelling and small arms gunfights . Despite a 2015 ceasefire, Minsk II is still active .
 Last week alone, international cease-fire monitors recorded more than 5,500 violations along the Donbas front line . Last week, more than five,500 cease- fire violations were recorded along the front line.
 Each violation does not comprise a single shot fired but can comprise an artillery barrage or a gun battle . Each violation, it should be said, but each violation, does not include a single shots fired .
 President Poroshenko kick-started a plan to build up Ukraine's naval strength and harden its coastal borders .
 Ukraine has announced the creation of a new Marine brigade to defend its southern coastlines . Ukraine has since announced the formation of the new brigade .
 Kyiv unveiled a plan to stand up a new naval base on the Sea of Azov to “repel the aggressive actions by the Russian Federation,” Kyiv said in a statement .
 The only way for ship traffic to enter the Sea of Azov is from the Black Sea through the Kerch Strait .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin drove a big rig over the new bridge to mark the unveiling . Putin drove it over the bridge.
 The bridge created a land transportation route from mainland Russia to Crimea . The Ukrainian peninsula that Russia invaded and annexed in 2014 was annexed by Russia .
 Prior to bridge’s opening, land traffic could only enter Crimea through Ukrainian territory .
 Some Ukrainian vessels have had to cut down their radio antennas to pass under it .
 Ukrainian ships passing under the bridge. More of a concern for Kyiv, however, was the uptick in Russian harassment against Ukrainian ships .
 The two Ukrainian navy ships were met by a pair of armored Ukrainian Gyurza-M class gunboats . The Kremenchuk and the Lubny served as escorts .
 The four vessels steamed into the Ukrainian port of Mariupol on Sept. On Sept.
 The whole exercise underscored the burgeoning crisis between the two erstwhile Soviet allies over the right of free movement through the Sea of Azov . The entire exercise underscores the growing crisis between Russia and the West .
 News of the Ukrainian ships’ Kerch Strait crossing lit up across Ukrainian social media throughout the week .
 Ukraine has also embarked on a diplomatic push to shed light on Russia’s aggression in the Sea of Azov . Ukraine is also embarking on a diplomacy push.
 Poroshenko calls for more Western sanctions on Russia for its aggression in the Sea of Azov . He also calls for Russia to be punished for its actions in the sea .
Tensions in the Sea of Azov could widen or escalate the ongoing land war in the Donbas . Ukrainian and Western military experts alike worry that tensions in the sea could widen .
 EP is an online English-language independent newspaper launched in 2014 by Ukrainian volunteers . EP is a free English- language independent newspaper .
 EP focuses on events covering Ukraine and provides translations of Ukrainian news and expert analysis as well as independent research . EP is based in Ukraine and focuses on Ukrainian news.
 EP strives to bridge Ukraine with the English-speaking world . Through its work, EP aims to bridge the country with the world .