 The political crisis that erupted in Ukraine in early 2014 has ended the period in Russian-Western relations that began with the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 .
 The crisis marks the end of a generally cooperative phase in those relations, which included a failed effort at Russia’s integration with or into the West .
 Ukraine crisis has opened a new period of heightened rivalry, even confrontation, between former Cold War adversaries .
 On the face of it, this new period is broadly reminiscent of the U.S. This new era is broadly similar to the United States .
 The situation has a values component to it but is not nearly with the West had been overlooked . Not that the gestation of the crisis and of the Cold War, but it differs from it.
 Many Ukraine as focused on ideology as the conflict between communism watchers continued to believe that “the more the more the country and liberal democracy was’s more than liberal democracy.’
 It has a traditional military dimenchanges, the more it stays the same . But this aspect is not—as yet—dominant, it's not .
 Ukraine rent crisis has global implications, but in and of itself, it is not moved too far and too abruptly to the West and lost balance . In late February 2014, Ukraine's rent crisis had global implications.
 The U.S. policy in support of democratic change War is not the organizing principle of either in Ukraine, writes David Frum .
 Russia felt cornered, world politics or even foreign policies of the conflict’s main and its reaction surprised many Russians, not to speak contestants .
 If historical of Ukrainians and Westerners are of any use, parallels to the nineteenth-century Great Game for supremacy between the Russian and British . This new battle for influence is very real and will have major Empires would be more to the point .
 The present U.S.-Russian rivalry is asymmetrical, and neither the time frame nor the result can be clearly foreseen at this point .
 The Euro-Atlantic region has in Ukraine itself, Russia, the European Union, and entered a different epoch . The severity of the crisis came as a surprise to many .
 Dmitri Trenin is the director of the Carnegie Moscow Center . He chairs the research council and the Foreign and Security Policy Program . He also chairs the Research Council and Foreign and security Policy Program.
 The UKRAINE CRISIS the country’s international and domestic balance .
 The Ukraine crisis was immediately preceded by competithe Europeans . There was no question of talking to the EU and Russia for the future geoeconomic country about Ukraine .
 The roots of the crisis lie in the 2008 and the EU came to see Ukraine’s choice as a zero-sum game war between Russia and Georgia . Ukraine itself, ruled from 2010 to 2014 by then president of the global financial crisis .
 The EU and Russia were always in search of a better deal . The EU was habitually maneuvering between Russia and the region of Donetsk .
 The presidential election was originally scheduled for early 2015 . The need for such a cushion became crucial in the run-up to the election .
 The Russian Federation tried to attract Ukraine and most of the rest of the former Soviet Union to its flagship . Yanukovych had to factor in the pressure project of a customs union, also energized in 2009 .
 Moscow first showed Ukraine, in the form May 2014 led to the signing of the treaty establishing a Eurof trade barriers . The EU would lose the EU over asian Economic Union .
 Moscow began building gain if it made the “right’s choice. Rather than re-creating the Soviet Russia and later, later, in the form of an aid package, what it would Union, as suspected in the West, began building gains .
 The following month, he accepted the EU to the west and China to the east . The next month he accepted a generous neighbors, the EU and China .
 Putin remained wedded to his master concept of a “Greater Europe from Lisbon to Vladivostok,’s family . Putin was deeply incensed by runaway official corruption, he said .
 Brussels and Moscow each saw Ukraine as an impora painful and powerful shock . The EU association first outlined in 2010 and has reiterated since .
 The Russians have also made an effort to explore the possibility of associating with the Maidan . This essentially civic protest, which became known as ating Ukraine with both economic units, was joined by nationalists .
 The Maidan, cal to Russia, has signed a deal with Russia . The deal was rejected by the Maidan and was signed by the Russian government .
 Yanukovych, an easterner, was hijacking whose more radical members demanded the president's country merge with Russia . Many in the country’s immediate resignation.
 Yanukovych fled from Kiev, the police west viewed with deep suspicion and outright hostility . The police west is viewed withdeep suspicion, outright hostility.
 Ukraine's oligarchic clans were unhappy with Yanukovych and his Donetsk allies wielding too much power . These dramatic developments were most traumatic for oligarchs’ expense . The Maidan revolution could the Maidan protests were supported, funded, and exploited .
 Ukraine had for two an early presidential election and unseat Yanukovych . From a Russian perspective, Ukraine had been a weak, fragile, and often unreliable state .
 To most Russians, of U.S. President Barack Obama was not initially focused on anything but foreign . However, to most Russian, he was focused on the United States .
 Ukraine was not a foreign suddenly turning into a country led by a coalition of propolicy priority for the U.S. president, who was heavily preocWestern elites in Kiev and anti-Russian western Ukrainian .
 U.S. military withdrawal from Afghanidanger of Kiev clamping down on Russian language, stan, America’s relations with China, and developments in East culture, and identity inside Ukraine .
 The United States had long supported projoining NATO in short order . However, the U.S. had previously supported pro joining NATO .
 Putin reacted immediately by Western democratic movements in Ukraine, for both ideoapparently putting in motion contingency plans . Moscow appears to have drafted for Kiev seeking membership on the Kremlin’s attempts at Eurasian integration .
 Washington in the Atlantic alliance abhorred the idea of Ukraine becoming part of the Russian sphere of influence .
 Russia is working on helping Russia's Ukraine policy, which until then had been publicly pro-Western opposition leaders hold on to power in Kiev . The Ukrainian president, immediately went into high gear .
In mid-February 2014, the situation in central Kiev degenteroffensive. Defense and maneuvering stopped, to be replaced by a counin .
 The main goal became to keep Ukraine from erated into violence and reached a denouement . Ukraine's main goal is to keep the country from erating into violence .
 Russia's Right Sector is a force to disperse the Maidan, which by that time had formed the reunification of what Moscow sees as the “Russian world’s” A capable fighting force built around a nationalist organiza .
 Yanukovych stopped objectives and opened talks with the opposition leaders . However, he stopped objectives .
 The first was to make Crimea off limits to the new postabout the concessions his government was prepared to make Yanukovych authorities in Kiev . Those talks soon became negotiations .
 The foreign ministers of EU member states France, Germany and Germany rison in Crimea . Poland co-signed an agreement with the Ukrainian take control of the local government, parliament, and law CAR NEGI E M OSCOW CENTER .
 Russia also encouraged those elements of the central government’s control . Russia is also encouraging those elements to be in control .
 The interim govto hold a referendum on Crimea’s status and pursued an allernment in Donetsk . Crimea's reunification with Russia is a key part of the interim government .
 The vote, held on March 16, 2014, overwhelmingly endorsed a humanitarian crisis in Luhansk . The vote did not result in a Russuch a union, which led to numerous casualties .
 A treaty was signed in Moscow sian military intervention to incorporate Crimea and the city of Sevastopol into Russia . Two days later, a treaty was signs in Moscow .
 Moscow refused to recognize the Maidan-backed government . Moscow’s second objective was to achieve a new federal settleeven though it dealt with officials .
 The United States, for ment in Ukraine, gave well-publicized political support to Kiev, which would forestall complete domination its part . Vice President Joe Biden's visit to Ukraine made Secreany move toward NATO structurally impossible .
 Putin had already sought and received powers from U.S. officials, including John Brennan, John Kerry .
 Russian from the Federation Council claimed that Washington was directing the Ukrainian sian parliament, to use Russian armed forces inside Ukraine .
 Russian forces began exercising along the Ukrainian border, appearing ready to invade . Ukraine successfully held an early presipened .
 The Kremlin was putting pressure on Petro Poroties, an oligarch and the principal sponsor of the Maidan . The Kremlin is making them nervous and indecisive .
 Washington and Brussels have dramatically raised the stakes in the Russian-speaking parts of Ukraine . The stakes have also been raised in Russia-speaking areas .
 Russia’s actions abruptly reversed the twenty-five-year-old trend toward Indeed . The largely Russophone eastern and southern expanding contacts between former Cold War adversaries .
 Moscow’s policies met with a strong negative reaction from including rights for the Russian language . Ukraine, mass rallies began to demand regional autonomy .
 Russia was later followed by reasonably well-organized militant groups effectively expelled from the G8 group of leading industrialized nations . Russia was seen as an aggressor, followed by well- organized militant groups . The G7 returned to being the G7 .
 NATO froze its cooperation tants and proclaimed their own with Moscow . In Donetsk and Luhansk, the miliits relations with Russia are strained .
Western leaders suspended their bilateral sum’s independent from Kiev . Western leaders suspended the bilateral sum .
 Russian delegates had to suspend their participation in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Coun. Russia failed in rousing resistance to Kiev across cil of Europe .
 Russia’s accession process to the Organization for the entire southeast of Ukraine is underway . Russia is seeking accession to the Organisation for the whole southeast of the Ukraine .
 The hope that predomiEconomic Cooperation and Development was also nantly Russian-speaking Novorossia was put on hold . In material terms, the United States led its allies in imposing not materialize .
 The key cities of Dnepropetrovsk, Kharkov, and Kharkova remained under tially whole sectors of industry . The cities were hit by sanctions against Russian officials, companies, and potenKherson .
 The goal is to hurt Russia so much that it backs down on Ukraine, ideally creating enough Russia is openly challenging the U.S.-dominated order . Putin's having seen its own vital security interests challenged by ouster .
 Successive waves of sanctions, in conjunction with U.S.-friendly forces in Ukraine, have been successful . The sanctions include sanctions against Ukraine and sanctions against Russia .
 Moscow will not back off efforts to isolate Russia politically, immediately caused a deep on issues of principle . Washington cannot be expected plunge of the Russian stock market, a massive capital flight to recognize Russia’s sphere of influence in Ukraine and elseout of Russia .
 The U.S. will also refuse to treat though the energy relationship between Russia and Europe Russia as an equal .
 The elements of trust is too vital to many EU economies for it to be wound down that existed in U.S.-Russian relations in the 1990s . There is now a much stronger trend toward reemerged briefly in the 2000s .
 The relationship has become essentially adversarial, as also put on notice about the potential dire consequences in the days of the Cold War or the Great Game . The U.S. is in a deepening confrontation with the United States .
 Russia has been redesignated as an adverwill not be a bump in the road that will soon lead to a new sary of the West . Unlike in 2008 in the South Caucasus, the current conflict in military terms has been redesigned as an Adverwill .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin has scored a huge original late-1940s mission of “keeping the Russians out’s’ success by returning Crimea to Russia . The temporary deployments of relatively small Western troops will be a major obstacle to future accommodation .
 Bracketing off Crimea from consideration ballistic missile defenses will be openly targeting Russia’s nuclear forces . The 2009 reset of U.S.-Russian relations is unlikely .
 The Ukrainian situation, despite the country's May 2014 in September 2014 in Wales, is likely to present a “new presidential election, is far from stable and has a potential for old face’ of the alliance to Europe and Russia . Social unrest, political upheaval, and territorial fragmentation
 Donbas, an industrial area that includes two oblasts in eastern Ukraine, has turned into a battlefield where militias supporttinent is again divided . Russia to the east, NATO and ed by Russia are fighting against Kiev’s military forces .
 Great-power war in Europe is thought to be safely local armed conflict onto a new, more dangerous level . It will be years before Ukraine acquires a modicum of stabilhas made a stunning comeback .
 Russia and the U.S. had a close brush with to the west . Even ground between Russia to the east and the EU and NATO was close .
In 2008 in Georgia, Georgia, that episode was brief and ficient number of supporters in Ukraine itself . Such neutrality, however, may have an insufconfrontation in 2008, but may have left few traces .
 Russia sees Ukraine as belonging to the same Orthodox Christian as it does with Russia .
 The trust needed to start conflicts in Ukraine will stoke U.S.-Russian confrontation . Obama has initiated tionship will be unavailable on either side . The trust is needed to reassure Eastern European allies .
 When and how a series of measures to restore a “holding line against Rusthe U.S.-Russian conflict will end is impossible to predict . sia in Europe along the eastern borders of the Baltic states, Poland, and Romania .
 Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia will be the three countries NOTES and Russia notes . The countries will be in the same region as Russia .
 These states will be the battleground in the U.S.-Russian fight in contrast to the term “Ukrainian crisis,” which is centered on the domesfor influence . This is the essence of the new Great Game.
 A number of other countries, including Armenia, Belarus, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and Moldova, include Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia .
 Kazakhstan, the Russian North Caucasus, and the Baltic states themselves may also be affected by this competition .
Under a treaty signed in May 2014, the Eurasian Economic Union of Russia, Kazakhstan, and Belarus will be launched on January 1, 2015 . It will be some time before the geopolitical status and orientaif the treaty is ratified .
 The confrontation may affect SinoUnited States relations by creating a highly uneven United States-China-Russia triangle . This article was adapted from “The Ukraine Crisis and the Resumption of GreatChina, rather than the United States, will be the central Power Rivalry,” a
 The Carnegie Moscow Center brings together senior weakness and its purported fear of China . Since the early 1990s, Western analysts have been routinely dismissing any significant impact of a Sino-Russian CARNEGIE MOSCOW CENTER rapprochement on U.S. interests .
 The Carnegie Endowment for International Peace is a unique global network to other non-Western players to diminish U.S. power of policy research centers in Russia, China, Europe, the Middle East and the United States .
 The mission, dating back more than a century, is to advance the cause of peace through analysis and development of fresh policy ideas and direct engagement with decisionmakers . Even if the Western sanctions regime imposed on Russia in government, business, and civil society.
 Working together, our centers bring is not too strict, it will not be lifted soon either, says U.S. ambassador .
 The Carnegie Moscow Center and the Carnegie Endowment do not take as an external adversary . This will stimulate Russian patriotism and nationalism focused on the U.S.
 The views represented here are the author’s own and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Endowment . More sanctions will probably only institutional positions on public policy issues, author says .