 The author would like to thank Ryan Goodman, Oliver Persey, Menaka Tennekoon, Erika Noronha, Lara Sofia Romero, Amandeep Singh, Sumeya Mulla, and Andrew Li for helpful suggestions .
 The author is grateful to the editorial staff at the NYU Journal of International Law and Politics for their assistance and advice .
 Three years3 have passed since the Russian annexation of Crimea . It seems unlikely that Ukraine will regain power over the territory anytime soon .
International law in general and the prohibition on annexation in particular are not law at all, says author .
 There is a qualitative difference between what is termed international law and the law we know from domestic legal systems, says the author .
 Crimean annexation is in fact an example of how international law creates obligations that international actors follow . But under closer scrutiny, the annexation is under closer attention .
 The specific rule prohibiting annexation is emphasized and even strengthened through the international reactions .
 First, from a positivist7 perspective, actions and statements by the international legal community create state practice and opinio juris.7 .
 The Crimean case evinces state behavior that supports the prohibition on annexation. Contrary to the critical view, the Crimean case is not a case that supports state behavior .
 The backlash against Russia's actions went beyond previous reactions, according to CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says the backlash went beyond the previous reactions to Russia’s actions .
 Some have argued that it might be best to give up Crimea . In fact, some argue that it may be best for the Crimea to stay .
 This paper does not attempt to ultimately prove the fate of the prohibition of annexation, which only time can tell, but it does put forward that the following analysis constitutes one significant element of such a proof .
 The term will be used to denote a perspective that focuses on the rules of international law, specifically customary rules that are formed through state practice and juris.
 The term shall mark a perspective that focuses on whether or not a violation of international law causes negative reactions . In this discussion, the term will be used to reflect a perspective on whether and not it causes negative reaction .
International attention has largely shifted from Crimea and Eastern Ukraine to Syria and other regions . The focus of international efforts has been on Syria .
Realpolitik has not given way to Realpolitik when it comes to the annexation of Crimea . However, as evidenced by continued statements stressing the illegality of the situation, the backlash hasn't given way .
 It is especially this shift in focus that allows for a more substantive analysis on what matters legally, says John Sutter . Sutter: "It is particularly this shift" in focus on what Matters legally, he says .
 The Article will conclude with a final assessment of the effects of the Crimean annexation on the rule prohibiting annexations . The Article is expected to conclude with the final assessment on the effect of the annexation .
 The Article will address both of the above-mentioned perspectives . Throughout the discussion, the Article will focus on both theabove-mentioned views .
Third party states answered the violation of international law, says U.S. State Department . The U.N. is investigating whether it is possible to find evidence of state practice .
 This Article claims that the international prohibition on annexation is strengthened through the Crimean case . This Article says that the International prohibition on annexing is strengthened by the Crimean cases .
 At the very least, the Article sets out to show how critics grossly underestimate and misunderstand the repercussions and their respective meanings . The Article also shows that critics grossly underestimated the repercussions of the article .
 Russia did not, and likely will never, accept jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice for the issue at hand .
 Authors with a less pessimistic perspective on international law label this critical view as “the perfect compliance fallacy,’13 a critique that aims at the measurement of effectiveness through compliance .
 The counter-argument is usually based on Louis Henkin’s famous statement that “almost all nations observe almost all principles of international law and al11.’ The Counter- argument is based on Henkin's famous statement “Almost all nations observing almost all Principles of
 Aspects pertaining to questions of the legality have entered other fora, however, but fora have also entered other questions .
 It is generally questioned what criteria are relevant to assess the effectiveness of international law . It is also questioned if effectiveness is desirable in the first place .
Powerful actors are capable of evading obligations when it comes to national systems of justice . In fact, it is not unheard of that powerful actors are able to evade obligations .
 An analysis might be empirically true, but it falls short of completely rebutting the criticism . The analysis may be scientifically true, however, and it doesn't completely refute the criticism.
 Many would question systems in which an actor has the possibility to deviate from the rules without any sanction whatsoever .
 Domestic legal systems have shortcomings, but a difference in perspective still exists . Domestic legal system has shortcomings, while domestic legal system have shortcomings .
 Domestic systems may accept specific cases of individuals evading legal responsibility due to power, influence, or financial means . Domestic systems might accept specific occasional cases.
 A system that generally accepts such a caveat for the powerful would be considered unjust . One might even question the denotation as a legal system . A system generally and openly accepts such an caveat would be seen as unjust .
 In international law, this power disparity arguably exists, at least for the time being . The power disparity in international law may still exist, according to the law .
Criticism of international law is based on a fallacious view of enforcement, says U.S. attorney general . "The critical view expresses a common concern with the existing system of international laws," he says .
 It assumes that enforcement must take the form of something akin to an international police force that stops perpetrators 15. It assumes enforcement must be akin to a police force.
International law formally treats states as sovereign and therefore as equals . It should be noted that international law formally Treats States as sovereign .
 The U.N. Security Council gives the five permanent members of the Security Council a veto power for Security Council resolutions . These resolutions are the only procedure envisioned by the United Nations Charter for authorizing use of force against any threat to peace or breach of peace .
 Some states are practically exempted from the threat of Chapter VII measures . This allocation of power results in a situation in which some states are almost exempt from Chapter VII Measures .
 Such an approach, when dealing with a system that lacks a centralized institution with a monopoly on the use of force, possesses the risk of an escalation of violence . Such a system, such a central institution, has a monopoly of force on use of violence.
To prevent such a situation is one of the core objects of the system of international law. To prevent such an incident, the law is one the core object of the law .
International law as completely analogous to domestic legal systems is not only unnecessary, it might even be disadvantageous . But it might be even disadvantageous, as it might also be unnecessary .
 Following such a line of thought, the focus then naturally turns to which enforcement mechanisms international law utilizes .
International law allows for the possibility of forceful interference, but this option is significantly limited through both restrictive requirements and a formal procedure .
 A first issue pertains to which forum,e., would be competent to deal with the issue of whether Russia or Ukraine is correct in their respective legal assessments .
 Gaiane Nuridzhanyan, Ukraine vs. Ukraine, is a talk of Ukraine's attempts to achieve judicial results . For a discussion of Ukraine’s attempts to achieved judicial results, see Ga Diane Nuridzanyan .
For a more extensive discussion of various forms of enforcement mechanisms, see infra Section III.B.4.4 . For a more comprehensive discussion of the enforcement mechanism, see Infra Section 3.3 .
 The World Trade Organization system relies solely on granting countermeasures to Members . Members must bring their inconsistent measures into conformity with their obligations .
International investment arbitration relies on enforcement in particular domestic systems . Even the realm of international investment arbitration depends on enforcement of domestic systems.
 If such enforcement does not yield the respective amount of compensation, recourse must be had to traditional means such as diplomacy to effectuate rights and prerogatives of stakeholders .
 A plethora of actions can and should be regarded when dealing with enforcement at the international level .
 states may at certain times pay only lip-service to an international legal rule . This examination should not be limited to statements, because states may not be able to make such statements .
 An expression could be highly relevant to determine opinio juris. As a matter of fact, an expression is highly relevant .
 A lack of enforcement power requires looking beyond statements in order to find practice in support of such statements, says the author .
 It must be noted that statements themselves may vary in significance . Additionally, it must be noting that statements itself may vary.
 A statement made against other interests of a state can be considered more crucial than a statement in line with such interests,g.g. G.
 A brief portrayal of the factual and legal aspects surrounding the annexation is in order . However, in order to assess the magnitude of reactions to the annexation of Crimea, a brief portrayal is in.
 The Crimean Crisis originated from the so-called Euromaidan protests in Ukraine which started in late 2013 . The movement demanded a closer cooperation with the European Union, which Viktor Yanukovych prevented .
29.29 A pro-Russian movement in Crimea developed, supported by Russia,30 and quickly took control over the peninsula . Violent response led to further protests, which ultimately resulted in the Ukrainian revolution .
 The pro-Russian movement ousted some Crimean leaders in favor of the new Ukrainian government . Some Crimean leaders switched allegiance to the new Ukraine government .
 Crimean parliament decided to accede to Russia on March 6, 2014 . The decision was made by the new Crimean parliament . The Crimean parliament has been in charge since March 2014 .
 Note, however, that the Ukrainian impeachment procedure was not followed . Note that the Ukraine impeachment procedure is not followed.
 Vladimir Putin acknowledged the Russian involvement on April 16, 2014 . He acknowledged the presence of troops in April 2014 .
 The details of how control was taken suggests that such an action had long been planned .
 Russia vetoed the resolution and so the referendum took place as scheduled, and overwhelmingly favored re-joining Russia . However, Russia vetoed the resolution, so the vote was held as scheduled . The referendum was held in Moscow, Russia's capital .
 Russia proclaimed the reincorporation of Crimea on March 18, 2014 . Two days later, the Crimea was reincorporated into Crimea .
 The U.N. General Assembly adopted Resolution 68/262, setting out the legal invalidity of the referendum . In response, the United Nations General Assembly, on March 27, 2014, adopted Resolution68/262 .
 The European Union and other nations adopted the first round of sanctions . Shortly thereafter, the EU and other countries adopted the second round of penalties .
 The ballot only offered to become part of Russia or an independent state . In addition, it has been criticized that the ballot only offers to be part of the Russian government .
 Crimea first seceded from Ukraine to form its own independent state . From a Russian perspective, this means that Crimea first Seceded to become an independent state.
 This state concluded a treaty with Russia that led to the incorporation into Russian territory . This state then concluded an agreement with Russia. This state was then incorporated into Russia's territory .
 Crimea's de facto integration of Crimea into Russia continues . The turmoil in Ukraine continues to continue .
 Reports of casualties continued to stream in even after the ceasefire went into effect .
 Crimea has been annexed by Ukraine since the annexation of Crimea in March 2014 . The Crimean annexation was the first time Crimea was taken into control of Crimea .
 Later reactions can be interpreted as aimed at the conflict concerning other regions in Ukraine . However, these later reactions may be aimed at other regions .
 This Article places emphasis on the actions leading up to and immediately following the annexation of Crimea . This Article therefore place emphasis on actions leading to and following Crimea annexation .
 Any later events will only be analyzed to the degree that they specifically target Crimea . The Crimea region will be targeted in the future .
 Both sides are convinced of their respective correct assessments46 without engaging the opposition . There is little common ground for debate45 because both sides are convinced of their respective assessments46 .
 The discussion also focuses on the realist assessment of the underlying reasons for taking such a bold move .
 annexation does constitute a per se illegal form of the acquisition of territory . annexation does not constitute an illegal way of acquiring territory .
 This prohibition does not only stem from the United Nations Charter,50 but is also considered customary international law, a peremptory rule .
Third party states are under an obligation not to recognize the annexation as a lawful change in territory . Third party states must not recognize annexation as lawful change of territory .
 The Friendly Relations declaration includes inter alia, Security Council and General Assembly resolutions . Further documents referencing the prohibition include, inter- alia and Security Council resolutions, most prominently .
 This so-called Stimson Doctrine goes back to a 1932 declaration by Henry L Stimson . The U.S. would not recognize changes in territory based on the use of force .
 The obligation of non-recognition has been determined to create very specific actions . The obligation to create specific actions is determined by the law .
 Crimea was formed from Crimea after a referendum in Crimea . Crimea was then incorporated into Russian territory . Crimea is now part of Russia's Crimea .
 The crux of the argument depends on the voluntary nature of the events, combined with a situation that purportedly justifies secession, says the author .
 No precise rule has been established as to when self-determination trumps territorial sovereignty . Thus far, no precise rules have been established .
 Many states in the world face groups or territories that aim to secede . Many states face groups that want to split .
 Some states allow secessionist groups to hold referenda, while other states forbid secessionist activities . Some states let secessionists have referenda.
 One example in which self-determination trumped territorial sovereignty is Kosovo . One example is Kosovo. One example was Kosovo.
 The Russian rhetoric specifically refers to Kosovo, an instance of self-determination that was supported by the West .
 This line of argument usually cites the history of the Crimean peninsula and considers and terms the annexation a reunification . The annexation of Crimea is considered the annexation of the peninsula .
 The West stressed that the Kosovo must be considered a special circumstance and could not be considered to create a precedent . However, the West stresses that the country must be seen as a special case .
Western interference in Kosovo sets a precedent for the possibility of exceptions to the prohibition on third party interference in territorial sovereignty . Western interference in the Kosovo is not allowed in Kosovo .
 The West's use of force in Kosovo supports arguments that the West only conforms to principles that suit its interests . The West’s use of Force in Kosovo is a key part of the West's policy .
 Russia referred to Kosovo in justifying its intervention into Crimea. It is therefore no surprise that Russia refers to Kosovo to justify its intervention .
 Some general criteria can be determined for when secession is justified . Even without reference to Kosovo, some general criteria could be determined .
 scholars often demand grave breaches of human rights or at least harm of a certain magnitude to consider secession justified .
 Rather self-determination has both an internal, as well as an external dimension .
 Even without granting a right to secede, the right to self-determination still has effects for a group within a state .
 It seems doubtful that a group allowed a high degree of self-determination internally should further receive the right to secession . Second, it seems doubtful. It appears doubtful that an internal group should further be allowed to seize .
 If a state grants a group autonomy from the central government, then the state cannot infringe upon to the right to self-determination to such a degree that violating territorial sovereignty is justifiable . A state grant a state autonomy from a state can't infringe on a state's right to
 Another state cannot use this right for its own benefits. It follows that another state can't use it for its benefits .
 secession is only possible if it is truly instigated by an internal group . secession can only be achieved by a group of people .
 Any signs that the group is under an outside influence will shed serious doubt that it acted in pursuance of its right of self-determination .
 The following discussion focuses on the factual and legal questions concerning the presence of Russian forces in Crimea . The following talk focuses on factual andlegal questions concerning Russian forces.
 If these troops instigated the takeover, then the secession was not voluntary, and is per se an illegal annexation . If these soldiers instigated it, it would be illegal annexation, says the author .
 Factual Assessment of the Crimean situation must address the differing factual scenarios put forward by Russia .
 Russia denied any direct connection with the Crimean crisis . At first, Russia presented itself as an outsider that would not interfere with Ukrainian sovereignty .
 Russia admitted in April 2014 that its soldiers were present in Crimea at the time of the crisis . Most legal scholars based their analyses on their analysis on the situation .
 In the following, any assessment of a statement as that of a state pertains to an official statement by a head of state or a statement officially identified as pronouncing the opinion of a State . The following is the following .
 The footage indicates that Putin and other Russian leaders had already decided on Crimea’s fate .
 It is now uncontroversial that Russian troops were present in Crimea prior to annexation . It's now uncontroversy that Russia was present before annexation .
 Russia portrays their involvement as minimal, and stresses that Russian troops did not fire a single shot throughout the events . Russia nevertheless portrays their presence as minimal .
 The situation is prima facie illegal, as no state must accept the presence of foreign forces on its territory .
 At the outset, it should be noted that any presence of foreign military is not illegal . If there was a voluntary approval, there should be no illegal presence .
 This might take the form of a treaty governing the stationing of troops76 or a statement inviting foreign forces . This might be the first time a treaty has been established .
 Both are claimed as justification for the presence of Russian forces in Crimea . Both claim to be justification for Russian forces presence in the Crimea .
 Russia and Ukraine had existing treaties covering the use of the Sevastopol Black Sea port, including the stationing of Russian troops . Russian troops were stationed in the port .
2014 troop movement was far exceeded by the 2014 troop movement . But treaties specifically limited the number of soldiers that could be present .
 Supporters of Russian presence on Ukrainian territory also point to a statement by Yanukovych, the President of Ukraine .
 Salenko, supra note 57; Tolstykh, supra Note 45; Tol Stykh, Tolstykh  note 57 . Salenko is a former member of the United States House of Representatives .
 One example of this outside the Crimean context includes the NATO treaty . Another example is the NATO Treaty on Ukraine .
 The consent is given by the “highest governmental authority’s’82 and that any action taken stays within the boundaries set out by the consent. One requirement is that the consent is made by the highest governmental authority .
 Yanukovych's impeachment did not comply with the procedural requirements set out in the Ukrainian constitution, according to the constitution . The authority of Yanukovych to voice such an invitation, it should be noted .
 The constitution required approval by parliament if the president decided to admit foreign forces onto Ukraine’s territory .84 such a lack of procedure only becomes relevant in international law if the acting state knew or ought to have known of this circumstance .
 Russia did not recognize the new government, but it did not know it was unconstitutional . Russia should have known, says the author .
 Putin's statement was aimed at the protection of Ukrainian citizens . Putin said the actions by Russia were beyond the scope of the invitation .
 Actions leading to secession of a part of the territory cannot be seen as covered by such an invitation .
 Use of force is considered an act against the will of a state. Technically, use of force can be used against a state's will .
An earlier invitation by the Prime Minister of Crimea cannot be regarded as an invitation to intervene . An earlier invitation is not considered an invitation for intervention .
 Int’l Law Comm’n, Draft Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts, United Nations Doc. Doc.
 Most other states recognized the new Ukrainian government . It should be noted that most other states recognize the new government .
 An intervention cannot be justified if only the intervening state recognizes the inviting government . An intervention can be justified in the case of an intervening state .
 In its rhetoric, this legal claim often overlaps with a claim for humanitarian intervention, which in international law is not limited to one’s own nationals .
91 circumstances countermand a successful invocation for the case at hand . Some argue that such a case would fall under the right to self-defense or might even constitute an exception to the use of force .
 In Crimea it is doubtful whether the people of Crimea were ever truly facing harm, especially at a necessary magnitude .
 Second, such a situation would allow for defensive measures only, rescuing and evacuating the at88 . Second, if a situation occurs, it would allow such measures only to be used .
This argument is at times not limited to nationals but also includes Russian-speaking individuals . This argument is not only limited to Russians, it also includes Russians-speaking people .
 Russia allows Russian speakers to acquire Russian citizenship under simplified rules . This distinction becomes less significant against the backdrop that Russia allows Russians to obtain Russian citizenship .
 The decisive criteria for the determination of nationality are implicit in any such discussion . The character of nationality itself is implicit in such discussions .
 Russia has used this line of argument before, before, regarding territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia . Both Georgian territories are primarily inhabited by Russian citizens .
 In connection to Crimea, this argument must be considered with even more scrutiny, as it is Russia that has placed those citizens there .
 The prohibition on moving one’s own citizens into occupied territory seems highly problematic . The actions seem highly problematic.
 Russia is at times seemingly arguing in the direction of an intervention to support self-determination . In addition, Russia is also at times seeming to be trying to supportSelf-determination, according to reports .
 It is doubtful whether any such intervention can take place without approval by the U.N. Security Council .
 humanitarian intervention has a high threshold and a limited scope of action . Even assuming intervention is permissible without U.N. approval, similar to the protection of nationals, has a low threshold and limited scope .
 U.S. may only act in cases of large scale violations of human rights97 if grave international crimes are committed . States may thus only act on cases of such crimes if they are committed.
 The presence of Russian forces on Ukrainian territory was not justified under international law . Russian forces in Ukraine were not justified by international law, according to the UN .
 The secession must meet the narrow requirements that even supporters of a far-reaching external right of self-determination set forth . Even ignoring the military presence in Ukraine at the time of the referendum, the secession must be met .
 Any genuine possibility for internal self-determination excludes the possibility of external selfdetermination. Frequently, any genuine possibility of internal selfdetermination excludes possibility of externally selfdetermination .
 Some commentators have stressed that Russia’s activities have led to a worsened human rights situation . Some commentators say Russia's activities have caused a worsening situation .
 autonomous regions, such as Crimea, which are already granted self-governance to a certain degree, fail to fulfill one important prerequisite . The assessment reflects the general consensus in the literature assessing the legality of the situation .
 The next Section returns to the question of enforcement mechanisms contained in international law . It elaborates on their appropriateness in the current scenario .
 Enforcement Mechanisms in International Law International law differ greatly from domestic law in terms of enforcement . Enforcement Mechanism in International law differs greatly from Domestic law .
 Domestic legal systems benefit from the state’s monopoly on the use of force . International law is often characterized by the lack of any centralized form of power .
 Charter envisions a system in which the Security Council106 authorizes enforcement, even though enforcement is not carried out by a centralized police force . The Security Council 106 would be the first such system .
 In addition to the possible threshold of using secession as a last resort, secession could be used as last resort . It is also possible to use secession as an alternative to using secession.
 It is highly questionable whether either would be met in the case of Crimea . It is also highly questionable if either would have been met in Crimea .
 This finding is further in line with the assessment of a majority of states. As shown infra, this finding is more in line.
 The Security Council’s responsibility is primary, but not exclusive. Note, however, that the Security Council's responsibility is not exclusive .
 States are free to agree among themselves on any enforcement mechanisms that they see fit . States are also allowed to agree on any law enforcement mechanisms they find fit .
 The prohibition on the use of force is further considered jus cogens . No resort to armed activities is possible beyond that envisioned in the United Nations Charter .
 The use of force is not the only measure that the Security Council may employ . In fact it should be considered the last resort .
 Chapters VI and Chapter VII (Actions with Respect to Threats to Peace, Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of Aggression) contain various possibilities .
 The Security Council may enact an embargo on a state that is in threatening international peace . The state is in a state in threat of international peace.
 Even in the case of a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or acts of aggression military measures are only employed after nonmilitary measures have failed .
 The Security Council determines when the conditions for Chapter VII are fulfilled and states are obliged to follow the Security Council’s decision . As scholars have frequently criticized throughout the U.N.'s existence, the Council can easily be under the command of one nation or alliance .
 A more classical perspective would perceive the United Nations system itself as an agreement between states on how to enforce the rules contained in the Charter . This overview sees the mechanisms under the U.N. Charter from a constitutionalist perspective .
 It seems highly unlikely that such an approach will be fruitful against any of these states, which possess powerful militaries as well as atomic bombs .
Under the United Nations, any act committed by a veto power state will likely not be resolved through the mechanism envisioned by the Charter . Under the U.N. under the Charter, such a state can't commit an act to a veto state .
 Some measures of enforcement are allowed under customary international law . Even in the absence of an authorization by the Security Council.
 Some of the proposals include expanding, rather than reducing, the veto powers . Note that some of the proposal includes expanding, instead of reducing the veto power .
Third states have a duty to refrain from recognizing as lawful any serious breach . Third states must refrain from rendering aid or assistance in maintaining that situation . The same direct effect of creating losses for a given state may entail some form of reputational damage .
 At first glance, this is the bluntest sword in the arsenal of countermeasures, as no active performance is required by third states . The result is no worse than a nuisance for the violating state .
 The situation is comparable to situations under domestic law in which a person has practical control or possession of something but lacks the title for doing so .
 Russia could not get evicted from Crimea. In the domestic example, this would mean that Russia would not get eviction from Crimea .
 At least in some thoroughly bureaucratized nations, such a situation severely limits possibilities . The situation is difficult in some countries, such as Russia .
Local authorities and banks often require some evidence of entitlement to allow any conduct . For instance, both local authorities and Banks often require proof of entitlement .
 The Netherlands continues to consider Ukraine, rather than Russia, in a position to determine where the treasure should be returned, as Ukraine still represented Crimea internationally .
 States are able to determine among themselves enforcement mechanisms for breaches of international obligations . Mechanisms under Special Regimes are also able to find out if states are breaching international obligations.
 Such mechanisms are at times included alongside a regime of substantive obligations . Such mechanisms at times are included alongside the regime of serious obligations .
 Most often, regimes that include enforcement mechanisms are encountered in the realm of international economic law . States are usually more prone to enter binding and enforceable obligations in an area they perceive as economically beneficial to themselves directly .
 Analysts often resort to prisoner’s dilemma to explain this situation .
 Similar principles may apply to regimes that deal with areas such as the environment or human rights . However, similar principles may be applied to regimes such as those in the past .
 States most often see the direct benefit of regimes when they easily translate into an increase in trade flow or investment .
7.7 actions taken in suspension of other states’ own obligations, such as granting a low level of tariffs . Only if the member keeps the measure in place, or does not fully return to conformity, does the WTO allow other states to act .
 State x could keep its breach of obligation in place indefinitely if it is found to be in violation of its obligations . In practice, state y will enact tariffs that are designed to create economic damages to state x .
 The WTO system is not directly affected by the breach of obligation . The system is first, the existence of a compulsory system of adjudication .
 A WTO member state may address a measure that distorts market conditions for bananas even if that state does not produce bananas . A second regime of interest is the investment regime, even though technically, the so-called regime consists of a myriad of individual bilateral treaties .
 These treaties oftentimes have similar or identical obligations and the tribu125 .
 Under investment treaties private investors are given a right to bring any violation of the specific investment treaty before an international tribunal . Private investors can bring any violations of the treaty before the tribunal .
 If the tribunal determines that a violation has occurred, it will then determine the amount of damages the investor suffered . The tribunal will decide if a violation occurred .
 If the violating state does not pay the award, the private investor may simply enforce the award in a national jurisdiction . National court most often enforces payment by seizing the state’s assets .
 The direct mechanisms for this enforcement differ slightly depending on the system of arbitration used and may at times encounter difficulties . The direct mechanism for thisenforcement differ slightly.
6.6 d.7 d. 6 d.6d. 6d.6D. 6D.6 D.7D . The investment regime may be considered as one aspect that underlies criticism voiced against the investment regime .
 Any such measure may be used to assist in the determination of the existence of a rule . From a positivist perspective, any such measure could be used in the decision of the rule .
 From a consequentialist perspective, the effectiveness of some measures is doubtful, says John Sutter . Sutter: "From a consequentialists perspective, some measures are doubtful"
 The Crimean treasure has been found in Crimea . It was found in the region of Crimea . The treasure was discovered by the Crimean government .
 Argentina had to face a challenge in Argentina’s attempts to avoid paying compensation . The system had to be challenged in Argentina's attempt to avoid pay compensation .
 From a positivist stance, this analysis may further the search for opinio juris .
 From a consequentialist stance, the analysis will show some of the enforcement mechanisms is in application . The analysis will also show some enforcement mechanisms are in application.
 Reactions by international actors lie at the heart of any examination of international law, both from a positivist perspective and from a consequentialist perspective .
 In theory, an ideal reaction to a breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty is U.N. Security Council action .
 The Council cannot be expected in cases where the potential perpetrator has a veto right . However, action by the Council can be expected.
 The voting result might give a first hint of the acceptance of the action by third states . Nevertheless, the voting result itself might give an indication of the vote .
 U.N. General Assembly actions allow for a first assessment of the legality of a particular action . The United Nations General Assembly is a nonbinding body .
 From a positivist perspective, any resolution might aid in the search for opinio juris. The resolution may help in the hunt for an impartial jurisist .
 It is relevant whether states’ voting behavior is contrary to other incentives, such as a potential alliance with or dependence on one of the main actors, says John Sutter .
Not all states’ voting behavior is analyzed in detail, and special regard is given to those that acted contrary to expectations. Therefore, not all states' voting behavior should be analyzed in Detail .
 The following discussion will highlight specific actors most relevant to the events or whose actions might shed further light on the workings of international law . The following talk will focus on specific actors.
 The analysis of states’ actions will focus on activities in the context of the U.N., followed by reactions of states in their individual capacity and in other fora.
 The international backlash could now be seen as a juris allowing for the determination of the existence of said rule . If these actions would not be considered violative of international law prior to 2014, the international backlash would now be viewed as an opinion juris .
 A more thorough examination would go beyond the scope of the present paper, which can only be seen as a starting point that tries to highlight the most crucial factors for a truly comprehensive analysis .
 annexation was not a definite outcome, as annexation wasn't directly focused on territorial integrity and the invalidity of the referendum . The annexation was usually not directly focus on possible annexation .
 An annexation would not have been possible without a positive referendum . Furthermore, an annexation would be possible without the vote .
 Certain knowledge of the outcome of annexation might have led to stronger reactions by some states . Some states may have reacted to the annexation of some countries .
 The Security Council voted on a draft resolution aimed at preventing the Crimean referendum . The vote took place the day before the referendum as a lastminute attempt at preventing events from running their course .
 The vote did not directly address a possible annexation by Russia, as this eventual result was uncertain at the moment . This also explains why the vote didn't directly address the possible annexation .
 referendum was a prerequisite to later Russian annexation . However, the referendum was not a precursor to later annexation .
 The envisioned resolution stressed Ukraine’s territorial integrity, which is at stake independent of the exact fate of Crimea . It stressed Ukraine's territorial integrity.
 The vote in the Security Council resulted in 13 votes in favor, one abstention by China, and one vote against by Russia . The vote was held in favor of China, Russia, Russia .
 The result can be seen as strong evidence of international rejection of the referendum . In addition to permanent members France, the United Kingdom, and the United States, the U.S., Argentina, Australia, the Chad, Chile, Jordan, Lithuania, 140.4 .
 This hypothetical is based on the thought that an annexation of another country denotes a rather definite, almost irreversible, situation . This hypothetical was based on a thought that the annexation would be almost irreversible .
 Security Council, Security Council Fails to Adopt Text Urging Member States Not to Recognize Planned 16 March Referendum in Ukraine .
 A proposal that has almost been accepted may nevertheless contribute to the formation of international law . The proposal has been rejected by some in the past .
 The Security Council is comprised of representatives from different parts of the world . This allows for a first impression of international support as the Security Council.
145 states sponsored the draft resolution, also a sign of its international support . In addition, a number145 of states sponsored a draft resolution .
 China was the sole abstention, and commentators remarking on China’s stance stressed its dilemma .
 China is among the countries with the strongest view on the prohibition of intervention by foreign states . China is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 China is skeptical of an external right of self-determination . Similarly, China is sceptical of an External right of Self-determination.
 China's partnership with Russia means it will only reluctantly take action against its neighbor . At the same time, China’s partnership with Russian means that it will not take action .
 Some commentators saw China's abstention as a victory, as a veto was certainly not out of the question . It is because of this specific situation that some commentators saw as a win over China .
 An annexation can be perceived as a graver outcome than an independent new state . One might speculate whether a vote on the eventual annexation would have led to a different result .
 The resolution itself only refers to the referendum and not to the annexation by Russia . The resolution is only meant to address the referendum .
 It stresses Ukraine’s territorial integrity and “alls upon all States . . . not to recognize any alteration of the status of the 145.
 Albania, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro,
 A resolution explicitly condemning annexation is conspicuously absent . It should be noted that a resolution explicitly condemned the annexation is absent .
 One explanation would be its futility in addition to a second resolution adding little value . One explanation is that the second resolution adds little value to the resolution .
 The voting procedure also included fifty-eight abstentions and twenty-four absent states . However, the voting process also included 50-8 abstentionions and 20-4 absent states.
Previous resolutions in similar situations had stronger voting results . It has been pointed out that previous resolutions had stronger results .
 Voting for a nonbinding resolution might be easier than putting in place actual sanctions towards an international perpetrator . Voting for nonbinding resolutions is easier than placing actual sanctions on a perpetrator .
 Such behavior can be based on membership in a specific bloc, based on one region, common ideology,157 and the existence of consultation mechanisms such as caucuses,158.9 .
 Despite their nonbinding nature, General Assembly resolutions may nevertheless develop legal effects . The resolutions may still have legal effects, however .
 The North-South is more in favor of the global South than the global North . A shift resulted in a division along the lines of North- South, specifically concerning self-determination .
 The majority of abstaining states are situated in the South . It is no surprise that the majority of the states are in South .
 The fact that they abstained from voting, compared to an outright rejection, might be seen as a gesture of support .
 The following discussion will highlight further voting behavior that might be against expected behavior . The following talk will highlight more voting behavior .
 It is noteworthy that the support is not merely comprised of Western states. It is not just Western states, it is not only Western states .
 Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia were absent, as well as Belarus and Russia, which voted against . With the exception of Bosnia, Serbia and Serbia, they were absent .
 The entire European Union has voted in favor of the resolution . In line with the bloc dynamics, the entire EU has voted to vote in favor .
 Asian states, especially those adjacent to Russia, largely abstained . However, Asian states such as China, Russia, and China, mostly abstained in recent years .
 Asian states that supported the resolution are inter alia traditional allies of the U.S. South Korea, Vietnam, Thailand, and the Philippines . Turkey, Turkey, Vietnam and Thailand are among the countries that backed the resolution .
 The group of rejecting states consists of Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia, Cuba, Cuba and Nicaragua . The group also includes Russia, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela and Zimbabwe .
 Kazakhstan167 and Uzbekistan abstained, while Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan were absent . Russia, Kazakhstan167, Uzbekistan and Kyrgysstan were absent, though politically and economically dependent on Russia .
 Both Azerbaijan and Moldova voted for the resolution . The resolution was approved by the European Parliament .
 Russian minorities fear that they might face a similar situation in the future . One possible explanation is that those countries contain Russian minorities .
 Overall, more than 30 percent of member states of the United Nations abstained . The United Nations is one of the world's most powerful nations .
 A two-third majority of present and voting members is 164 . The majority of non-abstaining, present members are present members .
 A regional organization of former Soviet Republic states that consists of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Uzbekistan .
 Possible explanations include dilemma situations in which states would have reasons, political or legal, to vote for and against the resolution .
 The situation might include states that are allied with Russia but nevertheless oppose the situation or fear for their territorial sovereignty . These situations might include countries that are allies with Russia.
Twenty-four states were absent during voting . The resolution had enough supporters .
 It is not uncommon that states are absent during votes at the General Assembly . It's not uncommon.
 This is often caused by the many obligations delegates have during times of meetings . This is not the first time delegates have been forced to attend meetings .
 Resolution 68/262 might be slightly different, due to its political significance, but it might be different. Nevertheless, it may be different due to the political significance .
 An absence is a way of neither voting to accept, reject, nor abstain. Mostly, an absence is not a way to vote, nor to abstain .
 While legally speaking, it has the same effect as an abstention, politically, it might not . It might not be the same.
 Close allies of either the Western states or Russia might feel pressure to either vote in favor or against .
 They might even fear repercussions in case of abstentions as it deviates from their allegiance . They might also fear repercussions if they don't abstention.
 Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan are all absent states . The list of absent states includes KyrgyZstan and Tajikstan .
 Belize, Bosnia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea-Bissau, Iran, Israel, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lebanon, Morocco, Oman, Serbia, Tajikistan, Timor
 The number of absent states might be a sign that states did not value the resolution as highly important . However, the number of missing states might actually be a signs that states didn't value it as important .
 This might be connected with either the nonbinding nature of the resolution or a resignation to events than were possibly perceived as inevitable . The resolution may not have been seen as inevitable.
 The discussion of states acting on an individual basis will focus on predominant actors and those whose behavior might contradict other incentives . Voting behavior will be considered in favor of those who are acting on individual basis .
 The starting point will be perceived division between Western states on the one hand . Western states may have presented an equally strong incentive not to vote in favor .
 Even an abstention could have been perceived as not supporting the U.S. cause .
 United States officials expressed their anger at Israel's generally neutral stance . U.S. officials expressed anger at the country's generallyneutral stance .
 BRICS178 states due to their economic cooperation, as well as other states that often side with Russia for ideological reasons . Among these allies are the states of the Commonwealth of Independent States .
 A state listed as an ally may in this specific instance take an opposing stance . This does not preclude that a state listed in this particular instance take a different stance .
 In fact these situations are most noteworthy in determining repercussions to the annexation . The annexation is most noteworthy.
 The most prominent proponents of Ukrainian unity were European states as well as the U.S. The West were the most prominent supporters of the Ukrainian unity .
 support came from Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan . In addition, support from Canada and Australia, Japan .
 In a sense, this bloc dates back to the opponents of the Soviet Republic during the Cold War .
 Those European states that are members of the European Union primarily acted through this organization . European States that are member of the EU primarily act through this group .
 This can be seen as a consequence of the historical background of the conflict, which emerged from talks between the European Union and Ukraine aimed at closer cooperation .
 The Ukrainian conflict was determined by the geopolitical power of the European Union and Russia . From its very outset, the Ukrainian conflict has been determined by its geopolitical power .
 European Union competences of the European Union necessitate that some actions are taken under its auspices .
 Both actors tended to initiate measures that were then taken up by others . As explicated in the analysis infra, both actors tend to start taking up measures .
 The former neutral states also voted in favor of the resolution . Note, however, that the formerneutral states also vote in favor .
 The European Union states were from the outset divided into those that favored resolute actions . Sweden182 and Eastern Europe,183 and those advocating for a more diplomatic approach .
 The United Kingdom acted at the first reports of Russian forces in Crimea, sending a "clear signal" to Putin . France and Germany acted in close cooperation with both countries .
 The UK reacted to the suspension of bilateral military cooperation, including the cancellation of joint military exercises . The UK also stopped exportation of military and dual use goods to Russia .
 France has historically not been involved with Ukraine as much as other European states . At first, it took a skeptical view of financial sanctions, which could hurt London's financial market .
 Eastern European states feel especially threatened by a perceived Russian expansion policy, reminiscent of previous invasions . Eastern European countries feel particularly threatened by the perceived Russian policy .
 France was at first reluctant to embargo military goods, as it had concluded a contract with Russia over the exportation of two warships . It argued in favor of financial sanctions, but was reluctant to do so .
 Germany's initial stance toward the events was reserved, driven by public opinion that favored reconciliation and rapprochement . In the end, the warship deal was cancelled, despite France having to bear immense costs .
 The sum France had to pay was not disclosed, but last reports indicate that it was below $ 1. billion .
 Germany is oftentimes favored, partly due to Putin’s connections with Germany .
 Germany had for a long time acted with restraint in response to similar situations . Germany had been acting with restraint for long time in similar situations.
 Germany is highly dependent on Russia for its energy supply . In addition, Germany is heavily dependent on the country's energy supply. Germany is also dependent on its neighbor Russia .
 Hungary had for a long period of time close connections with Russia . It nonetheless condemned Russian activities .
200 and Hungary approved the later sanctions. Those statements were nonetheless criticized in Hungary itself . Overall, European states face possible negative consequences from any drastic actions taken towards Russia .
 Putin addressed the German reunification in his speech at the signing of the treaty that incorporated Crimea into Russia .
Even outside of the European Union, these states have acted in opposition to the Russian annexation of Crimea .
 Neither Norway nor Switzerland is a member of the European Union . Other European states: Norway, Switzerland, Norway and Switzerland .
 condemnation bolsters international opposition against a perceived very proximate threat . condemnation might be considered contrary to Norway’s incentive for good relations with its direct neighbor .
 Norway suspended diplomatic meetings with Russia and decided on restrictive measures in alignment with those by the European Union . In addition to the condemnation, Norway suspended diplomacy with Russia .
 The initial measures included sanctions against individuals encompassing both travel restrictions and assetfreezes . The first measures included travel restrictions, asset freezes .
 Norway expanded its measures to include banning Russian state-owned banks from receiving midand long-term loans, banning arms exports to Russia . Norway also banned supplies of equipment, technology, and assistance to Russian oil sector .
 Crimean actions cannot be classified solely as reactions to the Crimean crisis . However, those actions can be classified only as reactions.
 The United States is the main antagonist of Russia in the Crimean crisis . The U.S. is also an antagonist of the European states .
 The annexation of Crimea went so far as to recognize Crimea as a part of Russia . It remains to be seen whether President Trump will change his preelection stance on Crimea .
 Some close allies of Russia such as the BRICS-states have thus far refrained from recognition .
There are three important considerations should President Trump recognize the annexation of the U.S. President Trump should recognize it .
First, such a development would immediately silence one of the loudest voices proclaiming the illegality of the annexation .
 This Article aims to underline that simply assessing the activities of the major players is shortsighted .
 It seems reasonable to assume that U.S. recognition would not change the stance of those European countries that see themselves threatened by perceived Russian expansionist policies .
 On February 28, 2014, President Obama released a statement warning Russia not to intervene in Crimea .
 President Obama followed up with an executive order on March 6, which authorized sanctions against yet to be named individuals . The order follows up with a similar executive order in March .
 President Obama then issued specific sanctions on March 17 in coordination with the European Union . The sanctions were in response to the President's comments .
7 Prime Minister Harper compared the situation with the Nazi German occupation of the Sudetenland . Canada mirrored the actions of the United States and the European Union .
 Canada's response included the suspension of its military cooperation that Russia would repeat a land-grabbing activity in the future . Canada’s response includes the suspension.
 These states would likely increase their efforts to rewind the Crimean takeover . Thus, these states would probably increase their attempts.
 Russia's trading ties are primarily with the European Union and less so with the U.S. While certainly a relief for Russia, it must be borne in mind that Russia’s trading ties with the EU are mainly with Europe .
 President Trump would have to be assessed as a result of the perceived illegality of the situation . If President Trump did move to recognize the annexation, he would likely face both domestically and internationally .
 China abstained both in the Security Council and in the General Assembly . China is the only country to abstain in both the Security council and the Assembly .
 China's stance is in line with China’s stance which generally calls upon all actors to deescalate the situation . This stance is not specified by any of these actors .
 China has a strong strategic partnership with Russia, mirrored by an alignment in voting behavior in the Security Council . China is both as its neighbor and as a BRICS-State .
 Russian activities in Crimea coincided with stronger cooperation with China . In fact, Russian activities coincided with a stronger cooperation.
 China has traditionally been opposed to any form of secession movement . China has thus traditionally been opposition to any forms of secession .
 China’s later statements were generally quite balanced, according to the U.N. Security Council . China's later statements in the United Nations Security Council prior to vot219.
 Pro-Russian denotes countries that would normally be considered historic allies of Russia . Those that voted against the General Assembly resolution are not necessarily those who voted against it .
 Some commentators perceive China’s abstention, rather than a veto, as a strong sign of disapproval .
 India has strong economic ties with Russia, which is its primary supplier of arms . In the past Russia backed Indian interests in the Security Council .
 India did not completely endorse Russian activities but instead took a more balanced stance .
 China abstained regarding the General Assembly resolution . Thus, just like China, it abstained.
 India pursued a balanced approach following the visit of the new Crimean leader to India . India pursued this balanced approach alongside Russian diplomats .
 The Indian Ministry of External Affairs said it was not officially aware of the presence of the new Crimean leader . The event leaked to Western officials .
 Any other response could have signaled official recognition of the new territorial leadership and thereby Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 India is facing secessionist movements and generally condemns external interference in domestic matters . India’s ties to Russia might incentivize India to support Russia more directly .
 Grant sees a possible explanation for China’s behavior in a shift to “promote the emergence of precedents favorable to the re-incorporation of territories said to belong to a historic legacy,’ he says .
 Brazil abstention at the General Assembly and its initial lack of condemnation at first have caused surprise . Some observers pointed to both Brazil’s status as a BRICS-state and an intent to not displease either side .
 Brazil feared the loss of Russian participation at the July 2014 BRICS meeting in Brazil . The Brazilian Foreign Minister nevertheless called for a solution which “respected the democratic values and the will of Ukrainians’”
 Russia rejected the General Assembly resolution . Russia also rejected the resolution .
 President Lukashenko stated his support for the territorial integrity of Ukraine . On the other hand, he said he supported Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 Crimea is after the annexation de facto a part of Russia, he continued to stress Ukraine’s territorial integrity . Even when he later acknowledged that Crimea was after the annexing de facto.
 Central Asian States may expect Russia's neighbors to side with Russia due to its proximity and economic dependence . The Commonwealth of Independent States is one of the most populous countries in the world .
 Armenia and Belarus rejected the General Assembly resolution . However, except for Armenia, Belarus, none rejected the resolution .
 The Commonwealth states did not initially issue any other statements in support of Russia .
 This might stem from a fear that similar events could occur in their own states . This may stem from the fear of similar events in other states .
 Kazakhstan issued a statement in support of Russia245 and Kyrgyzstan condemned the Russian activities . This initial balanced position broke apart to a small degree when Kazakhstan issued the statement .
 Other states that rejected the resolution were Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, North Korea, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe . Other states in support of Russia were Bolivia and Nicaragua, Cuba and Nicaragua .
 This list includes states with strong anti-U.S. sentiments, close ties to Russia, and/or a strong stance in favor of self-determination . This list also includes states that have strong anti United States sentiments .
 Putin's Stance on Ukraine Supported by Minority of Nations, supra note 176 . See generally Putin’s Stance. on Ukraine supported by minority of Nations . See general Putin”s Stances on Ukraine.
 While these states rejected the resolution, one should be careful in automatically assuming that they were in favor of an annexation .
 Bolivia's statements surrounding the resolution were rather neutral, including that it would not take a position . Bolivia’s statements about the resolution, for instance, were more neutral, than Bolivia's .
 The U.N. Security Council draft resolution would have an incentive not to vote in favor of the resolution . As such, it already had an incentive.
 Both states voted in favor in the U.N. Security Council resolution . Rwanda had already highlighted the importance of a national dialogue .
 Both states changed their stance at the time of the U.N. General Assembly vote, indicating different factors at play . The vote was held at the United Nations.
 The U.N. Security Council held the vote prior to the referendum as a preventive measure . The vote was held as a pre- referendum measure .
 The United Nations General Assembly resolution, however, was adopted after the referendum took place . The U.N. General Assembly Resolution was adopted following the referendum .
 A vote in the U.N. Security Council might be perceived as more significant due to the binding nature of the resolution . A vote may also be seen as more important due to a binding resolution .
 There have been instances in which domestic outcry has been intense after an abstention or no-vote in the General Assembly .
 It can be expected that such outcry is even more intense if the nation in question is only one of 15 states that has thwarted a given resolution .
 In the Council it may be easier to apply pressure to single states which find it more difficult to form blocs .
 The incentive to apply pressure on a single state is greater at this stage than in the General Assembly, where individual votes carry less weight . The incentive is greater than in General Assembly.
 One example can be seen in the German abstention regarding Security Council Resolution 1973 on Lybia, which has garnered both domestic as well as international criticism .
 The following discussion differentiates between those organizations with Russian membership, in which internal mechanisms were used, and those without Russian membership .
 Council of Europe Ukraine initiated an interstate complaint under Article 33 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
 The suspension had been extended and discussions were held on whether it should be extended again . The suspension was extended after it was extended last week .
 PACE renewed this sanction258 despite Russia's threats to halt its cooperation with PACE for the duration of the suspension . The Council of Europe was the first forum in which Russia faced internal sanctions in response to the annexation .
 G8 Technically, the G8 is not an international organization but a governmental forum of the leading advanced economies in the world . Russia is a member of G8, of which Russia is an member .
 The forum is used for matters of coordination among the members, dealing with a variety of economic and political issues . The forum has been used by members for years .
 The forum is not an official organization, but can be highly influential . Actions agreed upon in this framework can be very influential .
 The United States, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the U.S. agreed to exclude Russia from the group .
 The exclusion is not permanent and the G8 stated that Russia may restore its membership based on its future actions . The exclusion was not permanent . The G8 said that Russia could restore its members based on future actions.
 The G8 cancelled their planned G8 summit in Sochi, Russia, in June 2014 as a direct repercussion of the annexation . In addition, the G8 canceled their planned summit in Russia in April 2014 .
 Russia's contribution to Ukraine has been caused by the situation in Ukraine and Russia’s contributions to Russia .
 Some of the functions of the G8 have been transferred to the G20, a similar group consisting of the twenty countries with the largest economies . The G8 is a group of nations with the biggest economies .
 A group of member states attempted to exclude Russia from this group as well . But the BRICS states eventually thwarted the effort .
 The OSCE was used as a vehicle of de-escalation, attempting to send diplomatic and observing groups into the area .
 The missions overall were unsuccessful, but they can be seen as evidence of how different organizations may apply pressure . The missions were also providing a forum for diplomacy and pacification .
 European Union The European Union was an important actor throughout the events . European Union the European Union had a role in many European events .
 Many competences have been transferred to the European Union . First, many competences, including the decision to impose sanctions, have been moved to the EU .
 states may prefer to use the organization in order to form a common stance on matters of foreign affairs . Second, states might prefer the organization to use it to help them form acommon stance .
 The European Union consists of twenty-eight states which all have their own interests . The EU has been criticized for not acting enough by observers .
 Some states are highly dependent on Russia economically, and are fully aware that any sanctions taken against Russia will hurt them .
 The European Union always strongly opposed Russian actions in their statements . Nevertheless, the EU always strongly opposes Russian actions .
 Ukraine's crisis is rooted in a movement by Ukraine towards the European Union and away from Russia . This might be less surprising once one considers the historical background of the crisis .
 The European Union was always always the antagonist from a Russian perspective . In a sense, the European Union is always the antagonists.
 The European Union immediately responded to any action by Russia . The EU has not yet responded to Russia's actions .
 The Russian-EU confrontation is a possible explanation for some of the deescalating responses by the EU in the beginning of the crisis . The European Union merely felt misunderstood in regard to its intentions concerning Ukraine .
 Russia is trying to reduce its energy dependence on Russia . Diplomatic efforts, sanctions, refusal to recognize the annexation, support of Ukraine, and researching ways to reduce energy dependence .
271 EU measures meant that all twenty-eight member states acted in unity . The driving forces behind specific measures largely mirrored the general echo in Europe .
For a detailed and historic explanation, see generally SAKWA, supra note 28. For a detailed explanation,see generally S AKWA, for a detailed, historic explanation .
 The European Parliament is often quicker and more straightforward in its actions, which is based partly on its voting structure and composition . It should be noted that the European Parliament's actions are more straightforward .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, like the European Union, was seen by Russia as an antagonist in the events leading up to the situation . Russia was seen as a major part of the NATO crisis .
 NATO did not hold back in its criticism of the U.S. It comes as no surprise that NATO didn't hold back .
 In a statement, it condemned the ‘Russian Federation’s military escalation in Crimea.’ It said it was “Russian Federation's military escalation’ in Crimea .
 The OECD suspended negotiations with Russia on a possible accession . The OECD is an international forum to stimulate economic progress and world trade .
 Organization of Islamic Cooperation voiced condemnation . Other organizations voiced condemnation.
 Due to the date, the specific statement did not refer to the annexation yet . The specific statement was not released on the date .
Both individual states as well as the European Union introduced sanctions against Russia for its activities . Both individual states and the EU introduced sanctions for their activities .
 The first sanctions were initiated by the United States, Canada, and the European Union . The European Union was the first to impose sanctions .
 They targeted specific individuals and included both a travelling ban as well as asset freezes . They also included both travelling ban and asset freezes.
 Japan,278 adopted similar sanctions, including suspension of talks investment and visa requirements . Other states, including Japan, also adopted similar measures .
 Australia used financial sanctions and travel bans,279 while Albania, Iceland, and Montenegro issued the same sanctions as the European Union . Australia also issued travel bans and financial sanctions .
 The sanctions resulted from both Crimea and the ongoing crisis in Eastern Ukraine . Some observers have argued that the sanctions were not forceful enough, but they resulted from a concerted ef277.1 .
 It might be argued that these were taken even if states had accepted the annexation . It might thus be argued.
4 E Private Actors, not only states acted in response to annexation, but also nongovernmental organization, as well as private individuals and corporations . First analyses show that sanctions were in fact hurtful to Russia and its economy .
 Two arguments favor not disregarding them completely . While it is questionable how far these activities should be considered when discussing the enforcement mechanisms of international law,285 are not considered subject to international law .
First, these actors play an ever-increasing role in the international arena . First, they play a role in a growing number of international events .
 Second, the rhetoric of the responses focuses on the violation of international law . Third, the responses focus on the violations of the international law. Second, they focus on a violation of the law .
Private actors’ evidence general repercussions of a perceived violation of international law . This is not considered the primary enforcement mechanism .
 multinational corporations have significant economic power and influence . These reactions might be severe, and specifically multinational corporations may have significant power .
 Some companies have withdrawn from Crimea or stopped providing services to the region . Some actions directly targeted the peninsula of Crimea .
 Businesses are prevented from wiring or receiving payments from these cards . This means that paying through these cards is no longer possible .
 The accounts of Apple app designers and Steam customers are no longer accessible . Similarly, citizens of the region may no longer use their Paypal accounts .
 It may be argued that these should at least be seen as reactions to the later developments . It may also be argued these should also be seen in the future .
 Some of these private sanctions are connected to the United States sanctions, which also prohibited U.S. companies from dealing with Crimea . It should be noted, however, that some of these sanctions are linked to the U. S. sanctions .
 Some private activities are directly influenced by state action . Some of these private activities have been influenced by the state .
 A withdrawal from Crimea might simply be considered a prudent business decision .
Private and corporate action has taken place, as evinced by the renewal of boycott campaigns . Nonetheless, private and corporate actions have taken place .
 These were classic boycott campaigns against Russian goods in general295 or Russian vodka in particular . They were classic boycotts of Russian goods.
 It is fair to assume that the crisis influenced private actors in making decisions that concerned Russian goods, even if they did not completely boycott Russian goods .
 At the time of writing, more than three years have passed since the annexation of Crimea .
 The international response in the past three years helps assess whether the international community has accepted the annexation . While thus far, it does not seem likely that Russia will return Crimea to Ukraine in the near future .
 Most importantly, the focus of international attention has largely shifted to Syria . The focus of attention, at least when seen from a new Cold War perspective, has largely changed .
 Have states departed from their sanctions and similar measures as soon as 294. States have departed from sanctions and other measures .
 Crimea has changed Russian society since annexing Crimea has become more commonplace . The breaches of law that were undertaken to annex Crimea have now become more common .
 Russia has to bear an unlawful situation that might create more unlawfulness . This specific toll is often overlooked and another cost that Russia needs to bear .
 The actions were possibly taken to please local constituencies rather than to reverse developments . If so, these actions could have been taken by local constituencies .
 A more optimistic view sees any easing of reactions over time in connection with overall developments in the international realm, most importantly in Syria .
 Such an optimistic view would argue that international reactions compelled Russia to cooperate in general . Such a view would be optimistic. Such a pessimistic view would suggest that Russia would cooperate with other countries .
 Russia could be expected to act in a more lawful manner overall, even if such a success came at the expense of accepting one illegality . Russia could also act in more lawful way overall, according to experts .
 Such a view may have its merits, among them arguments stemming from Realpolitik .
 A state may overcome an illegality by threatening to commit or commit even more illegal acts . At the same time, it leaves a situation, in which a state could overcome an illegal act .
There are numerous examples of similar situations in the past where "giving in" was for the overall good. Certainly, there are many examples .
 Any major relaxation in countermeasures after a shift of focus is evidence of the weakness of this rule . However, when assessing the strength of the rule on annexation, any major relaxation of countermeasures is seen .
 Any ‘giving in’ depicts the rule as something that may be deviated from. Any “giving in" depicts a rule that may have been deviated by the rule .
 The sanctions against Russia are still in force and have been expanded . Fortunately, even though discussions and reports in the media are less prevalent, the sanctions are still being expanded .
Western states have continuously stressed that ending the annexation of Crimea remains a strict condition for any progress . Even concerning the situation in Ukraine itself, Western states have continually stressed that the situation remains a severe condition for progress .
 The conflict in Ukraine itself might appear prone for a compromise à la Russia gets Crimea, Ukraine keeps the Donbass . This is important, as even disregarding the events in Syria, this is important .
 The crisis in East Ukraine is solved, even if Russia gets to keep Crimea . A critic might argue that the crisis could be completely lifted after the crisis is solved .
 India and China have not recognized Crimea as part of Russia but have stuck to their neutral position . Even some of Russia’s strategically most significant allies,India and China, have refused to recognize Crimea in Crimea .
 The U.S.-backed country has recognized Crimea, which has been backed by the United States . commentators have highlighted the historical background of Crimea .
 Many Afghans believe that they have been deprived of a part of their territory by Britain .
 Afghanistan might need new allies, as the U.S. is withdrawing its forces from the country . The United States is also withdrawing its troops from Afghanistan .
 Abkhazia is only recognized by few states, including Russia . However, it is not recognized by many states, such as Russia .
 The situation is unlikely to change, even in the long-term, says Robin Geib . Further examples show that this situation is not likely to change .
 Quantifying the Damage would be a more consequentialist perspective . A positivist perspective would find activity as sufficient, a consequentialist mindset would inquire about the actual damage suffered .
 Some simplifications are necessary to achieve any significant results, but some are necessary . In order to achieve a significant result, some simplifications may be necessary .
 The current study concerns itself with only one aspect of the Ukrainian crisis, namely the events leading up to and immediately following the annexation of Crimea .
 Any sanction taken thereafter would normally have to be ignored, as later sanctions could be attributed to later events in the Ukrainian crisis . Thus, any sanction taken afterward would normally be ignored .
 The sanctions that are now in force must be considered a unitary set of measures . They cannot be dissected as some being a result of Crimea, some purely of later events .
 Russia stopped right after Crimea, but a lower level of overall sanctions would result and therefore also a lower amount of damage . One might argue that had Russia stopped after Crimea would have been less affected .
 Later sanctions were taken in consideration of later events as well as the annexation of Crimea . Namely, they still mostly expanded the measures already in place .
 It seems unlikely that without the annexation such measures would have been taken at all, it seems .
 activities in Eastern Ukraine are only indirectly attributable to Russia . This is because the activities in eastern Ukraine are not directly linked to Russia, it is said .
 The accusation in that case is merely the support of separatist groups in the region. The accusation is merely to support separatist groups.
 It seems unlikely that mere support, continuously denied by Russia, would have prompted sanctions .
 Russia’s support of the Assad regime in Syria has not even lead to a discussion of whether sanctions against Russia are appropriate .
 Sanctions against Russia are only feasible because Russia is perceived as the direct perpetrator rather than a somewhat involved bystander in the cir310 incident . Russia is seen as a direct perpetrator of the incident .
 A cynic could attribute this to different involvement in matters occurring in the West compared to the rest of the world . A cynics could also attribute the West's involvement to a different involvement.
 Syria seems to be an exception in some regards, at least because the West directly feels repercussions through the waves of refugees caused by the conflict .
 The bulk of the damages which occurred through the sanctions will be considered as a result of the annexation .
 Some further issues remain that complicate an assessment of the damage caused by the sanctions .
 The Russian economy is highly dependent on the international energy market . Russia is heavily dependent on energy markets .
313 oil prices have declined ever since 2014 . This, by itself, caused severe damage to the Russian economy .
 Any assessment of the damages caused by the sanctions would have to establish a distinction between losses caused by oil price drop and those caused by sanctions . Any assessment would therefore have to be made of the losses caused.
 Russia has imposed a ban on food imports from Western nations . Additionally, Russia has banned imports of food from the West .
 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries to cut down on their production . This lead to a deal by the Organization. of the petroleum Exporting countries .
 Russia, which is not a member of OPEC, has agreed to also cut its supply . Most importantly, Russia, not an OPEC member, has also agreed to cut its supplies .
 Daniel Gros and Federica Mustilli argue that the sanctions play no role in addition to the recession .
 Many commentators have pointed out that Russia itself has started to acknowledge the impact of the sanctions . However, many commentators have also pointed out Russia itself is beginning to acknowledge its impact .
 These factors produce not only additive, but sometimes also multiplicative effects . Note, however, that these factors produce more additive, and sometimes also multiply .
 A sanction in the form of an import ban of a certain product x would directly result in damages to that industry due to a lower demand for exports of product x . For example, a sanction would directly lead to damages to the industry .
 A ban on product x could further result in a decrease in sales of product y that is not the subject of any sanctions . However, such a ban onProduct x could also result in an increase in sales.
 A focus solely on the damages caused by sanctions would be insufficient. This may have different causes,g. That the demand in product x has created an infrastructure that also allows the transportation and supply of product .
 An analysis should further account for reputational damage incurred from the international reactions. Rather, an analysis should account for the damage caused by international reactions .
 If consumers start avoiding Russian goods, such activity might have the same consequences as a direct embargo . For instance, if consumers started avoiding Russian products, it might have same consequences.
 A state is excluded from specific fora that shape international development, that state will miss opportunities to influence relevant economic decisions . State will miss opportunity to influencerelevant economic decisions, according to experts .
 Any attempt at an assessment would largely rely on counterfactuals dealing with Russia’s role in current international politics had it not been for the annexation .
7.7 blamed for Russia’s recession is mismanagement. Such a counterfactual would be subject to so many possible differences that any realistic assessment is at least beyond the scope of this Article, if not impossible .
 Russian firms are increasingly reliant on the domestic financial sector . Due to being cut off from the international market, they are hit much harder by mismanagement .
 The sanctions on Russia are in fact export embargos, rather than important bans . Note that the sanctions are not intended to affect Russia's economy .
 Many assume that Russian cyber activity has influenced both the Brexit vote as well as the election in the United States .
 The Russian Ruble had lost up to 50% of its value against the United States dollar,319 and the corresponding increase in the first months of 2015 of 2. million people earning annual salaries below the poverty line . This loss amounted to 3.7% in the year
 Many indicated they would have to cut luxury goods due to the crisis . However, many indicated that they would be forced to do so .
 In assessing damages caused directly by the sanctions, analyses usually focus not on the economy as such, but focus on the effects on trade flows in goods targeted by sanctions . The impact of the sanctions can be seen in the United States .
Trade figures show a decline in trade amounting to $3. billion per month . Analysts say that the decline is due to a decrease of $3 billion a month .
 The sanctions led to, on average, a loss of 1.97% of quarter-to-quarter growth . While the sanctions thus have a noticeable effect, it is only of limited gravity .
 In such a scenario, Russia’s role on the international plane would likely be completely different to that of Britain . Britain is no longer part of the EU and Donald Trump is the United States President .
More punishing sanctions are certainly conceivable, but it is questionable whether they would also be desirable . More punishing sanctions would be desirable, but more punishing sanctions could be possible .
 Any loss in trade for Russia is likewise felt by its former trade partners in the West .
324 people suffer from the suffering of the population at large . Some sanctions are largely capable of targeting specific persons or organizations. Second, while some sanctions are mostly aimed at individuals or organizations .
 These results are problematic from a human rights perspective and could also backfire by causing an increase in anti-Western sentiment . It would harden the public opposition to any deal regarding Crimea .
 The strategy adopted by the West is that of applying long-term pressure rather than causing immediate and severe economic damages capable of crippling Russia, partly due to the fear that such activity might incite further military aggression .
 Studies indicate that Western states have thus far been able to cope with these damages . Western states can now cope with such damages, according to studies .
 Variable e indicates the economic advantage gained by controlling Crimea .
 The region has suffered immensely due to both the Russian annexation and thereafter sanctions pertaining to the region . However, the region has also suffered immensely from both the annexation and the sanctions .
 Russia must support the region with funds for the foreseeable future, says Russian official . Russia must help the region, he says .
8 Variable m represents military advantage gained by having Sevastopol base and thus a base in the Black Sea . The value for e is currently negative .
 Russia would certainly have lost a large amount of influence on states in the region . If so, Russia would definitely have lost large amounts of influence.
 Syria would be significantly harder to support without access to the Black Sea . The current prime example is Syria, which would be difficult to support if it had access .
 Russia's military advantage should not be underestimated, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia is currently perceives itself as a nation of power and influence .
 Variable n represents national/domestic support, assumedly a main incentive for the annexation . Variable n is assumedly an incentive for annexation .
 Russian public opinion has long considered Crimea a lost Russian territory . The annexation is domestically considered a strike against the continuing proliferation of NATO and West327.0 .
 Pro-West Ukrainian officials have frequently voiced their intention to exit these deals . At least Russia makes this assumption, and even though the contracts dealing with the base were running for a long period of time .
 The Russian population has for some time encountered the West and specifically NATO as a force that continuously encroaches on Russian interests under the pretense of spreading democracy and liberty . In order to fully acknowledge this aspect, one needs to understand that the Russian population is in danger .
 Some would certainly dismiss such sentiment as founded in propaganda . But one should bear in mind that this sense of dread is hard to set aside as completely unfounded .
 NATO has now grown far beyond East Germany and is virtually at the Russian border . For instance, when discussing German reunification, NATO promised not to station troops in the former German Democratic Republic .
 This should not indicate that Putin himself fears a Western military invasion . This should certainly not indicate the Russian president fears a military invasion.
 NATO tried to take control of more and more territory in Central and Eastern Europe to threaten Russia . An annexation of Ukrainian territory is still not legal, even if NATO tries to take over more territory .
 Russia's annexation had wide-spread support and thus created political gains for Russia’s rulers . However, it should help showcase why, domestically, annexation has wide- spread support . Russia's rulers.
For most values in the equation it is only possible to make rough estimates . For most values, for most values it is not possible to estimate the value .
 guesses will vary significantly based on political ideas and assumptions made . Furthermore, guesses will be based on assumptions made.
 The above equation should help to underline some aspects that are of particular importance for a consequentialist mindset . However, the above equation nonetheless should help.
 Even if one were to assume δ as low, it is still a value that needs to be offset by positive gains .
 Economic advantages are rarely gained in modern times through annexation of territory . Such an act usually entails a heavy toll on the local industry .
 The military gain can be more easily ascertained, depending on a state’s reliance on its military presence .
 Crimea is most likely an outlier as Russia already had a significant military presence in place . However, in this instance, Crimea is more likely to be outlier.
 In fact, it had been promised that NATO would not expand east . But it was not legally binding, and it was never legally binding .
Public opinion is difficult to fully estimate public opinion, especially long-term gains . However, it is hard to fully estimates public opinion .
 A leader's decision results in hard times for a state's population, one may assume that the population will be more open to accept such results if the measure is deemed lawful .
 Different parts of the equation will be affected differently, according to experts . The equation will also be affected by different factors .
Most likely only the military advantage gained by annexing Crimea will remain the same in the longterm . Most likely only military advantage won't remain same in long term .
 The economic advantage would most likely increase over time as new firms might settle in Crimea . New sources of income might emerge in Crimea or new sources of Income might emerge .
 Any benefit gained would most likely be limited as long as the sanctions continue . However, any benefit gained will be limited if sanctions continue.
 This is true regarding the direct damages contained in the equation . This is also true regarding direct damages. This is not only true about direct damages .
 The reputational damages would most likely decrease over time as states rearrange their stance towards Russia . As some states have arguably done due to the Syrian crisis, this equation shows . An annexation or any other breach of international law may be lucrative .
Under certain circumstances crime can be lucrative in a domestic legal system as well .
 A low sentence would be offset by a high reward or simply by a low risk of detection . situations will be lucrative in cases in which a low sentence will be offset.
 Russia domestic support for sanctions will likely decrease, as it is also influenced by sentiment . Within countries sanctioning Russia, support will also likely decrease .
 The sanctions regime might lead to shifts in relations, rather than eventual normalization . Also, the sanctions regime may lead to shift in relations .
 After the Cold War, most Western states formed economic and political ties to Russia . Most Western states may hurt themselves by taking a strong stance on the issue .
 Some states that would have been expected to side with Russia on the issue broke rank . Some states would be expected to be on the side of Russia .
 At least some states acted against and despite those other interests, says John Sutter . Sutter: It is noteworthy that at least some States acted against .
 The responses reveal that even without militarily intervention, Russia has not come out of the crisis unharmed . The responses further reveal that despite sanctions that could have been harsher, Russia hasn't been affected by the crisis .
 States applied pressure through various means, some economic, some political . States applied Pressure through various ways, including economic, political, political .
 Russia has not lost all its friends and compared to many smaller states, it might be able to shake off the pressure more easily . Russia may not have lost any of its friends .
 Both state and private actors have cut some ties to Russia . They perceive Russia as not playing by the rules .
 The first signs are the suspension of G8 membership and of voting rights in PACE . The suspension and termination of negotiations on a variety of treaties, as well as boycott campaigns by individu335 .
Around 70 percent of Crimea’s electricity comes from Ukraine . Few would argue for turning off electricity to pressure the inhabitants to change their minds .
 Putin was held in low regard internationally after the incidents in Ukraine, a Pew Research Center survey found .
 Russia, as a powerful state, can absorb more of these costs than other nations . It remains to be seen how hurtful this situation will be in the long-term, especially since Russia is powerful .
 The sanctions might not directly force Russia to change its actions . Other states facing the same sanctions might make different choices .
 Less powerful states might focus their observations on the magnitude of costs Russia incurred rather than on whether Russia gave in to international pressure . A pure positivist perspective could find plenty of relevant data to start its assessment concerning the prohibition against annexation .
 Some further background information will aid in the assessment, says John Sutter .
 There is still an abundance of conflicts to choose from. Sadly, even considering only conflicts after World War II, there is still a lot of conflicts .
 Any decision to highlight a particular precedent may incite criticism of cherry-picking examples that best fit the chosen line of argument .
 Putin has repeatedly referred to Kosovo when justifying the event in Crimea . It is no surprise that Putin has referred to the example of Kosovo when justified the event .
 The example shows that international crises tend to have similarities and dissimilarities, thus limiting the useful.341 .
 Cost-benefit analysis would include what exactly Russia has gained through its actions . Russia's actions would also include what it has gained in its actions.
 At least some argue that this is rather small, even less than it de facto had before 2014 .
For observers, ramifications are often connected to the character of Putin himself . For observers, Putin's character is often linked to his actions .
Georgia would be negligent to address the Ukrainian crisis, but disregard the similar events in Georgia .
 Both states border Russia and had been part of the Soviet Union . Both involved Russia sending troops into another country’s territory . Both sides justified both interventions by granting protection to Russian minorities .
 The international community’s stronger response to Crimea could therefore be seen as purely politically motivated . The Crimean crisis has been described as 'political'
 The step of officially integrating Crimea has evoked the harsher reactions . But a deeper analysis reveals other potential explanations that support the findings .
 First, the annexation of Kuwait is the poster-child for illegal annexation and how states dealt with it .
 Kuwait is an example of the envisioned enforcement mechanism through the United Nations Security Council resolution at work . Crimea and Kuwait share a strong negative international reaction to annexations, despite other possible third party interests .
 The last example depicts how scholars have evaluated reactions of states, especially of those with other interests, in order to determine the illegality of a situation, thus refining the underlying rules .
 The specific case, Panama, does not involve the political West reacting to some perceived aggression from the outside, but rather featured a Western state whose actions were under scrutiny .
 The RussoGeorgian War lasted from August 7, 2008 to August 12, 2008 . The events culminated in the 2008 Russo Georgian War .
 As of 2017, Russian military occupies the two territories in Georgia, in violation of the ceasefire agreement of August 12, 2008 . Several states and international organizations have issued statements and adopted resolutions condemning the occupation .
349 Russia, Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Nauru are officially recognized as independent states . Only four member states of the United Nations have officially recognized the territories as independent countries .
 No action has been taken by the United Nations Security Council or the U.N. General Assembly . The United Nations has not taken any action .
 None of the measures are as severe as those taken in response to Crimea . Crimea has been declared a state of war in Crimea .
 Crimea and the prohibition of annexation might shed light on Crimea and Crimea . Possible motivations for this qualitative difference may shed light.
 European states in particular might perceive any action in Ukraine as more threatening due to its proximity to Ukraine .
Vanatu and Tuvalu initially recognized independence but later withdrew their recognition . Vanatu andTuvalu originally recognized independence .
 The European community is frequently initiated by a smaller number of states . It is questionable how strong international reaction would have been without a strong European stance .
 Third states felt compelled to follow the European lead, according to the European Union .
1 Concerted action is difficult in such a short time frame, however, that doesn't account for the limited reaction to the ensuing occupation of the two Georgian regions . The war erupted quickly and lasted only for five days .
 In the case of Crimea, both the U.N. General Assembly resolution, as well as all sanctions, took place after Russia had firmly established control in Crimea .
 It was unclear for a long time whether Russia was truly the aggressor. Third, it was unclear if Russia was really the aggressors .
 A fact-finding mission was required to shed further light on the exact circumstances of the crisis . In fact, a fact- finding mission was needed to shed more light on what happened .
 The international community criticized Russia as well as the outcome of the situation . Events had at that point in time stabilized, the international community said .
 The political momentum for more severe actions might simply have faded, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Georgian crisis lacked the formal separation of the two territories, while the Crimean crisis led to official 351.4 Fourth . In Crimea, media reports of Russian troops in Ukraine were consistent from the outset .
 Russia might be in control of both areas and has recognized both territories as independent states . There is arguably a difference in perception between Russia and Russia .
International community may have perceived an internal solution as more appropriate . The lack of knowledge as to whether the inhabitants of these regions were properly represented in the Georgian federal government .
 The Georgian situation differs in two ways from a formal annexation by another state . The Georgian state's situation differs by two ways.
 If one country officially annexes territory of another state, it cannot be assumed that such territory will be handed back in the longterm . If such territory is given back to one country, it can't be assumed.
 The situation changes in quality, as soon as another state annexes territory, the situation changes . One may not know which side is right in an internal crisis .
 It then becomes openly visible that one state has taken territory that used to belong to another country . The territory is then openly visible to the public .
 Many would assume that in the realm of states, the status quo ante was correct . Any change is arguably considered as illegal,356 in which case the international reaction to the Crimean crisis evidences a strong stance against annexation .
 B Kuwait 1990 After Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, it formally annexed its territory on August 8 . The United Nations Security Council immediately passed a resolution declaring the annexation void .
 China voted in favor of the United Nations Security Council resolution . China had provided weapons to Iraq prior to the war .
Former allies of Iraq acted in concert with the rest of the international community . It is important to ask that the reaction towards Iraq was stronger than the reaction to Crimea .
 State reactions will always be the same, but it cannot be expected that state reactions will be same . State reactions are always the same.
 Kuwait may be understood as in line with lesson that third states will act to end annexation even if such response contradicts other incentives .
 Crimea has stronger repercussions overall, according to a report . Crimea's Crimea has a stronger impact on Crimea's future .
 Any action is more noteworthy if it is taken against other interests or against more important states . This is because from a consequentialist perspective any action is less important than against other states .
 Opposing Saddam Hussein in 1990 would carry less actual or potential risk of negative consequences than opposing Putin in 2014 .
Fewer states had direct connections to Iraq than have now to Russia . Fewer states now have direct connections with Iraq than now .
 See World Acts Against Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait, supra note 360; Tisdall & Hirst, supra notes 360. See World Act Against Iraqi invasion of Kuwait .
Thirty-five thousand U.S. citizens were living in Panama . The Panama Canal was regulated by the Torrijos-Carter Treaty .
 The United States relied on an invitation to intervene by the person they perceived as the rightful president . In addition, the U.S. relied on a invitation to intervention by the president .
 The international community recognized the invasion as illegal. Nonetheless, the invasion is still illegal .
 General Assembly adopted a resolution that condemned the invasion, with seventy-five in favor, twenty against, and forty abstentions . The resolution was approved by the General Assembly .
 The Organization of American States deplored the invasion in a resolution . The situation contains a number of similarities to the Crimean annexation . Panama was not annexed .
State action shapes the perception of a conflict under international law. It still supports analysis that state action shapes perception of conflict under law .
 Austria, Finland, Spain, and Sweden voted for U.N. Gen364 . It is important to note that not all Western states condemned the U.S. actions .
 The argumentation was similar to the one used by Putin in regard to Crimea . In this regard, the argumentation is similar to that of Putin .
 This circumstance is considered strong evidence for the widely agreed upon determination that U.S. actions were contrary to international law . This circumstance has been considered a strong evidence .
 Panamanian example shows a breach of international law, alongside opposition of friendly states, helped to shape and enhance international law . Overall, the Panamian example evidences a situation in which international law was breached .
 Most significantly, states may condemn these violations, even when committed by their allies . Most significantly. States may also condemn those violations .
State action can be considered as one factor for the determination of legality . Such state action can also be considered a factor in determining legality .
 Even the Georgian crisis of 2008 might be seen to support such a conclusion . State action may be influenced by the blatant and permanent nature of the violation .
 This part will assess the lessons drawn from the Ukrainian crisis for the prohibition on annexation . The part will also examine the international reactions to Crimea .
 The absence of state practice is relevant in this specific regard, and can be seen as overwhelming . Especially this absence of State practice is important, says the author .
 Russia's activities can be seen as an outlier, and might simply constitute a violation . Russia’s activities can also be considered a violation.
 Third states' reactions themselves will not qualify as state practice, but may rather qualify as evidence of opinio juris. It should be noted, that third states’ reactions themselves may not be state practice .
 The Crimean example does not provide much in the sense of state practice, as it does not change the fact that the majority of states have not annexed foreign territory recently .
 The question is whether the states refrain from annexing territory because of a sense of legal obligation, or because of some other reason .
 A sense of legal obligation must be affirmed, the U.N. General Assembly resolution says . A small number of states in favor, the small number against, says the resolution .
As resolutions are nonbinding, it seems questionable how they can determine what states consider binding . It's unclear how states can decide what they consider binding.
 U.N. General Assembly resolutions may provide evidence of opinio juris, al372. However, more recent decisions point in a different direction .
 Also termed “accepted as law’s” see Michael Wood (Special Rapporteur on identification of customary international law)
 State A carries out action x, then State B’s negative reaction y could be relevant state practice for a rule that action x must be answered by 374 .
 Of course, these abstentions aren’t evidence of a decline in the prohibition on annexation. Of course.
First, states that abstained gave various reasons, none of which involved declaring the annexation was lawful . First, states said they did not give reasons for abstaining .
 Only small number of states opposed a specific resolution . Overall, these deliberations should call for caution, even in cases in which only small numbers opposed a particular resolution .
 Resolution 68/262 can be doubted whether it can serve to identify juris, at least by itself . The individual reactions by states can be taken into account .
 Statements of condemnation and sanctions evince that states perceive an annexation as contrary to customary international law and further show they perceive the situation in Crimea to fall into the category of an annexation .
 The inactivity of most states stems from a sense of legal obligation pertaining to a prohibition on annexation . It can be deduced that most states are inactivity.
 Crimea is perceived as an annexation. Second, third states’ actions show that Crimea is considered an annexation .
 Crimea sheds light on both the existence, as well as the content of the prohibition on annexation . Crimea shed light on the existence of Crimea and the prohibition of annexation .
 Most importantly, in its legal determinations, it agrees with the Western analysis that an annexation is contrary to customary international law .
 It differs in whether the case of Crimea constitutes an annexation . However, it differs in if the case is an annexation.
 The differences regard the assessment of facts, as well as in application of the prohibition, not in its existence . The difference is not in the application of prohibition.
 Russia's prohibition on annexation can, from a positivist perspective, hardly be doubted . Even taking into account Russia, the existence of the prohibition on annexing Russia can, according to the author .
 The significance of the Crimean example should not be ignored. The significance should nonetheless not be ignore .
 Analysis shows that even a breach of international law can support the existence of rule rather that shed doubt on it. First, the analysis shows that the breach of law can be supported .
 The rule at stake is a prohibition, but breaches will result in more data than compliance . In some cases, breach of the rule is more important than compliance, according to the law .
 A consequentialist may argue that compliance has a number of reasons, none of them evidencing any support in the rule itself . This is because a consequentialist might argue that Compliance has a few reasons .
 A breach that entails a sharp international reaction will show evidence that third states believe in the validity of the rule and their obligation to protect it .
 The assessment of positivist results from Crimea shows both opportunities as well as pitfalls of determining customary international law and especially jurisio juris .
 The analysis highlights the difficulties such an analysis entails, even when it appears states concur on the existence of a rule .
 The above analysis carries to light some consequentialist insights, primarily addressing some of the criticisms of international law .
 In order to fully understand the consequentialist results, a short depiction of such criticism is in order . The author says that in order to understand the consequences, such criticism should be taken seriously .
 A plethora of individual critiques of international law exist and differ in their particular approaches . Many of these critiques of the law are different from those of other countries .
 Two strands of criticism are highlighted here in order to address possible general ramifications of Crimea . Not all of these approaches can be addressed in this analysis, but not all can be discussed .
 The first view, an extreme realist stance, would deny international law any significance at all, based on a lack of enforceability . The first. view would be an extremerealist stance .
 The view is seen as one extreme on a spectrum, the author says . The opposing end forms the view that international norms clearly motivate state behavior, he says .
 The first view would question a prohibition on jaywalking because the prohibition is not enforced . To give an example from domestic law, jay walking is not allowed in the UK .
 A consequentialist perspective on Crimea casts doubt on the first strand of critique of international law . The second view would rather question the motivation of those that do not jaywalk, proposing alternative explanations .
 These were not of a military nature and certainly could have been stronger . But to set aside the reactions as inconsequential misconstrues the facts, they were not.
 Russia has not swayed Russia to alter its course of action. Proponents of such a view would certainly stress that nothing has swayed Russia's actions .
 This is an important point, but nonetheless should not be confused with no enforcement at all . This is a important point. This is not the first time this has happened .
 In most legal systems, civil suits will only result in the obligation to pay monetary sums . In most cases, the money will only be paid out in court .
 This does not mean that the relevant norms in the domestic legal system are ineffective . This is not the case that domestic legal systems are ineffective, says the author .
 The second strand of criticism is more difficult to encounter as it focuses on the motivation of actors, rather than their actions . Overall, this common criticism has difficulties addressing the repercussions that follow violations of international law .
 For the sake of the following discussion, it will be assumed that the following norms are not among the interests that motivate state behavior .
Safety is also the motivating factor behind the law prohibiting jaywalking . This specific example is lacking insofar as safety is also a motivating factor .
 A more extreme example would pit abiding the law against some completely unrelated form of selfinterest . A moreextreme example would be a more extreme version of the law .
 The decentralized form of enforcement leads to weaker and stronger reactions in particular cases .
 This can be considered problematic, but one can once again find similarities in domestic systems . This can certainly be considered troublesome, but it can be seen as a good example .
 In legal systems that grant prosecutorial discretion, not every violation of the law will be pursued equally . For instance, in legal systems, not all violations will be followed equally .
 This Article can certainly not solve all remaining questions, but some lessons can be drawn from Crimea. Various analyses progressed this debate .
Realist analyses of state action are based on rational choice and game theory . Many realist analyses have been based on game theory and rational choice .
 In such an analysis, focal points,385 actions by an actor that lead to reactions by others,386 are relevant . In such a analysis, the analysis, focuses on focal points.
 The annexation of Crimea is such a focal point, which led to severe reactions . The annexation led to a series of violent reactions .
State actors might be punishing other actors for defecting from an agreed upon behavior, not annexing territory .
 The strong reaction makes it less likely that such behavior will occur again in the future, by any actor . It's less likely than any actor will act again.
 Crimea's prohibition on annexation has been strengthened as a result of Crimea's annexation . The conclusion may be drawn.
 Such a result is independent of whether or not states were motivated by bringing a defecting actor back into compliance with the law or by self-interest .
 Second, the above analysis has taken into account various motivations of actors .
Every state has many, sometimes conflicting, motivations in such a scenario. Every state has some of its own reasons for its actions .
 Even most European states were aware of the harm that would come from acting against Russia . Even most countries were aware that Russia could harm them if they acted against them .
 One might assume that any of these different self-interests rather than norm-compliance have been the key factor in state action . proving the opposite is virtually impossible .
 Many states opposed Russia’s actions in Crimea, even though many had opposing 384 . On the other hand, many states also opposed Russia's actions .
 Situations might exist in which state action would be taken regardless of how other states act. Situations may exist if other states do not act .
 The large number of states opposing Russia’s actions make it more likely that at least some states acted because of norm-compliance .
 At least, it appears to be an indicator that preventing annexation is in the self-interest of most states .
 This by itself could be seen as an indicator of the strength of the rule. This by themselves could be a sign of the power of the government .
Third, even in a system in which actors are purely motivated by their self-interest, international law still serves as the language of such a system .
 Terms as legal or illegal are used as a symbol to the other actors for which route of actions they should take .
 All discussions were held in the language of law. In addition, it should be noted that all discussions were in law's language .
 Russia justified any action taken as in conformity with international law, according to the U.S. While the West criticized Russia for its violations, Russia justified its actions .
 In the beginning, Russia also denied some of the factual allegations brought forward . The issue was never in how far a prohibition on annexation existed or whether a violation was to be sanctioned .
 Second, those activities were described as fully conforming with international law . Third, the activities were said to have been fully conformed with law .
Both strategies indicate the perceived strength of the prohibition on annexation . Both strategies indicate a perceived strength in the prohibition of annexation .
 The denial of any involvement, however, evidences how far the prohibition against annexation has been internalized . The denial is not the first time the prohibition has beenInternalized .
 No actor has argued that either an annexation would never be illegal or that it would not be illegal in this specific case . No actors have argued that neither would ever be illegal.
 Russia has gone out of its way to showcase its actions as merely supporting the right to self-determination of the Crimean people . Russia says its actions were in fact not an annexation .
 A play on words is not uncommon in a political world, it nonetheless is 389 . A critic may rightfully note, that such a play on Words was not uncommon .
 This perspective underlines an assumption that the Georgian crisis was not perceived as a blatant violation . The Georgian crisis is not seen as blatant violation, says the author .
 scholars point to the distinction between following norms because of their utility and following them because of the inherent sense of appropriateness is difficult to maintain . Fourth, scholars say that following norms is difficult for scholars to maintain.
 norms most often exist because of self-interests, according to experts . In international law, norms result from the behavior of the actors .
Law-conformity may simply be a self-interest among many other interests . Overall, law-conformsity may just be aSelf-interest, according to the study .
 Many rules of international can be considered self-enforcing, says John Sutter .
 A state will act in conformity with its obligations, as it wishes other states to do the same . In this sense, a state will acts in conformity to its obligations .
 It seems doubtful whether the Russian annexation of Crimea will lead to the prohibition on annexation fading out of existence . Otherwise, a state may set out a precedent that others might follow.
 Russia has depicted its actions as in conformity with international law. Once again, Russia has shown its actions in conformity to international law .
 The relevant question is not whether an annexation is legal, it certainly is not, but whether and how far actions taken by Russia were an annexation in the first place .
 Russian arguments go well beyond previous argumentations based on 394.4. Both of these questions may seem far-fetched .
 Both concepts have played a role in the discussions, but it seems noteworthy that both concepts have been discussed .
 Putin has made explicit reference to the German reunification and thereby acquired at least some support in Germany .
 Afghanistan may have been persuaded by this line of argumentation . Afghanistan, as well, may also be persuaded by the line.
 The case of Kosovo, which itself was phrased in terms of legality, only opened up the possibility of a further erosion of once firm principles .
 It is up for debate specifically how international law has compelled states to react to Russia . It is also up for discussion specifically how it has forced states to respond to Russia.
Even theories of international law based on states as rational actors might not necessarily deny that law may have played some role in the ongoing events . However, even theories of the international law may not necessarily denies that law has played a role .
 On the surface, international reactions to Crimea appear insignificant. CONCLUSION on the surface appears insignificant .
 Russia is still in control of the region without any sincere attempts to push it out with force . Russia is in control. Russia has been trying to push the region out of control with force.
 At the same time, the sanctions taken are sometimes criticized as too lax .
International reactions are in fact significant, but closer scrutiny reveals that international reactions are significant .
 No military action has been taken, but any such demand is based on a flawed understanding of how the international system should be enforced . It is true that no military action have been taken.
 Those that were taken must be measured against the interdependence of acting states and Russia, as well as the desire for a political solution . Those that are taken must also be measured.
 Crimea itself is far from prosperous;405 international reaction and sanctions damaged both the Russian economy, as well as Russia's reputation .
 Actions such as excluding Russia from the G8 might have long-term implications . In addition, actions such as exclude Russia from G8 may have long term implications .
 Crimea's actions are significant in revealing that states’ actions do not always fall in line with their otherwise existing interests . Most importantly, reactions to Crimea are significant, however, in revealing how states' actions are not always in line .
 Some states will support their allies throughout the whole process, according to CNN .
 Some will act in ways that might seem contradictory, considering their economic or political dependence on the primary actors . Some may act in the same way, but others may act differently .
 One explanation for the contradictory behavior lies in the legal effects created by the prohibition on annexation .
 States were compelled to act in accordance with their international obligations, whether directly or as a means to serve other interests. Independent of their affiliations, states were forced to act .
 This does not necessarily lead to the expectation that every state was to strongly oppose Russian actions and install sanctions . It does not lead to an expectation that all states should strongly oppose Russia .
 Any amount of action that is taken in response to a violation of international law bears legal significance . In fact, any amount of actions that is taking in response is legal.
 An analysis of the situation suggests that the prohibition of annexation is still strongly in place . First, seen from a positivist perspective, the prohibition is still strong .
 determining international law largely depends on state action, according to the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Any such action helps to illuminate the exact content of a rule. Any such act therefore helps to illuminated the content of the rule .
 The inhabitants are confronted with issues arising from a sudden shift and overlap in jurisdiction . In addition, the inhabitants are faced with issues relating to sudden shifts and overlap .
 Russia has referred to international precedent in justification of its measures, especially Kosovo . It should be noted that Russia has called for international precedent to be considered .
 A strong backlash itself can constitute evidence of the illegality of a given action . It might help to distinguish current from past cases .
 Crimea's annexation was strengthened by the events surrounding Crimea, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: At least the prohibition of annexation was stronger by Crimea's events .
 If one were to assess whether a United Nations veto power could take any action whatsoever without having to fear repercussions, such an assessment would likely be different before and after Crimea .
 Georgia's 2013 perspective was bound to be more pessimistic than previous examples, such as Georgia's .
In 2017, any state might reconsider whether expected repercussions are worth a desired annexation . In 2017, the state may reconsider whether it's worth an annexation .
 It may be argued that Russia underestimated the international reaction when deciding to take action .
 This does not mean that the annexation of further territory is rendered impossible . This doesn't mean that it is impossible to annexate further territory .
 This does not indicate that Russia will not be able to maintain the annexation for a long period of time . This also does not mean that Russia won't have to keep the annexation.
 It appears questionable whether a system that enforces international law through warfare would be preferable . Similarly, it appears questionable if a system of international law would be better .
 Crimea might greatly influence those states that do not have veto rights in the U.N. Security Council .
 The international community stood up against Russia's annexation of Crimea . For those states, it will create a weighty deterrence, preventing any similar actions .