 RUSSIA’S THREAT to NATO’s ENHANCED FORWARD PRESENCE in the BALTIC States . Michael R Kristek Sr. is a former NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL MONTEREY .
 Mikhail Tsypkin Second Reader: Thomas-Durell Young Approved for public release . Mikhail T Sypkin second reader: Thomas TsyPkin Second Readers .
 RUSSIA’S THREAT TO NATO’s ENHANCED FORWARD PRESENCE in the BALTIC States . The U.S. is the first NATO member-nation in the world to join NATO .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has deployed Enhanced Forward Presence forces to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland to deter Russian aggression . Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and subsequent military support to separatists fighting in Eastern Ukraine.
 EFP suggests policy makers consider a Russian incursion into the Baltic States a significant possibility . The EFP says policy makers should consider a Russia incursion.
 It details Russia’s national security strategy, military doctrine, and foreign policy toward the Baltic States . It also details Russia's political-strategic objectives .
 The EFP presents a viable military deterrent against Russian armed aggression through its trip-wire function . It would lead to deterrence by punishment by punishment .
 Baltic States remain vulnerable to Russian political and social influence by way of energy dependence, malign state influence in the information sphere, and Estonia and Latvia’s own divisive citizenship policies .
 NATO's ability to develop consensus on and codify what actions constitute an information operations attack will enhance NATO’s ability to deter Russian information warfare . NATO”s ability of developing consensus on, codifying what actions constitutes an information operation attack will increase NATO‘
 RUSSIA’S THREAT TO NATO’s ENHANCED FORWARD PRESENCE in the BALTIC States . Michael R Kristek Sr. is a former member of the U.S. Navy.
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has deployed Enhanced Forward Presence forces to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland to reassure NATO’s members .
7.7 A The IMPETUS for NATO action . 7.7 a The IMPetus for NATO Action . 7 1.2 for the United States .
Covert Invasion and Annexation of Crimea. Covert Invasion of Crimea . Covert invasion and annexation of Ukraine .
 Russian-Backed Separatist Campaign in the Donbas is the latest in a long line of anti-government efforts .
 NATO’s Readiness Action Plan and the European Reassurance Initiative .........................................................13 2.3.3 . NATO's Readiness action Plan and European Re Assurance Initiative .
17. RUSSIAN POLICY and STRATEGY. 27 1. RUSSIA and the BALTIC States are the top three countries .
27.27. 27.27 . 27. 27 . 27 .
29 D IMPLICations for the BALTIC States . 29 D IMports for the U.S.
 Concept and Aims of Hybrid Warfare are a two-year project .
 Russia’s Hybrid Warfare Goals and Methods in the Baltic States . Russia's Hybrid Warfare goals and Methods are revealed .
 RUSSIAN MILITARY CAPABILITY ..............................................................43 A REFORMS................................................................................................43 1.43 A ReFORMS.
 Serdyukov, Makarov, and the New Look are the three most popular new looks in the world .
 Shoigu: "Shoigu" is a Japanese language language . The country's most popular language .
 Organizational Reforms are now in place for the first time in 20 years .
 Material Reforms were introduced to the public in 2010 . The first two years of this year's program were the first two .
64 2.3.2.3 . 2.4.4 . 3.4%. 3.5.5 . 4.5%. 4.6.7.7 . 5.6 . 4 .5.7%. 5.7% . 5%
 Syria has a record of 75 per cent of the world's population . The country's population is estimated to have been at least 1,000 years old .
 The Battalion Tactical Group and its Organization and Equipment are among the top three military units in the world .
 A person is a person who has a history of being a person. A person can be a person with a long history of history . A person has a long-term history of having a long time relationship with others .
 The author's son says he has endured countless family obligations without him . He says: "For the sake of me completing my schoolwork," he says .
 Thank you for the countless evenings of putting the children to bed, providing coffee or water, cooking meals, running errands, and generally picking up the slack for everything I should have been doing .
 Major Jake Hubbard has been in charge of the U.S. Army since 2007 . He has served in the Army for more than 20 years . He says he will continue to advocate for his military career .
 Major Tom Kulisz and Major Andrew Reaves provided my krisha . They were instrumental in navigating both NPS and the Marine Corps’ EWS though a year and a half .
 I owe Professor Donald Abenheim a debt of gratitude for providing me with a “real graduate school experience’s” experience .
 To Professors David Yost, James Moltz, Covell Meyskens, Richard Grahlman, and Scott Jasper, thank you for affording me the opportunity to make my research relevant to your classes .
 Captain Christopher Bone took the time to actually read his thesis and for your comments and feedback .
 Professor Mikhail Tsypkin is grateful for the long leash and freedom that you allowed him to stay with his advisors .
 The professional contacts you provided were indispensable, and your quick, insightful comments and reviews speak to your tremendous skill and depth of knowledge . The professional contact you provided are indispensable, according to your professional contacts .
 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization has deployed Enhanced Forward Presence forces to Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland to deter Russian aggression . Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and subsequent military support to separatists fighting in Eastern Ukraine has prompted the deployment .
 The U.S. Army maintained a series of field manuals that analyzed the organization, doctrine, operations, tactics and equipment of the Soviet Army .
 These field manuals served as the basis for how U.S. and NATO ground combat forces organized and trained to fight a Soviet adversary .
 The U.S. Army maintains only a generic, non-country-specific, opposition force series on adversary organization, operations, tactics, and equipment . With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States Army now maintains a generic.
 Russian military continues to modernize, experiment, and reorganize . The Army’s current OPFOR publications are based on post-Soviet forces .
 These reforms began with an attempt to transition from a mobilization force built upon conscripts to a professional force . The reforms were designed to transition to a pro-military force .
 Russia instituted its ‘New Look’ reforms to address organizational and battlefield deficiencies . Russia’s poor yet effective 2008 performance in Georgia.
 The Russian military is reverting back to Soviet-era formations . In response to NATO’s EFP in Poland and the Baltic States, however, the Russian military has reverted back toSoviet-era formation .
 NATO and Russian forces may engage in combat within the Baltic States . NATO ground forces should understand the nature of the Russian threat, experts say .
 This thesis analyzes how Russian forces could engage NATO ground forces in the Baltic States . This thesis also analyzes the role of Russia in the region .
 It analyzes if the scenario of direct military confrontation is plausible and assesses what events would precipitate it . It also assesses if the situation is plausible . The scenario is likely to take place between Russian and NATO forces .
 There are three primary schools of thought regarding whether or not armed conflict between Russia and NATO in the Baltic States is plausible .
 The first is an ideologically driven argument, typified by Russian policy analyst Mikhail Aleksandrov and Russian-nationalist political scientist Alexander Dugin’s writings . It points to the inevitability of Russia reabsorbing the Baltic States through the realization of its greatpower status .
 Two schools in Crimea are informed by opposing views of the Crimean affair .
 One side views it as Russian opportunism during a period of instability on its border . One side says it was an opportunism in the region during a time of instability .
 The other sees it as a calculated manifestation of Russian hybrid warfare doctrine, attributed to General Valery Gerasimov . The other says it applies all the instruments of national power against an enemy .
 The third school of Post-Soviet thought warning of Russia’s possible military designs in the Baltic States is deductive reasoning . The Zapad series of JSEs.
 Many Western defense and security experts view Zapad exercises as blueprints for how Russia would attack the Baltic States and potentially Poland . Despite the stated goals of Zapad as a counterinsurgency exercise, many Western defense experts view the exercises as an exercise .
 Several think tanks have participated in wargames to investigate the outcome of a Russian invasion of the Baltic States . ongoing Russian military reorganization, modernization, and tactical refinement beg the question of how the Russians would actually fight in such a scenario .
 The hybrid scenarios involve Russia infiltrating non-conventional forces to stoke ethnic tension, organizing separatist paramilitaries in ethnically-Russian dominant cities .
 separatists would be supported by information operations, to include cyber attacks . The separatists would support information operations .
 NATO response would lead to a conventional Russian incursion in defense of ethnic Russians . A NATO response could lead to an incursion by Russian forces .
Experts disagree on Russia’s reliance upon a strategic nuclear deterrent, non-strategic nuclear forces, or conventional precision-guided munitions .
 Either scenario would involve conventional forces at some point . Russia would adopt a conventional or hybrid approach .
 There are conflicting opinions on whether or not a conventional Russian force in the Baltic States would be based on the New Look reforms or a more traditional Cold War model .
 New Look reforms are characterized by Battalion Tactical Groups . They are subordinate to brigades and operating under the command and control of armies .
 The Cold War model is characterized by regiments, subordinate to divisions, operating under the C2 of armies . The C2 model is defined by regimental units, which are subordinate to division .
 United States Army War College Assessment on Russian Strategy in Eastern Europe and Recommendations on How to leverage Landpower to maintain the Peace .
 Swedish analysis of Zapad exercises foresees tank and combined-arms armies as the primary model for a Russian advance into the Baltic States .
 These armies would be supported by airborne units with attached tank companies and naval infantry amphibious landings, all backed by large-scale indirect fires .
 The primary gaps in the literature fail to address how C2 was executed from within the Western Military District during its Zapad exercises . C2 is executed in the West Military District.
 There are operational and tactical implications for NATO forces depending on whether or not Russian forces were employed as fully-manned brigades, as single BTGs under the command of a brigade, single BTG under direct C2 of armies .
 The wargame literature does not appear to account for the Russian military’s reconstitution of tank armies .
 It also fails to address whether or not lessons learned in fire support and coordinating arms post-Georgia have been integrated into Russian tactical doctrine .
 The most significant piece of information missing from the literature at the outset of thesis research was how Russia will carry out the Zapad 2017 exercise . The most important piece of data missing was the information on Russia's plan to carry out a Zapad exercise .
 The 2017 installment portrays the latest Russian thinking in organization, doctrine, and tactics, and equipment . If Russia is training to fight NATO in the Baltic States through Zapad, the 2017 installment will be the latest installment of the series .
 The most compelling argument for whether or not Russia will invade the Baltic States is articulated best by retired U.S. diplomat Kirk Bennet .
 He postulates that a Russian invasion of the Baltic States would simply be too costly for Russia . He says that a Russia invasion would be too expensive for Russia.
 It would jeopardize Russia’s operations in Ukraine, the Caucuses, and Syria . It would also jeopardize Russian operations in Syria, Ukraine and Syria.
 Additional international sanctions would cripple Russia’s energy exports, thus bankrupting the economy . Furthermore, additional international sanctions could cripple the country's energy exports .
 To fulfill the aims of this thesis, there must be an assumption that Russia would invade . There must also be a belief that Russia will invade, says the author .
 Any protracted attempt at state capture through hybrid means, using special operations forces and intelligence operatives in a covert campaign to support an ethnic Russian separatist movement, would likely draw a NATO buildup .
 Russia's most likely course of action will be an armor heavy Blitzkrieg from Belarus into the Baltic States . The WMD’s newly reconstituted 1st Guards Tank Army has the goal of securing permanent geographic access to the Kaliningrad Oblast .
 The U.S. Defense Research Agency, 2013, is the largest defense research agency in the world . The agency is based in Washington, D.C., and has been working with the Russian Ground Forces .
 Viktor Yanukovych abdicated his presidential responsibilities and fled Ukraine in the face of the Euromaidan Revolution . The Kremlin seized the opportunity to intervene militarily.
 Russia’s Crimean campaign was fueled by fears of both Russian regime instability vis a vis the Euromaidan “color revolution” movement . The implication that Russia's Black Sea Fleet anchorage in Crimea may have been threatened by the deteriorating civil and security situation in Ukraine may
 Russia’s interests include maintaining Black Sea Fleet ports in Crimea, and the capability they provide Russia to project power into the Mediterranean and beyond .
 NATO and EU expansion threaten Putin’s quest to balance the West through a Russian-dominated Eurasianist hegemony .
 A corollary to that goal is the unification of ethnic Russians and the greater Slavic peoples . The goal is to unify ethnic Russian and Slavs .
 The Euromaidan movement provided a power-vacuum through which the Kremlin could seize the initiative to secure its interests . The Kremlin is promoting union with ethnic Russians in Crimea and the Donets Basin region of Eastern Ukraine .
 They advanced until significant resistance was met, and then consolidated their gains through deterrence and diplomacy . They advanced. They advanced before significant resistance and diplomacy was met .
 A Primer on Modern Russian Unconventional Warfare, Ukraine 2013-2014 (Fort Bragg, NC: The United States Army Special Operations Command, June 2015)
 Covert Invasion and Annexation of Crimea likely began developing plans to seize Crimea following the dissolution of the Soviet Union . Covert invasion and annexation likely began after Soviet Union dissolution .
 These plans would have been updated during the 2004 Orange Revolution, and the 2013 Euromaidan movement .
 Russian forces moved against Crimean administrative facilities, followed by key aviation and air defense units . Russian forces also moved against key Crimean administrative buildings .
 Russian special designation (Voyska Spetsialnovo Naznacheniya—Spetsnaz) and special operations forces initially blockaded military units, while fully seizing air defense.
 Despite Russia’s illegal covert actions, there did not appear to be enmity between the Ukrainians and Russians at many locations under siege .
 Russian forces eventually withdrew or relaxed their posture outside many Ukrainian military facilities . While waiting for a diplomatic resolution, Russian forces ultimately withdrew or relaxed their posture .
 Russia's Crimean operation began in force in the early morning on 27 February 2014 . Russia’s Crimean operation started in force on February 27 2014 .
 Special Operations Command (KSO) and the Airborne Forces’ 45th Guards Separate Spetsnaz Regiment (KSSO) seized Crimea’s parliament building .
 Russia's Black Sea Fleet blockaded Ukraine’s naval surface forces in port in Crimea . Coast Guard was unsuccessful in preventing the Coast Guard from fleeing .
 The Military Operation for Crimea,’ in Brothers Armed: Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, ed. The Military operation for Crimea.
 It often denotes a unit which is not under the direct tasking authority of the unit to which it is subordinate . But rather, it is under the C2 of a higher-echelon command; Georgian intelligence officer; Georgia intelligence officer .
 The Kremlin ordered snap inspections across the Western and Southern Military Districts . On 28 February, the Kremlin orderedsnap inspections.
 Black Sea Fleet Spetsnaz lifted into Crimea via Mi-8 helicopters that were escorted by Mi-35M attack helicopters . Mi-7 helicopters escorted byMi-35m attack helicopters to Crimea .
 In the afternoon, approximately 1500 Spetsnaz were lifted into Crimea by Il-76 transports . In the morning, approximately1500 SpetsNaz were lifting into Crimea .
 Spetsnaz seized Crimea’s airport and the Ukrainian state television station . The airport and state TV station were seized .
 The 10th Sep Spetsnaz Bde surrounded Crimea's parliament building, augmenting Russian forces already in control of the building .
 Russian forces surrounded three Ukrainian air-defense regiments and two radar installations . The 55th Anti-aircraft Missile Regiment in Yevpatoria was surrounded .
 The 10th Sep Spetsnaz Bde arrived in Crimea between 1 and 2 March . The 382nd Sep Marine Bn conducted an amphibious landing in Feodosiya .
 Russian researcher Anton Lavrov notes that uniformed Spetsnaz, without insignia, deployed across Crimea in “battalion and company-sized troop convoys…in trucks…accompanied by armored vehicles’ on 2 March .
 Russian forces established a logistics staging area at Lazarevsky barracks . The barracks had been long been abandoned for military purposes .
Russian naval forces blockaded Ukrainian naval forces in Novoozerne on 5 March . Russian naval forces blocked Ukrainian forces.
 Russian forces surrounding the 5th Naval Aviation Bde at Novofedorivka airfield were unable to prevent the unit from flying five helicopters and three fixed-wing aircraft off the installation and into Ukrainiancontrolled airspace .
 These were the only Ukrainian aircraft to flee Crimea over a five-day period . This occurred over the last five days .
 Russian forces transitioned from deploying lightly armed and equipped Spetsnaz in Ukraine to deploying armored vehicles and artillery, as well as attack aircraft, along Russia’s border with Ukraine to deter a Ukrainian counterattack .
 On 6 March, Russian forces scuttled the decommissioned Russian Ochakov to assist in blockading Ukrainian naval holdouts .
 The 727th Sep Marine Bn and the 18th Guards Sep Motorized Rifle Bde began moving from their bases in Russia toward Crimea on 6 March . The 7 27th Sep Marines began moving to Crimea in March .
 On 9 March, the 11th Sep Coastal Defense Rocket Artillery Bde, with 3K55 K-300P Bastion-P coastaldefense cruise missiles, was observed in Crimea .
 The CDCMs served as antiaccess and area denial deterring against third-party intervention . Ukrainian navy was already blockaded by the Ukrainian navy .
 The 18th Sep MRBde entered Crimea and reinforced Spetsnaz and proxy forces at the Perekop Isthmus . The 18th SepMRBde is the 18th September MRBDe .
 Russian units at Perekop, reinforced with artillery and multiple-launch rocket systems, were the primary defense against a Ukrainian counterattack . The Russian units were reinforced with weapons and artillery .
 Russian KSSO forces began the operation to seize the remaining Ukrainian military units that had taken defensive positions in their bases in March .
Motorized infantry in armored personnel carriers, Mi-35M attack helicopters, as well as proxy forces . They were supported by motorized infantry. They were also supported by armored personnel carrier and attack helicopters .
 The Russians systematically boarded and seized Ukrainian vessels, while surrounding and coercing ground forces through shows of force . The Russian forces seized the Ukrainian vessels .
 Russia had affected the surrender or defection of all Ukrainian forces in Crimea . By 25 March, Russia had had affected or defected of all Ukraine forces .
 Russian-Backed Separatist Campaign in the Donbas. Concurrently with its covert invasion of Crimea, Russia began its military intervention .
 Sutyagin argues that Russia’s goal in Ukraine is maintaining control over a reintegrated Donbas . He says it gives the Kremlin influence within the Ukrainian political process .
 The Russian military’s primary mission in the Donbas is to advise and assist, and build the capacity of RBS forces in Eastern Ukraine .
 Russia deployed 40,000 to 50,000 ground combat troops and an additional 45,000 combat support and combat service support forces on the border with Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova .
 These forces provided deterrence against Ukrainian forces fighting RBS, while also providing a rear area in which to organize and train for combat operations in Ukraine .
 The primary methods Russian forces used to assist RBS were providing C2, intelligence, weapons and equipment, and training . RBS was used to train and train RBS .
 Russian forces provided persistent cross-border fire support, and ultimately engaged in direct offensive combat operations at the brigade level . Russian forces were involved in direct combat operations.
 RBS, under Spetsnaz guidance, began seizing buildings in the Donbas in March .
 RBS seized the Donetsk television station and began broadcasting Russian Today instead of Ukrainian programming on 27 April .
Russian artillery forces initiated cross-border strikes against Ukrainian forces in July 2014 . In response, Russian artillery forces launched cross- border strikes against Ukraine forces .
 In August, Russia intervened directly with ground forces, committing approximately 4,000 conventional forces to spoil Ukraine’s successful counteroffensive .
 The Kremlin's committal of conventional forces demonstrates the futility of its hybrid methods against forces willing to offer resistance .
 Russian forces resumed a front-line combat role after the Minsk I agreement . However, after the agreement, Russian forces continued to fight on the ground .
 The 5th Tank Bn and 37th MRBde deployed to the Donbas in February 2015, engaging Ukrainian forces in Debal’tseve . The Ukrainian forces are the fifth and third largest in the country .
 Putin’s War in Ukraine (Washington, DC: Atlantic Council, 2015), 5; Sutyagin, “Russian Forces in Ukraine” 1.5 .
 By March 2015, Russia had approximately 12,000 forces in the Donbas serving in both advisor and directcombat roles .
 Russia employed intelligence personnel, local and foreign paramilitary and volunteer fighting formations, and private military corporations under Russian leadership to wage its campaign against Ukraine .
 The Baltic States are experiencing renewed fear of Russian invasion of Ukraine . Russia's hybrid campaign in Ukraine has led to renewed fear in the Baltic States .
 The Baltic States’ EU and NATO membership binds their strategic relations with Russia to Europe and the Atlantic . In turn, it influences U.S., EU, and NATO policies toward Russia .
 Following Russia’s annexation of Crimea, analysts and policy makers have paid considerable attention to collective defense and reinforcing deterrence against potential Russian aggression .
 NATO’s Readiness Action Plan and the European Reassurance Initiative NATO implemented the readiness action plan during its 2014 Wales Summit .49 RAP emphasizes rotational deployments into the Baltic States to serve as a trip-wire force .
 NATO established Force Integration Units in the member states along its eastern flank with Russia .
 The NFIU serve to facilitate C2 and improve infrastructure for the reception, staging, onward movement, and integration in case of NRF, VJTF, and alliance-member deployment . The N FIU serves to facilitate the reception and staging of C2 .
 A wide base of alliance members increased air and maritime patrol and policing in the Baltic Sea . The Baltic Sea is a key part of the NATO alliance .
 NATO increased bilateral partnerships with Sweden and Finland . NATO increased the frequency and size of its exercises in the region .
 The U.S. proposed its European Reassurance Initiative at the Wales Summit . The RAP was in concert with the United States .
 The ERI is meant to assure U.S. allies while deterring Russian aggression . It is also meant to reassure allies.
 The ERI enhances infrastructure and prepositions equipment in the AOR to increase U.S. capability to respond to threats. Aside from deploying forces, the ERI also enhances infrastructure.
 The U.S. Army sponsored a RAND study examining the prospects for NATO’s defense of the Baltic States against a conventional Russian ground attack .
 The U.S. Embassy of London is located in London, England, and is based in New York City . The embassy is in the United States.
 The RAND study’s results received sensationalized media attention . The results generated debate among analysts and policy makers .
 NATO has a severe capability gap between Russian and NATO ground forces . The gap would prevent NATO from exercising deterrence by denial toward Russian Aggression .
 The RAND study's policy implications materialized at NATO’s 2016 Warsaw Summit . The study was published at the end of the year .
 The Baltic States and Poland successfully lobbied their NATO allies for an increased deterrent to Russian aggression . Russia’s stated foreign policy goals, the Baltic States, Poland and Ukraine successfully lobbied the allies .
 NATO committed to deploying rotational ground forces as an EFP in Poland and the Baltic States . At the 2016 Warsaw Summit, NATO agreed to deploy rotational Ground Forces .
 The RAND study appears to be the catalyst for EFP, it was based on a specific wargame scenario . EFP is based on the RAND study .
 NATO moves forward with EFP in order to counter aggression . Any effort at deterrence must first understand the nature of the threat, NATO says .
 The Kremlin’s overarching foreign policy goals are to become a regional hegemon and global great power .
 The U.S. relies on its nuclear deterrent to underwrite its revisionist goals .
 Putin’s policies have evolved from seeking European multilateral cooperation and bilateral relations with the U.S., to creating multilateral geopolitical dominance in the Eurasian sphere .
 Putin relies on multilateral organizations created and dominated by Russia . The Collective Security Treaty Organization, Eurasian Economic Union, and Customs Union to support Russia's balancing .
 Russian relations with Europe are increasingly characterized by bilateralism . With the hope of the OSCE supplanting NATO dashed, Russia's relations with the European Union is increasingly characterized as bilateralism.
 The Baltic States are no longer beholden to the pressures of larger states . This European bilateralism, once characterized by German dominance of European affairs, is now seeing a cohesive anti-Russian bloc .
 The Duma Defense Committee and military draft the NSS in an iterative process . The NSS is being drafted by the Duma defense committee and military.
 The Security Council and Duma endorse the NSS before it is signed by the President . The NSS will be signed by President Barack Obama .
 The military’s response, the Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation, is also approved by the President .
 The following discusses the Kremlin’s worldview, national security interests, threat perceptions, and the policy implications of these factors . The following talks about Russia's NSS and Military Doctrine .
 Russia envisions itself in a struggle with the West for resources, markets, influence, and access to the global commons . Russia envises itself in the struggle for resources and markets .
 The Kremlin seeks stability within the international system through what it views as equal security . The idea is that it must balance against threats against threats .
 The interests and priorities it identifies include many socially-oriented themes such as preserving Russian culture and improving the economy .
 It also includes the dubious interest of social and political stability, signaling regime fears of domestic dissent, and providing precedent for government intervention in civil discourse . However, it also includes a dubious interest in social, political stability .
 Fears were partially stoked by the unforeseen mass protests in Russia following 2011 parliamentary and 2012 presidential elections . These fears were partially fueled by the 2011 presidential elections in Russia .
 The current NSS is oriented toward authoritarian regime stability against internal threats . It is projecting the threat image onto foreign powers to rally national support . The NSS has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The NSS gives significantly more attention to domestic, non-military goals and concerns such as strengthening national unity . The National Security Council is based in Washington, DC .
 It highlights the need to protect and reinforce traditional Russian culture and values against foreign influence . It also highlights the importance of protecting Russian culture.
 Russia believes the West is trying to subordinate the legitimacy of Eurasian governments, in opposition to Russia’s national interests . Russia believes West is actively trying to subordinate the legitimacy.
 This includes Western-led sanctions that are limiting Russia’s economic growth . This includes sanctions that have been imposed on Russia's economy .
 Russia views itself as surrounded by threats, to include from the Arctic . Russia has been accused of being in danger by Russia's president .
 Russian defense and security researcher Isabelle Facon cites the Kremlin's view that U.S. efforts to retain absolute military supremacy create problems for Russia . NATO expansion and EU enlargement into the former Soviet and Warsaw Pact spaces limit Russia’s ability to exert influence while contributing to general
 Russian national security concerns include military threats from NATO precision-guided munitions and forthcoming U.S. strike systems . The threat includes conventional weapons, missile defense systems and weapons of mass destruction proliferation .
 U.S. efforts to secure biological weapons labs in the Former Soviet Union are viewed warily by the Kremlin . The Kremlin perceives nefarious motives behind the United States actions .
 Russia’s external threat perception is focused on NATO, but this manifests internally as fear of regime change through color revolution .
 Russia feels its citizenry is subject to influence by information operations from foreign71 Hedenskog, “Russian Security Policy,’s’ Russian Security Policy .
 These groups, such as nongovernmental organizations and the media, foster corruption and subversion to create global instability . These groups are often involved in the creation of instability .
 The Kremlin feels the ultimate goal of these information operations is regime change through a color-revolution-style event . The Kremlin says it wants to change the regime through color- revolution-style events .
 The latest NSS iteration codifies Russia’s fear of Western-backed color revolutions such as those in Urkaine, Georgia, Kyrgyzstan and the Arab Spring .
 The Gerasimov Doctrine is based on the theory that future war is characterized by Western-instigated regime change following a pattern . The Ger asimov Doctrine was created by Russian General Valery Gerasov .
 This pattern consists primarily of non-military measures—i.e., information operations—perpetrated by state proxies such as NGOs and media .
 The information operations are designed to fuel a domestic, anti-regime opposition that would draw a violent response from the regime . Western powers can intervene with military force.
 Russia’s NSS expresses the intent to increase its coercive power both internally and abroad . The NSS says it wants to increase coercive power.
 Russia’s national security goals are focused on placing Russia at the nexus of global power and leadership . Russia's national security goal is to place Russia at a nexus of world power, leadership .
 The Kremlin pursues these goals through a mix of soft power and hard power . The Kremlin is trying to promote Russian culture, IO to garner sympathy and support, says the author .
 Russia’s Political-Military Reality, 71. Thomas, 71, is the author of "Unpacking Russia's New National Security Strategy" Oliker, 17, and Thomas, 67, are the authors of Russia's political-military reality .
 Strategic deterrence in Russian security thought includes not only nuclear forces, but a whole-of-government approach that uses all the instruments of national power .
Military modernization is the key benchmark for how the Kremlin will evaluate the success of its strategy . Import-substitution industrialization and revitalizing the defense industry are the key tools for Russia’s economic development .
 Russia is developing its military capability by increasing readiness and strategic mobility . Russia is also developing its ability to use its military capabilities .
 Russia considers this a defensive measure focused on deterrence . To the extent that Russia is building defense capability, Russia considers it to be a defense measure .
 Russian efforts to balance against perceived threats from Western IO efforts and asymmetries in missile defense and precision strike capabilities take the form of deterrence via A2AD systems .
 The Kremlin is modernizing its military capability to balance against perceived threats, as well as to entice non-aligned states toward its sphere of influence . The Kremlin has also modernized its military capabilities to balance its perceived threats against perceived threat .
 Russian political or military influence and interests predominate. These threats necessitate a buffer zone in which Russian political and military influence is in place .
The Kremlin pursues this buffer through Eurasian regional organizations and bilateral relations . The Kremlin purses this buffer via regional organizations, bilateral relations, and other countries .
 The NSS specifically targets NGOs and social media, citing their perceived role in the peaceful color revolutions in Georgia, Kyrgyzstan, and Ukraine . It also targets social media and NGOs .
 The Kremin’s compatriots abroad policy is meant to unite ethnic Russians abroad with their motherland . Putin's view of their spiritual-moral and cultural-historical linkages, and providing Rossotrudnichestvo with a security umbrella .
 The policy also provides what some view as a convenient pretext for Russian military intervention in the former Soviet Republics .
 The Russian National Security Strategy discusses maintaining trust and security in Northern Europe . The strategy is primarily through multilateral means in the Council of the Baltic Sea States .
 Russian relations with the Baltic States seek to control the economic and security environment . The Baltic States want to foster the consideration of Russian interests when the Baltic states decide geopolitical issues .
 Russian relations with the West are suffering, it will simply turn to the East rather than capitulate . Russia will turn to its East instead of the West.
 NATO has a military presence in the Baltics now, so the Kremlin will focus on its Syria operations . The Kremlin will also focus on the CSTO, Eurasia and Asia proper .
 Russia claims to value the roles of international and regional organizations, as well as international law, in achieving foreign policy objectives . Russia says it values the role of international organizations in achieving international goals .
 Russia’s staunch support of the Assad regime and legislation that requires foreign-funded NGOs in Russia to register as foreign agents are also manifestations of policy in action to counter Western-led regime change .
98 Russia will continue to seek opportunities to demonstrate power and leadership in the international and domestic arenas . However, it will use institutionalism instrumentally, particularly when deferring to the United Nations provides an advantage .
 The Kremlin will continue attempting to counter U.S. influence, while at the same time realizing it must rely on working with the United States on transnational threat issues such as terrorism .
Military DOCTRINE Doctrine in the Russian sense is akin to policy in the United States.
Military doctrine is the official Russian view on preparing for armed conflict . Military doctrine is a Russian view of preparing for war .
 Contained within is the nature of warfare, and how to apply military force within that construct .
 Russia’s military doctrine is predicated on analysis of threats to Russian interests . Russia's military doctrine has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The doctrine aims to counter NATO and U.S. expansion, force build up, and missile defense . Current Russian military doctrine characterizes modern warfare as fought predominantly through asymmetric, indirect methods .
 These forces are integrated toward achieving cross-domain synergy that culminates in simultaneous effects . These forces can be integrated toward achieve cross- domain synergy . The effects of these forces can also be seen in other areas .
 Modern conflict also includes political and social components, supported by external actors. Modern conflict includes political, social and political components .
 Conventional weapons are increasingly technical, and processes are exceedingly networked and automated, resulting in higher degrees of target discrimination and kinetic effects, while offering reduced warning and reaction time . Conventional weapon is increasingly technical.
 The Russian military doctrine stresses conflict prevention, fostering stability through deterrence . The doctrine stresses the importance of deterrence .
 Russian military doctrine permitted the first-use of nuclear weapons specifically to repel an aggressor when no other means of crisis resolution are viable .
 This manifests in a doctrine of escalation intended to deescalate a crisis, says the author . The author says the doctrine is meant to de escalate a crisis .
 The Ministry of Defense is expanding the role of nuclear, biological, and chemical defense forces .
8 Nuclear weapons are still the cornerstone of Russian strategic deterrence, but deterrence has expanded to include non-nuclear, and non-kinetic means . This has a dual purpose; it promotes the utility of thermobaric weapons in urban environments, while countering a perceived U.
 Russia is developing its precision strike capability for the first time in the 2014 military doctrine . Russia is also developing its own precision strike capabilities .
 Russia is expanding its conventional and irregular military capability . Nuclear deterrence will likely be ineffective at deterring the threat it perceives from color revolutions, says the Russian military .
 Russia continues the Soviet tradition of political indoctrination, targeting its citizenry with propaganda . The Swedish Defence Research Agency notes that non-military, indirect methods such as IO are now much more effective than the power of the gun .
 The Russian General Staff recognizes the importance of technology in modern and future warfare . Russian conscripts have neither the technical skill, nor the time to learn the skills necessary to serve with maximum utility on today's battlefield .
 The military doctrine cites Russia’s policy to seek deterrence through coalition building, arms-control regime compliance, countering unilateral and alliance missile defense . The doctrine also cites UN-led peacekeeping operations, countering biological weapons and countering information operations .
 Russia's threat to NATO's EFP is relevant to evaluate the relations between Russia and the Baltic States . Russia has been accused of threatening the EFP .
 The Estonians, Latvians, Lithuanians, and Estonians as nations with a geographic homeland existed in their current location before the Slavic predecessors to modern Russians immigrated to the region .
 The territory now belonging to the Baltic States was set upon by Russian imperial designs during Peter the Great’s reign .
 He sought Baltic Sea ports for his expanding navy . He invaded Estonia during his Great Northern War with Sweden at the beginning of the 18th century .
 Russia incorporated Lithuania into the Russian Empire by the end of the 18th century . Under Catherine the Great, Russia incorporated the country into the Empire . Lithuania was incorporated into Russia in 18th Century .
 The Baltic States were again brought within the Russian sphere under the Soviet Union as agreed upon by Germany and Russia in the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact .
 The Soviets invaded the Baltic States after the outbreak of the Second World War . In accordance with provisions in the secret protocol to the non-aggression pact, the Soviets invaded.
 The Soviet Union's victory over the Nazi's cemented the Baltic States within the Soviet state . Germany’s military held the Baltic states during much of the war .
8 Gorbachev’s Glasnost and Perestroika of the 1980s led to independence movements in the Baltic States . Following the war, ethnic Russians and Russian-speaking Soviet citizens were relocated into the region .
 Russia's inaction against the reemergence of Baltic nationalism from 1987 to 1990 set the conditions for the demise of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics .
 Gorbachev’s eventual reaction was an attempt of a crackdown by security forces and the military in Latvia and Lithuania . It further exacerbated nationalist tendencies in the Soviet republics .
 During the August 1991 revolution in Moscow, the Baltic republics declared independence .
 The Evolution–Not Revolution–of the Russian Way of Warfare,’ in Military Review 96, no. 10. The Evolution-Not Revolution-of- Warfare, was published in November .
 Petersburg, and its other Baltic ports, are maintaining Baltic pipeline access to Germany . Petersburg is the largest Baltic port in the Baltic region .
 Russia does not view the former Soviet republics as independent actors . It views them as tools of the West .
Russian relations with the Baltic States should be analyzed from an adversarial stand-point in an EU or NATO context . Under that rubric, Russian relations with Baltic states should be analyzed from an adversary stand- point .
 When U.S.-Russian relations are good, Russia has no incentive to harass the Baltic States . U. S. relations with Russia are good when they are good .
 The Baltic States are a lever with which the Kremlin believes it can sow discord and weaken alliance consensus, ultimately delegitimizing NATO . When relations sour, Russia is prone to saber-rattling and rhetoric designed simply to draw attention to itself .
 Russian fears of NATO expansion draws vehement reactions from Russian politicians . NATO forces’ forward presence in Poland and the Baltic States is a major concern .
 It incites official rhetoric that portends a Russian invasion to recapture its former Soviet Republics . The rhetoric is a sign of Russia's desire to regain control of its former republics .
 Russia’s current energy policy, tied to its national security interests, is to retain a Russian-dominated market . Russia's current energy policies are tied to the national security interest .
 The Kremlin's goals toward this end are market stability and a diverse, Russian-controlled, transit and distribution network . The Kremlin’s goals are to create market stability, a diverse and Russian- controlled, transit, distribution network.
 Russian gas and oil firms seek to retain their dominance over the Baltic States’ energy markets . The Baltic States are also diversifying transit options to the greater European market .
 The Russian National Security Strategy’s inclusion of Rossotrudnichestvo is particularly salient for the Baltic States . Russia seeks continuing access to the warm-water ports in the Baltic states .
 There are significant minority populations of ethnic Russians, native Russian speakers, and Russian citizens in the Baltic States . Many are stateless aliens as a result of not possessing the requisite language skills for citizenship .
 Russian speakers are largely disenfranchised politically and economically . Except for in Lithuania, where they enjoy full citizenship, they are mostly disenfranchised .
 Ethno-linguistic tensions within the Baltic States provide cleavages which Russia can exploit . Russia has taken the opportunity to nest within its overall concept of Russian security and stability .
 This narrative leads the Baltic States to minimize the Soviet contribution in defeating the Nazis. This narrative is the reason for the Baltic states to minimize their Soviet contribution .
 NATO faces a hybrid threat from Russian revisionist, ideologically expansionist aims in the Baltic States. IMPLICATIONS for the BALTIC States are possible .
 Western observers contend that Russian national security perceives a permanent state of hybrid war with the West . The Baltic States are a primary battlespace for this conflict .
 This section discusses the concept of hybrid warfare and its aims, followed by Russia’s goals and methods for carrying out such a campaign . This section concludes with the Baltic States’ susceptibility to the Russian hybrid threat .
 Concept and Aims of Hybrid Warfare Contemporary thought on Russian warfare focuses on the phenomenon of hybrid warfare . The concept is characterized by unconventional and non-military means of obtaining political objectives .
 General Gerasimov is often viewed as Russia’s chief hybrid warfare ideologue . He is often seen as Russia's chief hybrid war ideologue.
 Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation . He is responsible for writing Russia’s military doctrine .
 Russia refers to what the West calls ‘hybrid’ as next generation, or non-linear warfare . The West calls it ‘next generation’
 The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 29, no. : 331, DOI:10.1080/13518046.2016 .
8 Gerasimov observed changing nature of military means for obtaining political objectives . Conventional force is used pursuant to a fabricated pre-text, carried out by agent provocateurs .
 He observed the spread of democracy, and subsequent disorder that occurs when democracy overtakes authoritarianism . He postulated that these events were a form of warfare perpetrated by the West .
 Many Western observers of Russian security issues cite his thoughts on the future of warfare as a doctrine that will guide Russia through waging undeclared information wars to achieve its goals .
 The hybrid is a Western construct, and does not give sufficient weight to military power . However, hybrid is not enough to give enough weight to the military, it does not have enough power .
 Russia has exhibited coercive tools in the diplomatic, informational, and economic realms . Russia's military action in Ukraine demonstrates that military power remains a necessary policy instrument .
 U.S. characterizations of hybrid warfare involve a combination of conventional military force with state and non-state sponsored criminal, terrorist, and irregular warfare elements to achieve political goals .
 Alexander Lanoszka defines hybrid warfare as a strategy manifest in the ‘marriage of conventional deterrence and insurgent tactics’ that exploits nationalism to achieve political goals through deniable covert action .
 Threats and Potential Responses are based in Santa Monica, California . There are more than 10,000 threats and potential Responses .
 Hybrid tactics include propaganda, espionage, political agitation, criminal sabotage and subversion . Some consider the pre-eminent, method of conducting a hybrid campaign .
 IW seeks to damage the physical, as well as psychological, targeting the actual information systems and networks themselves . IW also seeks to influence perceptions in order to shape outcomes. IW aims to damage physical and psychological.
 Hybrid warfare is not attritional in nature; the primary target is domestic politics, not military forces . The primary target for hybrid warfare is domestic political politics.
8.8 Theorists and observers disagree on the impetus for hybrid tactics . Russia military analyst Dr. Lanoszka sees strength as the precursor to hybrid tactics, while Russia military analysts see strength as a precursor .
 Emmanuel Karagiannis sees hybrid warfare as the natural reaction of a relatively weak military . He sees it as a natural reaction to the weak military.
 Thornton's view is that hybrid practitioners have adapted to exploit their conventional weakness . Lanoszka’s view is a hybrid strategy can only be effective if the practitioner's conventional deterrent is effective .
 Hybrid practitioners aim to shatter the enemy’s will through a time-competitive cycle . The enemy is unable to determine who the actual combatants are .
 The ideas of out-cycling your opponent and using the whole of government's instruments of national power in asymmetric warfare are not new .
 They evoke notions of Clausewitz, Boyd and his OODA-loop, and the Marine Corps’ maneuver warfare doctrine . The Marine Corps' maneuver doctrine is based on Clausewitz .
 What distinguishes hybrid, particularly in the Russian case, is the notion of perpetual aggression combined with the effort to blur the lines.
 The goal of Russian hybrid actions against the Baltic States is to render NATO ineffective at fulfilling its defensive role . Russia’s Hybrid Warfare Goals and Methods in the Baltic states are in place .
 The Kremlin has political influence through local, regional, and national political parties, as well as through organized crime syndicates . The Kremlin is also involved in organized crime.
 The Kremlin seeks to subvert regime legitimacy in Baltic States through highlighting and exacerbating ethnic tensions over the civil rights of ethnic Russians there . The Kremlin also seeks to highlight and exacerbate ethnic tensions.
7 Russian efforts to weaponize energy include supporting IW campaigns targeting the development of non-Russian reliant energy infrastructure . Some Western analysts believe Russia’s protracted campaign against Ukraine suggests it is unlikely to embark on a similar imbroglio in the Baltic States .
 Its goals are to erode faith in the legitimacy and veracity of democratic public institutions and non-Russian-backed media .
 The Kremlin endeavors to erode the morale of Baltic States citizens’ perceptions of vulnerability by conducting aggressive maneuvers along its borders and violating their territorial seas and airspaces .
 The Kremlin seeks to limit Russian forces along its border with NATO to discourage a conventional NATO build-up . The Kremlin's IW effort is bulwarked by a robust media presence in the Baltic States .
 The Kremlin spreads its IW themes through traditional media such as radio, television, and print, as well as through the cyber realm . The Kremlin offers even more anonymity and deniability .
 Social media provides an ideal venue for promoting Russian themes while subverting the legitimacy of the Baltic States . Social media and its susceptibility to mis-attributable, even fake-contributors provide an ideal place for promoting Russia .
7 Russia seeks to exacerbate civil tensions through an IW effort aimed at stoking populist fears in the Baltic States . The Kremlin sponsors NGOs, civic organizations, and educational institutions within the Baltic states .
 Russia’s effort to de-legitimize NATO hinges on creating an environment of uncertainty as to the Kremlin's involvement in either sowing discord or intervening on behalf of Russian-speaking minorities in the Baltic States .
 NATO and the West are slow to react while debating Russia’s covert involvement and the legitimacy of overt actions . This provides Russia an advantage in which NATO and West areslow to react to Russia .
 Russia aims to conceal its involvement long enough to create sufficient debate within NATO’s decisionmaking bodies . NATO failed to react in a timely manner, resulting in NATO failing to react to Russia's role .
 If NATO cannot agree that Russia has attacked a member-state, NATO cannot act as an alliance . If NATO can't agree, it will not be able to act as a NATO alliance .
 These Rossotrudnichestvo, would be incited to protest against discriminatory language and citizenship policies .
 Russian agent provocateurs would incite violence against the state, while also inciting a violent state reaction against separatists . Russian agents would incite a violent response against separatists.
 This is the manifestation of reflexive control that further reinforce Russian IW themes. This is a manifestation of Reflexive control, says the author . This is an example of the Russian Iw themes, says author .
 Kremlinsponsored militias, supported by Russian security services, would then act to protect rights of Rossotrudnichestvo .
 The psychological deterrent of Russia's numerically and asymmetrically superior local forces would deter a response from both the Baltic States and NATO . Or, further armed conflict would then create a justification for Russian armed intervention, a conventional limited-objective attack reminiscent of Russia’
 Russia's cyber-attack in Estonia fit Kremlin policy, but the Kremlin was not the catalyst for action .
 Conflict scenarios involving Russia introducing little green men into the Baltic States ignore disparity between the Baltic states and Crimea .
 Russia leased its Black Sea Fleet bases in Crimea from Ukraine . Many of Russia’s little green men were already legitimately stationed in Crimea .
 No such situation exists in the Baltic States; no Russian forces are garrisoned in NATO countries . Any attempt to deploy such a force would be immediately transparent to the sovereign Baltic States . No such a situation exists.
 Russia's goal is to have influence agents in place to take advantage of developing situations . This suggests Russia’s goal was to have control agents to help develop situations in Russia .
 Several factors contribute to Baltic States’ susceptibility to Russian hybrid warfare. Susceptibility of the Baltic States to Russian Hybrid Tactics .
 Rossotrudnichestvo is the enduring legacy of the Baltic States’ tenure as Soviet republics . It is also the border with Russia’s border with the Baltic states .
 The significant minority population in the Baltic States has caused some to fear Russian state capture, or a hybrid take-over scenario . NATO’s RAP, and subsequent EFP—conventional deterrence measures targeting Russia include increased NATO forces deployed to the Baltics .
 Russia's self-proclaimed right to intervene on behalf of ethnic Russians may give disproportionate influence to the Russian diaspora in post-Soviet space . Nalbandov and Lo imply that the Baltic States’ NATO and EU membership places them forever outside of Russia’
 Ethnic Russians comprise 24 percent of the population in Estonia, 27 percent in Latvia, and 6 percent in Lithuania . The percentage of Russian speakers is 34 percent, 30 percent, and 8 percent respectively .
 Russian speakers comprise the majority in Riga proper, and are a significant portion of Tallinn’s population .
 Resident aliens comprise 7 percent of Estonia's population and 12 percent of Latvia’s population . Resident aliens are in the majority of Latvia's population .
 There are vulnerabilities to Russian influence in the Baltic States, but the hybrid template of Ukraine does not project well in Estonia and Latvia . These demographics also tilt away from the titular nations in the Ida-Viru County of Estonia, the Latgale region in Latvia.
 The professional, NATO-backed security services of the Baltic States are capable of collecting intelligence, conducting counterintelligence, and providing internal security . The Baltic states are also capable of conducting counter intelligence and providing security .
 The higher standard of living within the EU is preferable to Kremlin rule for the Baltic States’ minorities . Despite Russia’s persistent IW campaign to promote its agenda, the higher standards of living in the EU are preferable .
 The low percentage of Russian-speaking citizenry relegates these parties to secondary political importance, not partners in coalition governments .
 residency, not citizenship, is the requirement for voting in municipal elections . However, residency is not the requirement.
2 Russian IW themes and foreign policy toward the Baltic States highlight and exacerbate tensions . In Riga and Tallinn, where Rossotrudnichestvo comprise significant portions of the population, the Kremlin can wield disproportionate influence .
 This morphed into anti-Soviet nationalism during the Second World War, and lingers today as antiRussian nationalism . The Kremlin is portrayed by the Kremlin as fascism that targets the civil rights of Russians and Russian speakers .
 The history of Soviet occupation and subsequent physical, demographic, and psychological legacies contribute to feelings of fear and helplessness among ethnic Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians .
 Russia is afforded an advantage over NATO in understanding how to exploit the regional complexity in the post-Soviet space during an IW campaign . Russia is given an advantage in understanding the regional complexities of the region .
 The Baltic States’ militaries by themselves are inadequate for defense against Russian conventional forces . The Baltic states’ military forces are inadequate to defend against Russia .
Not every state in such a large alliance may risk their own security on behalf of Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania . They are newcomers to NATO .
0 Armed conflict between Russia and the Baltic States would deprive Russia of a prime source of income . However, Radin also acknowledges the unlikeliness of a conventional scenario .
 Russia has worked diligently to develop natural gas delivery infrastructure such as Nord Stream to decrease its reliance on transit states such as the Baltics . Russia has more geopolitical leverage in those bypassed states .
 Russia is also dependent on EU markets for its energy exports . The Baltic States and the EU as a whole are largely dependent on Russian energy imports .
 Latvia is unbundling its Kremlin-controlled, vertical energy firm structures, loosening Russia’s total grip on the Baltic States’ energy security . Lithuania is importing liquid natural gas, which it also supplies to Estonia, and Estonia .
 Russia was not apt to turn off the gas taps to Ukraine due to its downstream feed into Crimea . Russia's annexation of Crimea was demonstrated in Ukraine following Russia’s annexation .
 Lithuania is a transit state for the Soviet-era energy infrastructure that supplies Kaliningrad . Lithuania is in a similar position, as it serves as a transitState for the Russian-era infrastructure .
 Any gas production cuts would affect Russia’s ability to project its A2AD bubble from Kaliningrad .
 Russia’s poor performance during its five-day war with Georgia in 2008 was the catalyst for implementing change .
Command, control, and communications systems were not networked, and often did not work . Command, control and communication systems were often not networking .
 Poor C3, compounded by service-specific reporting chains, precluded joint coordination of air support . Poor C 3, compounded with service- specific reporting chains.
 Russian aircraft were vulnerable to Georgian integrated air defense systems . A lack of Russian identification of friend or foe technology led to Russian air losses to Georgian forces as well as fratricide .
 Russian intelligence was widely criticized for its poor technical performance . Russia’s Global Navigational Satellite System was not fully operational, leading to failures to provide timely indications and warning .
 When new equipment was in-place, such as reactive armor, the actual panels had been removed . The panels were removed, negating the armor's function .
Serdyukov, Makarov, and the New Look Putin appointed Anatoliy Serdykov as Defense Minister in 2007 .
 The first civilian Defense Minister, he was an accountant by trade . He was brought in to battle the military's endemic corruption, which accounted for 30 percent of the MoD's budget .
By 2012, military police brigades, subordinate to the MoD, were established in each military district . By 2012, the brigades had been established in every military district.
 Serdyukov pursued structural reorganization, seeking high combat readiness .
 Nikolai Makarov proposed and led the majority of reforms . Despite Serdyukov’s association with the New Look, his Chief of the General Staff was not involved in the reforms .
 Makarov’s idea was that a smaller, professional force would be most valuable during the initial stages of conflict .
 He also sought to simplify C2 through simplifying the military district structure . He also wanted to simplify the C2.
 The new district/OSK structure, with joint C2, allowed personnel reductions at the services’ headquarters, central commands, the General Staff, and MoD.198 . Along with the C2 structure, the military consolidated the 65 various military schools and academies into 10.
 The divisional model streamlined C2 from the operational command, to OSK, to brigade . The C2 model was streamlined from operational command to brigade.
 Colby Howard and Ruslan Phukov, 93, and Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992-2016, 29, are all Russian .
 The shift in focus from Cold-War era units poised for confrontation with the West to a force poised for rapid deployment to secure regional stability and counter separatists within Russia . This was largely a shell-game.
 Russia’s military was unable to meet its volunteer enlistment goals and unable to staff its readiness goals across the force . Russia's military was able to meet volunteer enlistments goals and was unable.
 majority of Russian divisions were cadre-only shells, ghost units waiting for conscripts to be mobilized . The majority of Russia's divisions were Cadre- only shells .
 The VDV retained the division construct, was staffed with a higher proportion of volunteer professionals . The V DV enjoyed higher personnel readiness than regular forces .
2 Serdyukov abandoned mobilization-based conscript manning for permanentreadiness brigades . VDV needed divisions to provide the extra CS and CSS that VDVs required for operating forward of friendly lines .
 This was possible by reducing the size of the force from two million nominal personnel to one million staffed billets . This could be reduced to a target of one million staff .
 Serdyukov traded logistics for combat personnel by outsourcing garrison logistics services to civilian contractors . Serdykov traded military logistics for civilian services .
In 2010, warrant officers who filled traditional WesternNCO roles were disbanded . In 2010, Warrant officers who fill traditional roles were disbanded .
 In 2013, they were returned to the force structure, now serving in a more Western-style, technical role . The force structure was returned to a more western-style role in 2013 .
 Serdyukov went on to prioritize improving procurement and combat training . He also formed a military police force and formed a civilian police force . The Aerospace Defense Forces also increased the number of contract professionals .
Serdyukov and Makarov were replaced by Sergei Shoigu as Defense Minister and General Valery Gerasimov as Chief of the General Staff . At the end of 2012, the two men were replaced as defense ministers .
 Many senior officers felt Serdyukov had eviscerated . Shoigu worked to instill pride back to the Russian military .
 He brought back legacy formal uniforms and reinstated the Tsarist-era 1st Sep Semyonovsky Rgt ceremonial honor guard in Moscow . He also reinstated venerated combat units that had been disbanded .
 His chief concern was enhancing Russia’s conventional offensive potential . But he was also concerned that Russia's conventional offensive could be enhanced .
 Shoigu prioritizes combat readiness through tactical training, that is, at the brigade-level and below . The U.S. military says it will be ready for combat in the coming years .
 A Test for Russian Military Reforms (Paris: Defense Research Unit, French International Relations Institute–IFRI, May 2015), 8. 46 capability is a new part of Russia's deterrence strategy, bolstered by Russia's aggression in Georgia .
 Russia is operationally testing and employing new EW equipment and tactics, techniques, and procedures in Syria and Ukraine . Russia is also using new EW techniques and techniques in Syria, Ukraine and Syria .
 Shoigu reestablished many of the disbanded professional training schools that were consolidated in the New Look . Shoigus reestablished some of the disbanding professional training school schools .
 In 2014, the National Defense Control Center and the Combat Control Center were created to provide networked national-level C2.218 . In 2015, the MoD announced plans to create a contract-professional-only NCO corps .
 Capabilities, Limitations, and Implications for International Security, 22–3. Capabilities and Limitations.
 International Centre for Defence and Security, September 2017, 20, 23, is the world's largest defence centre .
 Tank units have increased their engagement ranges in training from 1700 meters to 2200 meters . tank units have implemented independent tank engagements . Tank units now have an average of 1700 meters in training .
 Force generation lessons have led Russia towards prepositioning of equipment and material to support the rapid deployment and build-up of combat forces .
 Russian prepositioning operates on the concept of deploying ground forces by rail . The VDV's rapid air-deployment capability can be used to leave heavy equipment and weapons in garrison .
 Organizational Reforms Maneuver Forces Russian order of battle is in a state of flux . The Russian army is in the midst of a crisis .
 The military is reactivating divisions and deactivating brigades . The New Look brigade model is not completely abandoning the New Look model .
 In exercises and in Ukraine, brigades are proving inefficient at C2 because they have to provide C2 for 18 subordinate units . In exercises, in Ukraine and in Russia, brigade is proving inefficient.
 The MoD is creating two “super light’s motorized rifle brigades, which will be equipped with wheeled, instead of tracked vehicles . At the same time, the MoD has created two ‘superlight’ motorized rifles .
 Russia reestablished the 2nd Guards Tamanskaya MRDiv and 4th Guards Kantimarovskaya Tank Div as formations with regiments as subordinate units . They will be formed in the CMD and SMD, where terrain precludes heavy armor maneuverability .
 This was widely viewed as a balance against NATO’s growing presence in the former Soviet Union . This was seen as a morale boost for both the public and military .
 The 14th AC’s 200th and 80th MRBdes are positioned on the Kolya Peninsula, with the 200thMRBde adjacent to the border with Norway . The 200th MRbde is located on the same peninsula as Norway .
 BTGs are the preferred units for tactical employment. BTG is the preferred unit for tactical jobs . BTGs have the highest number of units in the brigade or division .
 The BTG has received much attention following the New Look . It has actually been in use since during Soviet times .
 23. 49 conducts preventative maintenance to ensure equipment readiness . C2 element can form a brigade in case of general mobilization .
234 The VDV are the President’s strategic reserve forces . The MoD's goal is to staff these forces completely with professional contract servicemen by 2018 .
 The VDV’s 45th Guards Sep Spetsnaz Bde was recently upgraded from a regiment .
8 The VDV is transitioning from its traditional airborne role to an air assault focus with a greater infantry role . VDVs are capable of operating in the full range of geographic conditions, from desert, to arctic, to airborne operations .
 The 31st Sep VDV Bde will upgrade the companies to tank battalions armed with T-72B3M tanks and BMD-4M infantry fighting vehicles . It is adding tank companies to each division (except the 7th, designated for mountain warfare)
 The VDV also plans to upgrade the separate reconnaissance companies within the brigades and divisions to reconnaissance battalions, each with a Spetsnaz company .
 In 2012, the General Staff established the KSSO, created out of 346th Spetsnaz Bde . UAV companies are being established in all Ground Forces maneuver brigades as well, employing tactical UAVs .
 The forces would go on to be highly influential in Crimea . These forces undertake national command authority missions .
 The 127th Sep Reconnaissance Bde was established under the Black Sea Fleet in 2014 . The 96th Sep Recon Bde has been established by the 1st Guards Tank Army in 2015 .
 There are plans for each army to get one with a Spetsnaz Bn and a psychological operations unit organic to it .
 These separate reconnaissance brigades are not Spetsnaz under the GRU’s control . They are not under the control of the GRu .
 They are under the operational control of the conventional commander at the Army level . They are also under the control of a conventional commander.
3 in 2008, sniper platoons were introduced at the motorized-rifle, tank, and Marinebrigade level . The Ground Forces’ brigade and division-level reconnaissance companies are being upgraded to battalions .
 The platoons have since been upgraded to four-platoon companies, resident at the brigade and regimental level and assigned to a specific subordinate battalion .
 One of the platoons is designated Spetsnaz, and is under direct tasking authority of the brigade commander .
 Some accounts of Russian snipers in Ukraine claim snipers are operating en-masse . But conventional tables of organization place snipers in two-man teams .
 The MoD established NBC brigades under each military district . Spetsnaz battalions and Ground Forces reconnaissance battalions each have two-man sniper teams .
 66. 52 were given increased prominence through their role in countering ISTAR and artillery in Ukraine .
 NBC forces serve a dual role, providing force protection through concealment and NBC defense . NBC forces also provide indirect fires with thermobaric flamethrowers .
 These thermobaric weapons have been instrumental in urban combat in Ukraine . The weapons are used in Ukraine's urban combat .
 In 2014, the MoD established NBC regiments at the combined-arms army level . This is in addition to the standard NBC companies within brigades and divisions .
 Assault Pioneers were reestablished within combat engineer units in 2015 . Russia's poor performance in seizing the Donets’k airport through 2014 and 2015 .
 Assault Pioneers are focused on urban assault and obstacle reduction to penetrate defenses . They aim to reduce obstacles and reduce obstacles in urban areas .
 The 6th Combined-Arms Army's 30th Combat Engineer Rgt was reestablished after 2013’s Zapad JSE highlighted an insufficient pontoon bridging capability to operate in the Baltic States and Finland . The 6st Combined- Arms Army’S Army�
 By 2020, each CAA plans to reintroduce combat engineer regiments, each with an assault pioneer battalion . Each CAA will reintroduce the regiments by 2020 .
 EW units exist at the military district, CAA, division, and brigade level . EW units are located in the military's CAA and brigade levels .
 Between 2009 and 2015, EW brigades were formed at the military district level . EW brigade were formed between 2009 and2015 .
 EW brigades are each comprised of four battalions. 6 EW companies, capable of 50km of EW coverage, were formed within the New Look's maneuver brigades .
 headquarters platoon employs a RP330KPK automated command post and R-330K automated control station . The headquarters platoon is based in the city of San Francisco .
 There is a platoon dedicated to jamming cellular and Global Positioning System signals, as well as radio communications and munitions that employ radiocontrolled fuses .
 The fifth platoon has two squads, one dedicated to jamming radio communications . The other is dedicated to targeting landmines and improvised explosives . This organization and equipment loadout does not appear inflexible, and appears to be based on being equipped with either the RB-301B Boris
 The RB-301B employs the R330K automated control station to synchronize variants of the R-330T UHF, R-378A/B HF, and R-325U HF . R-934B VHF automated vehicle-mounted jammers .
 The Borisoglebsk is a wheel-mounted system . It is available in tracked-variants, based on the MT-LB chassis .
 The truckmounted R330M1P Diabazol employs the R-330KMA C2 system to synchronize the Altayets-AM HF/UHF/Global System for Mobile Communications . The MoD announced the creation of a permanent, separate EW company dedicated to
 The MoD created logistics and maintenance storage bases and MTO brigades at the military district level . MTO battalions at the brigade level, as well as MTO brigade level .
9.9 Greater emphasis has been placed on improving the Railway Troops . Russia's ability to support transportation both within Russia and across the Soviet legacy rail networks .
 The Zapad 2009 JSE emphasized to Russian planners that rail transport was imperative for intratheater transport . JSE foreshadowed the need for prepositioning and centralized maintenance facilities at the MD level .
 It took five days for the 4th Tank Bde to move 400km from its Moscow garrison to Belarus during the exercise .
 Motorized rifle brigades took even longer due to a lack of An-124 transport and Mi-26 assault support aircraft .
Tactical aviation in support of maneuver forces are being moved from the VKS to Ground Forces . One brigade in each military district, and one regiment at each combined-arms army, will be established in 2014 .
 Brigades will have 84 to 88 assault support and attack helicopters, as well as EW helicopters, and regiments will have 66 assault support, and EW helicopters .
 The number of Military Transport Aviation regiments was also increased . Transport squadrons were created and transport squadrons created .
 VTA’s main priority for support despite also being available for general Ground Forces lift . These are aligned to VDV formations, which is the VTA's main priority .
 The VTA employs legacy An-12, An-22, and An-26, and Il-76 transport aircraft . VTA is based in New York City, New York .
 The current GPV, in effect from 2011 to 2020, has the goal of modernizing 70 percent of the military’s equipment over the course of its implementation .
 The current GPV pays considerable attention to automation, C2 integration, and targeting adversary C4ISR.279 It emphasizes reliance on technology over manpower, and pays greater attention to protecting individual forces .
Gerasimov is continuing to modernize Russia’s network-centric C4ISR . The military has procured new C2 systems; the VDV has the Andromeda-D, which is entering initial operating capacity .
 The Ratnik, which is to be introduced from 2014 to 2020, is a digitalcamouflage pattern family of network-integrated armor and communications equipment . It will be introduced in 2014.
 The next GPV was supposed to have been approved in 2016, now has a target implementation of 2018 to 2025 . Other armor innovations include the OVR-3Sh liquid-cooled assault-pioneer armor and the O VR-1 explosive ordnance disposal suit .
 MoD will only receive half of its requested funding. It has not yet been approved, but reportedly will only get half of the requested funding .
 The GPV 2025 will focus less on traditional military hardware, and emphasize the information sphere, autonomous systems, precision-guided munitions, and new weapons concepts such as hypersonic weapons . The military industrial complex vertically integrated Russia's EW-systems manufacturers into one company .
 The defense minister established a scientific committee for EW in 2015, and two additional EW production firms began operating soon after .
 Russia employs the Murmansk-BN system, which targets communications in the HF frequency band over a 5,000km range .
 Russia plans to field the RB-109A Bylina system in EW brigades from 2018 to 2025 . Russia will field the system from 2018- 2025 .
 Russia’s next generation of armored vehicles will be built around the Armata, Kurganets-25, and Bumerang families of vehicles . The GPV plans to add An-70 transport aircraft to the VTA fleet, while also upgrading to the An-124-
 The GAZ-2975 Tigr-M armored utility vehicle is being fielded across the force . Additionally, the GA Z-29 75 Tigr M armored utility vehicles are being fielded .
 There is the 2S35 Koalitsiya-SV self-propelled artillery, MLRS, and BMO-2 thermobaric flamethrower variants . There is also a 2S 35 Koalitiya-sV Self- Propelled artillery.
 The T-14 will have its own UAV system for organic battlefield awareness and more independent tank operations . The UAVs will be used to train and train tankers in the future .
 Armata will allow transition from operations conducted by standard units to a modular structure of task organized Armata vehicles . The Armata vehicle will allow the transition from normal operations to modular structures .
 The idea began circulating in 2014, and envisions replacing battalions with 2 tanks, 3 IFVs, a combined fire-support and air-defense variant, an artillery variant, a supply variant, and a C2 variant .
8.8 Russia’s existing tanks are being upgraded to T-72B3 and T- 72B3M variants . The modular concept theoretically supports continuous operations by using rotational crews . The Marines are upgrading their PT-76 light amphibious tanks.
 GPV plans on implementing the Kurganets-25 family of tracked, amphibious armored vehicles . The GPV also plans to implement the heavy Armata system .
 There is an IFV variant, meant to replace the BMP and MT-LB platforms, and an APC variant . The IFV version is intended to replace BMP, MT- LB platforms and APC variants .
 The GPV also includes the Bumerang family of wheeled armored vehicles, consisting of the K-16 APC, and K-17 IFV, intended to replace BTR-series vehicles .
 Current BTR-80s are being upgraded to air droppable B TR-82As, with 2S23 Nona-SV self-propelled mortar and Taifun-M MLRS variants . Additional artillery and rocket upgrades include increasing the size and scope of artillery
 There are new thermobaric weapons, such as the SPO Varna-S, for use in urban combat . There are also new Uran-10 antitank weapons, and a new U.S. antitank weapon .
 The 9M111 Fagot anti-tank guided missile is being replaced by the 9M133 Kornet and 9M115-2 Metis-M.304 . The 2S35 KoalitsiyaSV is replacing both the 2A65 Msta-B
 The 9A53 Uragan-1M and 9A52-4 Tornado MLRS systems are replacing legacy MLRS . The BM-21 Grad and 9K58 BM-30 Smerch are being replaced by the 9A 53-S Tornado .
 The Uragan and Tornado are universal systems capable of firing multiple rocket calibers . They provide more flexibility and range to tactical and operational-level commanders .
 62 artillery commanders with greater ISTAR capabilities, 59.62 artillery commanders . The list includes 59. 62 commanders with more ISTAR capability .
 Each separate missile brigade within the Ground Forces will have its 9K79-1 Tochka-U operational-tactical ballistic missile launchers replaced by newer 9K720 Iskander-M launchers . Small arms are being modernized through the GPV as well .
 The AK-12 is replacing the AK-74 as the standard-issue rifle, and the PYa MP-443 Grach will replace the Makarov . The Makarov will be replaced as a standard-issued sidearm .
 Combat engineers will be employing upgraded POM-3 anti-personnel, as well as M-225 and Temp-30 anti-tank mines, upgraded UMZ-K mine-laying vehicles .
 Russia used ethnic Cossack paramilitaries to blockade and seize Crimean positions . Russia usedethnic Cossacks to blockade, seize Crimea positions .
 Local Crimean proxy forces had marginal impacts on Russia’s Crimea operation . Their utility was in providing a public face of resistance against the Kyiv regime . The General Staff's KSSO was instrumental in seizing Crimea .
 Covert Spetsnaz seized terrain, then turned it over for local proxy forces to occupy . The group then turned the terrain over to local proxies .
 The KSSO is a national-mission unit created in 2011 . It is a separate command from the General Staff’s Main Intelligence Directorate Spetsnaz .
 Cossacks operated under the command and employ of the Russian military during Russia’s 2008 war in Georgia .
 The Creation of Russian Special Operations Forces, in Brothers Armed: Military Aspects of the Crisis in Ukraine, ed. The creation of Russian special operations forces, in brothers Armed.
 Russian forces moved personnel and equipment into Crimea via ferry, fixed and rotary wing aviation, and amphibious transport . Russian forces also moved personnel, equipment, and equipment to Crimea .
 The majority of conventional Russian forces, armed with APCs and artillery, entered Crimea after rail transport to the Kerch ferry crossing .
 Russia’s invasion was supported by a thorough intelligence penetration of the Ukrainian security services . An active IW campaign to garner popular support for Crimea's referendum and independence and spread disinformation and obfuscate Russian involvement .
 Russian propaganda efforts portrayed the messianic vision of Putin and the Russia military rescuing ethnic Russians from Western, Ukrainian fascists . Russian propaganda attempts portrayed the Russian government's view of Putin as a dictator .
 They were led and advised by current and former Russian intelligence and security forces personnel . They were also advised by former Russian security forces and intelligence personnel .
 Russian intelligence and security services organized proxy forces and encouraged Ukrainians to defect . Russian intelligence, security servicesorganized proxy forces .
9 Force Generation and Sustainment Russian forces in the Donbas were primarily contract soldiers, not conscripts . Observers estimate between 3,500 and 12,000 Russian forces at any given time were participating in combat in Ukraine .
 Eight of Russia's ten field armies provided forces for combat and CS . The only two that did not were the EMD’s 5th and 35th .
 Spetsnaz from “all seven SpetsNaz GRU Brigades,’s, the 45th Guards Sep VDV Spetnaz Bde, and the Federal Security Service participated in the Donbas . The KSSO, which provided Spets
 Three to four Spetsnaz battalions operating in the Donbas at any given time . There were three to four battalions in Donbas .
 Their role in the Donbas was primarily training and advising separatist forces and conducting special reconnaissance . Their role was mainly training and advises separatist forces .
 Russian BTGs were not employed as organic units, but rather, they were often piecemealed together . Due to manpower constraints and combat losses, Russian BTG were not used as organic unit .
 These units were drawn from a relatively limited geographic area in this early phase of the operation against Ukraine . The units are based in a small geographic area .
2 Russian forces in the Donbas were qualitatively inferior to the forces that were used to seize Crimea . WMD and SMD have insufficient personnel and equipment to sustain combat operations against Ukraine .
 McDermott notes that “regular combined-arms operations … secured key advances’ in Ukraine . “Regular combined combined-arm operations’s” in Ukraine, he says .
 As the conflict wore on, Russian and separatist forces in Ukraine increasingly suffered from low morale .
 The Russian Ministry of the Interior reacted by deploying forces, its Dzerzhinsky Div, to prevent Russian and separatist forces retreating .
 Rail transportation was the primary method Russian and RBS forces used for logistics in the Donbas . Rail transport was the main way Russian andRBS forces were used in logistics .
8.8 was a measure of force protection as improvised explosive devices became a threat in the area . But it constrained Russia’s ability to maneuver across the dispersed battlespace .
9.9 Russia denies its forces were fighting in Ukraine, but there are numerous examples of Russian-only military hardware in the Donbas . Russian forces suffered increasing casualties due to lack of deployed and disaggregated medical capability .
 Russian forces in the Donbas were occasionally armed with AS Val silenced assault rifles . Russian forces were sometimes armed withAS Val silenced rifles .
 The hallmark of Russian maneuver in the Donbas has been massed fires, followed by armored attack . They employed T-72B3 and T90 main battle tanks, 96K6 Pantsir-S1 air defense systems .
 Russian armored and mechanized advances were preceded by VDV insertion, and accompanied by ground-based air defense . Russian armored advances were followed by ground defense .
 Russian BTGs in Ukraine operated on 40km frontages, the doctrinal frontage of a brigade . The brigade is based in Ukraine .
 UAV Overmatch in the Ukrainian Conflict, (Ft Leavenworth, KS: Foreign Military Studies Office, 2015), 2. UAV overmatch in Ukrainian Conflict (2015) 2.2.
 Karber notes that Russia is employing at least “13 fixed wing and at least one quad-copter design’s’ in the Donbas .
 The Zastava model ISR UAV, as well as the RB-341V Leer-3 and Shipovnik-Aero, are some examples . The ISR model is also a model for the Zastva model.
 The first is long-range, high altitude ISR along the border, followed by brigade-level rear-area surveillance from slightly shorter ranges and slightly lower altitudes .
 The third role includes cueing the fourth role – short range target and coordinate acquisition for BM-21 Grad MLRS at approximately 1,000 to 2,500 feet . The fourth role is short range targets and coordination acquisition.
7 Russian UAVs appear constrained by their programming . The standard time between UAV target identification and the application of fires is 15 minutes .
 They do not appear to have the capability for real-time ground control station direction, and do not seem to be able to acquire moving targets . They don't appear to be capable of acquiring moving targets.
 Russian UAVs do not appear to be active at night, suggesting a lack of IR imaging . Also, Russian U AVs are not active at the night .
9 Russian forces and RBS are also using EW to pre-detonate radio-proximity artillery and mortar rounds . The Russian preference for countering UAVs is EW targeting the C2 and navigational systems .
 Russian IO tactics consisted of taunting Ukrainian forces through text message in conjunction with artillery strikes, as well as threatening to harm Ukrainian forces’ families .
 The RB-531B Infauna was used to jam communications within 3km of maneuver units . The 1L262E SPR2M Rtut-BM, Leer-2, and Lorandit were used tojam GSM signals .
3 Fires Artillery is the primary maneuver arm in the Russian Ground Forces . It is the main effort in Ukraine, and it is the first effort in Russia .
 The overwhelming majority of casualties in the Donbas were from artillery . The majority of the casualties were from the artillery .
7 U.S. Army Major Amos Fox highlights that because the Kremlin did not deploy VKS aircraft to Ukraine, Russian commanders were obviated of the responsibility for joint fires coordination and airspace de-confliction .
 He claims that the targeting cycle enjoyed “near instantaneous sensor-to-shooter’s responsiveness . He claims the targeting Cycle enjoyed ‘near instantaneous sensors-to’shooter.’
 This may hold true for ground reconnaissance forces, but does not accord with observations of UAS ISTAR and the 15minute kill chain lag between target acquisition and application of fires . This may be true for Ground reconnaissance forces.
Russian forces prefer massed fires and area fires over precision fires . Russian forces prefer precision fires, rather than area fires .
 They increasingly use MLRS over standard tube artillery in the Donbas . The ratio of 3:4 results in substantially more MLRS than conventional tube artillery .
 Russian artillery tactics consist of massed 122mm MLRS fires against a 300m target area at a range of up to 15km from five firing positions dispersed across a 23km front .
 In another attack, the Russians used five 122mm MLRs dispersed across a 100m front to attack a point target . The Russian attack was carried out by a group of Russians .
 Russian forces prefer to engage targets with artillery from maximum range . Russia prefers to engage target with maximum range.
 As the battlespace grew, Russia pursued longer-range projectiles for its artillery systems .
 Russia makes heavy use of dual-purpose improved conventional munitions . scatter-able mines and top-attack munitions and thermobaric munitions .
 The increased effects of artillery led the Russians to entrench and reinforce positional defenses . The increase in artillery led to the Russian forces to reinforce their positions .
 The dispersed nature of fighting in the Donbas resulted in the re-allocation of Russian brigade and higher-level artillery systems to the battalion level .
 Russian battalions were augmented with longer range 2S3 Akatsiya self-propelled guns, 52-P-546 D-20 towed howitzers, and BM-21 Grad systems, giving battalions fire support.
 Russia employed the BM-21 and BM- 21-1 Grad, TOS-1 Buratino thermobaric MLRS, 9P140 BM-27 Uragan, 2A18M D-30, 9K58 BM-30 Smerch MLRS . 2
 Russian forces in the Donbas used the 2S1 Gvozdika self-propelled howitzer in both its traditional indirect fire role and as a direct fire weapon .
 The 2S1 Gvozdika was used to cover armored advances at ranges from 1km to 6km . It was also used to protect against armored advances in the past .
 Russian forces in Ukraine employ the 1L219M Zoopark-1, 1RL232 Leopard-T, and 1RL239 Lynx-1 counterbattery radar systems . Russian forces also use the 1R2-2-3 radar systems in Ukraine .
 Russian forces’ use of explosive reactive armor on its legacy and upgraded tanks diminished the utility of single-warhead anti-tank missiles and rockets in Ukraine . Armor Russian forces' use of Explosive reactive armor.
 Singlewarhead missiles are not able to penetrate reactive armor equipped tank hulls . The missiles can also be used to launch missiles from the ground .
 Both Ukrainian and Russian tankers deployed tandem-warhead ATGMs in the Donbas . Neither side deployed the ATGm in the region .
Active armor on Russia’s T90 tanks has successfully defeated ATGMs in the Donbas . The active armor on the Russian T90s has been successfully defeated by ATGM .
 The T90 was deployed in smaller numbers, in company-sized formations, and saw less front-line use compared to the T-72B3 . The T-90 is deployed in small numbers, with less front line use .
 The T90 was instrumental in Russian success against Ukrainian forces . However, the T90 did not play a key role in Russia's success against Ukraine .
 The active armor on Russia’s most modern tanks has proven susceptible to direct fire weapons . Russian tanks have been known to be vulnerable to fire weapons.
Russian infantrymen forgoing the comparatively weak armor of their IFVs and APCs . The increased proliferation and lethality of direct fire weapons and artillery in the Donbas has resulted in Russian infantrymen.
Light infantry are riding atop their vehicles and fighting as dismounted light infantry to increase their survivability . Instead, they are riding on top of their vehicles to increase survivability.
6.6 Deception Russia’s operations in Ukraine are disavowed by the Kremlin . Karber says tank attacks are less effective because they no longer have accompanying mechanized infantry with equal mobility .
 Russia’s deception has also limited its ability to prosecute the war. While allowing Russia to maneuver time through ambiguity, Russia has also been able to prosecute war .
 Russia did not deploy its air forces to the Donbas because that would have taken away the Kremlin’s plausible deniability .
 Foreign Military Studies Office Russia analyst Timothy Thomas describes a deceptive IO tactic RBS employ through requesting OSCE observers visit their positions . RBS uses the tactic to request OSCE observer visits their positions.
 Russian forces then initiate an artillery strike against Ukrainian forces that concludes before OSCE observers arrive at the Russian position . Russia then begins a strike against Ukraine forces that ends before observers arrive .
 Russia made a pattern of suspending operations while negotiating, only to resume offensive action in violation of the treaty upon Ukrainian acquiescence . Russia made the pattern of suspension while negotiating .
 Putin assured besieged Ukrainian forces in Ilovaisk that they would be allowed safe passage to withdraw . Ukrainians accepted the truce .
 Russian troops attacked withdrawing Ukrainians and turned those who surrendered over to RBS . RBS tortured and executed the prisoners .
 Maskirovka was used in September 2014 to deceive the OSCE after the Minsk ceasefire . It gave observers the illusion that Russia was withdrawing forces and complying with sanctions when they in fact retained armor .
 Russia’s intervention in the Syrian civil war consists of an air campaign against the Islamic State and other insurgent forces that are battling the Syrian regime .
 The air campaign is coordinated on the ground by Spetsnaz performing terminal attack control . The aircampaign is coordinated by Spetnaz.
 The air campaign has been augmented with occasional cruise missile strikes . These were not out of necessity, but rather, to advertise and demonstrate that capability .
 Russia specialist Dmitry Gorenburg notes that Russia’s aviation operations demonstrated an “over-used and aging aircraft fleet” that nonetheless successfully implemented the post-Georgia reform goals of joint integration between terminal attack controllers and strike pilots .
 The joint integration of forces under new OSKs has enabled rapid strike coordination . Previously, coordination occurred between service- component headquarters .
 Russian aviation has successfully integrated strikes with Iranian and Syrian ground maneuver units . Impressively, Russian aviation have successfully integrated strike with Iranian, Syrian ground forces .
 Russian VKS suffered from personnel shortages, and from maintenance, pilot-performance, and inventory deficiencies in Syria .
After several mishaps, Kremlin resorted to reducing and cancelling non-Syrian aviation operations to maintain operational tempo .
 Russian forces in Syria have been achieving their operational and tactical objectives . Nonetheless, Russian forces are achieving their operations and objectives .
 PGMs, as well as UAVs for ISTAR and BDA, are employed for the first time in combat . They are employing PGMs and U AVs for first time.
5 Russia’s performance in Syria bears the caveat that Russian aircraft have de facto air superiority and freedom of movement . Russian forces on the ground have been using microwave jammers to counter enemy UAVs .
 Russia’s use of Spetsnaz for terminal control begs the question of how well aerial fires would be integrated within conventional ground forces conducting maneuver against an adversary with near-peer capabilities . Russia struggled during its war in Georgia during the war .
 With the addition of OSK-N, the districts are operationalized into five OSKs . The districts are operating into five districts .
 The WMD has the largest concentration of forces, comprising 40 percent of total Russian Forces . WMD is Russia's largest force, with a total of 40 percent.
 It shares a border with the NATO member-states Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, and Poland .
 The Russian Federation’s ground-combat forces could be deployed against the Baltic States without significant warning . This section provides an open source assessment of the Russian Federation's ground- combat forces .
 Western Military District Composition and Disposition The WMD is operationalized as OSK-West . It is headquartered in St. St. Louis, Missouri .
 The WMD controls the 11th AC in Kaliningrad, which includes the Baltic Fleet’s ground forces .
 He claims there are five in the WMD, two for motorized rifle, one for tank, and two for artillery units . He says there are also five for motorised rifle, and three for tank units .
 Under the 6th CAA is the 216th BKhRVT in Petrozavodsk, Republic of Kareliya . Under the 20th Guards CAA there is the 99th B KhRVT.394 . Also, under the 20st Guards C AA is the
 According to Jane's, there are eight additional BKhRVT locations . Some of the locations given are outside the WMD's area .
 The 144th Guards MRDiv is comprised of the 488th MRRgt in Klintsy, which was formed from the 28th Simferopl MRBde, recently transferred from the CMD . The 856th Arty Rgt in Pochep, Bryansk
 The Ministry of Defense is transitioning the motorized rifle brigades into divisions . As of January 2017, the 6th and 20th Guards CAAs still had 2 brigades .
 Rgt in Kerro, Leningrad Oblast’s St. Petersburg and Neni-Myaki, Republic of Karelia . 6th NBC Rgt. in Sapyornoye, St. St. Petersburg, Russia.
 The 51st Sep Bde in Krasnoye Selo, St. Petersburg, is the 51th Sep B de in Sertolovo, Russia . The 10th Sep NBC Bn is in the city of Petersburg, Russia.
 The 3rd Guards MRDiv, recently formed on the basis of the 9th Sep MRBde, contains the 252nd MRRgt in Boguchar and 237th Guards Tank Rgt in Valuyki .
 Sutyagin, email message to the author. “New’s” Divisions in the West;” “‘New”
 The 11th AC’s principal combat power is the 79th Guards Sep MRbde in Gusevo and the 7th Guard Sep MRRgt, which may now be at brigade strength .
 The Rossgvardia’s 136th Sep Special MRRgt in Kaliningrad can also be subordinated to the 11th AC in contingencies . The Ross gvardia's 136thSep SpecialMRRgt can be subordination to the 13th AC .
 The VKS’ 44th Air Defense Div in Kaliningrad is composed of the 183rd Guards AirDef Rgt in Gvarkeysk . The WMD includes the Baltic Fleet and its associated air defense, aviation, coastal artillery, missile forces and naval infantry .
 The 336th Guards Sep Marine Bde in Baltiysk is one of the most senior officers in the world . It is the third of the 336th Guard Sep Marines in the region .
The 336th is comprised of two Marine battalions, one assault landing battalion, and two artillery squadrons . The 336th includes two Marine battalion, two artillery squads, two Marine squadrons, and a Marine battalion .
 The Baltic Fleet is also responsible for the 561st Maritime Reconnaissance Spetsnaz Point in Parusnoye . It is comprised of two naval SpetsNaz companies .
Russian Federation–Army; Russian Federation-Army; Russia’s “Russian Military Activity in the Baltic,” 8; Perrson, ‘Russian Military Capability,’ 81. Russian Federation– army; Russia's ‘Russia’
 Russian Federation–Army;. Russian Federation-Army; “Russian Military Activity in the Baltic’s Baltic,” 8; Perrson, ‘Russian Military Capability,’ 81; Sutyagin, Russia's New Ground Forces: Capabilities, Lim
 The division is scheduled to establish a tank battalion by 2019 . The Principal combat power of the 106th Guards VDV Div is the 51st Guards VdV Rgt in Tula and 137th Guard VDVs in Ryazan .
 The Division is scheduled to establish another VDV regiment and tank battalion by 2019 . The division is set to establish a new regiment by next year .
 The Battalion Tactical Group and its Organization and Equipment The MOD are moving away from Serdyukov’s New Look brigades . The MOD is returning to a division model based on four maneuver regiments .
 Tank divisions have three tank regiments and one motorized rifle regiment . Motorized rifle divisions resemble the inverse structure of the tank division .
 The WMD’s 6th and 20th Guards CAAs’ brigades should transition to divisions in 2017 .
 The 20th Guards CAA’s brigades will fall under regiments within the 3rd Guards MRDiv .
 A standard rifle brigade is comprised of 3 motorized rifle battalions, as well as tank, self-propelled howitzer, MLRS, AAA, anti-aircraft missile-artillery, antiaircraft missile, reconnaissance, signals, engineer, and MTO battalions .
 Force Structure, Tactics, and Modernization of the Russian Ground Forces . 33. The Russian Ground Force is the largest military force in the world .
 Tank brigades have a similar structure, with an inverted ratio of motorized rifle to tank battalions . Tank brigade has an inverted ratios of motorised rifle to tanks .
 A brigade’s motorized rifle battalions each have three companies, while the tank battalions have four . The tank batt battalion has four companies, and the motorized rifles have three .
 Overall, a motorized rifle brigade has approximately 3,800 personnel, while a tank brigade has about 3,000 personnel . Where regiments are used, they serve as headquarters for four infantry or tank battalions, divided into three infantry and one tank .
 BTGs are the primary combined-arms unit of employment for the Russian ground forces . BTG are the main combined-arm unit of employed for the Russia's ground forces.
 BTGs pre-date the fall of the Soviet Union, but received renewed prominence in the reforms that characterized Anatoliy Serdyukov’s tenure as Minister of Defense .
 The Russian Army could neither man nor equip its nominal forces, so it cut conscript positions and scaled down from regiments to brigades . The Russian MOD has limited publishing official information about its military organization, equipment, and capabilities .
 The organization and equipment of motorized rifle units differ depending on whether the unit is armored or mechanized . To compound matters, the organization and Equipment of motorization units differ .
 Armored motorized rifle units are equipped with BMP-type IFVs while mechanized units areequipped with BTR and MT-LB-type APCs . Armored motorization units are also equipped with APCs and BMPs .
 Gerasimov detailed the structure of a BTG as an infantry or tank battalion, each with two to four companies and supporting arms . The BTG was an infantry and tank battalion.
 Supporting arms consist of anti-tank, artillery, reconnaissance, engineer, and logistics platoons . Supporting arms include anti- tank, artillery and reconnaissance .
 The armored forces are smaller due to their superior firepower . They do not require an additional AT platoon . They are smaller than the armored forces .
 tank-heavy BTGs should typically have 31 tanks, models T-72B3/T-80/90/14, and 11 BMP-2/3s .
 The CAA is equipped with TOS-1 Buratino thermobaric MLRS and RPO flamethrowers . They could have NBC attachments from their CAA .
 The WMD can field two Recon BTGs, likely with BTR and BRDMtype vehicles and five mechanized, infantry-heavy BTGs . From its directly subordinate forces, the WMD could field two BTGs.
 From the 1st Tank Army, the WMD can field seven tank-heavy BTGs and four mechanized infantry- heavy BTGs .
 The 20th Guards CAA can provide eight BTGs, five armored infantryheavy, and three mechanized infantry-heavy . From the 6th CAA, the WMD can field four mechanized. BTGs (with MTLBs)
 Strategic exercises typically involve an entire military district, and each district participates in a JSE on a regularly scheduled, quadrennial basis .
 The Kremlin uses legal instrumentalism, maintaining plausible deniability of the true size and scope of JSEs . OSCE member states must continue sharing information on their military exercises without reciprocation .
 The Kremlin invited observers to Belarus for its latest JSE, but not the Russian portions of the exercise . The Russian portions are part of the JSE exercise, or the parallel exercises .
 Zapad 2013 occurred along Russia’s border with NATO and the Nordic countries . It occurred along the Russia's border with the Nordic nations .
 The primary Russian training audience was five BTGs from the 20th Guards CAA . They trained for 10 days, covering 1,500km of movement .
 Snap inspections just prior to the exercise involved 12,000km movements, including a 400km foot march .
 The SMD conducted exercise Combat Commonwealth, focusing on air defense . In parallel, the SMD held exercise Combat Combat Commonwealth .
 Ukrainian authorities estimated 240,000 Russian personnel would take part . Lithuanian officials put the number lower, at 140,000, and Poland estimated 100,000 personnel would participate .
 These figures include not only Zapad, but forces in parallel exercises . These figures undoubtedly include not just Zapad.
 One Russian tank brigade has 94 tanks, 61 IFVs and APCs, 44 artillery pieces, and 2,900 troops . This includes one Russian tank Brigade with 94 tanks and 61 IFV and APC pieces . The brigade also has 2, 900 troops .
 The 1st Guards Tank Army’s 6th Sep Tank Bde initiated rail movement to Belarus on 14 September .
 One tank regiment, one motorized rifle regiment, and one independent reconnaissance battalion . This allows for one tank regiment and one reconnaissance battalion. This allows one tank unit, one rifle regiment and two independent reconnaissance units .
 RUSI assesses these units to be the 2nd Guards MRDiv of the 1st Guard’s Tank Army . The 136th Guards Sep Recon Bn.8 and 336th GuardsSep Marine Bde were also involved in Zapad 2017 . The WMD’
 The 11th Army Corps’ 7th Guards Sep MRRgt, the 79th Guard Sep MRBde, and the 244th Guards Arty Bde participated . The 14th AC’s 80th and 200th MRBdes also participated .
1 Zapad 2017 was a combined, joint-interoperability exercise within the Union State's armed forces and their various branches . The 45th Guards Sep VDV Spetsnaz Rgt likely participated .
 The scenario provided a defensive narrative, based on a surprise attack from the West . The scenario was based on the West's surprise attack on the United States .
 This narrative is pragmatic; it fits Russia’s historical experience from the Second Word War, but it only partially aligns with Russia's current threat perception . This narrative fits Russia's historical experience with the Second World War .
 Zapad 2017 was strictly conventional and high intensity . Unlike Zapad 2013, it carried undertones of color revolution and exercised capability to suppress civil-disorder and irregular warfare .
 Exercise aggressor forces engaged Russian forces with air and cruise missile strikes, simultaneously with diversionary ground maneuver and vanguard reconnaissance in force .
 Parallel exercises in other military districts mirrored Zapad’s scenario . Russia is preparing to defend against a multi-front attack .
8 Zapad 2017 was a two phase exercise. The parallel exercises suggest Russia is capable of employing brigade-sized units for multi-front operations .
 Phase one was a three-day defense until the WMD could forward deploy forces and aviation . Phase one would be a three day defense until WMD was able to deploy forces, aviation .
 Zapad 2017 did not have the overt simulated nuclear strikes that were present in Zapad 1999 and 2009 . The defensive phase of the exercise culminated with simulated strikes from Tu-22M3 bombers and a 9K720 Iskander-M missile system on 16 September .
 Zapad 2017’s conventional forces were monitored through a COP that provided situational awareness down to the battalion level, provided by a communications architecture that covered 1,000km .
Data was transferred along a high-bandwidth network, with transmission speed up to 20 gigabytes per second . Data was transferred on high-Bandwidth network .
 Belarus's 86th Comm Bde and 70th Mobile Command Post provided C2.476 . This combined architecture was instrumental in the Union States' ability to conduct close air support with Belarusian aviation providing fires for Russian armor units .
 GLONASS and GPS enabled Andromeda-D C2 systems in their BTRs, theoretically allowing COP down to the squad level . They employed the GLONass and GPSenabled Andromeda-C2 systems .
 The dual-use of both satellite systems suggests preparation to operate in a GLONASS-denied environment .
 During the Georgia War, Russian forces often used commercial GPS for navigation . The GLONASS constellation was not fully operational .
 Spetsnaz forces used the Strelets C4ISR system to provide friendly-force COP down to the individual level . ISTAR was also used to support targeting and fires .
481 Zapad 2017 saw extensive use of UAVs for traditional ISR as well as ISTAR in support of artillery fires . Integration of the Strelets system with GLONASS was a primary C4ISR focus .
Russian ground and naval forces employed the Orlan-10, Eleron-3SV, and Grusha UAVs . Russian ground and Naval forces employed them .
 A Russian EW brigade used RB-109A Bylina automated EW detection and suppression systems . The WMD’s 6th Air Force and Air Defense Army employed Tu-22M3 bombers, escorted by Su-35 fighters .
Su-24M strike aircraft were used to target aggressor C2, while Su-24MPs were used in a strike coordination and armed reconnaissance role . Su- 24MP aircraft were also used in strike coordination, armed reconnaissance and strike coordination .
 Both Su-25 and Su-34 strike aircraft conducted bombing sorties while escorted by Su-35 multi-role fighters . Both planes conducted bombingsorties while escorting Su- 35 multi- role fighters .
Su-25 strike aircraft used rockets and cannon fire against mobile armor formations . Su-25 strikes used rockets, cannon fire and rockets to attack formations .
 Russian VKS primarily used unguided bombs and rockets, in coordination with the SVP-24 Gefest targeting system . The VKS switched to PGM for the last two days of the exercise .
 Russian 15th Army Aviation Bde employed Mi-35M, Ka-52, Mi-28N, and Mi-8AMTSh helicopters in CAS and anti-armor roles .
 Belarus also employed Mi-8MTV5 and Mi-28N helicopters to provide CAS for Russian VDV forces . Russia launched a silo-based RS-24 Yars ICBM on 16 September, followed by a mobile-variant RS- 24 Yars intercontinental
 This is in keeping with Russia’s military doctrine, which supposes that quickly escalating to a nuclear strike would result in capitulation by the aggressor . Russia's military doctrine says a conventional threat would lead to capitulation .
 Russian forces conducted simulated launches of Iskander-M and Tochka-U missiles against massed armor from ranges of 30 to 100km .489 Russian forces carried out simulated launches.
 Russian forces launched an Iskander-M at a range of 480km, but Kofman suggests it was most likely an IsKander-K.491 Massed artillery and rocket fires . All Tochka-Us are to be phased out by 2020 .
 Artillery fire direction received target inputs from UAVs, 1L271 Aistenok counter-mortar radars, and the Strelets system .
 Russian forces in Zapad 2017 conducted real-time targeting with BM-21 Grad MLRS and with single-tube artillery .
 Its forces were organized into a BTG, reinforced with T-72B1 Tanks, BM-21 Grad MLRS, 2S3M Akatsiya self-propelled howitzers, and towed artillery .
 VDV forces with BMD-2 IFVs augmented the 11th Army Corps’ BTG for combined-arms maneuver . The move emphasized motorized rifle forces supported by artillery .
 NBC forces employed the RPO-A Shmel thermobaric rocket launcher as an urban, antipersonnel weapon .
 Baltic Fleet Marines conducted an amphibious landing with BTR-82A APCs from tank landing ships in the Baltic Sea . Also conducted a landing with Ka-27 helicopters providing assault support and under cover of Mi-35M attack helicopters .
 The Marines operated ashore in BMP-2 IFVs supported by tank destroyers – presumably 2S25 Sprut SDM1 self-propelled anti-tank guns . The 1st Tank Army's 4th Tank Div employed an array of tanks .
 The division used new T-72B3 tanks, while its recently re-formed 423rd Guards MRRgt used older T-80BVs . The division also used T- 72B3 Tanks, while the 423rd Guard used new tanks .
 The 1st Tank Army’s 6th Bde used T-72B3s, and was supported with 2S19 Msta-S artillery . The Army's sixth Bde was supported by 2S18 artillery .
Russian armor units in Belarus operated in conjunction with Belarus’ 120th Sep MRBde . Russian armor units operated in Belarus .
 WMD’s VKS forces trained for air superiority missions with Su-27, Su-30SM and Su-35 fighter aircraft . The VDV conducted airborne insertions to secure key infrastructure, such as airfields .
 The VDV practiced river crossings in their IFVs in anticipation that an aggressor would use PGMs to destroy key infrastructure, such as bridges, during the initial phase of conflict . Two battalions from the 76th Guards VDVs likely participated .
 Russian VKS aircraft and support personnel were transferred to forward basing during the exercise . Russia has limited power projection capability away from its current garrison basing .
 The Russian General Staff’s rapid-deployment force, the VDV, was notified of their deployment orders .
 The 76th Guards VDV Div was able to deploy one battalion – equipped with 10 BMD IFVs – in a matter of hours after receiving notification . The 76st Guards VV Div is equipped with ten BMDIFVs .
 The 106th Guards, 98th Guards and 76th Guards VDV Divs started operations on 18 September . The 98th may have inserted on 17 September . 3 Infantry, armor, and artillery units were transported to their training areas via rail .
 The Russian MoD contracted 4,162 individual rail cars to support moving personnel and equipment from Russia into Belarus during 2017 . The Russian Ministry of Rail was responsible for moving personnel, equipment and equipment into Belarus .
 2,908 rail cars have already been used transporting Russian forces and equipment into Belarus for earlier exercises this year . Many observers consider this to apply specifically to Zapad 2017 .
Each rail car can hold up to two pieces of armored rolling stock, or one passenger/cargo car . Each rail car has a passenger or passenger passenger car .
 The combat service support requirements to sustain one battalion also require one train . The combat support requirements for one battalion are also required .
 MTO units employed older KET-L light recovery trucks and BTS-4 tracked armored recovery vehicles, but also employed upgraded BREM-K wheeled recovery vehicles . MTO-UB-2 Ural maintenance workshops and BAKM 1040 BK cranes.
8 Force Protection in Zapad 2017 Force Protection efforts were a main theme throughout the year . Bridging units made extensive use of pontoon bridging in an effort to prepare for the expected destruction of infrastructure in actual combat .
 Russian forces used 3K60 Bal CDCMs to neutralize aggressor surface threats . In an A2AD role, Russian forces were used toneutralize aggressors .
 The VKS focused on “defending key civilian infrastructure’s during the defense phase of Zapad 2017 . S-300 and S-400 SAMs and 96K6 Pantsir S1 anti-aircraft systems were mitigated .
Russian military EW brigades employed RB109A Bylina automated EW detection and suppression systems . Russian military EW Brigades employed the system in Russia .
 Pantsir crews engaged slow, low flying targets, typically flying 200km/h at 50m altitude . Pantsir crew engaged slow.
 The 76th Guards VDV Div conducted air defense with 9K35 Strela 10M tracked, 9K338 Igla-S MANPADS, and ZU-23 towed AAA.525 Russian ground forces leveraged their NBC troops to provide smoke for concealment
 When Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania joined NATO, Russia was no longer viewed as the enemy . When Estonia and Latvia joined the alliance, Russia had no longer seen as an enemy .
9.9 Russia's Crimea invasion was opportunistic and asymmetric, exploiting Ukraine’s C2 and security structures . The Baltic States' view that Russia is an existential threat to their independence and sovereignty .
 The thoroughness and relative speed with which Russia carried out the Crimea operation suggests it was the product of detailed planning that was conducted over several years .
 Russian forces affected the complete capture and control of Crimea in less than 30 days, with relatively little armed violence .
 The Kremlin’s slower, less committed response in the Donbas suggests Russia lacked the detailed plans in place, the resources and the political will to achieve similar results there .
 Russia’s floundering successes in the Donbas reveal a military that has asymmetric advantages over Ukraine . But it has not yet achieved the readiness levels it wants to achieve .
 The keys to Russia’s success in Crimea were the speed and surprise of its forces .
 In the Donbas, the integrated use of air defenses, ISR, and fires have given Russia the advantage .
 Russia was aided by the ambivalence of the West in the face of what was clearly two illegitimate invasions of a sovereign state . Russia was helped by the West.
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine show that military force is a policy tool that has not diminished in the age of information and hybrid warfare .
 New Look reforms aimed at a force structure of one million personnel . As of the end of 2016, there were only 930,000 uniformed billets .
 The military reached its goal of 425,000 professional service members ahead of its 2017 deadline . Galeotti contends that the military reached the goal of 427,000 in 2016 . The military's goal is to reach 425,00 professional service member members in 2017 .
This is from total force he estimates to be 760,000, of which Ground Forces comprise 230,000 . This is from the total force of the Ground Forces, he says .
 Ground Forces are 19 percent below their 243,500 personnel end-strength, Sutyagin says . Sutiesagin provides a less-optimistic assessment .
 Russian brigade's ability to generate either one or two BTGs is dependent upon its contract manning . Herspring assesses the total force to be 23 percent below end-strength .
 The new divisions in the SMD and WMD will require a 37,000 personnel end-strength increase . The new division will require 37,00 personnel increase .
 VDV and Spetsnaz are Russia’s Rapid Reaction Forces, as Russia's rapid Reaction Forces . The VDVs are the priority for professional manning . The Rapid Reaction forces are Russia's Rapid Reaction Force .
 Rapid Reaction Forces leaves conventional maneuver forces with a smaller percentage of professionals . The imperative for all professional manning in the Rapid Reaction forces is to be more professional .
 It desires to have only professional NCOs supervising conscripts, reducing the need for officers at the lowest levels . It also wants to have professional N COs supervise conscripted officers at low levels .
 Despite meeting its professionalization targets, it is not sufficiently filling NCO billets . Yet despite meeting its goals, NCO is not filling its billets.
NCOs are reluctant to empower their NCOs, creating a duplication of effort . Where officers and N COs do fill traditional Western roles, officers are hesitant to empower them .
 Russia's dearth of NCOs is compounded by the inordinately long 42-month training program at the Ryazan NCO Academy . Russia’s dearth. of N COs.
 The combat arms are a priority for NCO staffing, leaving CSS units to struggle with insufficient leadership . NCO units are also struggling to find sufficient leadership .
 3.3 Russia’s conscription pool is inadequate to support its requirements . CSS NCO billets are typically filled by graduates of the Volsk Military Institute of Rear Services .
 A quarter of conscripts who do show for service are physically unfit, and a tenth are disqualified for criminality . Draft dodging is endemic .
 Many Russians evade serving for fear of the brutal hazing that is characteristic of Russian conscript service . Many Russians are afraid of the harsh hazing.
 Despite the introduction of military police and structures to maintain and enforce accountability, hazing and corruption remain problems .
 The military needs to draft 600,000 conscripts a year, in two biannual cycles of 300,000 . The military will need to draft more than 1,000 soldiers a year .
 It often fails to meet half of that goal due to evasion and physical disqualification . It often also fails to met half of the goal because of evasion andPhysical disqualification.
 The initial decline, coupled with generally poor health, has resulted in an insufficient manpower pool to support Russia’s conscription goals . Russia's conscription goal is to increase the number of people in Russia .
 The demographics of eligibility have temporarily corrected, but the manpower shortage is forecasted to continue . The manpower shortage will continue, according to the government .
 Demographics are expected to peak at 2020, after which the effects of Russia’s net population decline, compounded by intellectual capital flight, will limit Russia's ability to sustain a high-technology force .
 Russia is encouraging foreign-born Russian-speakers to enlist, and experimenting with all-women motorized rifle battalions . Putting an end to the conscription and mobilization-based force structure has left Russia with no true second-echelon reserve capability .
 Difficulties in sustaining force generation in Ukraine highlight these manpower limitations in Ukraine .
 Six months of the term are occupied by individual and unit training . Only a few months of service from conscripts before demobilization .
Budget constraints and time limitations result in the average Russian solder receiving as little as one-eighth of the live-fire training time of Western forces .
With collapse of Soviet Union and privatization of state-owned enterprises, military procurement turned westward . GPV was founded in the 1980s .
 Russia's defense industry needs to focus on dual-use technology to secure capital . But developing ISI to substitute by 2020, or even 2025, is not particularly effective for Russia’s defense industry .
High tech components from states that are sanctioning Russia still account for 10 to 20 percent of end item sub556 Galeotti, The Modern Russian Army 1992–2016, 20.
 This accounts for the majority of electronic components in military systems, to include GLONASS-K satellites . The majority of the electronic components are in the military systems .
 Russia is trending back towards state-owned defense enterprises, but this is negatively effecting innovation and efficiency . Russia is Trending back towards defense enterprises .
6.6 Putin twice attempted military modernization prior to the GPV 2020, and twice failed . The result, coupled with an economic downturn, is a weak production capability .
 GPV 2020 appears to be another drastic failure in terms of achieving its stated goals . The GPV2020 appears to have failed to achieve its goals .
 As of 2017, only $250 of the planned $630-$650 billion had been spent on the GPV . The GPV has been fraught with difficulty .
 $134 million was lost to fraud, waste, and abuse in 2012. It is slow, inefficient, and rife with corruption,g., $134million was lost in 2012 .
 Contracts are non-competitive, and are often more about domestic politics than technology . Contracts are more about supporting industries that are too big to fail, than rearmament with the best technology .
 Russia's defense budget has steadily increased as a share of GDP under Shoigu . Despite the Kremlin’s efforts to counter corruption, it is hampering both the government and industry sides of the procurement sector .
 Russia has continued increasing its defense budget, but the devalued ruble has resulted in a trend of net decline in real defense spending . Russia's defense budget has continued to increase, but it has also decreased in real spending .
 Defense budget shortfalls will be exacerbated by competition within the power ministries, to include the Rossgvardia . Putin will rely on more for domestic support as the proliferation of social media increases the average Russian’s desire for transparency and accountability .
 The military-industrial complex’ continually delayed production and procurement cycles have resulted in supplying the force with outdated technology in insufficient quantities . There is a rush to complete modernization before the money truly runs out, but a shrinking budget due to low oil prices, sanctions, and inflation continuously results in
 There is still no armed platform similar to the United States Predator, still in operation . The current Reaper is still a museum piece, or the current Reaper .
Marginal PGM use in Syria and Zapad 2017 suggests that PGMs are either in short supply, too expensive to procure, or both .
Despite seeking an integrated C4ISR network, ground forces and VDV employ different systems . Despite seeking anintegration, the ground forces are still using different systems.
Only the Spetsnaz are using its C2 components, while the base system is simply body armor . Despite media hype about the Ratnik and Strelets, only the Spetnaz use its C1 components .
 High technology equipment and weapons systems are disproportionately vulnerable to damage and maintenance issues in the Russian Ground Forces . The Russian Ground Force is the largest force in the world .
 This is the platform that will supposedly allow for rotational tank crews in modular elements conducting around-the-clock operations, with no regard to manpower or maintenance deficiencies . The platform is supposed to allow for tank crews to operate around- the-clock .
 The 1st Guards TA and 20th Guards CAA are slated to be the first units to receive this new technology . Russia's force generation and logistics nexus is a major flaw in Russia’s force generation.
 VDV and Ground Forces have different vehicles, even if the Armata, Bumerang, and Kurganets are fielded, different units will get different compliments .
 For units that train on one system, their ability to rapidly deploy and fight competently relies upon falling in on a prepositioned stock that has exactly the right compliment of equipment .
 Russia’s use of BTGs in regional conflicts does not indicate BTGs would operate independently in a fight against NATO forces .
 Russia's army was singularly represented with all of its forces . It begs the question of Russia’s ability to deploy fully-staffed combined-arms armies . Russia's forces are capable of conducting round theclock operations .
 The Kremlin most likely cannot, as a result of operational overstretch and manpower shortfalls . The Kremlin is most likely to be unable to cope with the problem .
 Russia's ability to redeploy units from other military districts theoretically enables it to support large-scale combat operations with nine combined arms armies . Russia’s ability to deploy units could be used to support combat operations.
 These forces would not be immediately available in one military district . However, these forces would be available in another military district.
 Russia has never mobilized that many formations at once, FOI points out . It is unlikely that such a large force could be mobilized without signaling Russia’s intentions .
Social media analysis suggests personnel from the 1st Guards TA’s 6th Sep Tank Bde deployed for Zapad 2017 over one month prior to the beginning of the exercise . Russia deployed 40,000 forces to the Ukrainian border in seven days in 2014 .
 Russian forces deploying over more than 100km will likely travel by rail . Mechanized movement over any greater distance is likely to result in the type of maintenance issues experienced in Georgia .
 Russia is limited in projecting considerable power into Europe to air lift . Russian railcars only work on Russian 1.520 m broad-gauge rails, not on standard European or Chinese rails .
 Russian broad-gauge rails are the standard in the former Soviet Republics (including the Baltic States), as well as in Finland .
 The VTA is comprised of the 12th Transport Air Division, which commands 5 regiments . It employs a total of 6 An-124, 5 An-22, and 82 Il-76 transport and cargo aircraft .
5 VTA regiments are geographically positioned to support VDV operations . One VTA sortie can lift 5 motorized rifle brigades, transporting 25,200 to 26,800 passengers without their vehicles or heavy equipment .
 The VTA could transport an entire VDV division in three sorties . If the aircraft were aggregated, the VTA would be able to transport the entire VV division .
 Russia is able to field 47,000 personnel in BTGs for rapid deployment . Sutyagin assesses Russia's rapid deployment of BTGs . Russia is also able to deploy more than 50,000 people to BTGs.
 Swedish Defense Research Agency estimated one CAA with four brigades and one VDV brigade could prepare in one week . In 2013, the agency estimated that one C AA could carry out combat operations without reinforcement .
 The RAND study formed the basis of opinion for NATO’s response to the perceived Russian threat . The study claimed the WMD could field 22 battalions .
 RAND’s methodology is somewhat unclear, claiming at one point to use 27 Russian battalions and a week of mobilization . It would take 36 to 60 hours to reach at least one Baltic state capital, some of which are stationed in Kaliningrad .
 The FOI assesses Russia’s personnel readiness to be 90 percent of available forces . It claims to use four tank, five mechanized, five motorized, eight VDV, and three Marine battalions .
 The 11th AC is not deployable from its current basing in Kaliningrad . A tank army of five brigades, and CAA of four brigades with associated fire support would be immediately available .
 The FOI assesses that OSK-W could prosecute a multi-front campaign due to its large size and ability to field two major formations simultaneously . This build-up is focused on supporting RBS in Ukraine and defending Crimea .
Sutyagin argues that threatening the Baltic States is really about pressuring Ukraine . Sutyagin says the Baltic states are pressuring Ukraine.
 The GPV prioritizes air defense modernization . This trend is forecasted to continue in the 2018-2025 GPV.610 Second to nuclear forces .
 Russia’s perception is based on the fear the U.S. missile defense system . Russia's perception of U.N. missile defence system is based upon the fear of the United States .
 Russia’s military doctrine is based on the perception that the West is waging undeclared war against Russia . Russia's military doctrine was based on a perception of the West's war on Russia .
 In response, the Kremlin seeks to balance through asymmetry while building a modern force . It is not expansionist, as much as it is reactionary, says the author .
 The 1st Guards TA and 20th Guards CAA were established in 2014 to balance NATO . Their subordinate units have been used mainly in Ukraine .
 The 20th Guards CAA is relocating to Voronezh to focus on operations in Ukraine . The CAA will focus on its operations in the Ukraine .
 Ground Forces are modernizing with the T-14 tank and T-15 IFV . The Ground Forces plan to procure 2,300 tanks between 2016 and 2020 . The equipment is going to the 1st Guards TA and 20th Guards CAA .
Despite rhetoric, the 6th CAA and 76th Guards VDV Div, not the 1st Guards TA, are aligned towards any potential incursion into the Baltic States . Despite rhetoric, they are not aligned to any possible incursions into the region .
 Rearmament in the 6th CAA and Baltic area has focused on air defenses . Despite the West’s anxiety over the Zapad exercises, the scenario is defensive .
 The WMD is characterized by large strategic air defenses focused on defending Moscow . Russia realizes that NATO is not likely to carry out a ground operation to invade Russia .
 Russian forces building up in the WMD is to secure a land bridge from Russia, to Crimea, and on to Moldova . Baev theorizes that instead of intervening in the Baltic States, the more likely course of action for Russian forces is to reach Crimea, Moldova.
 Securing a land bridge to Crimea through a non-NATO state is quite different than seizing NATO territory en route to Kaliningrad . Securing the land bridge is not the same as taking NATO territory to Crimea .
 Russian forces are hampered by political restraints in Ukraine, where they must limit their operations to maintain a modicum of deniability .
 The Ukrainian Army is more capable now than it was in 2014, when it achieved tactical successes against Russian and RBS forces . The Ukrainian army is now more capable than in 2014.
 There were 3,500 to 6,500 forces actually in Ukraine during August 2014, along with 90,000 on the border, 40,000 to 50,000 of which were ground combat forces .
 Russia’s contemporary conventional ground forces are roughly half that size, and are comprised of approximately half conscripts . Russia's conventional ground force is roughly half the size of the current ground forces .
 The Kremlin is likely to move forward with policy decisions that assuage NATO and the EU by demonstrating an unwillingness to use the conventional side of hybrid tactics in the Baltic States .
 Russia has reached its terminus towards this end, it seems. As far as securing economic stability is the Kremlin’s goal in the Baltic States .
 The Kremlin has little rational interest in occupying the Baltic States . Russia has sunk considerable cost into developing bypass energy and shipping transportation infrastructure . Estonia and Latvia’s ports for Russia.
 The diaspora issue will gradually fade as an increasingly cosmopolitan youth replaces the older Soviet-era generations, creating less appetite for Moscow’s intervention .
 The memory of Soviet occupation, and Russia’s claims of Nazi sympathizers within the Baltic States will remain a tension, but its value is little more than symbolic .
 Even business interests have been able to trump nationalistic fervor in the Baltic States when dealing with Russia .
 The Military Perspective,’ in The Russian Military in Contemporary Perspective, ed. The Military perspective,” in The Russia Military in contemporary Perspective, is published in the Russian Military In Contemporary Perspective .
 RBS and the Kremlin have failed to achieve their political goals in Ukraine . Despite tactical military victories in Ukraine, RBS, and Kremlin in general, they have failed.
 The conflict is an expensive stalemate, diverting resources that Russia could use for power-projection, or to develop its own economy . The conflict has cost Russia billions of dollars .
 Russia’s imbroglio in Ukraine has been a strategic failure through its diplomatic and economic consequences . Russia's economic and diplomatic consequences have been the result of Russia's actions in Ukraine .
 The United States and EU-led embargo, falling oil prices, rising inflation, and a lack of investor confidence is eroding Russia’s economy .
 Russia is moving missiles to Kaliningrad to increase its A2AD capability . Russia continues to pursue a hard line with NATO, and has engaged in nuclear posturing .
 Baltic States must engage with the West to secure sustainable infrastructure investment . They are also using UAVs to collect information on the strength and disposition of EFP forces .
 Baltic States’ economies have a comparative advantage in the labor market that will be lucrative for EU investment . The Baltic States' economies have an advantage in labor market .
 Baltic States can turn away from Russian energy will they have true independence . Only when the Baltic States are able to turn away, they will have trueindependence .
 It appears imperative for NATO and the EU that bolstering deterrence in the Baltic States means empowering them through integrative EU investment in energy security infrastructure .
 This would likely occur in tandem with airborne and air assault operations, likely from elements of the 76th Guards and 98th Guards VDV Divs . This would probably be in tandem. It would likely be from elements.
 Sutyagin theorizes that if Russia were to invade the Baltic States, it would be precipitated by either the 11th AC establishing a separate reconnaissance brigade or the newly forming 237th Rgt deploying to Kaliningrad as a detached, separate brigade .
 The RAND study recommends bolstering the Baltic States’ defensive capabilities with a seven-brigade tripwire force .
 NATO's EFP is a meager effort along those lines, offering no deterrence through denial . NATO’s EFP offers no deterrent through denial, though .
 NATO is establishing its EFP through four rotational multi-national battalions, one in each of the three Baltic States and Poland . From 2017 through 2018, NATO will establish four rotations through four battalions .
 This would require a tremendous national effort from every NATO Member State, and that effort would have to be preemptively stationed along Russia’s border .
 Latvia has two light infantry battalions, equipped with 40 Spartan CVR-T APCs . Latvia has a total of 2,000 light infantry units, with two light battalions .
 Lithuania has two mechanized infantry battalions, two motorized infantry Battalions, and one artillery battalion on active duty . Lithuania has one infantry battalion, and two artillery battalions .
 Army deployed its first armored brigade to Poland in January 2017 as part of Operation Atlantic Resolve . The U.S. Army is on a mission to reassure NATO and counter Russian aggression .
 NATO forces in place would likely be defeated through attrition or capture . The Kremlin would begin negotiating for a beneficial outcome .
 The loss of NATO forces in direct combat with Russian forces would change the calculus of Russian revisionist border adventures .
 NATO did not intervene in Georgia, or in Ukraine, because there was no imperative . NATO didn't intervene in Ukraine or Georgia, because it was not an imperative .
 NATO would be compelled to punish Russian aggression in a Baltic scenario . NATO's reaction would not be as geographically limited as Russia’s advance .
 The deterrence value of EFP is as a disposable force that would provide impetus for an armed NATO response . EFP would provide an impetus for a NATO response to the situation .
 If such a scenario were to occur, Russian training and operations demonstrate asymmetries that could be exploited by NATO forces .
 Russian planning and conduct of maneuver warfare is predicated on scientific correlation of forces, and offers little room for ingenuity . Russian planning, conduct of maneuvers are predicated by scientific correlation, and offer little room to ingenuity .
 Once operational-level commanders issue an order, it translates into a plan . Once an order is issued, a plan can be implemented .
There is no decentralized execution based on an overarching commander’s intent, but rather, commitment to the plan . There is no decentralization based on a commander's intent.
 United States Army Captain Nicolas Fiore’s research suggests Russian BTGs suffer from exploitable vulnerabilities .
 Fiore notes that BTGs in Ukraine did not have persistent, wide-area ISR capabilities, limiting their ability to focus ISR and EW . Fiore says commanders were relegated to focusing C2 on narrow objectives .
 BTG structure’s disproportionately high complement of brigade-level fire support assets leaves it vulnerable to either the rear, flanks, or both .
 It can neither adequately defend its entire position against fire, movement, and maneuver, nor can it properly mass to maximize efficiency of fire support . It can't adequately defend the entire position of fire against fire and movement .
 Russian forces do prefer mass, Fiore says . Fiore's point regarding security is valid, but Russian forces prefer mass .
 Russian forces prefer to mass their artillery against point targets, using infantry and armored maneuver only after direct and indirect fires .
 Fiore cites force regeneration issues with Russian BTGs that suffered casualties in Ukraine . Fiore also cites force Regeneration issues with Russia's BTGs .
 The lack of second echelon forces following the New Look reforms could also speak to general manpower shortages due to recruitment failures, inadequate reserve mobilization system, or prohibitions on deploying conscripts into combat abroad .
 Russia's increased air presence in the Baltic has been met by an increase in the number of aircraft supporting NATO's Baltic Air Policing mission . Russia’s increase in air presence is met by a rise in the numbers of aircraft support the mission .
 NATO must maintain communication with Russia, from the tactical to strategic levels, to deescalate quickly any tensions . NATO must keep contact with Russia from tactical to Strategic levels .
 Russia has an overwhelming capability in manpower and combined-arms forces . Russia has local superiority through its strength in manpower, combined-arm forces .
 Russia can deploy an overwhelming force without warning, and can follow up with reinforcements to sustain momentum or reinforce its position . Russia can use its own military force to strengthen its position without warning .
Despite reforms, economic and demographic decline, as well as operational commitments would limit the Kremlin’s ability to sustain such an operation indefinitely, especially if required to commit to multi-front defense .
 These capabilities seem to portray a bleak military situation for the Baltic States and NATO, especially considering Russia’s A2AD and nuclear capabilities .
 Russia has not yet demonstrated the will to embark on any such action . Despite Russia’s comparative advantage in a Baltic-States scenario, Russia has yet to take any action .
 Russian forces train for such a scenario in their strategic exercises, this does not communicate intent . All militaries train to carry out their functions .
 Russia’s military intervention against non-NATO forces in Ukraine have not achieved any political settlement after three years of protracted conflict. What is more relevant than wargames is that Russia's military intervention has not achieved a political settlement .
 The Russian military faces increasing fiscal constraints and growing mission creep against non-NATO forces in Ukraine and Syria .
 NATO’s EFP is insufficient for defending the Baltic States, according to NATO . It is sufficient for deterring any conventional Russian force from entering the Baltic states, regardless of size .
 As security of the regime is the Kremlin’s primary goal, a military adventure in the Baltic States presents a losing proposition . The Kremlin's primary goal is to protect the country's security .
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine have led to a stalemate that is slowly whittling down their economy . Russia is already suffering from the drop in global oil prices and soon to be followed by a net drop in oil demand .
 Fears of Russian revisionism in the Baltic States have led to NATO placing more troops in the region .
 NATO’s commitment to reinforcing deterrence in the Baltic States stands in stark contrast with Georgia and Ukraine .
 NATO's resolve and deterrence will be further enhanced if it can come to a consensus on what constitutes and how to respond to attacks in the cyber domain and electromagnetic spectrum . Russia is not likely to use conventional force against NATO .
 The French International Relations Institute, French International relations Institute, is based in Paris . It is based at the Defense Research Unit.
 Defense Intelligence Agency, 2017. www.dia.mil/Military-Power-Publications.com: 2017 .
 The Politics of Energy and Memory between the Baltic States and Russia. The politics of energy and memory between Russia and the Baltic states .
 In Russian Military Capability in a Ten-year Perspective --2016, edited by Gudrun Persson . In Russian military Capability, we look at the Russian military in a ten-year perspective .
 Strategic Studies Institute and United States Army War College Press, 2017 .
 The Central Asia-Caucasus Analyst. CSTO Stages Intelligence and Reconnaissance Exercise . The Central Asian-C Caucasian Analyst .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation document № 2232–01-01-12-2016 . The document was published by the Russian government .
 “Russia's Armed Forces in 2016,’ in a Ten-year Perspective – 2016, edited by Gudrun Persson, 23-56 .
 The Kennan Institute, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, is a non-profit organization . The Institute is based in Washington, D.C. It is based on the Kennan Foundation, the Wilson Institute, and the Wilson Center in Washington .
 The U.S. Army War College Strategic Studies Institute is forthcoming .
 Shlapak, David A., Michael W Johnson, Karl Mueller, and David Ochmanek are among the four men who have worked together .