 With 39 candidates on the ballot, it is most likely that there will be a second-round runoff election on April 21 . The winner will need to achieve 50 per cent plus one to win the election .
 Under the Ukrainian constitution, the president and the Rada share responsibilities on the key levers of power .
 The resulting political composition of the Rada will therefore be the second important act in the Ukrainian election process . The result will determine the country's political course .
 Then-president Viktor Yanukovych rejected a draft association agreement with the EU . He preferred a favourable bailout loan from Russia, with the attendant move towards stronger relations .
 violent uproar from Western-leaning Ukrainian nationalists led to a near civil war situation on the Maidan Square in Kyiv .
 Yanukovych fled to Russia and the most eastern and pro-Russian oblasts of the Donbass region rebelled against those pro-Western politicians who garnered the Rada's support .
 Russian military, economic and political support for the Ukrainian rebels led to the establishment of two breakaway proto-states within the Donbass . The Luhansk People's Republic and the Donetsk People’s Republic were formed from the Russian military and economic support .
 Germany and France brokered a ceasefire agreement known as Minsk 2 in February 2015 . Minsk 1 was aborted between Ukraine, Russia and the Donbass rebels .
 The line of demarcation has held, but frequent exchanges of fire continue between Ukrainian forces and rebel forces .
 Implementation of political terms of Minsk 2 have proven elusive thus far . Implementation of the political terms has proven elusive so far .
 The Ukrainian government has been unable to implement the requisite decentralization laws pertaining to the Donbass, including Russian-language rights . The Donbass is the region of Ukraine .
 Russia, in turn, has refused to allow Ukraine to re-establish control over its border with Russia along the Donbass region . Russia has also refused to let Ukraine re- establish control over the border .
 Russian interests in the outcome of the Ukrainian elections suggest they would welcome the implementation of the Minsk 2 process . Russian interests are in the Ukraine elections .
 Implementation of Minsk would likely satisfy a key Russian objective which is de facto Ukrainian neutrality between the West and Russia . Implementation would likely satisfied a keyRussian objective which would satisfy the Russian objective .
 Minsk does not cover Crimea, and for Russia, Crimea's status is non-negotiable . Crimea’s status is considered to be integral to Russia proper .
 For Ukraine, a number of potential options are at stake in the elections . Ukraine's elections are scheduled to take place in the summer of 2014 .
There is now general consensus that war with Russia and the Donbass rebels is not a practical option . There is now a general consensus.
 Implementation of Minsk, or some other form of negotiated settlement with Russia, remains under consideration by certain factions of the Ukrainian body politic .
 Other more remote options mentioned among far right nationalist elements include the proposal for Ukraine within an Intermarium union .
This option rejects negotiation with Russia, and moves toward EU/NATO membership . This option rejects negotiations with Russia. This option also rejects negotiating with Russia .
 The vision is for a de facto neutral Ukraine in some form of political alignment with Poland, the Baltic states and Belarus . The vision would be for the de factoneutral Ukraine .
 This is reflective of the embodiment of the old Polish-Lithuanian commonwealth from the Baltic to the Black seas .
 A variation of this option is a western Ukraine seeking EU/NATO membership . A variation is a west Ukraine seeking European membership .
The mainline option for Ukraine is to continue the current stalemate status quo vis-a-vis Russia . The mainline option is to keep Ukraine's current status quo status quo.
 Under this scenario, Ukraine would abide by the general ceasefire provisions of Minsk 2 but not move forward on the political provisions for settlement . This would face significant opposition among the nationalist elements within Ukraine .
 On Feb., 2019, Ukraine banned Russian electoral monitors under the auspices of the OSCE from overseeing the presidential election . In addition, on Feb. 2019 Ukraine banned Russia from overseeing presidential elections .
 The varied polls show Volodomyr Zelinskiy leading the pack of 39 candidates . The varied poll results show Zelinskiiy leading a pack of39 candidates .
 The 41-year-old Zelinskiy represents a younger generation of Ukrainian politicians . He represents a young generation of politicians .
 He declared his candidacy for president at the end of 2018, named his party Servant of the People . He has managed to hang on despite his lack of political experience .
 He has been very vague on policies and uses social media to almost crowd-source his political platform . He has not been very specific on policies .
 Zelinskiy has stated he is open to negotiations with Russia, but not at the expense of Ukraine’s sovereignty or territory .
 He has invited the U.S. and UK to join negotiations along with Germany and France . He has also invited the United States and the United Kingdom to join talks .
Ukrainian oligarch Ihor Kolomoiskyi is a new political actor . His political detractors point to the fact that he is supported by the powerful Ukrainian oligarch .
 President Petro Poroshenko and former prime minister Yulia Tymoshenko are vying for second place . President Poroshenko is the incumbent .
 Poroshenko's policy with regards to Russia is well known and represents the current status quo option . Poroshenko’s policy with regard to Russia.
 Journalists exposed a defence procurement scandal involving the first deputy of the National Security Council . Poroshenko took a political hit at the end of February when journalists exposed the scandal .
 She came on the scene during the first Maidan revolt, known as the Orange Revolution, in 2004 .
 Timoshenko served two terms as prime minister and later spent time in prison on charges of corruption . Timoshenko was prime minister of Ukraine for two terms and two terms .
 She negotiated a gas treaty with Russia and has experience in dealing with Russian President Vladimir Putin . She has been in contact with the Russian President for years .
 Tymoshenko has spoken in vague terms of seeking a peaceful settlement with Russia . On relations with Russia, she has said that she wants a peace settlement .
 The candidate who will become the next president of Ukraine will be known by April 21 . The candidate is expected to be known on April 21.
 Relations with Russia in the meantime are expected to remain status quo . Relations between Russia and Russia will continue to be status quo, despite political pressures .
 Players on Ukraine's political chessboard make their final moves in the Rada elections . Pressure will likely become more prominent in the lead-up to the elections .