 Russia's economy and finance ministries are currently working on new forecasts, RIA state news agency quoted Kudrin, who now serves as head of the Audit Chamber .
 Previous Russian government forecasts envisaged gross domestic product growth of 3% this year after the economy expanded by 4.7% in 2021 .
 A source close to the Russian government told Reuters that the economy ministry projects a GDP contraction of between 10% and 15% this year . The economy ministry is expected to see a contraction of 10% to 15% in 2014 .
 A contraction of 10% would amount to the biggest decline in gross domestic product since 1994 . World Bank and International Monetary Fund data.
 The World Bank this month forecast Russian GDP output would fall 11.2% this year . Analysts polled by Reuters in March had on average forecast 2022 GDP contraction at 7.3%, predicting a pick up in inflation to nearly 24% .
 Russia says it will never again depend on the West after the U.S. and its allies imposed crippling sanctions on it to punish Putin for his Feb. order for what he called a ""special military operation" in Ukraine .
 Putin traveled to the Vostochny Cosmodrome in Russia's Far East, 3,450 miles east of Moscow . It's 60 years since Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space .
 The launch of Sputnik 1 prompted the U.S. to create NASA in a bid to catch up with Moscow .
 Putin says the U.S. was using Ukraine to threaten Russia including via the NATO military alliance . Putin says Moscow had to defend Russian-speaking people in Ukraine from persecution .
 He said he had no doubts Russia would achieve all of its objectives in Ukraine . He cast the conflict as both inevitable and essential to defend Russia in the long term .
 West has imposed sweeping sanctions on Russia in an effort to force it to withdraw its forces . Ukrainian forces have mounted stiff resistance to the West's demands .
 Russia's economy is on track to contract by more than 10% in 2022, former finance minister Alexei Kudrin says . It is the biggest fall in gross domestic product since the 1991 fall of the Soviet Union .
 Putin toured the space port in Russia's far east with Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko .
 Kariuki and her cabbage, corn and spinach farm are indirect victims of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine .
 The war has pushed up the price of natural gas, a key ingredient in fertilizer, and led to severe sanctions against Russia . Russia is a major exporter of fertilizer and a key exporter.
 Kariuki used to spend 20,000 Kenyan shillings, or about $175, to fertilize her entire farm . She spent $175 on her farm in Kenya .
 Higher fertilizer prices are making the world’s food supply more expensive and less abundant . Farmers skimp on nutrients for their crops and get lower yields .
 The squeeze on food supplies will land hardest on families in poorer countries . The squeeze will be felt by grocery shoppers in wealthy countries .
 The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization said last week that its world food-price index in March reached the highest level since it started in 1990 . The U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization said the index reached its highest level in March .
 The fertilizer crunch threatens to further limit worldwide food supplies . It is already constrained by the disruption of crucial grain shipments from Ukraine and Russia . The crisis is already affecting food supplies across the world .
 The loss of those affordable supplies of wheat, barley and other grains raises the prospect of food shortages and political instability in Middle Eastern, African and some Asian countries . Millions rely on subsidized bread and cheap noodles.
 Belarus, also contending with Western sanctions, is another major fertilizer producer . Its ally Belarus is also contended with West sanctions .
 Many developing countries rely on Russia for at least a fifth of their imports . Mongolia, Honduras, Cameroon, Ghana, Senegal, Mexico and Guatemala use Russia for a fifth.
 The conflict also has driven up the already-exorbitant price of natural gas, used to make nitrogen fertilizer . The conflict has also led to higher prices for natural gas .
 European energy prices are so high that some fertilizer companies “have closed their businesses and stopped operating their plants,’ says David Laborde .
 The conflict in Ukraine was distant and puzzling until he had to decide whether to go ahead with the planting season . Jackson Koeth, 55, of Eldoret in western Kenya, is a corn and cabbage farmer .
 Koeth says he decided to keep planting but only on half the acreage of years past . Koeth said he decided on keeping planting but on half of his acreage .
 Most farmers plan to skip fertilizing their olive and orange groves this year, says Athens farmer .
 In China, the price of potash is up 86% from a year earlier . Potash is potassium-rich salt used as fertilizer .
 In the eastern Chinese city of Tai’an, the manager of a 35-family cooperative that raises wheat and corn said fertilizer prices have jumped 40% since the start of the year .
 As the growing season approaches in Maine, potato farmers are grappling with a 70% to 100% increase in fertilizer prices from last year .
 Edimilson Rickli showed off a warehouse that would normally be packed with fertilizer bags but has only enough to last a few more weeks .
 Ukraine war in Ukraine shows no sign of letting up, says Ukraine's leader . He's worried that he'll have to go without fertilizer when he plants wheat, barley and oats next month .
 Nigeria, for example, opened Africa’s largest fertilizer factory last month, and the $2. billion plant has already shipped fertilizer to the United States, Brazil, India and Mexico .
 India is seeking more fertilizer imports from Israel, Oman, Canada and Saudi Arabia to make up for lost shipments from Russia and Belarus . India, meanwhile, is looking to import more fertilizer from Israel.
 Agricultural firms are providing support for farmers, especially in Africa . Poverty often limits access to vital farm inputs .
 In Kenya, Apollo Agriculture is helping farmers get fertilizer and access to finance . Apollo Agriculture has been helping farmers with fertilizer and finance .
 The United States Department of Agriculture announced last month that it was issuing $250 million in grants to support United States fertilizer production . The U.S. Department of agriculture is issuing the grants .
 The Swiss government has released part of its nitrogen fertilizer reserves . The government has also released some of its fertilizer reserves.
 There's no easy answer to the double whammy of higher fertilizer prices and limited supplies . Still, there’s no easy answers.
 The market already was “super, super tight, before the war, says Kathy Mathers of the Fertilizer Institute trade group .
Airline ticket prices are sky-high and are only getting higher with spring break travel and a jump in the cost of jet fuel . Airline ticket price is sky- high and is only getting lower with spring breaks .
 Following June, airfare should seasonally decline into the fall shoulder season .
 JetBlue has announced it will reduce the number of trips it flies this summer . It can't keep up with staffing all its flights, it says . JetBlue will reduce its number of flights this summer.
 Passengers checking in at Sydney Airport this week have waited for hours in queues snaking outside terminals . Passengers waiting for hours have waited outside terminals for hours .
 Staff absences are running as high as 50% at Qantas Airways Ltd. While airport's workforce is little more than half its normal size .
 The aviation industry axed hundreds of thousands of workers to get through the worst of the Covid-19 pandemic .
Airports and airlines short of staff to handle upswing in travel as much of the world drops entry restrictions . The virus continues to ripple through flight crews and ground workers .
 Culbert said on some days the airport can find itself running at 60% staff capacity . The airport has to process more than 80% of pre-Covid passenger volumes .
 There's already nowhere to park at Sydney Airport for those taking a domestic flight . The Easter holiday is the first of the Easter holiday in Australia .
 The rebound in some major markets including the U.S. has caught airlines and airports on the hop .
 Smaller markets such as Thailand and Singapore that are yet to reopen to the same degree aren’t seeing the same delays .
 He said a similar recovery in air travel in Asia, where restrictions in places such as China remain, was still a few months away .
 Almost 4. million travelers passed through Heathrow Airport in March, a more than sevenfold jump from a year earlier .
 Border Force staff from Scotland and Northern Ireland are being deployed to help mitigate queues at the airport . The airport is racing to hire 12,000 new workers after the U.K. lifted curbs on travel .
 Low-cost carrier EasyJet Plc and British Airways Plc both canceled flights Sunday .
 The same day, one third of EasyJet services were delayed, according to tracking site FlightAware .
JetBlue Airways Corp. is planning to reduce its summer schedule to avoid flight disruptions due to staff shortages . JetBlue Airways is also planning to cut back on flights due to staffing shortages .
 The United States airline is offering flight attendants $1,000 bonuses if they don’t miss work from Friday through the end of May .
 Qantas has asked unrostered pilots to join three international flights and several domestic services that are critically short of crew . The airline's internal note cites an internal note from the airline, citing an internal memo .
 Qantas CEO Alan Joyce said staff absences were running at between 20% and 50% due to Covid infections or isolation requirements .
 He said delays were exacerbated because passengers have forgotten what they need to do when they fly . He said passengers had to wait longer because they had forgotten what to do .
 Sydney Airport security is rescreening 30% of travelers because they’re forgetting to remove items like laptops and aerosols from bags .
 It is already tracking BA. and BA.3. It is now globally dominant — as well as BA.1 and BA . It is also tracking BA .
 Viruses mutate all the time but only some mutations affect their ability to spread or evade prior immunity from vaccination .
 BA now represents nearly 94% of all sequenced cases and is more transmissible than its siblings . But evidence so far suggests it is no more likely to cause severe disease than its sibling .
 BA had been found in South Africa, Denmark, Botswana, Scotland and England from January to March 30 .
 All the BA cases were in South Africa as of last week, but on Monday Botswana’s health ministry said it had identified four cases of BA.5, all among people aged 30 to 50 who were fully vaccinated and experiencing mild symptoms .
 Russian troops have looted lethally radioactive material from two laboratories in Chernoby . They fled the site at the end of March, Ukrainian government says .
 Chernobyl was the site of a highly radioactive explosion in 1986 . Russian troops attacked from Belarus seized Chernobyl in 1986.
 Russian troops forced employees to work with little sleep and without adequate food, putting the Chernoby site at risk .
 Russian soldiers also drove armoured vehicles without radioactive protection through the “Red Forest’s” radioactive zone . The zone is a radioactive zone. Russian soldiers are also driving armoured vehicles through the Red Forest .
 Most Russian troops were reported to have left the site as part of a wider retreat on March 31 . Russia had struggled to execute its invasion plan .
 The two laboratories damaged by Russian troops in Chernobyl were established to investigate the impact of radioactive materials . The government office says the laboratories were damaged by the Russian troops .
 Officials are now working to determine the impact of Russia’s damage to the site .
 Portland Hotel Society launched its ‘enhanced access program’ last week . As first reported by the Globe and Mail, the program was launched last week.
 The program connects people who buy illicit opioids with a nurse who helps them determine a fentanyl prescription and dosage that will suit their needs . The program also helps people determine a dosage and dosage for fentanyl .
Patients can purchase powder fentanyl capsules at one of the Portland Hotel Society’s clinical sites .
 The cost is $10 for one-tenth of a gram, which is called a “point” on the street and goes for the same price .
 Christy Sutherland, medical director at Portland Hotel Society, says it seems "very strange" that she is coordinating fentanyl sales as a family doctor . She says she is a family physician .
 VICE World News has reached out to Portland Hotel Society for comment . The society has not yet received a response .
 British Columbia declared the overdose crisis a public health emergency in 2016 . The overdose crisis was declared by British Columbia in 2016.
 More than 8,500 people have died of drug overdoses since last year . Last year was the deadliest on record, with last year being the deadliest.
 The province already has prescription heroin and fentanyl replacement programs for people who are addicted to opioids . The province has already had programs for those addicted to the drugs .
Fentanyl is the dominant street opioid, and prescription heroin and other medical alternatives are not enough to keep withdrawal and cravings at bay . Some drug users told VICE World News that because fentanyl is a dominant street opioids, other alternatives aren't enough .
 Potent benzodiazepines, or tranquilizers, are now further contaminating the illicit fentanyl supply . More complicated overdoses are now more likely .
 The fentanyl powder capsules can be used to smoke, snort, or inject . The capsules are being sold via Portland Hotel Society .
 Last month, the Canadian government announced $3. million in funding to safe supply projects in Vancouver, Victoria, and Toronto .
 harm reduction proponents have told VICE World News the programs aren’t meeting demand .
 More than a dozen other cities in China are now under full or partial lockdown . China faces most significant spike of COVID-19 cases yet in the pandemic .
 Some experts scratching their heads over the lack of reported deaths in China . But rapid increases in cases from the ultratransmissible omicron variant and China's relatively low vaccination rate among its elderly .
 Shanghai is a city of around 26 million that functions as the country's financial hub . Residents' patience has run out as they enter a second week of full lockdown .
 Videos have circulated online of people screaming from their apartments and berating officials over food shortages . Videos have also been posted of people berating food officials over shortages .
 There are reports of people being denied medical care and forced into crowded quarantine facilities . There are also reports that people are being refused medical care .
 At the beginning of lockdowns, officials were widely criticized for separating parents from young children, including breastfeeding infants .
 China reported more than 200,000 infections in Shanghai since outbreak began last month .
 Chinese officials have reported that only one case in the city has been considered severe . No deaths from COVID-19 have been reported .
 China's elderly population are most at risk of severe disease and death from COVID-19 . That's despite China failing to reach high levels of vaccination among its elderly population .
 Only about half of people ages 80 and above in China have been fully vaccinated . Fewer have received booster doses, and even fewer have received boosters .
 Hong Kong recorded one of the highest daily death rates in the world . Earlier this year, Hong Kong had similarly low vaccination rates among its older adults .
 Scott Gottlieb, former U.S. Food and Drug Administration commissioner and current Pfizer board member, expressed skepticism about China's reported numbers . He said China reported numbers, but China has not reported numbers.
 The Wall Street Journal and others have reported outbreaks in elder-care hospitals resulting in scores of fatalities . Gottlieb pointed to previous reporting from TheWall Street Journal .
 One hospital worker who spoke with WSJ last month recalled seeing half a dozen hearses parked at the gate .
 "I said, 'Look, look, those are for dead bodies," the worker told the newspaper . "I told the worker, "Look, Look, look," he told the paper .
 The supposed use of some sort of toxic aerosol dropped from a drone apparently operated by Russian forces was first reported by the far-right Azov Regiment, one of the elements of Ukraine's armed forces operating in the key port city .
 The regiment reported late Monday that nearby troops subsequently had trouble breathing . The regiment said nearby troops later had trouble breathe .
 Defense Department spokesman: "We cannot confirm at this time and will continue to monitor"
 The governments of the United States and Ukraine did not immediately respond to requests for comment . Other elements of the U.S. and Ukraine have not immediately responded .
 Several Ukrainian military sources operating in the conflict zone could not independently verify to U.S. News the substance of reports .
 Putin appointed to take over command of Russian operations Gen. Gen. Vladimir Putin . The news comes a day after Putin appointed Gen. Putin was appointed to lead Russian operations .
 Alexander Dvornikov oversaw the brutal and cruel Russian-backed campaign in Syria . He oversaw the use of toxic nerve agents indiscriminately in densely populated civilian centers .
 Western intelligence officials have warned that the Kremlin's debunked propaganda about U.S.-funded bioweapons labs in Ukraine served as a pretext for its own potential use of chemical weapons there .
 Ukrainian authorities are still investigating allegations by Ukrainian forces that they came under a Russian chemical attack in Mariupol . Russia is still fighting to consolidate gains in the city, which Moscow sees as crucial to its efforts in taking over eastern Ukraine .
 Russia’s Defense Ministry said it was launching air and artillery strikes on Ukrainian positions in Mariupol .
 fighting is continuing in Ukraine’s south near the cities of Kherson and Mykolayiv . Russia is continuing to emphasize the eastern Donbas region in a shifting war effort .
 Russia will continue to redeploy its troops from Belarus to the Ukrainian east, British intelligence says . Russia will likely try to take the eastern city of Kramatorsk, the site of a deadly missile attack last week .
High-precision airand sea-based missiles destroyed an ammunition depot and a hangar with Ukrainian aircraft at the Starokostiantyniv military airfield in the western Khmelnytskyi region .
 Ukraine’s General Staff said Russians were boosting air-defense capabilities near Melitopol and Hovaisk . It had repulsed six enemy attacks in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, destroying four Russian tanks and eight artillery systems .
 The Ukrainian Air Force said it had downed a Russian plane, two helicopters and four drones . The Ukrainian air force said it was down to two helicopters.
 Ukrainian authorities say they are investigating a claim by their troops in Mariupol that they came under a Russian chemical weapons attack . Ukrainian authorities said they were investigating the claim .
 The Ukrainian unit deployed in Mariupol, the Azov regiment, said Russian forces dropped an unknown chemical substance from a drone . The unknown substance caused respiratory and nervous-system symptoms among its troops and civilians .
 Railway connections disrupted in the Russian town of Shebekino, near the Ukrainian border northeast of Kharkiv, the regional governor says .
 There were no casualties, he said, and the cause of the disruption was being investigated . He said no casualties were reported, and he said there were no injuries .
 Russia heavily uses the railways to reinforce and resupply its troops preparing the Donbas offensive . Shebekino, in Russia's Belgorod region, sits on one of its main rail connections .
 Normally only a 10% ethanol blend can be sold during that time period to reduce smog caused by the 15% blend’s higher volatility . Only a 10 per cent ethanol blend is sold during the time period .
 Allowing fuels with a higher ethanol content will lessen reliance on oil and give drivers more options, officials say . It could save drivers 10 cents a gallon off current prices, they say .
 Oil-industry officials questioned whether such moves would lower prices . Oil- industry officials have questioned whether it would reduce prices .
 Corn prices have also seen sharp increases this year because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine .
 Oil-industry leaders want Mr Biden instead to find ways to encourage investment in more U.S. oil and gas production .
 Environmentalists have opposed past attempts to raise the summertime cap because of the additional smog created by the higher blend . Environmentalists also opposed past efforts to raise summer time cap .
Higher content has long been supported by farmers who grow corn used to make ethanol . But the higher content has been support for farmers who use ethanol .
 The EPA will cite Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in issuing an emergency exemption to allow fuel with 15% ethanol to be sold over the summer .
 Mr Biden's visit to an ethanol plant in Iowa on Tuesday will take place in Iowa .
 The agency will review every 20 days whether to keep the emergency measure in place . Officials say they will review each 20 days if it is needed .
 E15, the term for gasoline with 15% ethanol, is currently sold at about 2,300 gas stations . E15 is currently selling at 2, 300 gas stations, according to the Biden administration .
 Mr Biden campaigned promising tougher environmental rules but has been under pressure for months to address historically high gasoline prices .
 Polls show voters are frustrated by inflation fed by those prices . Democrats are anticipating tough midterm elections that could cost them control of the House and Senate .
 The EPA moved to permanently allow summertime sales of gasoline with a 15% mix of ethanol . The move was a compromise between agriculture and energy interests .
 United States refiners sued and a federal appeals court struck it down last summer . The court said the Trump administration overreached its authority .
 The EPA had improperly reinterpreted legal language in the Clean Air Act, a three-judge panel says . EPA had long understood that ethanol could be limited to 10% of the content of gasoline during summer months .
 Senior Biden administration officials say their decision is based on different authority . They say they are making the decision based on their authority .
 The EPA has determined there won’t be environmental harm from the change . They also said the EPA has decided there will be no environmental harm. The EPA also said there won't be any environmental harm .
 The Labor Department is expected to report that the consumer-price index rose 8.4% in March from the same month a year ago, accelerating from a 7.9% annual rate in February .
 That would mark the sixth straight month for inflation above 6% . That's the fastest pace for inflation since January 1982, when it was on a recession-induced downswing .
 The so-called core price index, which excludes the often-volatile categories of food and energy, is estimated to have risen 6.6% in March from a year earlier . It is the highest rate since August 1982 .
 CPI is expected to have climbed a seasonally adjusted 1.1% last month, from 0.8% in February . On a monthly basis, the CPI is forecast to have risen 1.2% in the month .
 High inflation is the downside of booming growth as the economy bounces back from the Covid-19 pandemic . The Fed tightens monetary policy to douse price gains without damping growth .
 Uruci said supply-chain constraints continue to push prices up, except for an easing of the costs for used cars . Ururici: Supply-chain constraint continues to push price up .
 Persistently higher prices come as the overall economy is strong and the labor market is tight . The labor market in the United States is tight.
 Employers added 431,000 jobs in March, the 11th consecutive month with gains above 400,000 . It's the longest such stretch since records began in 1939 .
 High and rising inflation readings have cranked up pressure on the Fed to keep lifting interest rates this year to lower price pressures .
 The central bank raised its benchmark rate in March for the first time since 2018 . The rate is the first rate to be raised since 2018.
 Fed officials have indicated they could support raising rates by a half percentage point at their next meeting in early May . With job growth strong and inflation well above the Fed’s target, many Fed officials are considering raising rates .
 Energy prices soared in early March as Russia's invasion of Ukraine pushed up crude-oil prices . Russia’s invasion ofUkraine pushed up oil prices .
 gasoline prices have come down slightly in recent weeks, but they remain near record highs . The price of gasoline has been down slightly, but it remains near record high levels .
 Food inflation is also raising consumers’ grocery bills, pushed up by steady price increases for meat, eggs and citrus fruits . Food inflation has also raised consumers' grocery bills .
 Ukraine crisis likely to add more pressure in coming months because of disruptions to global wheat and fertilizer production . The Ukraine crisis is likely to be added more pressure because of the crisis .
 The burden of price rises could be triggering a consumer pullback, says Richard F Moody, chief economist .
 Consumer spending decelerated in February, rising 0.2% from January, but it remains strong. Consumer spending is up 13.7% from the same month in 2021 .
 Lowerand middle-income households are already having to make choices about what to buy because they’re having to pay so much more .
 Alex Salwisz, 40, is facing the rising costs of raising his five children . The father-of-five has five children.
 He says he has tried to substitute generic food products for name-brand foods as prices shot up . He said he has not always succeeded in substituting generic foods for name brands .
 Inflation has eroded their living standard in other ways, Mr Salwisz said .
 The children have grumbled when the family crams uncomfortably into the smaller of two vans to save on gas .
 They have substituted a fast-food meal for a once-a-month sit-down dining experience . They have replaced a fast food meal for the once- a-month meal .
 The Salwisz family is considering scrapping plans for summer camp because of a sharp increase in prices . He and his wife, Amber SalWisz, are considering canceling summer camp plans .
 One partial-day camp increased its price to $800 a week from $500 a week earlier this summer . The camp's price has increased to $8,000 a week .
 The bounceback in demand for travel, dining and other services as Covid-19 cases decreased is also driving price gains . Summer holidays could gain momentum as summer holidays spur more recreational spending .
 A steady upswing in housing costs is also adding to inflationary pressure . Housing costs account for nearly one-third of the CPI, according to the CPI .
 Solid demand for labor has shifted bargaining power toward workers, putting upward pressure on wages . The shift could feed into broader price gains, which could feed in broader wage gains .
 Annual wage growth was 6% in March, the fastest pace since records began in 1997, according to the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s wage tracker .
 This could push workers to demand higher wages, creating a feedback loop that puts upward pressure on inflation . This could put pressure on workers who want higher wages .
 median expectation for inflation a year from now shot up to 6.6% from 6% in February . However, the median expectation is now 6.8% from 7% in January .
 Ron Mayland, an aerial photographer in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, has experienced the triple-whammy of high costs from energy, supply-chain disruptions and labor .
 When he needed to buy small parts to repair one of his plane’s oilpressure systems, it took him two or three days to find the materials . They cost twice as much as he expected, he said .
 The response has brought U.S.-Russia relations to their lowest point since the Cold War . The response is the lowest point in U.N. relations since the 1950s .
 The U.S. government's posture toward Russia in the long term is still unclear .
 Biden administration has focused on using sanctions to inflict pain on Russia’s energy and financial sectors, its wealthy oligarchs and military complex, in a bid to force Russia to withdraw from Ukraine and end hostilities .
 President Biden has also labeled Mr Putin a war criminal whose actions merit a trial . He suggested the Russian president cannot remain in power .
 The U.S. hopes to see Mr Putin ousted and put on trial, or look for a way to resume diplomatic and commercial relations .
 Mr Biden has reaffirmed his view that the world would be better off without the current Russian president . A return to anything approaching normal while Mr Putin remains in charge appears unlikely, some former officials and Russia experts say .
 National security officials acknowledge that the Biden administration failed in its goal to have a ‘stable and predictable’ relationship with Russia due to Mr Putin’s invasion .
 It's too soon to draw up a new overarching approach toward Moscow, they say . But it is too soon for a new approach to Russia, they said .
 Maintaining flexibility over the longer term to allow Mr Putin to seek a diplomatic exit or to respond to changes on the battlefield could have its advantages .
 Ukraine and Russia have engaged in several rounds of cease-fire talks to no avail . So far, the two countries have been unable to reach an agreement .
 U.S. and European countries would likely be willing to lift some but not all sanctions on Moscow as part of the arrangement, former officials say . Former administration officials say Ukraine supported the move .
 The United States and its allies have avoided telegraphing what it would take to lift sanctions . The U.S. and allies have not yet decided to lift the sanctions .
 John Herbst, U.S. ambassador to Ukraine during the Bush administration, said some kind of thaw could be possible with Russian leader retaining power .
 Russian leader has shown no interest in doing. He said one way for Mr Putin to achieve sanctions relief would be to return to the status quo before invasion .
 Russian forces are now regrouping and expected to launch a new offensive in the Donbas region of Ukraine in coming weeks .
 Russia and U.S. are expected to continue cooperating on some strategic and security objectives . Elsewhere, Russia and the United States will continue to cooperate.
 Biden administration officials point to negotiations with Iran over reviving the Obama-era nuclear accord . Russia is a key participant; talks about the reconstruction of Afghanistan following the United States withdrawal last summer .
 A State Department spokeswoman said the U.S. government has no intention of suspending diplomatic relations with the Kremlin . Moscow has threatened to sever such ties with the United States .
 Diplomats with the U.S. Embassy in Moscow continue to engage with Russian officials . The numbers of diplomats have been reduced dramatically .
 Still, alleged Russian war crimes are an issue that could complicate relations between the United States and Russia in the future .
 Officials in the Biden administration and other allied countries have pointed to killings of civilians blamed on Russian forces in the town of Bucha and the city of Mariupol . Russia should be held accountable, officials say .
 The U.S. Justice Department says it is helping foreign prosecutors gather evidence of possible war crimes in Ukraine . The United States Justice Department said it was helping foreign Prosecutors gather evidence .
 The Biden administration has also been bracing for potential escalation on Russia’s part . The U.S. has been supplying Ukraine with protective equipment and supplies .
 The White House has repeatedly ruled out sending U.S. troops to Ukraine or instituting a no-fly zone . It has signaled that a chemical-weapons attack by Russia would trigger a response from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization .
 Negotiations to end the war are likely to become more difficult, says Michael McFaul, U.S. ambassador to Russia .
 The U.S. and its allies are left with the hope that sanctions and Ukrainian resistance will force Mr Putin to back down .
 The Russian economy is headed into what the IMF and other global financial institutions say will likely be a deep recession . They have failed so far to stop Moscow’s offensive, even though the economy is heading into a recession .
 sanctions against authoritarian regimes in North Korea, Iran, Venezuela and Cuba have failed to achieve major shifts in those governments . But sanctions programs against authoritarian governments have not achieved major shifts .
Ben Cardin said broad economic sanctions on Russia could be lowered as part of a peace deal . Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky should agree, he said .
 Mr Zelensky said he didn’t want him to be pressured to accept a deal . But he said he did not want Mr Zelenky to be pressure to accept the deal .
 He said sanctions aimed at Mr Putin and efforts to hold Russians to account over human rights should remain in place . He also said sanctions against Mr Putin should continue .
 Russian President Vladimir Putin will meet his ally, Belarusian President Alexander Lukashenko, for talks Tuesday . Putin will discuss Ukraine and ways to “counter’s’ pressure from the West .
 Putin flew to Russia’s far-east Amur region for the talks . His military sends reinforcements and supplies to troops positioned in Ukraine's east . The talks were held as his military sent reinforcements to troops in the east .
 The Pentagon press secretary warned that the “same brutal tactics, that same disregard for civilian life and civilian infrastructure, will probably continue” as Russia pivots east .
 A sprawling, eight-mile-long Russian military convoy is believed to include a command element, a support battalion, helicopter support and other forces . It is likely to become a staging point for further attacks on southern cities .
 The Defense Department is monitoring unconfirmed reports that Russia has used chemical weapons during its siege of the Ukrainian port city of Mariupol . The defense department is also monitoring reports of chemical weapons use .
 Britain’s armed forces minister said “all options’ would be on the table for the international community to respond if such reports were confirmed .
 Britain and Australia said they were working with partners to verify the details . Britain, Australia called the allegation “deeply concerning’s”
 Putin's forces failed to topple Ukraine's government or wrest control of its biggest cities . Putin is now regrouping to focus his military campaign on Ukraine’s east in what is widely seen as ‘Plan B’
 Questions are mounting about how a Russian leader steeped in security policy could have sleepwalked into a strategic morass .
 Officials in the U.S. and Europe are piecing together the answer to that question . Officials in Europe and the United States arePiecing together.
 Officials say a hubristic and isolated leader pressed forward without consulting his full cohort of advisers . What emerges is a picture of aHubristic leader, beset by biases and skewed information, officials say .
 Putin rushed headlong into Ukraine, confident in his ability to secure a quick victory and weather any blowback within the authoritarian system he erected .
 Some leaders in Europe and Ukraine discounted the possibility that Putin would invade . They didn't see sufficient Russian forces amassed along the border for Moscow to succeed with a multi-front offensive .
 Moscow was nurturing deeply flawed assumptions, writes CNN's John Sutter . Moscow was planning a large-scale invasion, Sutter says .
Top military commanders and trusted advisers unaware Russia was going to mount an offensive . U.S. officials say Putin had been keeping the plans very close-hold .
 The Russian leader notoriously doesn’t use a smartphone and rarely accesses the Internet . He rarely uses the Internet.
 He spent years snuffing out Russian independent news and erecting an authoritarian system of government devoid of constructive feedback or dissent, he said .
 Putin's isolation has been compounded by the coronavirus and his limited contact with others, officials say .
 Putin has long viewed independent Ukraine as a quirk of the Soviet empire’s collapse that needed to be handled personally .
 Putin for years controlled policy toward Ukraine himself because he didn't trust anyone else, according to Mikhail Zygar’s book ‘All the Kremlin's Men,’
 Putin's confidence in his personal expertise on Ukraine came through in a lengthy treatise he published last summer . Putin’s confidence on Ukraine comes through in the lengthy treatises he published .
 The article portrayed Ukrainians as people who are naturally the same as Russians but have been taken hostage by Western governments bent on radicalizing them against Moscow .
 Russia got Ukraine wrong “because this was totally a Putin-directed operation,’ says a U.S. official who specializes in Russia .
 In the early days of the war, Russian state news already began promoting the notion that Zelensky had fled . He posted videos from Kyiv .
 Putin had witnessed a rapid collapse of the Ukrainian government when former president Viktor Yanukovych decamped to Russia in 2014 .
 Putin shouted at Yanukovych not to leave Kyiv and described him as a “cowardly piece of s---” when he fled the capital in response to a pro-Western uprising .
 Zelensky may have led Putin to imagine a similar scenario with Zelenski . Putin may have been inspired by the events in Russia .
 Putin’s misconception about Ukrainian weakness was paired with a swaggering view of Russian power .
 He famously boasted to a top European official in late 2014 that he could easily seize Kyiv “in two weeks’ if he desired. He appeared to continue believing until he attempted to do so .
 Russian paratroopers attempted to land at Hostomel cargo airport northwest of Kyiv . They were apparently with the intention of sweeping breezily into the Ukrainian capital .
Alexander Gabuev says the Russian leadership doesn't see Ukraine as deserving of rigorous study . The Carnegie Moscow Center says the leadership doesn’t see Ukraine, once controlled by Moscow, as deserving.
 Russia’s military proved unable to regroup, saddled by fuel, ammunition, transport, food and other logistics problems, as well as demoralized soldiers .
 Russia relies primarily on its foreign intelligence service, the SVR, to collect information about countries such as the U.S. and China . Moscow enlists the FSB, primarily a domestic intelligence service .
 Russian journalist Andrei Soldatov says the FSB regularly failed to understand the popular and grass-roots movements fundamental to Ukraine's political culture .
 U.S. and European officials say Russia's poor performance in the initial stages of the war has led to a bad blood between the Russian military and intelligence establishments .
 The U.S. and European officials say Putin's immediate advisers had shown an unwillingness to give the Russian president information that challenged his assumptions .
 Individuals lower down in Russia’s security establishment thought the invasion was ill-conceived but their concerns didn’t reach the top, officials said .
 Several current and former officials described the Russian security service as rife with corruption . The security service is beset by bureaucratic bloat and ultimately out of touch .
 The central government in Kyiv wouldn’t hold and resistance would collapse . The government would collapse if resistance was not held .
 The official singled out pro-Russian politician Viktor Medvedchuk, who made Putin the godfather of his daughter, as a significant source of misleading information . The official also singled out a pro- Russian politician who was Putin's godfather .
 Medvedchuk, a Ukrainian politician who has long promoted Russian interests, was charged with treason last year . He allegedly escaped house arrest in the days after the invasion .
 The Kremlin is also getting information from out-of-touch former elites associated with Yanukovych . European officials said the Kremlin was also getting info from former elites .
 Russian intelligence was plotting with Yanukovych’s former prime minister, chief of staff and deputy prime minister .
 Putin believes himself to be the biggest expert on Ukraine, Soldatov says . Putin believes he can be the largest expert on the country, he says .
 The two-page spread showed a map of nuclear facilities across the U.S. with color coding to indicate seismic risk .
 Magda spotted a nuclear plant icon superimposed over an alarming shade of red . Magda looked to her own region, coastal Southern California .
 It represented the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station, about 20 miles south of Laguna Beach, and near multiple geological faults . The station was located near the city of San onofre, Laguna beach .
 The interpretive map has acquired a status akin to a sacred text . Magda, a retired elementary school teacher, had it laminated .
 Birds chirping riotously in a large orange tree heavy with fruit. She handed it to me as we sat at a table in her backyard .
 Residents also feared an earthquake or tsunami could lead to a nuclear disaster in Southern California .
 The plant, which had about 2,000 employees and produced enough electricity to power 1. million homes, had operated since 1968 . The plant had about two,000 workers and produced about 1.million homes .
 The looming domes of its two reactors were visible to drivers on Interstate 5, a heavily trafficked freeway . surfers who trekked from all over the world to catch waves at famed beaches nearby .
 Southern California Edison assured the public that the plant could withstand any plausible seismic or weather event .
 1,600 tons of spent fuel rods will remain at the site for the foreseeable future . Magda and other activists realized that all of the high-level radioactive waste had accumulated at the plant over the course of its lifetime .
 The Obama administration halted the project at Nevada’s Yucca Mountain in 2010 . The federal government is legally responsible for disposing of commercial spent nuclear fuel in a repository .
 There are currently about 80 locations in 35 states — mostly at operational and decommissioned nuclear plants — where spent fuel is being stored indefinitely . About 80 locations are currently at operational nuclear plants, with about 80 sites in 35 States .
 Magda has been trying to get the spent fuel moved to a more suitable site . The San Onofre plant shut down last week . Magda is trying to ensure that the fuel is stored as safely as possible .
 As of 2017, she has represented her local chapter of the Sierra Club on the Community Engagement Panel . SCE holds quarterly meetings with the public .
 In her garage, she showed me a gray filing cabinet with four vertically stacked drawers . Her granddaughter’s teal bike propped up against the side of the cabinet .
 Inside folders are notes from meetings, business cards of public officials, news clippings, academic papers and government reports .
 Magda and other activists are worried about coastal erosion and sea level rise caused by climate change . In addition to earthquakes and tsunamis, Magda is worried about the rise of sea level.
 The question of what to do with the nation’s spent nuclear fuel has recently garnered renewed attention .
 Mike Levin, who represents the district encompassing San Onofre, has taken up the cause as one of his signature issues . Levin is a former member of the San On ofre district .
 An environmental lawyer by training, he told me he ran for Congress partially to make progress on reviving the nation's stalled efforts .
 In January 2019, he established a task force of local stakeholders to study the situation at San Onofre . He established the task force in January 2019 .
 Rep. John Boehner has cofounded the bipartisan Spent Nuclear Fuel Solutions Caucus . He has also cofounded a bipartisan Nuclear Fuel Caucus .
 Rodney Davis introduced the Spent Fuel Prioritization Act . It would ensure that the material is moved first from the most sensitive locations, including San Onofre .
There is broad consensus that the optimal solution is to eventually bury nuclear waste in a deep geological repository .
Spent fuel scattered at sites across the country would be moved to one or more facilities . This would be devoted entirely to safely storing the fuel until a geological disposal facility is ready. This would mean that the spent fuel would be scattered at one or other facilities .
 There is also agreement, of a limited sort, between many nuclear opponents and supporters on the importance of addressing the waste issue .
 Magda is a waste of energy. But for many opponents, such as Magda, it is a reason to abandon this form of energy altogether .
Supporters of nuclear power seek to clear hurdles to its expansion . By contrast, supporters of nuclear energy do not emit greenhouse gases .
 nuclear power provides almost half of the country's low-carbon electricity . A better waste management strategy is essential if nuclear power is to play a meaningful role in a future energy system that does not rely on fossil fuels .
 The Biden administration has called for substantial investments in nuclear reactors . To reach its goal of net-zero emissions by 2050, the Biden administration wants to invest in reactors .
Despite recent momentum to break the spent fuel impasse, the obstacles are considerable . Despite recent momentum, there are still some obstacles to overcome .
 The most viable method would be to inter it deep underground, preferably in salt mines . The National Academy of Sciences report was published in 1957 .
 In the ensuing years, different ideas — including burying the waste in ice sheets and shooting it out into space — were thrown around .
 But enduring conventional wisdom favors the original idea of deep geological repositories . The original idea was to find deep geological reserves .
 The 1982 Nuclear Waste Policy Act was the first major law to address spent nuclear fuel . It assigned the federal government the task of constructing and operating such facilities .
 By that time, there were dozens of commercial nuclear plants that had been accumulating spent fuel and storing it on-site . There were no plans for disposal .
 The Department of Energy was required to move promptly to site two geological repositories for permanent disposal .
 The selection was based on the Energy Department's assessment of the site’s geological features and was also thought to reflect political dynamics at the time .
 Harry M Reid, Nevada’s powerful long-serving senator, made it his mission to see that this repository would never come to pass . Reid's mission is to see this repository will never be passed .
 In 2010, the Obama administration announced that it would withdraw the license application to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission .
 Obama's secretary of energy convened the bipartisan Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future to devise a new strategy . Obama’s secretary ofenergy convened the panel to devise new strategy.
 The report’s first recommendation was a “consent-based approach to siting future nuclear waste management facilities’ for both permanent underground disposal and temporary aboveground storage .
 The new approach would solicit volunteers, and engage communities, states, tribes and other stakeholders to obtain their approval before proceeding with plans . That is, instead of selecting sites based strictly on physical characteristics, the new approach will solicit volunteers .
 The idea was built around observations of more successful programs in other countries, including Finland and Sweden . This idea was based on observations of success of successful programs.
 The goal is “to work with the community to find out what they need, what they want, not from our point of view,’s Tom Isaacs told me .
 This could mean jobs, investment in parks and schools, or other forms of compensation . This could be a form of compensation for parks, schools and schools .
 The Blue Ribbon Commission report was widely regarded as a seminal document in nuclear policy circles . The report was published by the Blue Ribbon commission .
Until recently, virtually no progress had been made toward implementing its recommendations . It included developing one or more geological disposal facilities as well as one or other consolidated storage facilities .
The fuel rods consist of solid pellets, each slightly larger than a pencil eraser . The fuel rods are made from solid pellets .
 The fuel rods, bundled into fuel assemblies, were retrieved from reactors over the course of decades .
After cooling for at least five years in pools of water, they were transferred into stainless-steel canisters . The walls are fiveeighths of an inch thick, with walls fiveeighth of aninch thick .
 Workers then transferred the loaded canisters to a concrete pad overlooking the ocean . Workers then lowered them into stainless-steel cavities beneath the pad’s surface .
 San Onofre's public information officer, Jerry Stephenson and John Dobken led the team through security and outside to the concrete pad .
Major decommissioning work is expected to continue through 2028, as well as the construction of a rail yard . On our way, we passed workers in hard hats.
Millions of pounds of metal and steel, and tens of thousands of titanium tubes, will eventually be loaded onto rail cars and shipped away . Some of the tubes will be recycled, some to be recycled and some to a landfill .
 One day, according to the plan, the spent fuel will be shipped away on this rail line as well . No one knows to where the fuel will go .
 A partially demolished industrial site looks like a commercial for a seaside vacation . The concrete pad is on a concrete pad .
 The canisters were below our feet, inside the enclosures . We could not see the canisters .
Each canister was surrounded on the sides by 10 feet of concrete, as well as a three-foot reinforced concrete slab at both the top and bottom . All of which blocks radiation that isn’t shielded by the stainless steel .
Vents allow air to continuously cool the spent fuel, and the air comes out heated, says Stephenson .
 A radiation monitor installed on the pad showed a reading of 13 microrem per hour, just slightly higher than the area’s natural background radiation .
 As with everything related to nuclear power, answers to the question are highly polarized .
 Proponents tend to call it “used fuel,” as opposed to “spent,’ to indicate that it has the potential to be recycled . Proponents see it less as a threat than as a resource .
 These differences in perspective have been underscored by recent events in recent events .
 The attack on Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant proved to anti-nuclear advocates that the energy source is unacceptably risky . Pro-nuclear people see the geopolitical situation as a sign that Europe needs more nuclear power to pry itself from dependence on Russian oil
The fear of this substance, whatever we might call it, is hardly without basis . The fear of the substance, which we might name, is barely without basis, says the author .
 Being in the same room with unshielded nuclear waste, fresh out of the reactor, could very quickly give you a fatal dose of radiation .
 James Lovelock is the British scientist best known for originating the Gaia hypothesis . He is a champion of nuclear energy .
 The U.S. has eschewed reprocessing because of concerns about proliferation . Other countries, such as France, do reprocess used fuel in civilian nuclear reactors .
 Oklo, an advanced nuclear start-up, won a $4 million grant from the Energy Department . Deep Isolation, a company focused on nuclear waste disposal, also won the grant .
 Some of these divergent views, and gradations in between, are apparent in the community surrounding San Onofre .
 The Community Engagement Panel’s meetings have been well attended, and before they shifted online because of the pandemic, often raucous .
 "I did pretty much everything, he told me," he said of a turkey sandwich . He told me about his experience at a cafe . He also told me that he did "pretty much everything"
 In addition to working as a reactor operator and on the decommissioning, he was heavily involved in the union .
 Since being laid off in 2020, he started an energy consulting firm called Zodiac Solutions . He has participated in both Levin's task force and SCE’s Community Engagement Panel .
 His experience as a Black man in the nuclear industry gave him a distinctive, nuanced perspective .
 At work, he was obliged to put himself “in a position where people aren’t afraid of me’s. He explains, as in the rest of his life, he is obliged to be in a position that people aren't afraid of him .
I cross the street before you do because I don’t want you to accuse me of anything. I cross the road before I do. I don't want to accuse you of anything, he says . He says.
 He has lived a good life with his wife and two children in Oceanside, a beach community not far from San Onofre .
 As for the spent fuel, he says he is not particularly concerned about the risks, at least in the near term .
 hosting it could present significant opportunities for the right community, he says . But he supports efforts to move it, and he believes hosting it is a good place for community .
 He's skeptical that the government will exhibit the “cultural competence’ to engage these communities in a constructive way . He’s skeptical of the government's "cultural competence" to engage those communities .
 Other area residents are focused less on moving the fuel and more on addressing what they see as deficiencies in the current storage system .
 A canister was improperly lowered into an enclosure and was briefly wedged there . The incident happened in August 2018 .
 community members have raised questions about the integrity of the canisters and the plans for addressing any problems that might arise . But some community members are concerned about the safety of theCanisters .
 Some activists place less emphasis on moving fuel than moving fuel . Another reason is that they doubt it will happen in their lifetime .
Iwane and others are also wary of foisting their problem on a less affluent community . But Iwane and other residents are also worried about foisting the problem on less affluent communities .
 They believe consolidated interim storage would inevitably drag on longer than promised . They believe that consolidated interimstorage will drag on long-term .
 A handful of other countries have made progress in planning for the disposal of their nuclear waste . The stalemate in the United States has continued in the past decade .
 Finland is very close to opening the world’s first geological repository for spent fuel . Sweden is not far behind, while Canada has narrowed its search to two possible host communities .
 Communities invited communities that were potentially interested to engage in a dialogue, learn about the possibilities without making a commitment, and discuss their priorities and concerns . They invited communities to talk about their priorities, concerns and concerns.
 Penny Lucas is the mayor of Ignace, Ontario, one of the two final candidate communities in Canada . She spoke with Penny Lucas, who is a former mayor of the town . Lucas is also a former president of the United States .
 The economy in Ignace had been based on mining — for gold, palladium and other metals — and forestry . She told me that the economy had beenbased on mining .
 The population has shrunk to about 1,300 people, roughly a fifth of whom are Indigenous and the rest White . In recent decades, the mines have become less active, and the population has dropped to about a fifth .
 A nuclear waste repository would be about 22 miles away, in an uninhabited area . She sees it as an economic development opportunity .
 Other workers would also presumably move to town, bringing ancillary benefits like new shops and restaurants . Other workers might also move to towns, bringing new shops, restaurants and other benefits .
 The Energy Department has a budget of $20 million allocated for each of the past two fiscal years . In the United States, we are nowhere near siting a permanent repository .
In December, the department issued a request for information on consentbased siting for such facilities . In December, it invited anyone to submit comments on what such a process should look like .
 The Energy Department’s developing approach “centers equity and environmental justice” and “makes the needs of people and communities central,’ says Kim Petry . Petry said in a virtual meeting with SCE's Community Engagement Panel.
 The government is not yet at the stage of negotiating with towns or cities . Two corporate ventures have engaged in talks with communities in New Mexico and Texas about hosting interim storage sites .
 Holtec and Orano would be for-profit enterprises that manufactured the spent fuel canisters . The companies would still need approval from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission .
 The proposed site is 35 miles from the closest population center . Hobbs, N.M., is one of these communities .
 The four co-owners of the land — Hobbs, neighboring Carlsbad, and their respective counties — entered into an agreement with Holtec . The land owners of Hobbs and Carls bad entered into a agreement with the county .
In exchange for land, Hobbs would get jobs associated with storage and royalties from Holtec’s gross revenue .
 Hobbs Mayor Sam Cobb told me there has been no formal mechanism to gauge community consent . Hobbs mayor Sam Cobb said there has no formal mechanisms to gauge it .
At public meetings, many more people have expressed support than opposition, Cobb says . Cobb: Many more people are expressing support than opposed .
 In the state legislature, bills have been introduced to block the site from proceeding . The state legislature has also introduced bills to stop the site being used .
 Marni Magda, a retired teacher, believes that the waste at San Onofre is stored as safely as possible .
 Yucca Mountain is not the only permissible site for a permanent repository . Magda points out that for real progress to occur, the law needs to change .
 Levin has not yet introduced legislation to change that, but he told me he plans to . Levin has yet to introduce legislation to do that . He said he will try to change the law.
An improved waste management strategy, unlike so many other causes, has bipartisan support . One arguable reason for optimism is that an improved wastemanagement strategy, like so many others, is bipartisan support.
In other countries there are higher levels of trust in the government and in fellow citizens, says Isaacs . Isaacs, the veteran nuclear waste expert, told me that in other countries, there are more trust in government .
 Americans have a long history of distrust of the nuclear industry . In recent years, they have been increasingly suspicious of both the government and one another .
 Certain aspects of our political system pose additional hurdles, such as the power of states . The power of state powers could also pose extra hurdles.
 San Onofre's storage is "perfectly safe," says Isaacs . Isaacs says the status quo is undesirable in communities that didn't sign up to host it .
 An internal federal document said the preparatory process for this work will produce toxic vapors from a substance called acetonitrile . The substance would be unsafe for workers and people and animals that live nearby .
 The U.S. Department of Energy report dated Aug., 2021. In fact, that complication has not been studied .
 On March 2, 2022, the Washington State Department of Ecology sent a message to the U.S. Department of Energy asking for answers on this issue .
 Seattle-based watchdog organization Hanford Challenge obtained internal document . State agency received a March 1 letter on the matter from the group .
 DOE's Hanford headquarters declined to provide anyone to discuss the matter with Crosscut .
 A spokesperson wrote in an email that the issue has been resolved, but did not provide any details . A spokesperson said the issue was resolved, and did not give details .
 The DOE and major contractor designed the glassification equipment . The public can ask questions at a May 10 public hearing related to permits for acetonitrile-related equipment .
An internal memo raised concerns about acetonitrile, which will be used to re-treat the nuclear waste . Neither the federal government nor its contractor would elaborate on the internal memo .
 Acetonitrile, which exists in liquid and vapor forms, is easily ignited by heat, sparks or flames . It is a liquid form that can be ignited by flames or heat or heat .
When ignited, it gives off hydrogen cyanide fumes and potentially flammable vapors . When ignited, the fumes can be seen in the air .
 Short-term effects from exposure can range from eye, nose and lung irritation to heart irregularities and death .
 Long-term exposure could enlarge the thyroid gland and damage the liver, lungs, kidneys and the central nervous system .
 The Hanford Nuclear Reservation was created in late 1942 to create plutonium for America’s atomic bombs in World War II and Cold War .
Producing plutonium required nuclear reactors and massive radioactive chemical extraction plants . Producing plutonium requires nuclear reactors, massive radioactive plants .
 These tanks hold 56 million gallons of waste on what is arguably the most radioactively and chemically contaminated spot in the Western Hemisphere . The tanks hold more than 50 million gallons.
 Hanford’s longtime master plan has been to convert those wastes into benign glass .
 Originally, glassification was supposed to begin in 2009 and completed by 2021 at a cost of $4 billion . Originally, Glassification was expected to start in 2009, and be completed in 2021 .
 glassification to begin in late 2023 and end by 2069 . The price of glassification is $17 billion .
 The first glassification facility is scheduled to start its work glassifying the least radioactive wastes in late 2023 . The facility is expected to begin its work in the late 20 23 .
 It will glassify the least radioactive and least complex of the tank wastes following some preprocessing of the material . The material will be glassified after some preprocessing .
 Washington River Protection Solutions did computer-model testing on the possibility of a liquid acetonitrile leak during the pre-treatment process . The internal DOE memo says it did not calculate for the possibility.
 The acetonitrile vapor concentrations could reach from 49,910 parts per million up to 463,343 parts permillion at different parts of the pre-processing facility .
 The federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration has a maximum permissible exposure limit of 40 parts per million . The American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists has set a threshold of 20 part per million for acetonitrile vapors .
 If gas in concentrations would escape, it would affect nearby workers, says Tom Carpenter . Carpenter stepped down April 1 as executive director of Hanford Challenge .
 The secondary wastes could contain acetonitrile in the materials . They would be trucked 12 miles from Hanford to Richland to be mixed with a cement-like substance known as grout .
 The facility is located within five miles of an estimated 30,000 Tri-Citians . It is owned and operated by Perma-Fix, which is located in the area .
 Perma-Fix treats low-level radioactive and mixed chemical-radioactive wastes from across the nation .
 The Washington Department of Ecology sent a series of questions and comments to DOE about various aspects of the DFLAW project . In March, the department asked questions about significant amounts of acetonitrile vapors wafting into the air .
 DOE has not responded to those questions, a spokesman says . So far, the department has not answered those questions .
 DOE hid this document from disclosure, says Carpenter . As far as ’m concerned, DOE hid the document, Carpenter said .
 Carpenter also criticized Perma-Fix’s safety record, specifically pointing to two on-site fires involving hazardous materials in 2019 .
 Hanford Challenge published a report critical of PermaFix’s safety records in the 21st century . The two 2019 fires were the most recent incidents, the report says .
 The Hanford Challenge report said one of the fires happened at Perma-Fix when some hot glassified radioactive material from Chicago ended up on a wood pallet .
 Perma-Fix stated there are no fire sprinkler systems installed at the facility due to potential radiological contamination issues . The facility is not equipped with fire sprinklers .
Perma-Fix. Carpenter also criticized DOE for not having a plan for disposing of grouted secondary waste .
 The fires were managed by our own staff and fully disclosed to our regulators, as required . The fires are managed by their own staff.
 No injuries to employees, no escape from hazardous materials, no damage to building . "We had no injuries to our employees," says manager .
 RPGs and anti-tank missiles, as well as Brazilian-designed rocket launcher systems, have been dispatched to Russia from Iraq . Moscow's campaign has faltered in the last month, the Guardian has learned .
 Moscow is forced to lean on Iran, its military ally in Syria, following new sanctions triggered by the invasion of Ukraine .
 The developments have huge implications for the direction and volume of trade in the international weapons trafficking business . The developments also have huge impact on the direction of the global weapons trafficking industry .
 Iraq has hosted United States and western troops since the 2003 overthrow of Saddam Hussein . The United States has trained and supplied various Iraqi army and special forces units to defend the Baghdad government against insurgencies .
 Much of it has passed legally into the hands of Iran-backed Shia militias, which are opposed to the U.S. presence in the country . Since 2016, they have been officially incorporated into the Iraqi armed forces as part of the fight against Islamic State .
 These groups have become powerful actors in Iraq’s security establishment . Known for their efficiency in dismantling Islamic State's ‘caliphate’ and for their brutal treatment of Sunni civilians .
 RPGs and anti-tank missiles in possession of Hashd al-Shaabi, the most powerful Shia militia umbrella, were transported to Iran through the Salamja border crossing on 26 March . They were received by the Iranian military and taken on to Russia by sea .
 Hashd al-Shaabi also dismantled and sent in pieces two Brazilian-designed Astros IJ rocket launcher systems to Iran .
 Two Russian flagged and one Iranian flagged crossed the Caspian Sea from Iran’s port of Bandar Anzali to Astrakhan, a Russian city on the Volga delta .
 Istanbul-based maritime affairs expert Y6rtik Isik says these require skill to transport as they're fragile and explosive .
 Hashd alShaabi controls much of the border region with Iran, which would make this transaction easier . The move would make the transaction easier for Iran .
 Iran wants to make sure Russia doesn't lose ground in this conflict . Iran, as part of that axis, wants to ensure Russia doesn’t lose ground .
 Western sanctions imposed on Moscow since the 24 February invasion have included bans on dual-use goods . The sanctions include items with a civilian and military purpose, such as spare parts for vehicles .
 Russia's main armoured vehicle plant, as well as a tractor factory, have run out of parts for making and repairing tanks . Russian manufacturers reportedly hit hard by the new restrictions .
 Moscow appears to have abandoned its initial attempt to seize the capital, Kyiv, instead drawing down and repositioning its ground forces for a renewed assault on the Donbas region .
 Airstrikes and artillery assaults are expected to continue on the cities of Kharkiv and Mykolaiv . The besieged port of Mariupol is also expected to be targeted .
 Ukrainian intelligence services accused Georgia of helping Russia receive sanctioned military materiel . It is another potential sign of the scale of Kremlin's new efforts to use international smuggling networks to aid its campaign in Ukraine .
 Georgian special services received instructions from the country’s political leadership not to interfere with smuggling channels from ‘east Asia’ The instructions were designed to circumvent new western sanctions, the intelligence directorate said .
 Relations between the two post-Soviet nations have sharply deteriorated since the conflict broke out over the pro-Russian government in Tbilisi’s refusal to impose sanctions on Moscow .
 Russia has asked China for military-grade weapons and aid in support of its Ukraine operation . US officials have also said that Russia has also asked China to support its Ukraine operations .
 Serbia took the delivery of a Chinese anti-aircraft system in a secretive operation over the weekend . Western concerns of an arms buildup in the Balkans at the same time as the war in Ukraine which could threaten the fragile peace in the region .
 The 36th brigade said its 47-day defence of Mariupol was coming to a tragic conclusion .
 Russian troops have been besieging the city on the Sea of Azov since the beginning of March . The city has been besieged by Russian troops since March .
 The territory controlled by Ukrainian forces has gradually shrunk to a few central areas . The territorycontrolled by Ukraine forces has slowly shrunk to some areas .
 The surviving marines are now holed up in the Azovstal iron and steelworks next to the port . The marines are being held by the Russian navy .
 "They surrounded us with fire, and are now trying to destroy us," the marines posted .
 The “mountain of wounded” amounted to nearly half of the brigade, they said . Those “whose limbs are not torn off” continuing to fight, they added .
 artillerymen, anti-aircraft gunners, radio operators, drivers and cooks. The “shootings battles’ against the Russians are now being conducted by artillerymen and anti- aircraft gunner .
 Ukraine's president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said Russia had ‘destroyed’ Mariupol . The desperate last bulletin came as Ukraine’s president says Russia has “ destroyed’ed Mariupols .
 The Russians are not stopping their offensive, he told South Korea’s parliament, he said .
 Zelenskiy said it was too soon for Ukraine to declare it had won the battle for Kyiv . The scale of the suffering of civilians living in Russian-occupied areas in the capital’s garden suburbs.
 The exact number of residents killed in Mariupol is unlikely to be known . It is not known how many residents were killed .
 Ukrainian-controlled council said the Russians had been collecting bodies . Many of them lying in shattered streets were incinerating them in a mobile crematorium .
 Russia has refocused its military efforts on the eastern Donbas region . After failing to seize Kyiv, Russia is refocusing its military effort on the region .
 When Mariupol falls, Russian tactical battalions are expected to advance north and try to link up with other military columns moving south from the city of lyzum and the Kharkiv region .
 Western officials say they expect Russia to try to “double or perhaps even treble’s forces in Donbas . Russia is shifting forces from Kyiv and elsewhere in the coming weeks .
 The first of those forces had begun to redeploy via Belarus . It was unclear how many units could be effectively brought back into battle . The whole exercise would take 'some considerable time'
 Oleksandr Motuzyanyk: We expect an offensive in the near future .
 Several Russian battalions retreated late last month from the Kyiv region to Belarus . Several Russian troops retreated from Kyiv to Belarus.
 Some are now making the long journey via Belgorod on the Russian side of the border, to redeploy into Ukraine .
 If Kyiv moves the bulk of its forces to the Donetsk and Luhansk territories, this would leave the capital exposed to a second surprise Russian attack from Belarus .
 In their message, the marines in Mariupol also say they feel “written off’ by their commander in chief .
 Russian officials say repeated promises to relieve the crushing Russian blockade of the city came to nothing . Some of the wounded wounded by helicopter were evacuated by helicopter, they say .
 Like Mariupol’s trapped civilian population, the soldiers have been living in hellish conditions .
 Russia has claimed it targeted Ukrainian air defence systems in airstrikes overnight on Sunday . The airport in Dnipro was completely destroyed by the airstrikes .
 Another attack wounded five people in the town of Zvonetsky, Ukrainian officials say .
 Emergency workers were also combing through an infrastructure facility in Zvonetsky that was attacked on Monday . The infrastructure facility was attacked Monday .
 Valentyn Reznichenko, governor of the Dnipropetrovsk region, said casualty figures would be given at later point .
 Reznichenko earlier said that the Dnipro attack had wounded one person . He said rockets had sparked a fire that was eventually put out .
 Five staff members of the state emergency service were wounded by the strike on the airport . Separately, the head of the Dnipro region council, Mykola Lukashuk, said five staff members had been wounded .
 Russia said it had targeted an S-300 air defence missile system transported to Ukraine by Slovenia last week . Slovenia denied the claim, saying it was a claim denied by Slovenia .
 Kyiv has repeatedly begged its western allies for long-range air defence systems to help it against the Russian invasion .
 Dnipro, an industrial city home to 1 million people, has become a vital reception point for Ukrainians from farther east . Ukrainians have been told to evacuate in the face of both Russian advances on the ground and intensifying airstrikes .
 There seems little prospect Moscow will stop its Ukraine invasion anytime soon .
 Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said talks with Ukraine will continue . But he stressed there will be no pause in hostilities until a final agreement is reached and signed . Sweden's ruling party has begun debating whether the country should join Nato . Finland expects to reach a decision within
Public support for Nato membership has almost doubled since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, to about 50% in Sweden and 60% in Finland . Both countries are officially non-aligned militarily, but public support has doubled since the invasion .
 Sweden’s centre-left Social Democrats said their ‘security review’ was about more than just joining the 30-nation alliance .
 Andersson said she was ‘ready to discuss’ the policy in light of Moscow’s aggression . She said she “did not rule out” joining Nato .
 The question is expected to be a key issue in parliamentary elections due on 11 September . Centreright opposition parties already say they would back a Nato application .
 Finland, which shares a 1,340km border with Russia, is a Nato partner after abandoning its position of strict neutrality at the end of the cold war . Finland is expected to outline its decision regarding the alliance before midsummer .
Alexander Stubb says it is “a foregone conclusion’ that Helsinki would apply to join Nato . Former prime minister of Finland says it would be in time for a June Nato summit in Madrid .
 Both countries have received public assurances from Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, that their applications would be welcome . US, UK, Germany, France and Turkey have also received support from several members including the US .
 A prominent Russian opposition activist and outspoken critic of the invasion of Ukraine has been detained in Moscow . His lawyer told the independent news outlet Sota on Monday evening .
 Vladimir Kara-Murza, 40, is a veteran Kremlin critic who says he was deliberately poisoned in Moscow in 2015 and 2017 . He says it was retaliation for his lobbying efforts to impose U.S. and EU sanctions against Russian officials accused of human rights abuses .
 Kara-Murza nearly died from kidney failure in the first incident . She was a close friend of opposition leader Boris Nemtsov, who was shot and killed in 2015 .
 Kara-Murza had been arrested late on Monday on charges of disobeying police orders . He faced up to 15 days in jail or a small fine, his lawyer says .
 Kara-Murza's arrest comes amid unprecedented crackdown on independent media and anti-war dissent . It was not immediately clear if his arrest was linked to his opposition to Russia's actions in Ukraine .
 The Russian parliament passed a law imposing a jail term of up to 15 years for spreading intentionally “fake news about the military’s military . Last month, the Russian parliament passing a law.
 Kara-Murza has been a vocal opponent of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine . She has launched an anti-war committee with other Russian opposition figures .
 Alexei Navalny is one of the few prominent opposition figures still living in Russia . Many have fled the country out of safety concerns after the jailing last year of Navalny .
 The two main questions are time and price and by price, Kara-Murza said . The Putin regime will end over this and there will be a democratic Russia after Putin, she said .
 Ukrainian authorities claim Russia dropped a drone carrying a toxic substance on the south-eastern city of Mariupol . Earlier on Monday, Ukrainian authorities claimed Russia dropped the drone .
 Ivanna Klympush is a Ukrainian MP and chair of the parliamentary committee on integration of Ukraine to the EU . She said the unknown substance was “most likely’s chemical weapons.
 The Ukrainian Azov Regiment, a unit of the National Guard of Ukraine, accused Russia of using chemical weapons of an “unknown origin’s ‘unknown origin, dropped via an unmanned aerial vehicle on civilians.
 Azov leader Andriy Biletsky told the Kyiv Independent that three people had signs of chemical poisoning . But there appears to be no “disastrous consequences’ for their health, he said .
 More than 10,000 civilians have died in Mariupol, the city’s mayor has said .
 Vadym Boychenko said the death toll could surpass 20,000 . He said weeks of attacks and privation leave bodies “carpeted through the streets’
 Zelenskiy partly blamed the Ukrainian loss of life on western nations that had not sent weapons to bolster the war effort . Zelenkiy also blamed western nations for failing to send weapons to Ukraine .
 Ukrainian authorities warn people not to go near what they say are landmines being dropped on Kharkiv .
 Zelenskiy spoke of ‘hundreds of thousands of dangerous objects’ including mines and unexploded shells left by Russian forces in Ukraine’s north .
 The gruesome task of exhuming the bodies of Ukrainian victims from mass graves in Bucha on the outskirts of Kyiv started on Monday .
 Vladimir Kara-Murza Jr has been detained in Moscow on charges of disobeying police orders, his lawyer says . One child died in Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-largest city, the region's mayor says .
 The six agents are accused of working against France’s “national interest” after an investigation, Reuters reports . e Russian forces are focusing on the Donbas region, the U.S. Pentagon says .
 The Austrian chancellor, Karl Nehammer, held “direct, open and tough talks with the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, in Moscow on Monday . Western officials said they expected Russia to try to “double or perhaps even treble’s forces in Donbas .
 Both sides are girding for a trial of strength in Donbas after Russia was forced to abandon its attempt to capture Kyiv . Both sides want to try to prove their strength in the region .
 An eight-mile convoy spotted on Friday by satellite imagery, 50 miles east of Kharkiv, is likely to be heading for Izyum . One of the early images of the war was captured in the early days of the conflict .
 Russian forces have been, for several days, trying to push from Izyum south to Slavyansk, but not so far making much progress .
 The belief in the west is that Russia can “double or perhaps even treble’s forces in the Donbas . It could be a decisive shift in Moscow's favour, says the West .
 Russia has stepped up preliminary operations, bombing the quickest supply lines for the forces dug in in the area . Russia has already stepped up its preliminary operations .
 The airport in Dnipro, the largest city behind the defensive lines, was destroyed by a Russian attack over the weekend . Friday’s cruel missile strike on the railway station in Kramatorsk killed more than 50 people .
 Moscow has a total fighting force about 90 battalions strong . That leaves Moscow with a total force of about 90 battalion strong .
 Russian forces are edging closer to seizing control of Mariupol, according to the Institute of the Study of War . The city is being cut into two by Russian forces, the study says .
 For Ukraine, the problem of the current phase is acute, if no longer existential . Ukraine's current phase of the Ukraine crisis is acute.
 Kyiv has shown it can mount effective counterattacks against overextended Russian forces with western anti-tank weapons . But its forces are also depleted and have not been able to push the Russians back far, if at all, in the south and east .
 Both sides become exhausted after what would be more than two months of fighting . Russia's focus will be trying to stem the Russian advance, to avoid its forces being enveloped in Donbas .
 Ukraine is largely cut off from the sea, and Russia has a land bridge from Donetsk to Crimea . That would nevertheless leave Ukraine largely cut out of the sea. That would still leave Russia with a landbridge from Donetsk.
 Ukraine's economy shrunk by an estimated 45% this year, according to the World Bank . Ukraine may not be demilitarised as Putin demanded, but its economy is still devastated .
 President Zelenskiy has repeatedly demanded more and better weapons from the west . He hopes to turn stalemate into victory as he tries to turn the situation into a victory .
 Ukraine is effectively fighting a proxy war with Russia in the Donbas . The question for the west is whether Kyiv can turn the tide on land, force Russian forces out of Kherson .
 The refusal to supply Russian-designed fighter jets from eastern-bloc Nato members suggests the US is nervous not just about provoking an unpredictable Kremlin but also about altering the balance .
 If Ukraine were in a stronger military position, Kyiv might seek to reclaim the Donbas territories occupied since 2014 . Moscow’s defence may be fiercer.
 Children in so-called "widow camps" found to be severely neglected, abused and forced to work while mothers are at “breaking point’s psychologically psychologically. Children in ‘widow camp’ have been severely neglected and abused .
 More than 80% of women say they do not have adequate healthcare . 95% expressed feelings of hopelessness . More than 90% of people say they have no adequate healthcare.
 About 34% of children said that they have experienced one or more forms of violence . 2% said they married young and 2% of them said they had experienced violence .
Child labour is a big problem with 58% of boys and 49% of girls aged 11 or older forced to work . Child labour is the biggest problem for boys and 11-year-old girls .
 Some find they have no choice but to engage in so-called survival sex with male guards and camp managers . Some are unable to seek paid employment or support their families .
 Syrian widows and their children deserve the same level of empathy, compassion and commitment, says CNN's John Sutter . Syrian Widows and children deserve a level of compassion and compassion, he says .
 Fatima, a mother of three in one of the camps, suffers from severe back pain . She is unable to access healthcare. Fatima is also unable to get medical treatment .
 She said it was not safe for women and girls to go to the mountain to fetch wood to heat themselves or cook . She said the mountain is not safe.
Nearly 7 million Syrians have been displaced internally since conflict erupted in 2011 . Nearly 7 million people have been internally displaced since 2011 .
 About 2. million are living in an estimated 1,300 camps for internally displaced people in the north-west of the country . About 2,000 people are internally displaced in the country's north.
 Widow camps in Idlib and Aleppo are managed by the Syrian opposition and the Turkish military .
 There is little or no delivery of essential services for residents, aid workers say . Residents are experiencing “a shocking crisis within a crisis’ and “the worst of the worst’’ protection challenges.’
 World Vision’s report comes before the government pledging conference on Syria in Brussels in May .
 Less than half of the Syria humanitarian response plan was met last year . Less than 50% of the Syrian humanitarian response plans were met .
 Most feel Seattle is headed in the wrong direction and most no longer trust the city to spend their tax dollars wisely . The bulk of them feel Seattle's tax dollars are going wrong .
 The Index is the second installment of the Seattle Metro Chamber of Commerce sponsored survey The Index .
 The first was conducted in August and showed voters’ top concern was homelessness . The second was held in August .
 Voters worried about the second top issue in the March poll — public safety . That remains the same in this second survey, which also saw a significant increase in voters worried about safety .
 The Index is a research project measuring quality of life over time . It asks registered Seattle voters about the region’s most pressing issues .
 More than half of registered voters in the citywide survey mentioned that issue as a concern . More than 50 percent of voters were concerned about public safety in the survey .
There was also an increase in concern about affordability compared to the August survey . There was also a increase in concerns about affordability .
 One that centers our values and will enhance our quality of life here for everyone. One that center our values is one that will enhance the quality of our life for everyone . One that centres our values, one that focuses on our values .
Public safety is the second mostcited reason, following the expensive cost of living and cost of housing in the city . When asked if voters have actively considered moving out of Seattle, the number of ‘yes’ responses grew by 7 percent .
 91 percent of Seattle voters say Downtown Seattle cannot fully recover until homelessness crisis is addressed . Now, 91 percent say public safety problems are addressed .
 There is near-universal agreement on expanding state and regional partnerships to address homelessness . Voters strongly preferred providing outreach when closing encampments to a blanket just stop the sweeps approach . Voters also wanted to invest more in behavioral health .
 Voters say they would not feel safe visiting downtown during the day and at night . Three-quarters say their own neighborhood feels less safe compared to two years ago .
 The top five issues voters say would have the biggest impact on improving quality of life mirror their top concerns . Top five issues would have a big impact on life's quality.
 The other two are removing tent encampments and maintaining bridges and infrastructure . The other three are removing tents and maintaining infrastructure .
 President Andrés Manuel Lopez Obrador’s popularity still high . Opposition largely boycotting the referendum .
 The vote became one more trench from which each side of the political spectrum could do battle . Instead, like so much in the country’s polarized politics these days, the vote became a more trench .
 On Sunday, almost 18 percent of the electorate cast their ballot, far less than was needed for the result to become binding . The outcome was largely symbolic, making the result largely symbolic .
 More than 90 percent of those who did turn out voted in favor of the president, according to preliminary results from Mexico's electoral watchdog .
 L6pez Obrador's political project among his base, even at a moment of weakness . The president and his backers will be able to point to the overwhelming support for the president . The referendum is expected to be held in the fall .
 The president has struggled to follow through on key campaign promises . His approval rating has slipped to 59 percent last month from 66 percent in December .
 Lépez Obrador fell far short of the 40 percent participation required to make the results count . He marshaled more than 15 million people across the country to vote in his favor .
 The recall referendum also presented an opportunity for Mr Lopez Obrador to test his party's strengths and weaknesses across the country .
 Mr Lépez Obrador is limited to one six-year term by the Constitution . He is expected to play a vital role in picking a successor to carry on his legacy .
 The opposition viewed the exercise as an attempt to shore up the president’s hold on power . On the other side, the opposition viewed it as an effort to shore-up the president's hold.
 The president's critics pointed to the low overall turnout as anything but a mandate for Mr Lopez Obrador and his efforts to transform the country .
 The institute's request for more funding from the federal government to oversee the vote was rejected . The institute’s request for additional funding was rejected by the government .
 Analysts say turnout was low, but it was stronger than some analysts had expected . It may strengthen the institute’s reputation and insulate it from further attacks from the president and his party .
 Analysts say more than 16 million people turned out to cast their ballots could also work in the president’s favor .
 The president has spent much of his term in campaign mode, traveling the country to meet with voters and keep his base energized . He has spent most of the term on campaign mode .
 The recall vote has served as an opportunity to fire up his base in key battlegrounds . In the leadup to the 2024 elections, the recall vote is an opportunity for him to build his base .
 There is a particular focus on Mexico City, long considered the president’s stronghold .
 Claudia Sheinbaum, a member of his party, is widely assumed to be among the likeliest contenders for the top job . Lopez Obrador's term is up.
 Last year, the party lost several critical seats in the capital’s legislature .
 Sheinbaum was running the city, which was seen as a potential blow to her political future .
 Supreme Court has said political parties cannot advertise the recall . The nation’s Supreme Court says political parties can't advertise it .
 Sheinbaum had spent weeks furiously campaigning in support of the vote . It was seen as a chance for the mayor to recover from the party’s losses last year .
 The participation rate in Mexico City was not among the top five states . Despite ubiquitous advertising and consistent promotion from the mayor, the participation rate was not one of the top 5 states .
 The final outcome may yet alter the political mood in Mexico, showing the president and his party which parts of the country are most important to securing the presidency in 2024 .
 The vote appears to have merely underscored the acrimony of Mexican politics . But far from the seismic shift that a recall referendum of a president might have brought, this vote seems to have only underscored that .
 low turnout rendering the results nonbinding, the country’s polarized political forces will instead be left to fight over the narrative that emerges from the results .
 Marine artillery captain named Sukhbir Singh Toor has been on a mission over the past year to become the first Sikh in the United States Marine Corps allowed to openly practice his religion while in uniform .
 Marine Corps officer can now wear beard, long hair and turban required of a faithful Sikh while on duty . He has won a string of victories against strict dress standards of the Marine Corps .
 The Marine Corps is refusing to allow any Sikh to wear a beard on a combat deployment or during boot camp . It says that beards would hinder the corps’s ability to function and put lives at risk .
 Captain Toor and three other Sikhs sued the Marine Corps in the District of Columbia . They say the corps’s refusal to grant a religious waiver is arbitrary and discriminatory, and violates the constitutional right to free exercise of their religion .
Three prospective Marine recruits have been told they must shave their beards and cut their hair for boot camp . All Marines receive basic training, and only afterward would be able to apply for a religious exemption .
 The lawsuit is emblematic of the larger struggle the tradition-bound military faces in trying to attract personnel in an increasingly diverse nation . The lawsuit was filed in the U.S. against the military for discrimination .
 At issue is the long-simmering tension between constitutional guarantees of individual rights and the military’s need to maintain an effective fighting force .
 An Orthodox rabbi serving in the Air Force sued the service over the right to wear a skullcap . The back and forth over religion has been evolving since 1981 .
 Current law requires that the military not restrict individual exercise of religion . In those cases, to use the “least restrictive means’s possible.
 What counts as a compelling government interest, or as the least restrictive means, is at the center of the case . The government is trying to keep the U.S. military out of the military.
 One is uniform appearance in the ranks, which the corps argues is crucial to good order and discipline .
 The Marine Corps has said beards might hinder Marines’ physical ability to do their duties by keeping them from wearing gas masks . Second, the Marine Corps says, beards may hinder their physical ability.
 Captain Toor and other Sikhs currently cannot wear beards when deployed in any of 39 countries that are considered potentially hostile . Algeria, Israel, Turkey, Uganda and Cuba are among those considered hostile .
 Kelly Frushour, a Marine spokeswoman, said the risks in foreign deployments could change rapidly .
 The Sikhs counter that the Marine Corps routinely deploys men to combat zones who have permission to wear beards because of medical conditions or because they are Special Operations units .
 Marines deployed there are not equipped with gas masks . The risk of chemical attack is so low that Marines deployed in the U.S. are notequipped with masks .
 The Army made similar safety arguments against a Sikh soldier in 2015 . The Army relented in 2016 after the soldier sued . The soldier sued in 2016 .
 The U.S. military now grants more religious exemptions to uniform and grooming standards than ever before . Hijabs for Muslim women, long hair for a small Christian sect, and beards for a few practicing Norse Heathens .
 The Marine Corps has for generations fought changes after other branches embraced them . But the Marine Corps is still struggling to adapt to the changing world .
 It was the last service branch to allow Black men to enlist in 2015 . It balked at a 2015 mandate to allow women to serve in combat .
 The Marine Corps has dug in over more than just practical considerations . In the case of the Sikhs, the Marine Corps have dug in on more than practical considerations.
 It says beards and turbans are a potential threat to a more abstract concept of unity . It also says turbans and beards could be a threat to an abstract idea of unity.
 Jaskirat Singh and Milaap Singh Chahal declined to be interviewed . Mr Singh and two other prospective recruits, JaskIRat Singh, declined.
Lawsuit says Marine Corps routinely allows other recruits into boot camp who do not fit homogeneous appearance standards . The suit was filed on Monday .
 Women are allowed to keep their long hair during training . The corps recently loosened restrictions on tattoos, allowing recruits to have ink covering all their hands, head and neck .
Giselle Klapper is a civil rights attorney with an advocacy group, the Sikh Coalition . She says the coalition tried for more than a year to negotiate a solution with Marine Corps leaders, but the corps had been unreceptive .
S Sikhs have in the other service branches, but Sikhs are in other branches . Sikhs had to take the issue to court, says Sikhs' lawyer .
 Austria’s chancellor visited President Vladimir V Putin of Russia on Monday . He said he came away feeling pessimistic about peace prospects but fearing that Mr Putin intended to drastically intensify the brutality of the war .
 visiting chancellor Karl Nehammer said Russian forces were mobilizing for a large-scale assault in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region .
 President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said ‘tens of thousands are dead’ in Mariupol, the besieged southern city that has been the scene of the most intense destruction of the war .
 Mr Putin, despite Russia's military blunders in the war, still appeared in control of the crisis .
 He has severely repressed any dissent and benefited from widespread domestic support, he says . He has also benefited from the implicit backing of China and the refusal of much of the world to join sanctions.
 Many commentators in the West had criticized the Austrian chancellor for having visited Moscow . The Austrian chancellor is a member of the European Union but not of NATO .
 Mr Nehammer says he tried to confront Mr Putin with the horrors of war and of the war crimes that Russian troops are accused of having committed in Kyiv .
 He said he also had told Mr Putin about the destroyed Russian tanks he saw on a recent visit to Ukraine . Mr Putin also told him to make clear the loss of life that Russia was suffering .
 Mr Putin brushed aside the accusations of war crimes as having been staged by Ukraine .
 President Putin has totally adopted the logic of war, says Mr Nehammer .
 The interview was aired on Russian state television . Eduard Basurin, a separatist commander, was interviewed by state TV .
Ukrainian forces ensconced in underground fortifications at a steel plant in Mariupol, Ukraine . Mr Basurin said that with Ukrainian forces ens Conventional Forces, storming the redoubt did not make sense .
 Putin was silent on Monday but was expected to speak publicly on Tuesday . He will travel to the Vostochny spaceport in Russia’s far east with President Aleksandr G Lukashenko .
 The Feb. invasion of Ukraine has been framed by Mr Putin as not against that country, but against the West . The U.S. is the supposed patron of Mr Zelensky's government and its aspirations to escape Russia’s sphere of influence .
 Russia's foreign minister says what the Kremlin calls its "special operation" in Ukraine is aimed at rolling back American influence . The Russian government characterizes the Russian government as the root of the world's ills .
 The United States and European Union have imposed increasingly severe economic sanctions on Russia . They are sending weapons to Ukraine’s military .
 The European Union remains reluctant to ban Russian oil and natural gas, which remain critical to the bloc's own economic health .
 ministers discussed a possible phaseout of Russian oil, more easily replaceable from other suppliers than gas . Meeting also laid bare the bloc's divisions .
 Austria, Hungary and Germany opposed any effort, for now, to restrict Russian gas imports . Austria,Hungary and Germany also opposed any attempt to restrict gas imports.
 Russian troops have been resupplying and regrouping in Russia and Belarus so they can join the battle in eastern Ukraine . Russian troops retreated from northern Ukraine after a failed effort to reach the capital, Kyiv .
 Western officials said on Monday that effort may still take some time . But Western officials say that effort could still take time .
 Ukrainian officials have been warning that civilians in east Ukraine should flee while they can .
 Mr Zelensky warned that tens of thousands of Russian troops were preparing a renewed assault there .
 Russian troops can move north to meet up with Russian troops attempting to move south from Izyum . The bulk of Ukraine’s army is concentrated further east, says Mathieu Boulégue .
 Mr Boulégue said the battered Russian troops await reinforcements . That is easier said than done, he said .
 The Ukrainians were trying to block the Russians and organize a counterattack that would be more complicated than the fighting around Kyiv, he says . The Ukrainians, he said, were attempting to block a counter attack that would have been more complicated.
 negotiations between the Ukrainian and Russian governments are on hold . Reports of Russian atrocities at Bucha, Kramatorsk, Mariupol and other cities have been reported .
 If and when talks on a settlement finally occur, Mr Putin will be part of them, says Francois Heisbourg, a French defense expert .
 Diplomats deal with leaders of governments, no matter how distasteful they are, he said .
 The West hopes that increasing economic pain will encourage Mr Putin to scale down the war and end it . The West also hopes that Mr Putin will end the war.
 Russia is already in a deep recession, the World Bank reported . The economy is expected to shrink by 11 percent this year, it said .
 Mr Putin originally named one goal of the war as the “denazification of Ukraine’s Ukraine, falsely labeling those who resist Russian domination . He also falsely labeled those who resisted Russian domination as Nazis .
 Mr Putin is priming his security apparatus for an ever-widening intolerance for dissent . It was the latest sign that, even as the war in Ukraine rages, Mr Putin's security apparatus is being primed .
 The crackdown has accelerated in recent weeks, with prowar Russians turning in teachers and neighbors who speak out.
 Russia closed some of the last remaining independent institutions of civil society . The Carnegie Moscow Center and Human Rights Watch offices were closed last Friday .
 Ashish K Jha said there had been a recent uptick in new U.S. coronavirus cases . He said he was not overly concerned .
 Jha made several media appearances on Monday, his first official day in the White House . He pointed to low hospitalization numbers across the United States .
 The vast majority of the country has low community levels of Covid-19, according to calculations performed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . The calculations are designed to assess the number of new cases in a community .
 Jha acknowledged many of those results may go unreported, underpinning the importance of hospitalizations as a metric . He said many of the results may be unreported .
 Jha’s tenure begins as a highly transmissible Omicron subvariant, known as BA.2, has become the dominant version among new United States cases .
 Biden and Harris tested negative in the last 24 hours, White House press secretary says .
 Ms. Harris had been considered a close contact of her communications director, who tested positive last week . But the vice president was now five days post-exposure, she said .
 A handful of colleges and universities in the country have reinstated mask mandates as they battle outbreaks on campus .
 The city of Philadelphia announced it would soon reinstate an indoor mask mandate on Monday .
 At least 80 attendees tested positive at the Gridiron Club and Foundation’s annual dinner in Washington on April 2 .
 The number of new cases reported each day has been declining, he says . Several asymptomatic cases have also been reported, he said .
 Jha said on “Good Morning America,” referring to the number of cases after the Gridiron dinner, which included Cabinet members .
 Pelosi said on Monday that she would be leaving isolation on Tuesday after testing negative on Monday . Pelosi said she will be leaving isolated on Tuesday .
Rep. Rashida Tlaib says she tested positive on Monday . She was in the House on Monday.
 Connecticut's lieutenant governor tested positive, too . Susan Bysiewicz said she tested positive .
 Jha replaced Jeffrey D Zients, who left the position to return to his private life . Jha replaces Jeffrey D. Zients.
 Mr Zients is an entrepreneur and management consultant . He steered the White House response and United States vaccination campaign through multiple variants .
 The world's two biggest democracies are having trouble getting on the same page over the world’s hottest war .
 President Biden lobbied Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi in a video call Monday not to boost New Delhi’s purchases of Russian oil . U.S.-led push to punish the Kremlin for its 6-week-old invasion of Ukraine.
 U.S. and Indian foreign and defense ministers met behind closed doors in Washington to discuss the Ukraine crisis . They barely mentioned Ukraine in their public remarks to reporters .
 India is an outlier among U.S. allies and democratic governments on the Ukraine crisis . India has a history of defense and economic ties with Russia dating back to its very first days of independence .
 Mr Modi's political base at home has a strong pro-Russia and anti-United States strain . White House officials said he made no commitment to cut back India’s recent purchases of Russian oil .
 Mr Modi told Mr Biden that he hopes talks between Ukraine and Russia will lead to peace . He also called for an inquiry into atrocities outside of Kyiv .
 Mr Biden tried to make the case that offering Russian President Vladimir Putin an economic lifeline was not helping the situation .
 Mr Modi said he has spoken on the phone multiple times with Mr Putin and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy since the invasion began in February .
 We instantly condemned the killing and have called for an independent inquiry . We immediately condemned the death and called for a probe into it .
 India's stance on Ukraine poses a dilemma for Mr Biden because Washington has been assiduously cultivating New Delhi as part of an alliance of East Asian democracies .
 India is perhaps the key player in the Indo-Pacific security ‘Quad’ with the U.S., Japan and Australia .
 Mr Modi and Mr Biden are set to meet in person at a summit of Quad leaders next month in Tokyo .
 India's formally neutral stance on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has frustrated global partners and boosted the Kremlin's case that much of the world does not share the United States and NATO view of the clash in Eastern Europe .
 India abstained from a recent U.S.-sponsored measure to suspend Russia from the 47-member Human Rights Council .
 Moscow continues to buy Russian oil at a discounted price despite a global push to cut off Moscow from such proceeds . Some European countries also have maintained purchases .
 The official was careful not to condemn India’s purchases of Russian oil . Not every country is in an ideal position to cut off supply from Russia .
 The official said Mr Biden talked about how India could diversity its energy supply . India should take into account that China has also resisted Western sanctions on the Russian economy and moved closer to Mr Putin as the Ukraine invasion has unfolded .
 Mr Biden struck a positive tone during the public portion of the meeting . He welcomed India’s humanitarian support for Ukraine .
 Mr Modi hailed the U.S. and India as the largest and oldest democracies . Mr Modi, likewise, hailed the United States and India.
 Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin and Secretary of State Antony Blinken met with their Indian counterparts in the fourth annual “2+2’ series of discussions on a range of issues .
 Biden-Modi conversation largely danced around the divisions over Russia and Ukraine .
 Indian Defense Minister Rajnath Singh suggested both China and Russia are looking to undermine the security of their neighbors .
 Mr Singh brought a more generic public message without mentioning Ukraine . Mr Singh's message was more generic.
 He hopes the meetings will take the U.S.-India strategic partnership to the next level . He told reporters at the Pentagon that he hoped the meetings would take the relationship to a new level .
 China’s nationalistic press has picked up on the tensions between the U.S. and India over Ukraine .
 India would prefer not to pick sides in the diplomatic tug of war, some analysts say . The Modi government will face mounting pressure to break with Russia should the Ukraine conflict drag on .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy again appealed for outside support . Russian forces are regrouping and repositioning ahead of the Donbas campaign .
 U.S. defense officials say a large Russian convoy of troops, vehicles and equipment is headed toward the region . Ukrainian officials urged civilians to flee the area or risk being caught in the crossfire .
 Russia’s decision to pull its troops from northern Ukraine and abandon its effort to capture the capital of Kyiv has raised fears across Ukraine and Western nations that Moscow will double down on its strategy of targeting civilians and nonmilitary targets in the more vulnerable east and south .
 Austrian Chancellor Karl Nehammer gave voice to those fears Monday . He described what he described as a “very direct, open and tough’s meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin .
 Mr Nehammer is the first leader of a European Union nation to visit Mr Putin since the war began . He confronted the Russian leader about suspected war crimes in the city of Bucha .
 He effectively warned the Kremlin against such tactics in the coming Donbas battle . He effectively warns the Kremlin.
 Mr Putin has resolutely denied Russian guilt in the face of widespread condemnation . Mr Putin resolutely denies Russian guilt.
 The southern port city of Mariupol also has been the site of carnage and devastation . The southern city of Marupol has been a site of devastation and carnage .
 He estimated the death toll at about 10,000, though he said it could be much higher . He said he estimated that death toll could be more than a million .
 Russian shelling blamed for civilian deaths in Kharkiv and Donetsk . Some 150,000 residents of Mariupol were allowed to leave the beleaguered city .
 Russia forcibly annexed the Crimean Peninsula in 2014 . The breakaway pro-Moscow Donbas enclaves in Donetsk and Luhansk are part of Russia's Crimean Peninsula .
 Putin has formally recognized those two territories as independent “republics’s. Ukraine and most of the rest of the world have not acknowledged those claims .
 The Donbas region was the site of a grinding civil war between separatists and the Kyiv government for eight years before Russia’s invasion in February . The region was site of an eight-year civil war.
 Officials in Luhansk and Donetsk painted a bleak picture for civilians . The conflict is set to become the stage of perhaps the most intense fighting so far .
 Kyiv was returning to a semblance of normalcy as Russian forces were driven away . The Russian forces are driven away from Kyiv .
 Mr Zelenskyy framed the looming Donbas battle as a fight for his country’s very existence .
 Ukraine is trying to eliminate the culture and language of the Ukrainian nation, he said .
Biden administration should send more guns, anti-tank weapons, drones, drones and other weapons of war, says Zelenskyy .
 Russian forces are reeling from their failed attempt to take Kyiv . Russian forces already are reeling.
 Thousands of casualties and lost hundreds of tanks in a series of military missteps. They suffered thousands of casualties.
 The Kremlin has resorted to calling back discharged soldiers to backfill its manpower shortage . British intelligence officials said over the weekend that the Kremlin has called back discharged troops to fill its growing manpower shortage.
 Aleksandr V Dvornikov is known for his brutal tactics during Russia’s campaign in Syria . He oversaw the Donbas attack.
 Ukraine may benefit from Russia’s change in strategy. Even with the full weight of Moscow's war machine pointed at the Donbas, Ukraine could benefit from the change .
 Ukraine can redirect some of its forces and equipment away from the northern regions toward the east, effectively reducing the conflict to a single-front war . Ukraine can also redirect some troops and equipment from the north to the east .
 Military analysts say Ukrainian soldiers have proved their ability to slow down the much larger Russian force . They say they have proved they are capable of slowing down Russian forces .
 Private security analysts say guerrilla warfare tactics and insurgent assaults on Russian troops could effectively doom Mr Putin’s effort to secure a significant foothold in the Donbas .
 Each insurgency has the potential advantage of copying techniques from those that preceded it, he wrote .
 The growing toll of war on Mr Putin’s army could offer Ukraine a much stronger hand in cease-fire negotiations .
 Top Biden administration officials said over the weekend that such leverage is the central United States goal .
 Russian officials say they remain open to peace talks . The Kremlin has given indications it has no intention of ceasing its attacks, even during negotiations .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov: "We are persistent and patient,” he says .
 The U.S. has ordered its consular staff to leave Shanghai . Shanghai is under a lockdown to contain a COVID-19 surge .
 The State Department said the order is an upgrade from the “authorized departure’s” departure issued last week that made the decision voluntary .
 He said it is something he hadn't before seen happen so quickly in 31 years of humanitarian work . He said he hadn’t before seen anything so quickly.
 Ukraine’s United Nations ambassador, Sergiy Kyslytsya, claimed Russia has taken more than 121,000 children out of Ukraine . Russia reportedly drafted a bill to simplify and accelerate adoption procedures for orphans and even those who have parents and other relatives .
 Most of the children were removed from the besieged southern port city of Mariupol and taken to eastern Donetsk and then to the Russian city of Taganrog .
 He said that of Ukraine's displaced children, 2. million are in Ukraine and 2 million more are in other countries . He said of Ukraine’s displaced children: 2.m. in Ukraine, 2m more in Ukraine .
 At the same time, nearly half the estimated 3. million children still in their homes in Ukraine “may be at risk of not having enough food,’s spokesman says . Those in besieged cities like Mariupol face the most dire situation .
 School closings affecting the education of 5. million younger children and 1. million students in higher education . Fontaine said school closings are affecting 5.m. younger kids and 1 million students .
 The council also heard from Sima Bahous, the executive director of the UN Women agency . Moldova is hosting an estimated 95,000 Ukrainian refugees .
 Bahous said her agency is increasingly hearing allegations of rape and sexual violence . Bahous: "We are hearing allegations"
 Moldova’s government and border police are also very concerned at the risk of human trafficking, she said . She said Moldova's government and Border Police are also concerned .
 Ukraine's ambassador said his country's prosecutor's office is now investigating a case in the Kyiv region . A Russia soldier is alleged to have killed a local resident and then raped his wife in their home .
 Kyslytsya said the Prosecutor General’s Office is also installing ‘a special mechanism’ to document cases of sexual violence by Russian soldiers .
 The Security Council meeting on the impact of the war on women and children was convened by the United States and Albania during Britain's presidency of the body .
 The three countries, Ukraine and other council members attacked Russia for creating the dire situation for women and children . The Russian deputy ambassador Dmitry Polyansky vehemently denied the allegations .
 U.S. Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield said when men like Russian President Vladimir Putin “start wars, women and children get displaced,” she said .
 Albanian Ambassador Ferit Hoxha accused Russia of committing “unspeakable crimes’s every day, including burning civilians, throwing bodies in mass graves, shooting into playgrounds, attacking schools on purpose, and leaving all Ukrainians suffering .
 Russia’s war has made Ukraine kids draw bombs, tanks and weapons, Hoxha said .
 The missile killed at least 52 mainly women and children at the train station in eastern Kramatorsk . Both the U.S. and Albanian ambassadors pointed to the discovery of bodies .
 India remains a vital partner to the United States in helping to counter China’s increasingly aggressive moves in the Indo-Pacific region . New Delhi has declined to take a strong stand in the Ukrainian crisis against Russia, New Delhi's close ally since independence .
 Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin and Secretary of State Antony Blinken met with their Indian counterparts in the fourth annual “2+2’ series of discussions on a range of issues .
 The meeting comes as the government of Prime Minister Narendra Modi declines to join a Western sanctions campaign against Moscow over the Ukraine invasion .
 India is seen as a key pillar of United States hopes in Asia to contain an aggressive China . U.S. officials preferred to emphasize publicly on Monday that India is neutral .
 Mr Austin suggested that both China and Russia are both looking to undermine the security of its neighbors and alter the status quo by force .
 Defense Minister Singh hopes the meetings will take the U.S.-India strategic partnership to the next level .
 The country's stance on President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine has caused concern in Washington .
 India abstained on a United States motion last week to suspend Russia from the U.N. Human Rights Council . India abstains on a U.S. motion to suspend the Russian government .
 The country continues to purchase energy from Russia, despite pressure from Western countries . The country also continues to buy energy from the West .
 A senior U.S. official last month called India’s United Nations votes ‘unsatisfactory’ but ‘totally unsurprising’ and even Mr Biden told a business forum in March that India had been “somewhat shaky’
 Modi government's decision to acquire the Russian-made S-400 air defense system has not soured the Pentagon on a deepening partnership with India .
 Instead of building Interstate 5 on piers above the river, the state used landfill for some of the foundation, permanently changing the route .
 Decades later, the changes could lead to catastrophic problems, economically and for commuters in the state .
 A U.S. Geological Survey predicts the bridge over the river could be wiped out by floods within 20 years . The bridge could cut off a vital portion of I-5.
 Frank, III, led a boat tour of the Nisqually River with Senator Maria Cantwell, U.S. Representative Marilyn Strickland, and Gov. Gov. John McCain, also on the tour .
 State lawmakers have authorized nearly $80 million to look at replacing or repairing the stretch of highway . But those projects could cost more than $4 billion .
 Cantwell says federal infrastructure funding could cover some of the costs . Cantwell said federal funding could be used to help cover the costs of infrastructure .
 Strickland said the federal government and the state need to take action . The federal government should take action, he said .
 The Seattle Space Needle is painting the sloped roof Galaxy Gold for its 60th anniversary . Five grand prize winners will have the opportunity to help paint the roof .
 The ‘Celebrating 60 Contest’ is currently accepting submissions at spaceneedle.com/60 for people to share their Space Needle memories from the past 60 years .
 Five people will be selected to join the painting of the roof on April 21 . 55 additional winners will also receive Space Needle tickets, VIP packages to The Loupe Lounger .
 Monday was their first day back on the job, but Teamsters organizers say the return to work has been slow .
 KIRO 7 has reached out to the concrete companies for a response but has yet to hear back from them . KIRO7 has contacted them to get a response from them.
 The news of a temporary truce is celebrated by trade workers . While tensions continue to rise, the news of the temporary truce has been celebrated .
 In March, as many as 15,000 people lost their jobs due to the strike, local builders estimate .
 Jay Inslee’s emergency declaration remains in place some two years after the state logged its first reported coronavirus case . The emergency declaration has been in place for two years .
 Even though there is a slight uptick in cases in some areas of the state, it is nothing like what we saw with the last surge .
 Inslee has said in the past that his emergency declaration is important in order to keep the state eligible for federal relief dollars . He has said that he wants the emergency declaration to remain in place .
 Oregon's governor has closely aligned Washington with what has been happening in Oregon . But the governor has been closely aligned with what's happening in Washington .
 Jim Walsh said Inslee should follow Brown’s lead and urges people to tell Inslee that they should follow his lead .
 The governor has retained emergency powers, but there is no talk of returning to mask mandates . The governor's emergency powers have been retained .
 He has said in the past that he wants to rely on people getting tested if they need to and to get vaccinated . Instead he has said he wants people to get tested and to be vaccinated .
 The majority of the U.S. and Washington are seeing low community levels of the virus . Two of the three largest counties in the state are seeing a medium level of virus .
 Spitters say they're only seeing a small bump in cases going up because of the omicron subvariant . Spitters: "It's not a big difference"
 He does not think we're seeing a surge though but he said it's important to pay attention to what the virus is doing . He doesn't believe we're see a surge but he does not believe it's a surge .
 Any type of surge from the subvariant won't be like what we saw initially with omicron or with delta, says Ali Mokdad .
 The number of people who've already been infected with COVID-19 make them feel like we'll stay in a relatively good place for the time being . Other parts of the United States are reinstating mask mandates or worrying about an imminent surge .
 Lynch says fatigue and political divisions can make plans difficult . Lynch says we have enough tools and prior experience to help limit any massive infection .
 Donetsk People’s Republic spokesman Eduard Basurin said Russia should bring in ‘chemical forces’ to use in Mariupol .
 The video was posted online Monday in the United States, and shortly after midnight on Tuesday in Ukraine . The video is posted online in the U.S. and was posted in Ukraine.
 Ukrainian unit in Mariupol claimed on social media that Russian invaders had used chemical weapons there . Earlier in the day, a Ukrainian unit claimed that Russian invasion had used Chemical weapons there.
 Lesia Vasylenko, a member of Ukraine’s Parliament, made a similar charge . The Ukrainian parliament member made the charge .
 The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Monday night .
 The Ukrainian Parliament said on Monday that it had learned of local reports from the police that Russian forces had fired on nitric acid tanks in the Donetsk region .
 A small number of U.S. colleges and universities are reinstating mask policies, citing coronavirus outbreaks .
 Omicron subvariant, known as BA.2, has become the dominant version among new U.S. cases .
 Several prominent officials and some Broadway stars have recently tested positive . Some Broadway stars tested positive for positive .
 Some universities shifted to enacting school policies aimed at living with Omicron . Some universities are quarantining and social distancing when outbreaks occur .
 As new cases decreased, some colleges and universities further loosened precautions, such as widespread surveillance testing programs .
 Professors will be able to remove their masks in classrooms while teaching . The masks will be removed while teaching.
 Those who are unvaccinated also must continue to wear a mask in other indoor areas . Those who have not been vaccinated must also wear a masks in other areas .
 Shanghai and more than a dozen other cities in China are under full or partial lockdowns to tackle spikes in Omicron cases of the coronavirus .
 The lockdowns are exposing a growing social and economic cost of the strategy, which has been abandoned nearly everywhere else in the world . The lockdown is exposing the growing social costs of the strategies, which have been abandoned everywhere else .
 Other countries have lifted most restrictions, but “lying flat is not an option for China,’ Mr Liang said .
 China’s relatively low vaccination rate among older people and its limited health care resources for treating severe virus cases continue to worry officials . Officials are keeping them from easing pandemic restrictions.
 Health authorities report 27,419 new locally transmitted cases in China on Monday . Most of the cases were in Shanghai, a city of 26 million .
 Omicron variant is the biggest surge in China so far . That case count is small compared with many countries, but it's the biggest in China .
 China has reported more than 200,000 locally transmitted coronavirus cases in Shanghai . Most of the cases have been mild or asymptomatic .
 The city has just one case that is currently categorized as ‘severe’ Officials said the case required hospital treatment but did not elaborate .
 Mass testing is a key part of China's strategy to eliminate infections . It has allowed health authorities to isolate patients who test positive and send them to a hospital or isolation facility .
 Guangzhou said last week that it would test all 18 million of its residents . A small number of locally transmitted cases — fewer than 30 — were reported over the previous seven days .
 Officials in Shanghai announced a second round of mass testing for that city's 25 million residents over the weekend .
 Officials in Wuhan, where the coronavirus first emerged, began on Monday to require residents wishing to use the city's subway to have had a negative result on a nucleic acid test .
 Passengers must show their test result and scan a code from the specific subway car they sit in . Authorities can keep track of exposure, according to a notice posted online by the Wuhan Metro .
 Authorities in Shanghai appeared to respond to public outcry over the city's handling of the outbreak . Mr Liang indicated that China would not back down from its coronavirus strategy .
 The city will begin to lift lockdown measures in neighborhoods that go 14 days without a new case . The vice mayor said on Saturday that the city would begin to lifting lockdown measures .
 On Monday, the city announced a system to categorize districts based on the number of reported positive cases in each .
 Some economists say the lockdown will not do much to mitigate the lockdown’s larger economic impact . But, they say, it won’t do much.
 For most of last year, only a few cities in China were under lockdown at any one time . Economic damage was manageable, says Mr Zhuang .
 The equivalent of around a quarter of China’s economic output is on hold, he said . But these days, he estimated, the equivalent of about a quarter. of China's economic output was on hold .
 The growing frustration over having daily life disrupted is another risk, says the author .
 Wuhan residents complained about the new subway system rules on Monday morning . Many turned to social media to complain .
 Jessica Whitehead claims she was punished for asking to avoid child violence investigations after the death of her stepdaughter . Whitehead, 15-year veteran, says she was treated differently than male employees .
 A lawsuit was filed March 31 in Superior Court against the Sheriff's Department, the county Human Resources Department and Undersheriff Brent Bomkamp .
 The Pierce County Prosecutor’s Office says he cannot comment on pending litigation . The Sheriffs Department is in legal matters with the county .
 The death of her stepdaughter had a traumatic effect on her, her mother says .
 Special Assault Unit involves investigating cases where children are victims of violent and sexual crimes . Chief Roberts, a lieutenant at the time, told her she was going to be assigned to the unit .
 Whitehead was not assigned to the unit, but that decision didn't come until the counselor she had begun seeing said Whitehead would be placed on PTSD leave if the department transferred her .
 A male officer allegedly overheard Undersheriff Bomkamp make a sexist comment to another man in department leadership .
 Whitehead filed an equal employment opportunity complaint with HR with HR in January 2020 to report sexism she'd observed .
 Whitehead said she witnessed a male chief berating women over childcare issues caused by the COVID-19 pandemic .
 Whitehead did not see male staff with children with children treated this way, lawsuit says . Whitehead is accused of failing to treat male staff in the same way .
 Whitehead's complaint also alleged an improper investigation into Bomkamp’s comments . The complaint also alleges a improper investigation.
 Roberts allegedly asked two women detectives whether they intended to apply for an upcoming promotion . The complaint was filed about a month before it was filed .
 Roberts asked them if they were referring to Bomkamp’s comments, according to the lawsuit .
 The lawsuit claims the department did not abide by its own policy when investigating the Undersheriff's comments .
 A Lieutenant not named as a defendant began questioning female detectives, it says . The Undersheriff was “pissed’ that someone reported it, the officer says .
 The witness who overheard Bomkamp’s comments was not interviewed until more than a year after the incident .
 This isn't the first time the Sheriff's Department has been sued over allegations of gender discrimination . This isn’t the firsttime the Sheriff’s Department has sued .
 In November, three black women who work in Pierce County Jail sued, claiming a pattern of discrimination and retaliation existed at the department that harmed minority employees .
 Judge Thomas Quinlan agreed with the women’s claims and ordered the county to pay the defendants a total $850,000 in damages . The county also ordered the defendants to pay about $200,000 for attorney fees .
 In 2017, Pierce County Council approved a $680,000 settlement for a similar lawsuit alleging a pattern of harassment and discrimination at the Sheriff's Department . In 2016, the county council approved a similar settlement for the same lawsuit .
 The HR Department acknowledged that the Sheriff's Department has a history of sexist conduct in its report on her complaint . Whitehead’s lawsuit says the HR Department has history of sexism .
 The investigator dismissed Whitehead's allegations and said the department's history of sexism actually made it less likely that she would have experienced sexism there .
 Alaska, Seattle-Tacoma International Airport's largest carrier, cut its spring schedule by 2% last week .
 Twenty flights through Sea-Tac had been canceled by Monday afternoon, according to FlightAware.com . Additional cancellations expected Tuesday and Wednesday .
 The cancellations were of a different sort than those earlier in April that saw passengers stuck and unable to reach the airline's customer service desk .
 Customers whose flights have been canceled should call a custom phone number included in the email notifying them of the cancellation . Rudin said customers who have been cancelled should call the phone number in their email .
 Staff shortages have been largely to blame for hundreds of cancellations that have delayed or stranded tens of thousands of passengers .
 In the days after the cancellation run began April 1, some passengers reported 10-hour waits to reach customer service desk .
 Alaska and the union representing its pilots have been stalled on a new contract for three years . Alaska and its pilots are working together to work together for the first time since 2009 .
 Washington State Ferry spokesman Ian Sterling says "we don't have enough people to sail the vessels right now" He stood outside the Seattle Maritime Academy Monday .
 The admission comes after months of delays, cancellations, and unstable service on the water . It's unclear whether it is in San Juans, Bremerton, or Vashon Island .
 A March 8 report from the ferry system states staff shortages are "unprecedented" The ferry system's 70-year history has seen staff shortages in the past 70 years .
 A one-year program at the Academy costs about $10,000 and a graduate can make between $70,000-$80,000 a year to start . Bateman said a one- year program at Academy cost about $ 10,000 .
 The Academy and Washington State Ferries are teaming up to sponsor open houses on Tuesdays to solicit interest . The open houses will be sponsored by the Ferries.
 In 2021, Washington State Ferries operated approximately 22,000 fewer sailings than 2019 roughly 72% of pre-pandemic ridership . The state-run ferries operated about 22,00 fewer sails than 2019 .
 In January, ridership slightly decreased compared to January 2021 levels, according to the March 8 report . The ridership in January was slightly lower than in January 2021 .
 Vessel availability has recovered, according to the March 8 report . Meanwhile, vessel availability has also recovered, report says .
 availability remains at risk because of the aging fleet, according to the report . However, availability of the fleet is still at risk, the report says .
 The ousted agents belonged to the Fifth Service, a division that Putin set up in 1998 . Putin was then director of the FSB, then head of Russia's FSB . The Fifth Service was set up to carry out operations in the former Soviet Union .
 Authorities placed Sergei Beseda, the former head of the Fifth Service, under house arrest last month . Authorities placed Beseda on house arrest .
 He has since been moved to the FSB-run Lefortovo prison in Moscow, The Times reported .
 The NK VD, the KGB's predecessor, used the prison for interrogation and torture during Stalin's 1930s Great Purge . The prison was used for interrogations and torture.
 Andrei Soldatov, an expert with the Center for European Policy Analysis, said the move sent a "very strong message" to other Russian elites .
 Analysts previously told Fox News that Beseda's house arrest sentence seemed a form of retaliation for intelligence errors in Ukraine .
 The Fifth Service represents "the most sensitive department of the FSB department, which is in charge of espionage in Ukraine"
 Vladimir Putin finally understood that the intelligence he was given before the invasion was not extremely accurate . Now it looks like Vladimir Putin has finally understood his intelligence .
 Moscow is also fighting an intelligence war in Ukraine . Russian troops fight to take ground in Ukraine.
 The FBI announced last week that it had disrupted a Russian military hacking scheme to set up a "botnet" on victim devices in the U.S. and elsewhere . The FBI said the scheme was set up by the Russian military .
 The Biden administration unveiled new regulations for ""ghost guns"" Monday in a move that advocates say will help reduce gun violence . The new regulations were unveiled by the Biden administration .
 The new rules will help law enforcement track and trace these firearms, authorities say . Authorities say they are increasingly involved in crimes .
 Ghost guns can be made with a 3D printer or assembled from a kit . Ghost guns are unregistered and untraceable homemade weapons .
 The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives says such weapons are contributing to a rise in gun violence .
 The weapons can be produced for less than $200, though officials have put the average price at around $500 . The average price is $500, officials say .
 Current law requires manufacturers to include serial numbers on weapons, but doesn't regulate most parts . Some parts of assembled guns are hard for authorities to trace, making them hard to trace .
 Authorities say people can skirt laws aimed at blocking certain gun purchases . Buyers of kits aren't required to undergo background checks, authorities say .
 Los Angeles County Sheriff Alex Villanueva told "60 Minutes" correspondent Bill Whitaker in 2020 . "No one knows you have it," he said .
 Someone can make a gun at home — either with a kit or through 3D printing — without a license . So, someone can make the gun without the license .
"I've seen videos on YouTube, where you can see people doing it in record time — 20, 30 minutes," ATF acting director Marvin Richardson said .
 One part — what's called the frame or lower receiver — is regulated under federal gun law .
 The kits generally come with the drill bits and guides necessary to do so, Evans reported . But there are tutorials easily available online, including tutorials online .
 Law enforcement across the country are pointing the finger at ghost guns as a growing problem . ghost guns are only a fraction of the firearms involved in gun crimes, authorities say .
 ATF was able to trace fewer than 1% of the approximately 45,000 ghost guns recovered during criminal investigations between January 2016 and December 2021 . A senior administration official said.
 Ghost guns have been involved in school shootings, such as one in Saugus, California, where a 16-year-old killed four people, and in mass shootings, like one in Northern California . A court order prohibiting him from having guns has been issued .
 The new regulations would mandate kits include serial numbers, and people who sell them would have to be federally licensed and run a background check .
Current requirements would also be required to keep records of purchases for as long as they're in business . Current requirements would be 20 years under current requirements .
 Russian state media seem to be in agreement that former U.S. President Donald Trump remains Moscow’s candidate of choice .
 The time is coming “to again help our partner Trump to become president,’ state TV host Evgeny Popov recently declared .
 Putin’s pet pundits offered an update on plans for 2024 . The Evening With Vladimir Soloviev was on Thursday's edition of the state television show .
 Malek Dudakov is a political scientist specializing in the U.S. He is a Russian “Americanist’s. What can we do in 2023, 2024?
 He suggested that Russia’s interference in the upcoming elections is still in its early stages . He said more will be accomplished after the war is over and frosty relations between the United States and Russia start to warm up .
 Dmitry Drobnitsky suggested Tulsi Gabbard should be invited along with Trump . The Americanist is an omnipresent "Americanist" on Soloviev's show .
 Gabbard has become a fixture of state television for her pro-Russian talking points . She has even been described as a ‘Russian agent’ by the Kremlin’s propaganda machine . The former TV presenter has been a fixture on state TV for the
State TV is any indication the real agenda of the Kremlin’s operatives was never limited to boosting any particular candidates . The real agenda was to harm America as a whole.
 America is a dying empire, and most empires weren’t conquered, they were destroyed from within . Most empires weren't conquered, but most empires were destroyed by within .
 Dudakov’s Twitter feed offers a glimpse into his own propaganda efforts . He maintains despite the service being blocked in Russia.
 Tweeting as “Duderman67,’ Dudakov focuses on criticizing U.S. President Joe Biden, Vice President Kamala Harris, and Hillary Clinton .
 We don’t have infoweapons equal in strength to our hypersonic weapons, as opposed to what they have . We don't have infowapons equal to our weapons, we have more in strength than them .
 There are plenty of people in the U.S. who say that he is bringing us all to the edge of nuclear war .
 A parade of pundits recounted various ways U.S. sanctions are affecting the Russian economy . The limited avenues for Russian retaliation are limited .
 Russia is focusing its efforts on distracting America from its foreign policy objectives . Russia is threatening to meddle in the United States internal affairs .
 Konstantin Dolgov, the deputy chairman of the Committee on Economic Policy of Russia’s Federation Council, predicted that “the results will apparently not be good for the Democrats,” because of rising gas prices in the U.S. But the midterms, he
 Beginning April 18, masks will be required in all indoor public spaces . Schools, child care settings, businesses, restaurants and government buildings will also be required .
 I wish this pandemic was over just as much as any of you, but I am very worried about our vulnerable neighbors and loved ones . I wish it was over. I wish the pandemic had been over, and I'm very worried.
 "People can't get timely care when they need it," Health Commissioner Chery Bettigole said . "My hope that our actions today will slow the spread of COVID and help us avoid seeing our ERs"
 The city will implement a one-week "education period" to ensure that all residents are made aware of the change in protocols .
 There is no vaccine or testing requirement for establishments that serve food or beverages . For now, there is no vaccination or testing requirements for establishments serving food and beverages .
 Over the last week, new cases per capita have increased by more than 50%, according to city data . Daily case rates have risen past 100, according to the city data.
"If we could do that we can literally save the lives of vulnerable Philadelphians," Bettigole said .
 The city remains open, but wearing masks will allow those activities to continue, she said . She stressed that the city is still open, while keeping all residents safe .
 Several colleges and universities have also moved to reinstate masking requirements . Students and staff testing positive on-campus have been testing positive .
 BA is now the dominant strain in the United States, school officials said last week .
 In recent weeks, a flurry of positive COVID-19 infections has disrupted life in Washington, D.C. As many top officials and politicians have tested positive for the virus .
 School officials reported that there have been no known cases of serious illness . However, school officials said that there had been no serious illness.
 Twenty-two villagers died in landslides in four villages in Baybay city in Leyte province on Sunday and Monday, city police chief Lt. Lt. Police chief says .
 At least six people are reported missing in the landslides . Search is underway for at least six others .
 Three other storm-related deaths were reported by the government’s main disaster-response agency in Davao de Oro and Davao Oriental .
 Coast guard, police and firefighters rescued some villagers in flooded communities . Some villagers were trapped on their roofs .
 Schools and work are suspended in central Cebu city . Mayor Michael Rama declares a state of calamity to allow the rapid release of emergency funds .
 At least 20 storms and typhoons batter the Philippines each year, mostly during the rainy season that begins around June . The Philippines has been hit by at least 20 typhoons each year .
Storms have hit even during the scorching summer months in recent years . Some storms have hit during the summer months .
 The disaster-prone Southeast Asian nation also lies on the Pacific “Ring of Fire,’ where many of the world’s volcanic eruptions and earthquakes occur .
 The blast in the town of Banaafoul, near the port city of Sidon, demolished the two-floor building . The building had served as a municipality building and a scout center for the Shiite Amal movement .
 The dead person was the son of the town's mayor, a security official says .
 Blast also caused material damage to nearby buildings and cars . It is not immediately clear what triggered the blast .
 The explosion may have been caused by diesel fuel stored inside the building . The official said the explosion may be caused by the stored fuel .
 The official spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to give official statements . The official was not allowed to speak to the media .
 Army personnel sealed off the building as they searched through the rubble for clues and casualties .
 arms stored for the Palestinian Hamas group exploded in a building in a Palestinian refugee camp in the south Lebanon port city of Tyre, injuring a dozen people .
 Hamas denied it had kept weapons there and said the explosion was caused by oxygen tanks stored in the building .
 Sharif took the oath of office inside the stately, white marble palace known as the Presidency .
 The president's elevation won't guarantee a peaceful path forward or solve the country's many economic problems, including high inflation and a soaring energy crisis . But his elevation will not guarantee a peace, he says .
 If Khan's followers take to the streets, it could create more pressure on lawmakers and deepen the crisis . Khan has vowed to take action if his followers take the streets .
 Khan, a former cricket star, was ousted early Sunday . His conservative Islamist ideology and dogged independence characterized his three years and eight months in office .
 He lost a no-confidence vote after being deserted by his party allies and a key coalition partner . His party allies were deserted by the key coalition partners .
 Khan rallies hundreds of thousands of supporters in protests Sunday night . He describes the new leadership as an "imposed government" that colluded with the U.S. to oust him .
 His backers marched in cities across Pakistan, waving large party flags and shouted slogans promising to return him to power . His backers waved large party flag flags and chanted slogans promised to return his power .
 The crowds were dominated by youths who make up the backbone of Khan’s supporters .
 Khan sidestepped an initial no-confidence vote demanded by the opposition by dissolving parliament and calling early elections . The political drama began April 3 when Khan sidestpped anInitial no- confidence vote demanded.
 The opposition accuses Khan of economic mismanagement . The Supreme Court has appealed to the Supreme Court .
 Khan's move was illegal and the no-confidence vote went ahead, leading to his ouster . The court said the vote was illegal . Khan's ouster came after four days of deliberations .
 Khan has demanded early elections — the balloting is not due before August 2023 . Khan has called for early elections .
 He has tapped into anti-American sentiment in Pakistan . He accuses Washington of conspiring with his opponents to topple him .
 The U.S. war on terrorism after 9/11 often sees Pakistan as unfairly targeting Pakistan . That conspiracy theory resonates with his youthful base .
 Khan claims Washington opposes him because of his independent foreign policy favoring China and Russia . Khan claims the U.S. opposes him due to his independent policy favoring Russia and China .
 He was criticized for a visit to Moscow, where he met with President Vladimir Putin . He met with Putin as Russian tanks rolled into Ukraine .
 The U.S. State Department has denied any involvement in Pakistan’s internal politics .
 China, which is Pakistan's key ally and investor, said Monday it would support any government . Pakistan is a key ally of China, and is the country's key investor .
 China is heavily invested in Pakistan in its multibillion-dollar global initiative . The initiative is to link south and central Asia to Beijing . China is also investing in Pakistan .
 The two countries have fought three wars, coming dangerously close to a fourth over Kashmir . The disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir is divided between the two and claimed by both .
 The opposition coalition consists of parties that cross the political divide, from the left to the radically religious . The opposition is a coalition that includes the left and the religious .
 A few wealthy and powerful families have dominated Pakistan's politics for decades . Power most often alternating between the Sharif and Bhutto camps .
 Both political houses have been accused of and at times convicted of widespread corruption . Both houses are accused of corruption .
 Asif Ali Zardari, Bhutto's husband, has spent more than seven years in prison . He served as president of Pakistan after the 2008 election .
 Khan came to power in 2018, promising to break the pattern of family rule in Pakistan . His opponents said he was elected with help from the powerful military, which has ruled the country for half of its 75 years .
 Nawaz Sharif was also ousted in 1999, in a military coup . Benazir Bhutto's government was ousted several times after the military sided with her opposition .
 In Pakistani politics, where loyalties are often fluid, Bhutto's fiercest opposition often came from Sharif's party .
 Hamza was elected as the new chief minister by the Punjab provincial parliament . His son, Hamza, was elected last week as the chief minister .
 Khan's party is challenging that election, and the younger Sharif has yet to be sworn in . Khan's Party is challenging the election.
 Six Chinese Air Force Y-20 transport planes landed in Belgrade early Saturday . China said Monday its military planes delivered “regular military supplies’ to Serbia .
 The planes’ arrival prompted heavy speculation they were carrying HQ-22 surface-to-air missiles . The planes were believed to be carrying the missiles under a previous deal signed between the sides .
 Serbia’s defense ministry did not immediately respond to a request for comment from The Associated Press .
 Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic will present “the newest pride’ of the Serbian military on Tuesday or Wednesday . The delivery of medium-range systems was agreed to in 2019, he said .
 The veiled operation came amid Western concerns that an arms buildup in the Balkans at the same time as war in Ukraine could threaten the region .
 Serbia and China have long shared strong ties, partly out of a common disdain for Washington . The two countries have been in the same region for decades .
 Serbians nurture resentment over NATO's 1999 air campaign during Kosovo conflict . Chinese Embassy in Belgrade was hit by NATO air campaign .
 NATO called the incident, which sparked violent demonstrations in Beijing, a mistaken bombing . China and many others have long rejected the explanation .
 China has largely sided with Russia in the Ukraine conflict and many Serbians are sympathetic to Moscow . Despite claiming to be neutral, China has mostly sided with Russian in Ukraine .
 Serbia has voted in favor of U.N. resolutions that condemn the Russian attacks in Ukraine . Serbia has refused to join international sanctions against its allies in Moscow .
 The apparent arms delivery to Serbia over the territories of at least two NATO member states, Turkey and Bulgaria, was seen as a demonstration of China’s growing global reach .
 There are fears in the West that the arming of Serbia by Russia and China could encourage the Balkan country to move toward another war . The former province of Kosovo that proclaimed independence in 2008.
 Serbia, Russia and China don’t recognize Kosovo’s statehood, while the United States and most Western countries do .
 He stressed the need to open humanitarian corridors so that civilians trapped in cities under attack can access basic supplies like food and water . He also stressed that civilians under attack should be able to access water and food .
 Austrian leader calls Moscow trip to Moscow his “duty to exhaust every possibility for ending the violence in Ukraine . The trip comes just two days after travelling to Kyiv for talks with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy .
Nehammer said face-to-face talks could have a greater impact over the long term . Nehammer said talks to look “each other in the eye, discussing the horrors of war, could have greater impact .
 He said he walked away from the meeting without much optimism for an end to the war any time soon . But he said he did not expect an end of the war to end soon .
 Austria supported the 27-nation bloc’s sanctions against Russia . Austria has opposed cutting off deliveries of Russian gas .
 Austrian officials stress that military neutrality does not mean moral neutrality . But Nehammer and other Austrian officials have been keen to stress that it is not the case .
 Nehammer said he told Putin the EU is “as united as it’s ever been” on the issue of sanctions . Nehammer told Putin that these will remain in place and may even be strengthened as long as Ukrainians continue to die .
 Austrian foreign minister Alexander Schallenberg said Nehammer decided to make the trip after meeting with Zelenskyy in Kyiv . He followed contacts with the leaders of Turkey, Germany, Germany and the European Union .
 Schallenberg said it was an effort to "seize every chance to end the humanitarian hell" in Ukraine . He said ahead of a meeting with his EU counterparts in Luxembourg that it was a effort to "seize every chance" to "end the
 TB of data it claims to have taken are contracts, accounting documents, social security numbers, email databases and more . TB of the data is a database of email databases, contracts and social security documents .
 When asked for comment, the university shared a message it sent to campus on Friday .
 There is no indication so far that sensitive information has been compromised . We have been investigating and there is no sign of compromised information .
 The university says no further information is available. At this time, no further info is available .
 A spokesperson for the university did not respond to follow-up questions about group's claims .
 Cybersecurity experts who looked at the allegedly stolen data confirmed that it did include sensitive information from staff and students at the university .
 The first 3 months of this year have seen more attacks than in any previous year, Liska said . The first three months of the year have been more attacks.
 BlackCat has attacked at least three of the U.S. universities or colleges . BlackCat attacks at least 3 of the United States universities.
 Emsisoft threat analyst Brett Callow and others believe the group is a rebrand of the BlackMatter and DarkSide ransomware groups . The group is believed to be a rebranded group of BlackMatters and Dark side ransomware groups.
 The group has so far been implicated in attacks on two German oil companies and Italian fashion brand Moncler .
 Many organizations initially say there is “no evidence information has been compromised,’ that is often not the case . Callow noted that while many organizations initially said there was no evidence information had been compromised .
 In previous incidents, multiple organizations which initially stated they had no evidence of data being compromised later discovered that it had been .
 The material included “individuals and phone records that do not seem to be related to this case,’ the April 5 filing reads . The material includes “Individuals and phones records that don't seem to have been related to the case”
 Maksim Nemtsev is the Boston-based lawyer representing a Russian tech executive, Vladislav Klyushin, 41, who stands accused of insider trading based on hacked non-public information . The claim included the claim in an April 5 filing protesting the pretrial
 The federal magistrate denied bail for Klyushin Jan. based on his lack of ties to the U.S., "substantial financial means," the magistrate said .
 Nemtsev’s filing also noted that the defense is ‘investigating’ whether some of the files produced by the government in response to a grand jury subpoena may be altered .
 The defense points to a spreadsheet that may have been modified by an FBI agent working the case, according to a preliminary review .
 Nemtsev declined to comment on the specifics of any material turned over by the government .
 Prosecutors said the material was “included erroneously and asked us that we delete it,” Nemtsev told CyberScoop .
 The material from the cases involving the Russian businessmen have yet to be charged . Nemtsev said he believes the material from these cases has yet to have been charged .
 If there is a potential ongoing investigation, ‘we don’t want to compromise it,’ he said .
 It's possible that the records turned over somehow relate to Klyushin’s case, perhaps in terms of common witnesses or overlapping evidence .
 The seriousness of the problem would depend on the other case, she said . She added that the seriousness would depend upon the other cases .
 If the case is already charged, then sharing discovery material beyond the parties in the case could violate court orders or compromise witnesses, she said . If the cases are already charges, sharing discovery materials could violate the court orders .
 A media representative for the U.S. Attorney’s Office in Massachusetts declined to comment .
 Nemtsev's main arguments are that it's hard for him to fully participate in his defense and analyze the U.S. government's evidence while behind bars .
 Prosecutors have turned over more than five terabytes of discovery containing more than 5 million individual files . Klyushin is only given 16 hours of access to the database per week .
 The database is also not searchable, and there are format issues making it difficult, he added . There are also problems with the database.
 Klyushin was originally arrested in Switzerland on March 21, 2021, and extradited to the U.S. on Dec., 2021 . Other elements of the case are still being investigated .
 Federal prosecutors claim that between January 2018 and September 2020, Klyushin and his codefendants hacked into two U.S. firms that help publicly traded companies prepare filings for public release . They then used that information to trade stocks ahead of the release .
 The campaign netted the group at least $82. million, prosecutors allege . The group's campaign netted $82 million .
 Ivan Yermakov was one of the 12 Russian nationals indicted as part of Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. election . He was already under indictment, having been part of a Russian military intelligence hacking unit .
 He'd also been indicted for his alleged role in hacking various anti-doping agencies, sporting federations, and anti-Doping officials . He'd been indicted in the past for allegedly hacking anti- doping agencies .
 Klyushin had previously rebuffed approaches by U.S. and British intelligence agencies while traveling in Europe . His attorney told NBC News in December that he had been rebuffed by United States and British agencies .
 Marc Fernich joined Klyushin’s legal team this week . Fernich is a high-profile criminal defense attorney .
 Google is seeking to block the person from accessing or attempting to access any Google services . The person will not be able to create any Google accounts or engage in any activity that violates Google's Terms of Service agreements .
 The fraud is part of a “dramatic increase’ in online scams during the COVID-19 pandemic . People shop more online and less in person as people shop more and less online .
 A variety of studies have looked at ‘puppy scams’ in particular . perpetrators pose as breeders with puppies for sale .
 After the first round of payments, the scammers will add on additional payments such as animal quarantine and delivery fees .
 AARP received a complaint in August 2021 from a South Carolina resident who reported that they were looking for a puppy online . In August 2021, the AARP got a complaint from a S.C. resident .
 They came across a site called ‘familyhomebassetthoundscom’ and sought to purchase a specific puppy . They came out of “familyhome Bassetthoundthounds.com”
 Gmail account told victim to pay for dog by sending $700 in gift cards to specific place . Google Voice account told the victim to send $700 gift cards for the dog .
 The victim was then told the shipping company needed an additional $1,500 to deliver the puppy . The puppy never came . The shipping company was told to pay $1.5,000 to deliver it .
 Google’s investigation of the matter revealed ‘a network’ of Google services accounts being used in other non-delivery schemes linked together subscriber and recovery email addresses and phone numbers .
 One of the older Gmail accounts was created in September 2013 from an IP address in Cameroon . It had a phone number with the with the country code for Cameroon .
 Another site controlled by the suspect purported to sell marijuana and prescription opiate cough syrup . Another site purported to be selling marijuana and opiate syrup .
 Site was accessible through April 7, Google's lawyers wrote, when it was taken down at Google’s request .
 Traffic direction systems are used by threat actors to determine whether or not a target is of interest . Threat actors should be redirected to a malicious domain under their control and act as a gateway to compromise systems with malware .
 The BlackBerry Research and Intelligence Team detailed another TDS called Prometheus that has been put to use in different campaigns mounted by cybercriminal groups . Earlier this January, the BlackBerry Research team detailed a number of other TDS calls Prometheus .
 Parrot TDS has a huge reach, with increased activity observed in February and March 2022 . operators have primarily singled out servers hosting poorly secured WordPress sites to gain administrator access .
 Most of the users targeted by these malicious redirects are located in Brazil, India, the U.S, Singapore, Indonesia, Argentina, France, Mexico, Pakistan, and Russia .
 Parrot TDS, via an injected PHP script hosted on the compromised server, is designed to extract client information and forward the request to the command-and-control server upon visiting one of the infected sites . The attacker can perform arbitrary code execution on the server .
 The response from the C2 server takes the form of JavaScript code that's executed on the client machine . The code exposes the victims to potential new threats .
 The malicious backdoor PHP script is a web shell that grants the adversary persistent remote access to the web server . Also observed alongside the malicious backdoor is a Web shell that gives the adversary remote access .
 Avast said the attacks involved prompting users to download malware under the guise of rogue browser updates . A remote access trojan named "ctfmon.exe" that gives the attacker full access to the host .
 The mass adoption of cloud infrastructure is fully justified by innumerable advantages, says GIST . The mass adoptions of cloud systems are fully justified, he says .
Today’s most sensitive business applications, workloads, and data are in the cloud . As a result, today, organizations’ most sensitive applications and workloads are in cloud .
 Hackers, good and bad, have noticed that trend and effectively evolved their attack techniques to match this new tantalizing target landscape .
 With threat actors’ high reactivity and adaptability, it is recommended to assume that organizations are under attack . Some user accounts or applications might already have been compromised .
Find out exactly which assets are put at risk through compromised accounts or breached assets . mapping potential attack paths across a comprehensive map of the relationships between assets .
 graph-based tools enable the visualization of assets and resources relationships within the related cloud service provider . Those are graph- based tools enabling the visualization of assets.
 By resolving policy information, collectors determine how specific access paths affect specific resources . They determine how combining these access paths might be used to create attack paths .
 These graph-based collectors display topological results mapping out all cloud-hosted entities in the environment and relationships between them .
 The relationship direction is the connection direction from asset X to asset Y or the other way round . The links between each entity are analyzed according to the asset's properties to extract the exact nature of the relationship .
 The comprehensive mapping output they generate is a passive result, inasmuch . The information needs to be accurately and timely analyzed and acted upon to effectively map potential attack paths .
Cloud-specific collectors will shine a light on misconfiguration in Privileged Access Management . It fails to detect potential secondary permission layers that an attacker could leverage to carve an attack path .
 This requires additional analytical capabilities to perform in-depth analysis on assets and passive relationships relative to the contained assets . This requires extra analytical capabilities. This requires more analytical capabilities .
 Cymulate is developing a toolkit that operationalizes a more active discovery approach that performs a far more indepth analysis . Cymulates is currently developing the toolkit to perform more active analysis .
 graph-based relationship map fails to identify relationships between user A to assets Y . This requires analytical capabilities enabling the identification of the relationships between assets contained within other assets and assets external to the containing asset .
 SEC filed filing that charged former Cash App employee with stealing personal information of 8 million users .
 Block Inc. says data heist should not affect the wider group of 44 million users of Cash App’s popular P2P service .
 It does raise concerns about the risk and reliability tied to financial employees . But it does raise questions about the reliability of financial employees.
 The former employee in question had previously been allowed to download reports and customer information for their job .
 The vast majority of intrusions come as a result of employees’ unintended mistakes . The attack appears to have been the result of a malicious former employee .
 In this attack, there may have been an “incomplete termination of access” when the employee was let go, CISO Josh Yavor says .
 Leak Hackers leaked around 437,500 emails belonging to Aerogas, Forest, and Petrovsky Fort . The emails were leaked by the Leak hackers .
 Aerogas clients include Rosneft, Russia's largest producer of oil, and Novatek, the country’s leading natural gas producer .
 Aerogas and Petrovsky are state-owned entities . Both Aeroga and PetroVSky areState-owned entity .
 The third company affected by this leak is Forest, a Russia-based logging firm .
 DDoSecrets has published more than two million emails since the Russian invasion of Ukraine began at the end of February 2022 . The Russian invasion began in February 2022.
Anonymous is standing strong with Ukraine over the ongoing conflict between the two countries . It is no secret that Anonymous is standingStrong with Ukraine .
 collectives have so far targeted both the government and the private sector to spread their message . The collectives are targeting both government and private sector .
 Seven days later, the company's status page still shows ‘Active Incidents’ for Jira Software, Jira Work Management and Jira Service Management .
 Atlassian says a routine maintenance script "unintentionally" disabled a small number of sites, blocking customers' access to their products and data .
 Atlassian initially estimated that its restoration efforts would not take more than several days . The incident was not the result of a cyberattack that would've led to unauthorized access.
 restored services to affected customers will likely take up to two more weeks . In emails sent to customers, the company revealed that restoring services to those impacted will likely be up to 2 more weeks.
 "We estimate the rebuilding effort to last for up to 2 more weeks," one customer was told . "We are beginning to bring some customers back online," one said .
 Atlassian has taken steps to avoid a recurrence in the future . "We apologize for the length and severity of this incident," says Atlassian .
 The company says it was able to restore functionality for more than 35% of all users directly hit by this ongoing outage with no data loss . Over 35% Of impacted customers brought back online .
 Atlassian's co-founder and co-CEO Scott Farquhar announced in October 2020 that the company will no longer sell licenses for on-premises products starting February 2021 . The company will discontinue support on February 2, 2024 .
 BleepingComputer has reached out to Atlassian with further questions regarding the incident . We will update the story if we receive a response from Atlassian .
 The disclosure came in today's filing of an SEC Form 424B3 that updates their investment prospectus to alert investors of business disruption and data breach risks resulting from cyberattacks .
 Report provides example of a ransomware attack that hit the firm in August 2021, impacting most of its IT systems .
 Zegna underlines that they did not engage with the ransomware actors in negotiating a ransom payment . They had to restore from backups in the weeks that followed the incident .
 Zegna had previously disclosed unauthorized access to their systems at the time . It was not until today's SEC filing that it was a ransomware attack .
"As we refused to engage in discussions relating to the payment of the ransom, the responsible parties published certain accounting materials extracted from our IT systems," reads Zegna's SEC filing .
We use our systems to collect and store confidential and sensitive data, including information about our business, our customers and our employees . In addition to supporting our operations, we use our system to collect, store and store sensitive data .
 Any unauthorized access to our information systems may compromise the privacy of such data . It could expose us to claims as well as reputational damage .
 RansomEXX claimed responsibility for the attack last year . Data was published as a way to further extort the victim into paying a ransom .
 The leaked data was stolen from Zegna’s systems and published by the ransomware gang on the day of the firm's announcement .
 Threat actors claim to have copied 20.74 GB of data where they offered it in password-protected ZIP files . As part of the attack, the threat actors offered the data in a password- protected ZIP .
 Zegna's listing on the leak portal has allegedly received 483,000 visits . At this time, ZegNA's listing has received 482,000.
 Zegna's filing confirms the authenticity of the leaked data, but did not comment on the impact on clients and partners . The company has not commented on how the data was leaked .
 This is the same ransomware group that has hit corporate giants such as Konica Minolta in August 2020, GIGABYTE in August 2021, and more recently, Hellmann Worldwide .
 A maintainer adds broken code, protest messages, or undesired functionality to the latest versions of their project without documenting it beforehand .
New code gets pulled in and runs by surprise when an existing application fetches the latest version of the project .
 Most recently, the developer of the 'event-source-polyfill' package has peacefully protested Russia's "unreasonable invasion" of Ukraine .
Open source software has been reliable, community-fuelled, and efficient in that it takes out the need to reinvent the wheel . The recurring cases of voluntary self-sabotage by maintainers have cast doubts on the overall reliability of the ecosystem .
Polyfill packages are designed to implement existing JavaScript features on web browsers that may not support them . Polyfill packages may not be available to web browsers with existing features .
 The package in question expands Mozilla's 'EventSource' APIs to other browsers that may lack the concept .
 applications built with the library will show anti-war messages to Russia-based users after 15 seconds of launch .
 The new version continues to be up on nom and GitHub, nearly four weeks after it went live . As of today, the new version remains up on the site .
 This marks the third major protest of 2022 by an open source developer leveraging his vastly used software to express opinions on a matter of public interest . This is the third big protest by the developer of the open source software .
 'event-source-polyfill’ turned into protestware . Several other vastly popular packages followed suit .
 The 'es5-ext' and 'styled-components' are just some examples of real npm packages with millions of weekly downloads turned protestware .
 In 2016, Azer Koculu broke the internet by withdrawing his popular ‘left-pad’ library from the npm registry .
 The far-reaching impact compelled former CTO Laurie Voss to restore the removed versions of the left-pad .
 January's sabotage of ‘colors’ and ‘faker’ libraries in protest by maintainer potentially broke thousands of production applications that were using dependencies .
 ' node-ipc' released last month by its developer deleted all data on the hard drive of users it believed were Russian or Belarusian .
 The case of 'event-source-polyfill' is more benevolent than a peaceful protest . The case is more benign than a protest, however, according to the author .
 application urges Russia to end its "unreasonable invasion" of Ukraine . Instead of deleting any data or breaking applications, it urges Russian civilians to seek reliable news sources .
 The newly added code directs the user to a Change.org petition that's been signed by over 1. million people to date . The petition was created after appealing to Russian President Putin to end this "senseless war"
 'Colors' sabotage led to mixed reactions, some praising maintainer for taking a stance against big corporations who use open source without funding it .
 The publication of destructive 'node-ipc' versions drew sharp criticism from developers . Some called it "a huge damage" to the credibility of the whole open source community .
Some parts of the newly introduced code could break production apps in edge cases . A debate further ensued on GitHub over whether certain parts of code could broken production apps .
 As a caution, some have pinned their 'event-source-polyfill' version to the earlier, safe version 1.0.25 .
 The latest version of an open source project has been released by the Open Source Project . The project is an open-source version of a popular open- source project .
 Redefining open source software largely started out as a way to promote an ""open development process" Open source software.
Open source registries like npm, PyPI, and RubyGems are set up in a manner that minimizes barriers to entry . The new registries are also set up to reduce barriers to access .
 These registries let anyone publish software packages that are ready for consumption by novices and hard-core professionals alike .
Software repositories can and often face abuse from malicious actors . But as with any system that's open to the public, software repositories can also face abuse .
Security incidents centered around the distribution of typosquatted packages . An 'electorn' package was published by a threat actor to trap developers installing Electron .
 If the developer misspell ‘electron’ in their console, they'd end up with the attacker’s malicious package . The attacker's malicious package can be found in the console .
In 2021, dependency confusion drastically gained momentum as an emerging attack vector against software supply chain attacks . In 2021,dependency confusion drastically gain momentum.
Major incidents also involved accounts of legitimate developers being hijacked by attackers who'd now publish new versions of real libraries laden with malicious code .
 This year's cases of 'ua-parser-js', 'coa' and 'rc' being hijacked to serve malware are examples of this problem . Both 2018's ‘event-stream' and ESLint compromises are examples.
Developers voluntarily withdrawing their code from the internet or sabotaging their own projects . Software consumers are re-evaluating the open source model as it stands today .
Current protestware may be centered around the war, but that doesn't mean it always will be limited to trending issues . The current protestware is focused on the war .
 A developer can change their code as they please, on a whim, decide to change their mind and their code . Developers have discovered an avenue of creative self-expression .
 Qbot operators are switching from their standard way of delivering malware via phishing emails . This is the first time the operators are using this tactic, using malicious macros .
 Microsoft has begun rolling out the VBA macro autoblock feature to Office for Windows users in early April 2022 . The feature will be rolled out to other release channels and older versions later .
 VBA macros embedded in Office documents are a prevalent method to push a large assortment of malware strains in phishing attacks . Qbot, Emotet, TrickBot, and Dridex are among the malware strains used to push malware strains .
 Qbot is a modular Windows banking trojan with worm features used since at least 2007 to steal banking credentials, personal information, and financial data, as well as drop backdoors on compromised computers and deploy Cobalt Strike beacons .
 This malware is also known for infecting other devices on a compromised network using network share exploits and highly aggressive brute-force attacks targeting Active Directory admin accounts .
 Qbot malware has been used in highly targeted attacks against corporate entities since they provide a higher return on investment . Although active for over a decade, it has been primarily used for over 10 years .
 Multiple ransomware gangs, including REvil, Egregor, ProLock, PwndLocker, and MegaCortex, have used Qbot to breach corporate networks .
 Qbot infections can lead to dangerous infections and highly disruptive attacks . IT admins and security professionals need to become familiar with this malware .
 A Microsoft report from December 2021 captured the versatility of Qbot attacks, making it harder to evaluate the scope of its infections .
 Murali Y Venkata, 56, of Aldie, Va., was found guilty of conspiracy to defraud the U.S. government, theft of government property, wire fraud, and aggravated identity theft .
 Charles Edwards, former acting inspector general of DHS-OIG, worked with two other former officials . He worked with Sonal Patel, who pleaded guilty previously in the scheme .
 The three former DHS officials conspired to steal sensitive, proprietary software from the feds . Hundreds of thousands of federal workers were targeted, the Justice Department says .
 Edwards and Patel separately pleaded guilty in 2022 and 2019, respectively, for pilfering U.S. government property in order to create a commercial case management system to sell to government agencies . The two pleaded guilty to pilfered United States government property .
Venkata stole source code and databases from DHS-OIG and helped Edwards install servers in his home for software developers in India to use to create a commercial version of the stolen software .
 Sandworm, a Russian-sponsored hacking group, believed to be part of the GRU Russian military intelligence agency, also exploited this high severity privilege escalation flaw to build a new botnet dubbed Cyclops Blink .
 The flaw can only be exploited if they are configured to allow unrestricted management access from the Internet . The flaw is only available if the Internet is set to allow unlimited access to the Web .
 All WatchGuard appliances are configured for restricted management access . By default, all WatchGuard devices are configured to allow restricted access .
 CISA has given them three weeks until May 2nd to patch the CVE-2022-23176 flaw . The flaw was added to its catalog of Known Exploited Vulnerabilities .
 CISA also strongly urged all U.S. organizations to prioritize fixing this actively abused security bug to avoid having their WatchGuard appliances compromised . This directive only applies to federal agencies .
 Malware hit 1% of WatchGuard firewall appliances with CVE-2022-23176 exploits . Malware used by Sandworm state hackers to create their botnet .
 It establishes persistence on the device through firmware updates . It provides its operators with remote access to compromised networks . It establishes persistent persistence on a device through updates .
 It uses the infected devices' legitimate firmware update channels to maintain access to the compromised devices . It also repacked firmware images and repacked images of infected devices .
 This malware is also modular, making it simple to upgrade and target new devices and security vulnerabilities . This malware also taps into new pools of exploitable hardware .
 WatchGuard says Cyclops Blink may have hit roughly 1% of all active WatchGuard firewall appliances . U.S. and UK cybersecurity and law enforcement agencies linked the malware to GRU hackers .
 The UK NCSC, FBI, CISA, and NSA joint advisory says organizations should assume all accounts on infected devices as being compromised . The advisory says all accounts should be taken into account .
 Admins should also remove Internet access to the management interface . Admits should also immediately remove internet access to management interface.
Botnet disrupted, malware removed from C2 servers on Wednesday . U.S. government officials announced the disruption of the Cyclops Blink botnet .
 The FBI also removed the malware from Watchguard devices identified as being used as command and control servers . The malware was notifying owners of compromised devices in the U.S. and abroad .
 WatchGuard has shared instructions on restoring infected Firebox appliances to a clean state and updating them to the latest Fireware OS version to prevent future infections .
 Didier Reynders is a senior Belgian statesman who has served as European Justice Commissioner since 2019 . He has been in charge of the EU since 2019, according to documents .
 At least four other commission staffers were also targeted, according to a document and another person familiar with the matter .
 The two EU officials confirmed that staffers at the commission had been targeted but did not provide details . The two European officials confirmed the incident .
 The commission became aware of the targeting following messages issued by Apple to thousands of iPhone owners in November . The two EU officials said the messages were "targeted by state-sponsored attackers"
 Apple sent a mass alert to users that they were in government hackers’ crosshairs . It was the first time Apple had sent an alert to its users .
 The warnings triggered immediate concern at the commission, the two officials said .
 A senior tech staffer sent a message to colleagues with background about Israeli hacking tools and a request to be on the lookout for additional warnings from Apple .
 Reuters was unable to determine who used the Israeli spyware to target Reynders and his Brussels-based colleagues .
 Reynders and his spokesman David Marechal did not return repeated messages . Reynder's spokesman did not respond to repeated messages.
 A smaller Israeli spyware vendor named QuaDream also sold a nearly identical tool to government clients .
 The company faces a number of overlapping lawsuits and was recently blacklisted by U.S. officials over alleged human rights abuses . The company said it supported an investigation into the targeting of spyware industry .
 QuaDream, which keeps a lower profile, did not return repeated messages . Qua Dream, which kept a low profile, does not return messages .
 IT experts examined at least some of the officials' smartphones for signs of compromise, EU sources say . The results were inconclusive, according to the two EU sources .
 Reuters has not been able to determine whether the commission is still investigating the matter . The commission is yet to decide whether the matter is still under investigation .
 The European Parliament is set to launch a committee of inquiry to investigate the use of surveillance software in member states on April 19 . EU lawmaker Sophie in 't Veld' championed the committee's creation .
 The committee was formed in the wake of reports that senior opposition politicians in Poland had their phones hacked with Israeli spyware . prominent critics and journalists in Hungary had also been targeted .
 Polish officials and a Hungarian lawmaker have acknowledged that their respective governments purchased NSO software . Both nations have denied wrongdoing in relation to allegations of domestic espionage .
 It was important not to jump to conclusions about who might be responsible, says Kenneth Lasoen, a research fellow at Clingendael Netherlands Institute of International Relations .
 The EU “are a very high profile target for multiple actors,” Lasoen said . The EU is a ‘very high profile’ target for actors, he said .
 The group is known for grabbing and leaking source code at every opportunity . Samsung, Qualcomm, and Nvidia are also known for leaking source codes .
 The hackers also dropped a trove of data containing portions of the source code for Microsoft's Bing, Bing Maps, and its Cortana virtual assistant .
 Businesses, governments, and other institutions have been plagued by ransomware attacks, business email compromise, and an array of other breaches .
 Source code leaks may seem catastrophic, but they typically aren't the worst-case scenario of a criminal data breach . Researchers say, though, that while source code leaks might be catastrophic, they aren't good .
 A company's intellectual property could be exposed in the process, and attackers may be able to spot vulnerabilities in their systems more quickly . In other words, when attackers gain access to source code, and especially when they leak it for all to see.
 Attackers can't take over Cortana from Microsoft or access users' accounts simply because they have some of the source code for the platform .
Open source software can be publicly available without making software underpins less secure .
 Google's Huntley points out that the same broad and diverse vetting needed to secure open source software is also vital for critical proprietary source code .
Major vulnerabilities in open source software have often lurked undiscovered for years or even decades . The recent Log4j flaws are similar to inconspicuous typos that aren't caught by an author, editor or copyeditor .
 Source code leaks can be problematic, especially for organizations that haven't done enough auditing and vetting to be sure they've caught bugs . Still, there's no doubt that source code leaks are problematic .
Attackers have a clear interest in making source code leaks sound as damaging as possible, says Brett Callow . Callow: Attackers are also interested in making the leaks sound damaging .
 Some data breach victims have specific concerns about source code leaks, Callow says . In practice, some victims are not concerned about the source code leak .
The bigger concern about source code leaks often isn't about the source code itself . The bigger concern is about the Source Code itself .
 If an attacker has compromised something as highly guarded as source code, it could mean that they've grabbed other crown jewels . Code-signing certificates are meant to verify that a piece of software hasn't been altered by a malicious actor .
 If stolen, these have more urgent and immediate ramifications for the security of a company, its products, and its customers . The theft of these products has more urgent, immediate ramifications, says the author .
An attacker can change a product's source code through a software update or other manipulation . The type of breach can have dire consequences if an attacker can access or steal a copy .
 Aurangzeb Ayub quietly arrived in the United States last month, according to court records reviewed by Motherboard .
 Ayub is the first of 17 alleged Anom workers to be extradited . Motherboard reported on the operation, known as Trojan Shield, in June . The FBI and its law enforcement partners held press conferences on its success .
 Ayub's extradition is some judicial movement regarding those who allegedly sold phones for Anom . The U.S. Department of Justice has also charged some users of the devices .
 He first appeared in the Southern District of California on March 21, document adds .
 The Department of Justice and Ayub’s defense team have already discussed the production of discovery, court records show . All of Ayub's communications on the Anom platform, according to court records .
 Court records add that material contains around 3,500 communications and about 14GB of data . That material contains about 3, 500 communications and around 14GB.
 The government was expected to turn over these messages to Ayub’s defense team by Friday .
 The Department of Justice anticipates that it will turn over more material in May . The material will contain recorded conversations between an FBI confidential human source and Ayub, a technical report .
 Operation Trojan Shield started in 2018 when a former seller of phones from other companies called Phantom Secure and Sky became a CHS . It offered the FBI their own company they were developing to aid in the FBI’s investigations .
 Typically, companies in this industry sell phones that may have GPS, voice call, and other capabilities removed . Instead, they send end-to-end encrypted messages .
 Some deliberately cater to the criminal underground . Some are even run by organized crime figures themselves .
 CHS secretly added a feature to Anom’s devices that made a copy of every message sent across the platform and automatically provided that copy to law enforcement agencies .
 As Motherboard previously reported, the phones also secretly captured their GPS coordinates and provided these to law enforcement .
 Anom, like other encrypted phone companies before it, used a network of distributors to sell these devices to criminal end users . Anom used to sell the devices to criminals, like others before it .
 The sellers were really in effect working for the FBI, and helped to spread a backdoored device to criminal organizations around the planet .
Ayub is allegedly one of these distributors, with the indictment against him . Ayub is a citizen of the United Kingdom and the Netherlands who currently resides in the Netherlands .
 Ayub is charged under RICO, a law traditionally used to prosecute mob bosses . Ayub has been charged under the law known as RICO .
 Department of Justice has leveled similar charges against the administrators and sellers for such companies . Since 2018, the FBI started shutting down encrypted phone companies initially with Phantom Secure .
 Photos and videos showed bodies in the streets and anguished survivors describing loved ones, civilians, killed by Russian soldiers .
 Denys Rabomizo carefully built an archive of the gruesome evidence in Chernivtsi .
 The International Criminal Court in the Netherlands said in February it would begin investigating alleged war crimes and crimes against humanity in Ukraine . Such evidence could, in the months and years ahead, be submitted to the court in Netherlands .
 Cases over actions in Ukraine might also be brought at the European Court of Human Rights or in countries like Germany that prosecute crimes beyond their borders .
 War crime cases are usually built with witness testimony, documents, and forensic evidence . But all are hard to collect after the chaos of war .
 Open source investigation methods that combine clues across social posts and other sources could fill crucial gaps, says Whiting .
 The material posted by persons unknown has been seen as unreliable and at risk of manipulation . But they have rarely featured in such cases to date .
Open source investigators at Bellingcat believe they can change that with new, more rigorous protocols and technology for archiving posts .
 She's been helping Rabomizo and others document potential war crimes through an alliance of Ukrainian human rights organizations . The 5AM Coalition is named for the moment on February 24 that the first explosions rocked Kyiv.
Open source evidence has not been well tested as evidence of war crimes . But there are signs that the idea is becoming more mainstream .
 In December, the U.N. Human Rights Office and lawyers at UC Berkeley released legal guidelines . They called the Berkeley Protocol for gathering, verifying, and using open source and social media evidence .
 Berkeley's Human Rights Center has been advising her and others in Ukraine . Volkova has been following the protocol, and Berkeley’s Human rights Center is advising her .
Online evidence so that it can meet the standards of a criminal court requires painstaking work . Collecting online evidence for a criminal case is difficult .
 The nonprofit Mnemonic has created software that downloads social posts from different platforms and generates a cryptographic hash to show the material has not been altered .
 It saves the posts into a digital archive that will be made available to investigators . The archive will be used to help investigators find out more about the posts .
Mnemonic operates similar collections for conflicts in Yemen, Syria, and Sudan . Mnemonic operates in Yemen and Syria, as well as Sudan .
 Germany and Sweden have filed criminal complaints against Syria’s use of chemical weapons . The material has contributed to criminal complaints filed against Syria .
 Ukraine has become a testing ground for the use of online posts as evidence of military crimes . This is not the first time Ukraine has used online posts to prove its military crimes.
 Bellingcat has pioneered and popularized the public use of open source intelligence, or OSINT . It won prominence through its investigation into Malaysia Airlines flight 17, which was downed over Ukraine in 2014 .
 In 2015 Bellingcat concluded that a Russian army missile had shot down the aircraft . In part by analyzing photos posted online that showed a missile launcher moving through a part of eastern Ukraine controlled by separatists .
Dutch investigation led by the Netherlands later independently came to the same conclusion . An investigation later independently found the same conclusions .
 Bellingcat investigators got talking with lawyers at the nonprofit Global Legal Action Network about gaps in evidence of civilian deaths from airstrikes by a Saudi-led coalition .
 The two organizations have since used open source video to contribute to a case being built under UK law against arms suppliers whose products were used in the attacks .
 GLAN and Bellingcat are jointly developing a more rigorous methodology for collecting online videos and other material used in investigations . GLAN are also jointly developing more rigorous methods for collecting videos and videos .
 Protocol is still a work in progress, but it will be used on material from Ukraine judged to show potential crimes . The protocol is still in progress .
 Software called Hunchly, primarily marketed to law enforcement, also records an investigator’s every action .
 It captures each page a person views, time-stamps it, and stores a cryptographic hash . It captures a person's view, time and location of the page .
 Last year, Waters and Bellingcat founder Eliot Higgins took part in a mock trial jointly organized with GLAN . The group sparred over the reliability of material gathered by the group before a British judge .
 Bellingcat is feeding links of posts from Ukraine that merit further investigation to Mnemonic for archiving . BellingCat is also feeding links from Ukraine to the internet .
 The nonprofit has pulled in several hundred thousand items since it began operating in March . That has helped the nonprofit to pull in hundreds of thousands of items .
Social platforms often pull down posts of interest to investigators for breaching policies on depictions of violence . Social media is often used to share information about the Ukraine war .
 Valuable evidence that isn’t collected in time by Mnemonic or others using rigorous methods can be effectively lost forever, says al Khatib .
 TikTok did not return a request for comment . Meta spokesperson Drew Pusateri declined to comment .
 Even without help from social platforms, investigators will have a potentially overwhelming supply of material .
 ICC’s prosecutor last month asked for new funding for technology to help his office handle video and digital evidence .
 Despite new archiving protocols, the sifting required could become a sticking point in court . The new protocols could be used in court.
 romance scams have become the most common type of fraud recorded by the Federal Trade Commission . Victims have lost $1. billion in the last five years, according to the study .
 SocialCatfish.com released a study on the Most Catfished States in 2021 on Thursday . FBI and FTC data released in March and February 2022 .
 The study shows the average victim in Washington lost $48,644 last year .
 The study said that among romance scammers’ new tactics are money laundering and cryptocurrency investments .
 Victims are tricked into money laundering when the scammer says they need to wire money overseas to a family member in trouble . There is an issue with their bank.
 Though teens may be tech-savvy, young people are not always savvy in love, they aren't always savvy .
 Social Catfish says teens lost a record $101 million to romance scams in 2021 .
 Scammers impersonate a successful influencer and engage in romance scams . Scamers impersonate successful influencers and engaged in romance scam scams .
 Instead of asking for money, they ask for gift cards, which cannot be traced . It’s a standard romance scam but instead of money, which could be traced to a bank account .
 SocialCatfish.com.com is the latest in a growing number of scams . For more information on these scams and how to avoid them, visit the site .
 The West African nation last week began implementing a new court practice that bans the media and the public from trials involving terrorism charges at the start of the trial of a pro-Biafra separatist leader .
 Nnamdi Kanu holds dual Nigerian and British citizenship . He leads the Indigenous People of Biafra campaigning for secession from Nigeria of the Igbo .
 Kanu's trial in the capital, Abuja, resumed behind closed doors a day after the nation's Federal High Court announced that court proceedings for offences of terrorism ""shall be held in camera,” prompting concern among many human rights advocates .
 Kanu accused of leading terrorism-related activities and instigating violence in Nigeria's southeast . He is accused of jailbreak in Imo state last year that led to the escape of nearly 2,000 inmates .
 Eight other charges were dropped by the court when the trial resumed last week .
 The concerns are not just about Kanu's trial, say activists as Nigeria has dozens of terrorism suspects in detention .
 Court hearings and judgements must be public, says Amnesty Nigeria's Seun Bakare .
 Third issue of Voice of Khurasan magazine released online . A war can be fought militarily targeting physical self or it can be fighting ideologically targeting intellect .
 They funded thousands of people in the name of research for this along and bought people who wear cloaks of Muslim,’ the article continued .
Jihad is not limited to fighting physically, and fighting with tongues is as important as fighting physically. Jihad is not only physical, but it is also a form of fighting, ISIS-K says .
 Voice of Khurasan has so far been on a monthly schedule . The 37-page inaugural issue was released in February . The current April issue is coming in at 20 pages long .
 In the first issue, the group declared that theirs is the “most important province of ISIS after Iraq and Syria’s. In the second issue, they also declared that they are the ‘most important provincial’ of ISIS .
 The second issue dedicated ample space to criticizing the Taliban and the Taliban . The third issue focused on the "sheer stupidity" of al-Qaeda leadership .
 Omer Kuzu, 26, was born in 1988 in Sudan and grew up in London . He was a member of a group of apparently British guards who oversaw foreigners taken hostage in Syria and were responsible for killing four Americans .
 Mr Elsheikh faces charges of hostage-taking resulting in death and other counts stemming from torture and killings of aid worker Kayla Mueller, journalist James Foley and others in Syria in 2014 and early 2015 .
 Prosecutors said he was among a group of British guards known to the foreign prisoners as the “Beatles,” feared for their wanton cruelty . They included vicious beatings that often left hostages with broken ribs .
 The government is relying on the emotional testimony of several released hostages who interacted with the guards but never looked at them directly . The government says they are relying on their emotional testimony .
 Mr Kuzu said Mr Elsheikh never talked to him about kidnapping or executing them . He said he did not discuss kidnapping or execution with him .
 defense attorney suggested Mr Kuzu had limited knowledge of Mr Elsheikh . He was testifying so prosecutors would seek a lower sentence in his own terrorism case .
 Ms. Kotey pleaded guilty last year to working with Mr Elsheikh and others to take Ms.Kotey's job .
 Mueller hostage, along with Mr Foley, journalist Steven Sotloff and aid worker Peter Kassig, were all beheaded in gruesome propaganda videos .
 Prosecutors aren't expected to seek testimony from Kotey, who is expected to be sentenced in the coming months . Prosecutors aren’t expected to ask for testimony .
 Mr Elsheikh and Kotey were captured by Kurdish fighters in Syria in 2018 . They were in United States military custody in Iraq until 2020, when they were brought to the United States to face the charges .
 The Justice Department agreed not to pursue the death penalty against them . They were charged with hostage-taking resulting in death, conspiring to murder Americans outside the U.S. and providing material support to terrorists .
 Mr Elsheikh’s two-week trial has been dominated by stirring testimony from former hostages .
 French journalist Didier Francois described how he and photojournalist Edouard Elias had been kidnapped after entering Syria in 2013 . They were held at an Islamic State facility where other prisoners were being tortured .
 Mr Francois, who was transferred to a number of prisons before his release in April 2014, said he became familiar with the Beatles and the fear and pain they would inflict .
 The Beatles guards were instrumental in crafting proof-of-life videos of hostages for use in ransom negotiations . Mr Francois said the Beatles guards made the videos for ransom negotiations.
 Mr Elias testified on Friday that he heard people being beaten in a corridor of the prison where he was first taken hostage and knives were being used .
 He said he heard people being slaughtered, and described the sound that came after a beheading . He said the sound came after the beheading.
Three English-speaking guards came to be known among the prisoners as the "Beatles" Mr Elias said he was later placed with other American and British hostages who spoke of being terrorized .
 Mr Elias first encountered those guards, who usually wore flip flops and carried sticks . He said he was surprised at how different they were from local guards .
 English-speaking guards had professional military gear, boots, and Glock pistols . They worked together as a team, he said .
 One of Mr Elias' captors came to him and asked him about the conditions of his captivity .
After guards left, one of Mr Elias’s fellow prisoners, Federico Motka, was so shaken by past memories of them that he was unable to speak for 10 minutes .
 Ali Harbi Ali, 26, stabbed Amess to death on 15 October 2021, fuelled by Islamic State propaganda . He spent at least two years researching which MP to murder . He stabbed the MP to death in October 2021 .
 Ali was radicalised in 2014 at the same time as he was going through the Prevent anti-radicalisation scheme . Ali was being radicalised at the time of the scheme .
 The Guardian understands that in 2015, while Ali was becoming an adherent of terrorist violence, Prevent concluded he did not pose a significant danger and his case was closed .
 Amess died barely an hour after the attack at a church in Leigh-on-Sea, Essex . He had been holding an advice surgery for those from his Southend West constituency .
 In 2016, an extreme rightwing attacker assassinated the Labour MP Jo Cox . He was the second MP in just over five years to be murdered by a terrorist .
 David's name will be remembered, especially by the people of Southend whom he served . David’s name will also be remembered .
 Ali, who had once dreamed of being a doctor, was arrested at the scene . He posed as a constituent to gain an appointment .
 He told police after his arrest that he supported IS and that he had picked Amess . Amess's constituency surgery details, including location and time, were advertised online .
 Amess, 69, was stabbed 21 times and died in the church before paramedics could get him to hospital . Amess was stabbed in church 21 times before paramedics were able to reach him .
 Ali was convicted of the murder of Amess and planning other attacks against MPs . He was convicted after 18 minutes of deliberation at the Old Bailey .
 Ali, from Kentish Town, north London, booked an appointment at the constituency surgery with the sole aim of killing Amess . Ali took a train to Essex and booked the appointment .
 Ali stood up and pulled a knife from his pocket and began a frenzied knife attack . Ali received a call from Amess, who said sorry, said sorry .
 Ali sent a note from his phone apparently justifying his actions to his WhatsApp contacts and stayed in the church . Amess was killed by a car accident on Sunday .
 He did not try to attack anyone else, despite ample time and opportunity . He didn't try to attacks anyone else .
 Ali told police he had wanted officers to shoot him and had rushed towards them . After his arrest Ali said he had rushed to police after his arrest . He said he wanted to shoot police, but was not arrested .
Once he realised that the first officers on the scene were unarmed, he dropped his knife . Heeded their command to drop his knife after he realised they were unarmed .
 He had planned an attack for two years, since May 2019, supposedly angered by western actions in Syria . He was apparently angered by Western actions.
 He had carried out reconnaissance on other MPs, even scouting the home of Michael Gove .
 He loitered around the Houses of Parliament on several occasions, looking for a chance to strike . He loited around the houses of Parliament.
 Ali had visited the north London constituency office of Mike Freer MP . He had been spotted peering in through a window .
 Searches of his electronic devices showed research on MPs including Dominic Raab, Sir Keir Starmer and Ben Wallace .
 Amess’s killing caused shock and outrage as well as a review of MPs’ security .
 He was known as a diligent constituency MP with 38 years in parliament . He was also known for his work as an MP for a constituency.
 The issue of whether the level of danger Ali posed was properly assessed may be an issue for the inquest into Amess’s death . Amess's death is expected at a future date .
 Once Ali was referred to Prevent, he was assessed as being of sufficient concern that he was seen by the Channel programme . He was seen as a man at greatest risk of radicalisation .
 Police and security sources have given little detail about his Prevent involvement . It was first revealed by the Guardian .
Each year a small proportion of the thousands referred to Prevent are referred on to the Channel programme for more intensive support . Each year a large proportion of those referred to the programme are referred to.
 A government-commissioned review of Prevent is expected to be published this month or next .
 Ali will be sentenced on Wednesday and the crown may ask the court to impose a whole-life tariff, meaning he will never be released . Ali will not be released.
 The floors, ceilings and support beams of the building are made almost entirely of spruce and pine harvested from nearby woodlands . The building also houses a museum and other facilities .
 The 323,000-square-foot complex is part of an emerging trend as architects, developers and builders turn to so-called mass timber, wood that is glued and pressed in special ways to make it similar in strength to concrete and steel . It is capable of
 Advocates of mass-timber construction maintain that it can be more environmentally friendly than conventional construction .
 The carbon footprint of a building constructed with sustainably harvested mass timber can be half that of a similar building made of concrete and steel . The timber is made from trees that are selectively cut rather than clear-cut .
 The number of mass-timber buildings being built in the U.S. rose 50% between July 2020 and December 2021 . More than 1,300 structures are being built, WoodWorks says .
 Among the projects are an eight-story office building in Charlottesville, Va., a new Google office building scheduled to open in August in Sunnyvale, Calif., and a 25-story residential-retail complex rising in Milwaukee .
 The International Building Code permits wooden buildings of up to 18 stories . Developers say they obtained a variance after submitting data showing it was as safe as a conventional building .
 A Japanese timber company has proposed a 70-story wood building for Tokyo . A U.K.-based architectural firm has plans for an 80-story skyscraper in London .
 18 manufacturing plants have been built in the U.S. and Canada since 2014, according to the United States Forest Service .
 The global market for mass timber was estimated at $956 million in 2020 . It is expected to grow at an annual rate of 13.6% from 2021 to 2028, report says .
Construction experts say mass-timber buildings can cost less than concrete-and-steel structures . They say they can also have potential environmental benefits .
 With mass timber, builders don’t have to pour concrete and wait for it to set . With mass Timber, for example, builders have to wait for the timber to be built .
 wood panels and beams were made at a nearby plant . Mr Schmitz and the team behind the Sara Cultural Centre say they saved a year in construction .
 Using mass timber cut the timeline for the Milwaukee complex by about four months, says Tim Gokhman, managing director of the Milwaukee-based New Land Enterprises .
 Only 10 workers were needed to install the crosslaminated timber, or CLT, panels for each floor .
CLT is made by laying down and gluing together multiple wooden pieces oriented at 90-degree angles to one another . CLT is commonly used for floors and walls .
 Another key type of mass timber, called glulam for glue-laminated timber, is commonly used for support beams .
 Some point to limitations of mass timber, saying that buildings made with both conventional and masstimber construction can have advantages over those made solely of wood or solely of steel .
 Some fear the mass-timber trend could spur timber companies to cut down old-growth forests that contain large amounts of carbon . Some fear it could spur the trend of selectively harvesting younger forests .
 The carbon footprints of mass timber buildings must include roots, branches and other parts of trees that are often burned as well as fossil fuels consumed to cut down the trees, fabricate the wood products and transport them to construction sites .
 10-story tall wooden building scheduled to take place in California this fall . Seismic testing could give a boost to the mass-timber trend .
Fire safety engineer David Barber: To minimize risk of fire, builders and architects are incorporating precautions into mass timber buildings . Barber, a Washington, D.C.-based fire safety engineer with the multinational design, engineering and architectural firm Arup .
 He points to covering CLT wall and floor panels in taller mass timber buildings with fire-rated drywall rather than leaving them exposed, for example .
 Tests of a two-story mass timber apartment conducted in 2017 at a Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms facility in Beltsville, Md., showed that it took longer to catch fire and retained its structural integrity longer than a similar wood-frame structure . Chile has announced an unprecedented plan
 The plan features a four-tier alert system that goes from green to red and starts with public service announcements . The plan ends with rotating water cuts of up to 24 hours for about 1. million customers .
 The alert system is based on the capacity of the Maipo and Mapocho rivers, which supply most of the capital with most of its water . The drought has seen dwindling water levels as the drought drags on .
 The government estimates that the country’s water availability has dropped 10% to 37% over the last 30 years . The country could drop another 50% in northern and central Chile by 2060 .
 The water deficit in the rivers, measured in liters per second, will determine if cuts will take place every 12, six or four days .
 Areas fed by well water or other sources besides the two rivers will be exempt from the cuts .
 A user on Twitter wrote “it’s expensive to be poor,” alongside a meme that compared financial losses incurred by Americans in 2011 from both overdraft fees and burglary .
 The cost of burglary totaled $4. billion, while overdraft fees accounted for $30. billion in losses, a difference of more than six-fold .
 overdraft fees cost Americans more than six times as much as burglaries in 2011 . The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation overdrafts cost Americans six times the cost of burglaries . The National Foundation for Credit Counseling e Federal Deposit insurance Corporation is a nonprofit .
 overdraft fees cost Americans more than six times as much as burglaries in 2011, VERIFY confirmed . The difference nearly doubled by 2019, VERify confirmed .
 An economic research group called Moebs Services studies overdraft fees, and FBI crime data . The group is based on research by the FBI .
 Moebs Services says Americans paid $30. billion in overdraft fees in 2011 . The meme's first statistic is the first statistic, which cites Moebs services .
 Banks and credit unions took in $30. billion in overdraft revenue during the fiscal year ending in June 2011 . That report did indeed find banks and credit union took in more than $30 billion .
 The tweet claims victims of burglary, or the “unlawful entry of a structure to commit a felony or theft,’ as defined by the FBI, lost $4. billion in 2011 .
 The bureau's data from 2011 reports the same amount was lost in burglaries that year . That's true, according to the Bureau's data .
 Burglaries differ from robberies and larcenies, which do not involve illegal entry into a home or building . Burglary is not illegal entry to a house or building, but it is illegal to enter a building .
 The FBI estimates Americans lost an additional $6. billion to robberies and "larceny-theft" crimes in 2011 .
 Banks’ revenue from overdraft fees has largely remained consistent . The FBI has reported declines in burglary losses since 2011 .
 Moebs Services reported overdraft fees totaled $31. billion in 2020 and $32 billion in 2021 . Moebs services reported over $31 billion in overdrafts in 2020, $32billion in 2021.
 Overdraft protection is not automatically the default for all bank accounts . Overdraft Protection is not automatic for all accounts .
 Customers legally must opt-in in order for their bank to provide this service . It was originally “created in the spirit of convenience’ when checks were mailed, according to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau .
Financial institutions have become too reliant on overdraft penalties and non-sufficient funds fees . CFPB also says financial institutions are too reliant.
 Since 2015, the agency has taken legal action against multiple financial institutions for deceptive or fraudulent overdraft practices and marketing . The agency has collected data on how these fees affect consumers .
 In 2021, CFPB Director Rohit Chopra announced the organization would pay close attention to banks that rely heavily on overdraft fees . The organization will focus on banks with heavy overdrafts .
 CFPB Director Rohit Chopra says banks now provide hardly any interest on deposits and charge billions in fees .
 On April 6, attorneys general in 15 states plus D.C. urged JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, United States Bank and Wells Fargo to eliminate overdraft fees . They cited the charges’ disproportionate effect on people of color and low-income customers .
 Bank of America announced it would eliminate and reduce some fees related to low account balances in January . In January, the bank said it would cut some fees for account balances .
 Citi announced in February it would cut overdraft fees altogether, following similar moves from Capital One and Ally in 2021 .
 Too many vulnerable customers are still falling prey to these fees, experts say . But many experts say too many customers still fall prey to the fees .
 Critics say charges, typically around $35, often push cash-strapped customers further into debt .
 Some banks will continue to charge for every day the account remains in the negative . Without money to pay off negative balances, charges can snowball .
CFPB data shows less than 9% of bank customers pay 10 or more overdrafts per year . CFPB figures show up close to 80% of all overdraft revenue .
 Frequent overdrafters are also more likely to have a lower credit score . CFPB also concluded that credit card access is limited .
 Avoiding these fees can also be confusing when juggling low balances . It is hitting people hard, especially those who are struggling the most right now, says Bruce McClary .
 It’s not always clear when recently-deposited funds will be available to cover pending charges .
 To avoid uncertainty, McClary recommends reading the fine print to understand the most cost-effective way to avoid fees .
 He suggested setting up automated alerts that will send notifications when an account's balance is low . He also suggested sending notifications when a account's balances are low .
 The National Weather Service says 1. inches of snow fell at Portland International Airport . It's the only measurable amount of snow there since official record-keeping began in 1940 .
 Schools across the region were closed and some areas received up to several inches of the white stuff . Some areas west of Portland received some inches of white stuff.
 More than 55,000 customers were without power in a six-county region of western Oregon at the storm's peak .
 A winter storm warning is in effect on Mount Hood for the next 24 hours . Between 12 and 24 inches of the white stuff is expected to fall on the mountain .
 Seven inches fell in Happy Valley, a suburb southeast of Portland . 7 inches also fell in Camas, Washington to the northeast .
 The India Meteorological Department forecast that the temperature in New Delhi would reach 41. degrees Celsius on Monday . The temperature will be nearly eight degrees above normal .
 The weather agency declares a heat wave when the temperature is at least 4.5 degrees . The weather department declares the heat wave at 4.6 degrees .
 The main summer months — April, May and June — are always excruciatingly hot in most parts of India before monsoon rains bring cooler temperatures . April, June and April are the hottest summer months in India .
 Heat wave has arrived early and grown particularly intense in the past decade, killing hundreds every year . But the heat wave has been particularly intense.
 During heat waves, the country usually also suffers severe water shortages . Tens of millions of people are lacking running water .
 Extreme temperatures have struck large parts of northern and western India in the last week . Rajasthan, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh and New Delhi among the worst hit .
 Higher temperatures also felt in relatively cooler Indian-controlled Kashmir in the Himalayas .
 The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warns that heat waves and humidityrelated heat stress will intensify in South Asia . Scientists who study climate change say Indians can expect more of the same hot temperatures in the coming years .
 Heat waves are especially dangerous for daily wage workers, rickshaw drivers, street vendors and homeless . Many have to work outside in hot conditions and are at the greatest risk of heat exhaustion and heatstroke .
 India's worst heat wave since 1992 was in 2015, when at least 2,081 people died . India's hottest heat wave was in 2013, when 2,000 people died in India .
 North Korea’s demolition of South Korean-built facilities at its Diamond Mountain resort comes as ties between the countries remain strained over the North's recent series of high-profile missile tests .
 Seoul’s Unification Ministry said it has confirmed North Korea is demolishing the golf resort in addition to a South Korean-owned hotel there .
 North Korea is dismantling the Haegumgang Hotel, a floating hotel docked at a coastal area in the resort .
 The ministry said it strongly urges North Korea to stop destroying the South Korean facilities .
 The Koreas jointly ran a tour project at the resort for about 10 years during an earlier era of interKorean detente . The two Koreas ran a tours project for about ten years during the earlier era.
 The tours drew an estimated 2 million South Korean visitors . They served as a rare source of foreign currency for the impoverished North .
 South Korea suspended the project in 2008 after one of its tourists was fatally shot by a North Korean soldier there . But the project was suspended after the incident in 2008 .
 Koreas pushed to resume stalled cooperation projects including mountain tours . After their relations improved in 2018, the two Koreas resumed cooperation projects .
 Seoul failed to do so without defying U.S.-led sanctions that kept the tours from restarting . But Seoul eventually failed to comply with the sanctions . The South Korean government failed to stop the tours.
 North Korean leader Kim Jong Un ordered officials to tear down South Korean-owned assets in 2019 . The demolition was delayed due to worries about the spread of the coronavirus .
 North Korea has sought sanctions relief and other concessions from the U.S. and South Korea to revive its moribund economy . North Korea is seeking sanctions relief from the United States and South Korean .
 Some experts say recent weapons testing was meant to perfect its missile technology and boost its leverage in future negotiations with its rivals . Others say it was intended to boost leverage in negotiations with rivals .
 South Korea owns other facilities in the resort such as spas, a culture center, accommodations, a duty-free shop, karaoke rooms and a building used for reunions of Korean families separated by war .
 The North’s state media reported Tuesday that a fire in the Diamond Mountain area over the weekend destroyed unspecified facilities and hundreds of hectares of forests . The state media said the fire was caused by a fire.
 It wasn’t immediately known if the fire was related to the demolition of the South Korean facilities at the resort .
 The South Korean Unification Ministry said it was trying to find out if the fire caused any damage to its facilities in the resort . The South Korea Unification ministry said it is investigating the fire .
 The sanctions target former high-ranking government officials and a media mogul in Albania, Bosnia and Bosnia and Herzegovina . The sole entity is based in Hungary .
 Svetozar Marovic was the last president of the Serbia and Montenegro common state, which dissolved in 2006 . He was among those targeted by the former president .
 In 2016, he signed two plea deals admitting to corruption charges . He was sentenced to three years and nine months in prison and ordered to pay a fine of $1 million . He fled to neighboring Serbia where he is reported to be living .
 Nikola Gruevski was the prime minister of North Macedonia from 2006 to 2016 . He was also named for sanctions on accusations of abuse of office, money laundering and other offenses .
 Gruevski was convicted by a North Macedonia court on correction-related charges . He has evaded capture in Hungary where he owns and directs I-C.I.C.C KFT, a limited liability company .
 Gruevski took to social media to refute the charges against him . He took to Twitter to deny the charges .
 The Treasury also sanctioned Aqif Rakipi, a former Albania Parliament member; Y1li Ndroqi, a media mogul whose assets were seized in 2020 and 2021 .
 Sasho Mijalkov, the former chief of counterintelligence, was blacklisted in North Macedonia . He was accused of engaging in a vote scheme and illegal wiretapping of 20,000 people .
 The sanctions freeze all their assets in the United States and bar U.S. persons from doing business with them . The sanctions were imposed under an executive order President Joe Biden signed in June .
 It is the second time sanctions under that executive order have been used . It is second time that sanctions under the executive order are used .
 At the State Department, Gruevski, Mijalkov and Tadic were designated for United States entry bans as well as members of their family members .
 A dozen Colombian law enforcement officials say machine guns, assault rifles and semi-automatic handguns are flowing into the South American country .
 Among the weapons popping up in traffickers’ arsenals is the Belgium-made FN Five-seveN pistol .
 The 5.7-caliber weapon can penetrate bullet-proof vests . Nicknamed the "cop killer," it can penetrate bullets . The weapon can also be used in a variety of other weapons .
 Most of the 1,478 long arms confiscated from Colombian armed groups in 2020 and 2021 were foreignmade and imported clandestinely . Police say the same smuggling routes used to get drugs out of Colombia .
 Mexican drug gangs have easy access to guns purchased in the U.S. and long-term business relationships with Colombian armed groups, authorities say . Colombian authorities say they have purchased cocaine for decades .
 cartel emissaries are increasingly paying for shipments of cocaine with guns, authorities say . Authorities say they are trying to avoid the need to move large quantities of cash across borders .
 The potent firepower of the cartel-supplied arsenal has potential implications for Colombia's security . Colombia has been hit by a spate of violence in recent years .
 Heavy arms in the hands of criminals put law enforcement at risk, could further complicate the 2016 peace deal between Bogota and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia rebels .
 The agency authorized the person to speak to Reuters on the condition they not be identified . The person has not been identified .
 The Colombian police say they have a permanent dialogue with their U.S. and Mexican counterparts on keeping weapons out of drug traffickers' hands . They say they are working with the United States and Mexico to keep weapons from drug traffickers.
 The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration declined to comment . The Mexican government did not respond to Reuters questions .
 Colombian authorities say the battle for control of their country's drug trade is waged between former FARC members who reject the peace accord .
 FARC dissidents and the ELN espouse some of the same Marxist ideals . They now regularly fight each other and rival crime gangs to dominate lucrative drug routes, security officials say .
 Law enforcement encounters with these groups are turning up powerful weapons . The weapons are being turned up by law enforcement officers .
 In mid-December last year, Colombia's army conducted an operation against FARC dissidents in southwestern Narino province, a major coca-producing region .
 The military says it captured 16 people and seized a cache of weapons . The military said it captured 24 U.S.-made M16 assault rifles and AR-15 semiautomatic rifles .
 Authorities said they believe such guns are supplied by Mexico's Sinaloa, Zeta and Jalisco New Generation cartels . All of which have emissaries on Colombian soil .
 Their representatives are present in 11 of Colombia's 32 provinces, according to a 2021 police intelligence report seen by Reuters . Their representatives will be present in Colombia's 11 provinces, the report says .
 The Sinaloa cartel, once headed by jailed kingpin Joaquin "El Chapo" Guzman, has the most extensive geographic reach and deepest relationships with armed groups, the report says .
 Some 55 Mexicans have been accused or convicted of drug trafficking offenses in Colombia in the last three years, prison agency says . Some 55 Mexican have been charged or convicted in Colombia.
 Colombia's national police said last week they had captured Brian Donaciano Olguin, a Mexican national . They allege he served as the Sinaloa cartel's most important go-between with FARC dissidents .
 Reuters was unable to contact Olguin or determine if he has legal counsel . It is not clear if he had legal counsel.
 Mexico's warring drug gangs have been bulking up on military-grade armaments at home . Officials in their own country have been alarmed by the increase in armaments .
 Last year, Mexican President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador's government sued gunmakers . They accused them of facilitating weapons trafficking, which the gunmakers deny .
 U.S. gunmakers support stronger enforcement of existing laws, a trade group says .
 Paying coke suppliers with weapons, rather than bulky cash, helps Mexican cartels launder profits and move money around .
 Colombian guerrillas and right-wing paramilitaries used Russian-made AK-47s left over from wars in Central America .
 As drug trafficking expanded, armed groups upgraded to newer AK-47s, U.S.made M16s, AR-15s and Tavor assault rifles, police officials said .
 machine guns can fetch up to $5,000 in Colombia, experts say . Some guns go for as little at $500 in Colombia .
 The Segunda Marquetalia, a group of FARC dissidents, have appeared in YouTube videos armed with Tavor assault rifles, police say . The group's leaders are likely supplied by Mexican cartels, the police say.
 The United States DEA estimates Colombian criminal groups earn some $10 billion from drug transactions per year . The U.S. DEA estimates Colombia's criminal groups make $10billion a year from transactions .
 The flow of weapons southward comes as Colombian provinces like Norte de Santander and Narino and Cauca have seen increases in coca production . U.S.-backed efforts by President Ivan Duque to slash narcotics production have not been successful .
 The Clan del Golfo alone moves some 20 tonnes of cocaine per month for clients including the Sinaloa and Jalisco cartels . Police say the Clan's gangster allies in Medellin have used the FN Five-seveN pistol in internal disputes .
 It is possible some cartel-supplied guns enter Colombia through Venezuela, officials from the Colombian police and army say .
 Dissident leaders like Ivan Marquez, who heads Segunda Marquetalia, meet with Sinaloa and Jalisco emissaries, General Jorge Luis Vargas .
 Bogota has long accused Venezuela's government of providing refuge for Colombian armed groups . Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro has denied the allegations .
 A month has passed since the Seattle Police Department moved its mobile precinct to the intersection of Third Ave. and Pine St. in downtown Seattle . The open-air market had been the scene of two murders .
 SPD has maintained a presence at the intersection since then as part of a push to crack down on crime downtown called Operation New Day . SPD has made arrests for shoplifting and other misdemeanor crimes .
 Unlike a similar crackdown in the Little Saigon neighborhood in February, there have been few felony arrests in the area .
Social services that Seattle Mayor Bruce Harrell said would follow the sweep at Third and Pine are still on hold . The social services that Harrell says would follow that sweep are on hold, he said .
 Senior Deputy Mayor Monisha Harrell says that the relative scarcity of felony arrests doesn’t tell the full story .
 The sweep of Third and Pine was a direct response to the shootings on February 27 and March 2 . Reno Maiava and Michael Del Bianco were killed in the shootings .
 SPD later arrested suspects in both shootings . Officers tracked Maiava's killer to a Tukwila motel, while Del Bianco's killer turned himself in at SPD's West Precinct .
 SPD is still working with federal partners to make drug arrests in the area . The investigations require patience, says Harrell .
 Judges have already released many of the people arrested at both Third and Pine and 12th and Jackson . One man released by a King County Superior Court judge reappeared along Third, where SPD officers arrested him again for drug possession and carrying a gun illegally .
 Some prosecutors have frustrated some prosecutors . The repeat arrests have frustrated them .
 U.S. Attorney Nick Brown says finding a “high-level’s drug dealer at an intersection like Third and Pine is unlikely .
 Most of the people we identify as significant in those cases are not even in Seattle . Many are in Mexico or California or Mexico .
 The King County Prosecutor’s Office handles the vast majority of felony cases . Brown's office has the discretion to decide which cases rise to the federal level .
 So far, Brown’s office has taken four cases from the crackdowns in Little Saigon and along Third Ave.
 Most of the behavior at Third and Pine doesn't rise to the felony level . In the view of some skeptics of the operation, most of thebehavior doesn’t rise to that level .
 The operation at Third and Pine has re-opened the direct line between police officers and the Public Defender Association-run program LEAD . LEAD is the city's primary diversion option for people who commit crimes related to behavioral health issues or extreme poverty .
 LEAD’s early model relied on referrals from arresting officers . In the past two years, the program shifted focus, relying instead on community groups, business organizations, outreach workers and prosecutors .
 Community referrals don’t create an arrest record, one reason the program began shifting away from arrest diversions to begin with .
 LEAD project director Tara Moss says trend is reversing, but that trend is changing .
 In 2021, LEAD received one arrest diversions; this year, the program has received eight . This year's program received eight arrest diversion .
 LEAD will be able to take on more clients later this year, Moss said . Moss also noted that the program currently has some “capacity issues’ as a result of a new wave of referrals .
 SPD is retraining officers on how to engage with LEAD and introducing officers hired in the past two years to the program for the first time . Since officers haven’t done arrest diversions in years, Harrell said, officers haven't done it in years .
 SPD did not arrest everyone at the open-air market on Third and Pine . Some scattered to nearby corners, to Pioneer Square or to other parts of the city .
Drug user solidarity group DUST says dispersing people can create tension in places where those people land . The service providers there have limited capacity, they say .
 Newcomers can trigger conflicts, V added, that can escalate into violence . V added that newcomers could trigger conflicts and violence .
 SPD's clearance of Third and Pine has not been peaceful since it was cleared . The weeks following the clearance have been peaceful .
 Harrell disputes that the sweeps in the downtown core fueled an increase in violence elsewhere . But Harrell says the sweeps are not the cause of the increase in violent violence .
Seattle's deputy mayor says a pattern of gun violence long predates the crackdowns in downtown Seattle . In Ballard, Ballard, the deputy mayor said, the site of two shootings, one of them fatal, in the past month .
 People have moved from encampments and corners swept by SPD . Many of those detained during those sweeps have left jail with no place to go .
 The city needs to do more to make the strategy sustainable, Brown says . The city's efforts to clear Third and Pine have made the intersection feel safer, he says .
 Operation New Day has improved public safety, but not everyone agrees that it has actually improved safety . The hot spot approach is a hot spot.
 The city hasn’t brought new social services online to support SPD’s operations in greater downtown . So far, the city hasn't brought newSocial services online .
 Another option on the table to sustain SPD’s efforts downtown, Harrell said, could be opening smaller satellite police precincts .
Both downtown core and the International District are on the short list for new locations . If SPD moves forward with the satellite precinct concept, she added, both the downtown cores and International District will be on the list .
 Surveillance videos capture what he believes the burglars walking out of the house . The piece was stolen in July of last year .
 The video shows a suspect taking off with a fossilized mammoth tusk worth $19,000 .
 Prior to the theft, the suspect was "wandering around" the store, police say .
 The suspect grabbed the tusk and ran after walking around the store some more .
 An employee followed the suspect out of the store and sprayed pepper spray in the suspect's direction . She ran toward the getaway vehicle, but the vehicle hit her instead .
 He was wearing a black hooded sweatshirt and black baggy jeans with black and white hand tattoos .
 An FBI spokesperson confirms the bureau is aware of both incidents but would not confirm or deny if there is an open investigation . The FBI has not commented on the matter .
 The action is the result of close collaboration between OFAC, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Ireland’s national police force . The European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation is also involved .
 Kinahan organized crime group The KOCG operates in Ireland and is established in the United Kingdom, Spain, and the United Arab Emirates . It was designated as a significant transnational criminal organization .
 The KOCG emerged in the late 1990s and early 2000s as the most powerful organized crime group operating in Ireland . The group was founded in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Irish courts concluded that the KOCG is a murderous organization involved in the international trafficking of drugs and firearms . Since then, Irish courts have concluded that it's a murderous group involved in drug trafficking .
 Criminal activities of the KOCG, including international money laundering, generate proceeds in the United Kingdom . Proceeds are then pooled together and passed to local criminals before being handed to Irish organized crime group members .
 The KOCG also frequently uses Dubai as a facilitation hub for its illicit activities . The K OCG also often uses Dubai tofacilitate illicit activities.
 Since February 2016, the KOCG has been involved in a gang war with another group in Ireland and Spain . Two innocent bystanders were killed in the war, including two innocent bystanders .
 Christopher Sr. oversees the property portions of the enterprise . Christopher Jr. now manages his drug trafficking operations while Christopher Sr.'s sons, Daniel Kinahan and Christopher Jr., now manage his drug operations .
Christopher Sr. has registered a number of companies under aliases or using abbreviations of his name . For example, Christopher Sr. is known for using an alias or using an abbreviation .
Daniel Kinahan is believed to run the day-to-day operations of the KOCG . Each member of the organization reports to Kinahan .
 Daniel Kinahan, who sources large quantities of cocaine from South America, plays an integral part in organizing the supply of drugs in Ireland . Kinahan is attempting to facilitate the importation of cocaine into the United Kingdom .
 Christopher Jr. regularly contributes to a fund that is used to pay KOCG members .
Christopher Jr. responds to directives from Daniel Kinahan and has collaborated with other members of the KOCG to transport and sell narcotics in the United Kingdom . Christopher Jr. also works with others to sell and transport narcotics in UK .
Christopher Jr. was also caught travelling with a false identity document in Germany . Christopher Jr. also caught with false identity documents .
 Daniel Kinahan Associates Irish national Sean Gerard McGovern was designated for materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or in support of, Kinahan . McGovern is currently based in Dubai .
 Sean McGovern is Daniel Kinahan’s advisor and closest confidant . Evidence indicates that all dealings with Kinahan go through McGovern . McGovern was Kinahan's advisor and close confidant.
 Sean McGovern also has managed communications on behalf of Daniel Kinahan . He sells multi-kilogram quantities of cocaine .
 Irish national Ian Thomas Dixon is currently based in Dubai . He was designated for materially assisting, sponsoring, or providing financial, material, or technological support for, or in support of, Daniel Kinahan .
 Ian Dixon has arranged multiple payments on behalf of Daniel Kinahan . He has also moved bulk currency on the behalf of the Irishman .
 Ian Dixon also oversees a fund on behalf of Daniel Kinahan and keeps track of money owed by narcotics trafficker .
 Bernard Clancy is a key KOCG lieutenant . He is tasked by Daniel Kinahan with providing wages to elements within the KOC G . Clancy is also tasked with providing payments to others .
 John Morrissey has worked for the KOCG for several years, including as an enforcer . He facilitates international drug shipments for the organization from South America .
 Nero Drinks was designated for being owned or controlled by, directly or indirectly, John Morrissey .
 John Morrissey is heavily invested in Nero Drinks . He has given a significant portion of the business to Daniel Kinahan to compensate for loads of drugs seized by law enforcement .
 John Morrissey controls and operates Nero Drinks through his wife, who is used as a frontperson for his interests .
 Hoopoe Sports LLC is a UAE-based sports management and advisory company . The company is based in the UAE .
Hoopoe Sports was designated for being owned or controlled by, directly or indirectly, Ian Dixon . Hoopoe sports was named for being controlled by or directly or indirect by Ian Dixon.
 Ian Dixon is a 49 percent shareholder, and he also receives 80 percent of Hoopoe Sports’ profits . Dixon is also a 49 per cent shareholder .
 Jan Dixon is the sole manager of Hoopoe Sports and has full executive power over the company . He is the only manager of the company.
 Ducashew General Trading LLC is a UAE-based business management consulting company . The company is based in the UAE .
 The Ducashew was designated for being owned or controlled by, directly or indirectly, Daniel Kinahan .
 Daniel Kinahan runs Ducashew through various individuals and is involved in its financial and business management .
 OFAC’s regulations generally prohibit all transactions by U.S. persons or persons within (or transiting) the United States that involve any property or interests in property of designated or otherwise blocked persons .
 Operation Oscar will run for at least a year as an umbrella initiative that will feature many separate investigations, Europol said . Europol explained that the initiative will run at least one year .
 The European Financial and Economic Crime Centre will work to exchange information and intelligence with partners . It will provide operational support in financial crime investigations .
 Russian individuals and entities will be trying to move around the region in order to bypass sanctions imposed since President Putin’s invasion of Ukraine .
 The operation will include Eurojust, the EU agency for criminal justice cooperation . It will provide legal assistance and strengthen cooperation between partners .
 Operation Sentinel will work similarly to Operation Sentinel, another wide-ranging initiative designed to crack down on attempts to defraud the EU’s massive COVID-19 recovery fund . Europol: Operation Sentinel is similar to Operation Operation Sentinel .
 The EU has joined the U.S. and others in imposing wide-ranging economic sanctions on Russian organizations and individuals . The EU joined the United States and other countries in imposing sanctions on Russia .
 Europol investigators will have their work cut out investigating sanctions-evading efforts . Europol will now focus on the issue of economic sanctions .
 Despite occasional successes, the fight against money laundering remains one-sided . The fight against the money laundering is still one- sided .
 UN estimates suggest between 2-5% of global GDP is lost this way each year . Between 2-4% of world GDP lost each year, according to UN estimates .
 Leah Farrington is a receptionist at a law firm receptionist in London . Farrington was a formerly incarcerated person . She is now a former inmate .
 A justice studies major, she had recently made the dean’s list and was applying to grad school .
 The woman handling new employee orientations asked Farrington why she decided to go back to school . Farrington asked the woman why she went back to the school .
 As Farrington spoke about her career goals and harmful legislation, the woman reached out and dragged her offer letter back across the conference table, silently tucking it beneath a folder .
 Most formerly incarcerated people report that it’s nearly impossible to find a job after prison . Employer prejudice is the most significant barrier, according to former inmates .
 The problem is even worse when you count the millions more who have never been convicted, but who face similar stigmas when their arrest record pops up in background checks .
 If you are mistakenly arrested and released without any criminal charges, that arrest alone can jeopardize your job prospects . For example, if you are accidentally arrested and release without any charges, you may be out of work .
 Black and brown Americans can have their job opportunities diminished regardless of whether they’ve ve ever been found guilty of a crime . Black and Brown Americans are disproportionately targeted by police, according to CNN.
 Second chance employers have promoted formerly incarcerated people as a viable solution for the country's labor shortage . In recent years, employers have hired people with criminal records .
 John Koufos, the former executive director of the New Jersey Reentry Corporation, now works on policy reform . He says he has a second chance shortage .
Before serving time in prison for a drunk driving accident, Koufos was a criminal defense lawyer . He was a lawyer for the defense of the defendant .
 The Second Chance Business Coalition says “more inclusive hiring’s” strengthens the local economy and breaks cycles of poverty . The group includes companies such as McDonald's, Home Depot, Microsoft, and Koch Industries .
 The Second Chance Business Coalition says employees with criminal records are more likely to stay in their jobs and work harder than their coworkers . The study was published by the Charles Koch Institute and the Society for Human Resource Management .
 formerly incarcerated people are eager to find work wherever they can . But they're also extremely vulnerable to exploitation .
 From access to housing, education and employment, the added barriers haunt people long after they have served their sentences . The added barriers created by a criminal record haunt people.
 Several employees with criminal records told VICE News they accepted low paying positions out of desperation . They said they felt they could not advance professionally no matter how hard they worked .
After being released from prison, they are far less free than their coworkers . They may not feel financially secure enough to report workplace abuse or join unionizing efforts .
 Leah Farrington was sexually harrassed by a coworker in her first job after prison . She couldn't quit without permission from her parole officer .
 She put up with the harassment, knowing that if she left her job, she risked arrest and returning to prison . "Employment was a condition of her release," she says . "I'm not a parolee," she adds .
 parole officer randomly arrived at the office for a mandatory check, wearing an intimidating gun and uniform that frightened clients . Farrington says it was humiliating that all her coworkers knew she had been to prison .
 Florida state senator Jeff Brandes introduced a bill earlier this year proposing to pay people with criminal histories less than minimum wage .
 Companies like Goodwill already pay employees with disabilities less than minimum wage . Employers are allowed to pay workers who are younger than 20 years old $4.25 per hour .
 A sub-minimum wage for formerly incarcerated workers is not an impossibility, it is not a impossibility, says the author .
 At Unloop, a Seattle-based coding school for people who have survived the carceral system . Unloop provides training for jobs in tech, a lucrative industry with well-paid jobs .
 Many formerly incarcerated people report only being able to get hired by a business owner they know personally .
 Victor Sauceda studied computer programming in prison and graduated from Unloop's bootcamp . He says he was applying to McDonald's, Burger King and Burger King when he first got out .
 Sauceda is currently working on an app to help youth access community resources . He built a program he built for Santa Barbara County .
 Victory Code is a former incarcerated developer . He recently started his own company, Victory Code . He plans to hire other formerly incarcerated developers .
 Sauceda said he would like to see tech companies publicly report data on how many formerly incarcerated people they employ . He said he wants to see companies report how many former inmates are employed .
 There’s so much untapped human potential, he said of his fellow coding bootcamp graduates .
 Farrington acknowledges that she is lucky in many ways — she has a supportive family and a safe home . Farrington admits that she's lucky in a number of ways .
 Others had no other option after prison than living in a South Boston homeless shelter . Every person, including Casey Sullivan, caught COVID-19 .
 Each morning at 5am, Sullivan and the other shelter residents walked three blocks to a staffing agency that hired them as day laborers .
 Many workers in their 50s and 60s did grueling construction projects for $100 a day . Many of the workers were in their 60s and 50s .
 Sullivan worked while living in the shelter during a series of COVID outbreaks . For three years following his release in 2018, Sullivan worked in the Shelter during the COVID outbreak .
 Sullivan was hired as a boat deckhand last year . He learned the job growing up as a kid on Lake Michigan .
On his second day of work on a new boat that paid better, his job offer was retracted . His job offer on the new boat was retracted on the second day .
Non-violent charges are treated the same as someone with a more dangerous history . His non-violent charge is treated same as those with more dangerous histories .
 Sullivan: I wouldn't want to hire some guy who ripped off a joint or something like that . Sullivan: "I wouldn’t want to hired some guy ... that’s what I would like to do"
 Sullivan’s new deckhand job with better pay actually cost him money in the end .
 He is caught in the same trap as many formerly incarcerated people who try to advance their careers . He is a former inmate who tried to advance his career .
 Most formerly incarcerated people agree there are certain jobs they wouldn’t offer to a violent offender . Most former prisoners say there are some jobs they would not offer to violent offenders .
 All advocate for a legal system that doesn't punish people for life even after they've served their prison sentence . But they all advocate for the legal system to be more lenient .
 Ineffective one-size-fits-all job background checks treat premeditated murder the same as a teenage shoplifting charge . Or view violent assault equal to a bounced check .
 The Florida subminimum wage bill did not pass, but there are no legal protections against discrimination or pay disparity . The third of Americans who have criminal records still need to support themselves and their families .
 Farrington is continuing to interview for jobs where she can help people . She is still trying to find a job to help people in the UK .
 She is applying to grad school to become a licensed therapist . She wants to be a counselor for women who have survived trauma, especially after incarceration . She is also applying to graduate school.
 A stranger will make a decision about her petition. Her future and the career she has fought so hard for largely hinges on the decision .
 The assailant was a man in his 40s from the flashpoint city of Hebron, Israeli-occupied West Bank .
 There has been a rising tide of violence among Israelis and Palestinians. There has also been a rise of violence in Israel and Palestinians .
 Four shooting, stabbing and carramming attacks in Israeli cities have left 14 people dead since late March . The attacks have killed 14 people since March .
 Over the same period, Israeli forces have killed 15 Palestinians, including assailants, according to an AFP tally . The AFP tally shows that 15 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli forces .
 Israeli security forces killed a Palestinian woman who stabbed a police officer in the centre of Hebron . About 1,000 Jewish settlers live under heavy military protection among 200,000 Palestinians .
 The army shot and killed an unarmed Palestinian woman who they said failed to heed warning shots near the West Bank town of Bethlehem . On the same day, a Palestinian woman was killed by the army .
 A man from Jenin shot and killed three people in Tel Aviv last week . Israeli forces rounding up suspects in the northern West Bank .
 Jay Allen Johnson, 65, of Delta Junction, Alaska, left a total of 17 voicemails laden with threats for two Alaska Republicans . Senators Lisa Murkowski and Dan Sullivan, both Alaska Republicans, were among the threats .
 The voicemails were placed from April to September 2021 . They were “intended to retaliate’ against the two senators for doing their work, prosecutors said .
 Jason Weiner, a lawyer for Mr Johnson, did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Monday .
 Mr Weiner said Johnson’s health problems after decades spent performing manual labor had contributed to his behavior .
 Senators Murkowski and Sullivan did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Monday .
 He asked her if she’d ever seen what a .50-caliber shell does to a human head . He also asked her whether she'd ever seen a shell .
 Mr Sullivan left 13 voicemails, stating in one that he would get his ‘50 caliber out’ and then hold an online fund-raiser for the shells . He left Mr Sullivan 13 voicemsails, and then held an online Fund-ra
 Mr Johnson was arrested on Oct., 2021 . The calls were traced to him .
 F.B.I. agents also seized seven unsecured firearms illegally owned by Mr Johnson . He has a prior felony conviction in 2016 barring him from possessing guns .
 Mr Johnson pleaded guilty to two counts of threatening to murder a U.S. official in January .
 In addition to his prison time and fine, he has agreed to a three-year federal protective order forbidding him to contact Ms. Ms.
 Murkowski and Mr Sullivan, their families, and staff members after he is released . Mr Sullivan is released from prison .
 Threats of violence against lawmakers surged after former President Donald J Trump was elected .
 A Times review found clear increases of threats around Mr Trump’s first impeachment and then after the Jan. attack on the Capitol last year .
 There were 9,600 threats against members of Congress last year, a record that was double the previous year’s total .
 Callers have left messages detailing various methods to kill lawmakers . They include hanging them, shooting them in the head and hanging them to shoot them .
 Tacoma saw a 43 percent decrease in crime in March compared to the month before . The Tacoma Business Council put on a virtual townhall Monday night .
 The department has worked to have more of a presence on Tacoma's streets for the last few weeks .
 He acknowledged the department would be fully staffed with a force of 362 . He also acknowledged that about 55 officers would be down .
 "I felt I needed to start internally with morale, so I met with every officer here,’ says Moore . ‘I met with each officer here. I felt I need to start internal with morale,' says Moore.
 The Tacoma Business Council was recently formed to bring attention to crime problems impacting businesses . The council was formed to focus on the crime problems affecting businesses .
 Video highlights businesses who have experienced crime and theft and are worried about the safety of staff and customers .
 Tacoma Police is focused on violent crime, which police say has a direct correlation to property crime . Tacoma Police are focused on property crime, police say .
 The department is working to create a crime plan, which will be specific to the needs and trends in Tacoma . Moore said the department is trying to create the plan .
 He plans to give an overview presentation of the plan at Tacoma City Hall next Tuesday . He will give a presentation next Tuesday.
 Police received calls at around 10m. about a man shooting a rifle near 13th Avenue South and South Lane Street . The man is believed to have shot a rifle .
 Officers found a 45-year-old man with stab wounds to his arm and torso . Officers were not able to locate the man .
 Medics took the stabbing victim to Harborview Medical Center in serious condition, police said . The stabbing victim is in a serious condition .
 Witnesses told police the victim and the woman he lives with in the encampment were not getting along with another resident . The man is suspected of stabbing the man .
 The suspect, allegedly a woman in her 20s, fled up the stairs leading to 12th Avenue South . Someone else took a gun from the victim’s tent and fired shots at her, police said .
 Officers tried to search the victim’s tent for firearms, but the woman he lives with refused . She bit one officer in the leg and scratched a second, police say .
 She was booked into King County Jail for third-degree assault, police said . She is accused of assaulting a woman in her car .
 Police served a search warrant and retrieved three rifles and multiple rounds of ammunition from the tent . Maria Jestis was grilling tortillas .
 Martinez sisters prepare lunch in their simple homes as their husbands tended the fields .
 Gunmen in four armor-plated "monster trucks" spotted just across the valley, Javier told his children .
 17 family members are crammed into an abandoned restaurant in Coahuayana, a banana-growing town on the Pacific Coast . An estimated 1,000 Mexicans are uprooted from their communities .
 As criminal groups battle for control over Mexican territory, the displaced are becoming increasingly visible . In towns such as Coahuayana and at the U.S. border, they are increasingly visible.
 An estimated 20,000 people have fled violence in Michoacan state, roughly the size of West Virginia .
 Thousands more have abandoned their homes in other states like Zacatecas and Guerrero .
 Forced displacement is generally associated with armed conflict . It’s been a feature of the Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 Mexico's Senate is considering legislation to offer humanitarian aid to victims . The country’s Senate is also considering a humanitarian aid bill for victims .
 In Michoacan's Tierra Caliente region, one of the country's most violent, homes are peppered with bullet holes . The region is known for violent violence .
 Security officials describe the conflict as a battle between Jalisco and a rival cartel network to control the region . Jalisco is a hub of marijuana and methamphetamine production .
 The accounts of displaced underscore how unconventional this war actually is. But the accounts of the displaced underscore the unconventional war .
 At stake are not just drug routes but timber, minerals and fruit plantations . At stake is not just drugs but timber and minerals and plantations .
 In many cases, armed groups have ties to local governments, business groups and the police .
 Political scientist Romain Le Cour Grandmaison says displacement is a sign of the deepening crisis of violence in Mexico .
 While the country has replaced its long-running authoritarian system with democracy, it has failed to build a justice system that prosecutes crime effectively .
 For years he’d sold ground meat, ribs and fried pork rinds in Chinicuila municipality, a bucolic place .
 For years, marijuana had flourished in Michoacan’s rich soil .
 The grip of Mexico’s one-party system waned in the 1990s . But the illicit business began to change in the 90s .
Farmers in Martinez's village, Tehuantepec, were forced to pay a “tax’ every time they sold a cow or a sack of corn . Conditions got so bad that farmers in Martinez’s village were forced.
 Thousands of Michoacan residents formed citizen militias, kicking out the Knights Templar cartel . Starting in 2013, thousands of Michoan residents formed Citizen militias .
 He leads the Jalisco New Generation cartel, which has trafficked tons of heroin, methamphetamines and fentany into the U.S. He is also a former member of the Mexican drug cartel .
 Instead of cartel-vs.-cartel battles, whole villages are now swept up in the fighting .
 If one group moves into a town, it expels its gun-toting enemies, he says . It frequently does a “social cleansing’ of relatives and other civilian supporters, he said .
 The Martinez family fled Tehuantepec after a warning that the Jalisco cartel was targeting Javier Martinez, head of the “self-defense’s force there .
 The gunmen torched Javier Martinez’s butcher shop and home, and three other houses belonging to relatives .
 The family had sped down the mountain in their pickups and a borrowed van to the coast two hours away . State police arrived by the time state police arrived .
 Héctor Zepeda — ‘Comandante Teto’ — is the law in Coahuayana, and a symbol of how Mexico’s old security arrangements have collapsed .
 Teto became head of the local "self-defense force" after his brother was killed by the Knights Templar . Teto is a Hollywood-handsome, with soft brown eyes and a sly grin .
 The 51-year-old former auto mechanic sits at a rough-hewn wooden desk in front of a wall covered with pictures of fallen comrades .
 The Martinezes now live in a rundown former restaurant with a courtyard webbed with lines of drying laundry . The courtyard is now a former restaurant.
 Comandante Teto has brought security to the town, an oasis of sea breezes and swaying banana trees . Families from other regions have packed into pastel-colored homes .
 The Jalisco cartel gunmen are so close that they can hear their enemies’ voices crackling over the radio . The cartel is so close to the town’s perimeter that the ‘self-defense’ forces patrol the area .
 In a video last year, the Jalisco fighters accused Comandante Teto of working with their rivals, Carteles Unidos .
 Alfredo Ramirez Bedolla pledged to disarm the “self-defense forces in the state’s state . Bedolla said he would disarm the state's self- defense forces .
18,000 recently issued police uniforms and credentials to “self-defense fighters’s” fighters . The town of 18,000 has put dozens onto the public payroll .
The 15 members of the state-recognized municipal police now serve under Comandante Teto . The 15 members are part of the city's police force .
 Former police chief Teto served coffee to two journalists .
 Mayor Gil Ruiz said many townsfolk believed that federal and state security forces were corrupt or didn’t have the savvy or will to fight criminal groups effectively .
 In Michoacan, everyone remembers the tight embrace between the Knights Templar and many politicians and police .
 Coahuayana’s economic elite don’t want to rely on the state security apparatus, either . The economic elite doesn't want to use the security apparatus .
 The banana growers began bankrolling Comandante Teto’s militia years ago . They’ve enjoyed a boom under North America's free trade agreement .
 The mayor said the force was the only alternative to the Knights Templar and their $250-a-day “protection fees’ on fruit shipments . The mayor, a banana producer, says the force is the only alternatives to Knights Templar .
 Longtime residents agree that the “self-defense’s’ forces ended a terrifying period of robbery and murder under the Knights Templar . The Knights Templar was founded in 17th century .
Questions swirl about exactly what role Comandante Teto's force has played in Coahuayana’s unending plague of methamphetamine abuse . But questions swirl about what role Teto has played.
 Coahuayana is a rare haven in Michoacan for people who are fleeing violence . The town is known for its violent history of violence .
 Migrant activists have noted an increasing number of Mexicans arriving at the border . The number of Mexican migrants has increased in recent years .
 Some want jobs or to reunite with family in the U.S. Many are fleeing the harsh rule of criminal gangs .
 Lopez Obrador has won praise from human rights groups for recognizing the problem of internally displaced people .
 The lower chamber of Congress, dominated by his party, unanimously approved a bill in 2020 to register and aid people who are forced to leave home . The bill is expected to be approved by Congress in 2020 .
 It covers not only victims of organized crime violence, but those uprooted by land disputes, religious conflicts and natural disasters . It also covers victims of religious conflicts, land disputes and natural disaster .
 Lépez Obrador bristled when challenged about front-page newspaper photos showing people fleeing Zacatecas state . Still, he bristles when challenged recently about the photos .
For all the administration's promises to help the displaced, it's unclear whether it will do much to reduce expulsions .
 Authorities poured more than 3,000 army and national guard troops into Michoacan to “liberate’s towns controlled by organized crime groups. Starting in January, authorities poured more.
 Mexican government has launched military operations in Michoacan before . But only to see violence resurge after troops withdraw .
 Le Cour Grandmaison said such war-on-drugs policies didn’t address crime groups’ expansion into extortion and protection rackets .
 Police remain poorly trained, and the justice system is underfunded, politicized and veined with corruption . Police are underfunded and under-funded, and police are poorly trained .
 Like many people in Michoacan, they have relatives in the U.S. Like many in the United States, they also have relatives.
 One of two juvenile suspects wanted in connection with the fatal shooting of an employee at a Tacoma marijuana store in March . He and two accomplices allegedly committed a smash-and-grab robbery at a West Seattle jewelry store .
 The 15-year-old boy was arrested by robbery detectives outside the Maleng Regional Justice Center in Kent .
 He was turned over to Tacoma police and booked into Remann Hall Juvenile Detention Center . He is being held in a juvenile detention center .
Prosecutors charged the 15-year-old boy and Montrell Hatfield, 16, with first-degree murder . Jordan Brown, 29, was killed during an armed robbery at World of Weed on East Portland Avenue in Tacoma, court records show .
 A third suspect, who acted as a lookout during the robbery, has yet to be identified . The third suspect has not been identified .
 Anyone with information about his whereabouts is asked to call Crime Stoppers at 1-800-222TIPS or 911 . Anyone who has information about the whereabouts of the man is asked for help in finding him .
 All three are suspected of committing at least 10 armed robberies in Pierce and King counties in recent months . The charges are filed in the Tacoma murder case .
 The 15-year-old and Hatfield were charged in February in connection with an armed robbery at a pawnshop . They were released from detention and placed on electronic home monitoring .
 Both cut off their monitoring devices on March 16 and warrants were issued for their arrests . Both were arrested on March 17 .
 The Seattle Times does not typically name juvenile defendants unless they are charged as adults . It does not usually name juveniles as adults.
 Under state law, 16and 17-year-olds can automatically be charged as adults for serious violent crimes like first-degree murder and first- degree rape .
 For teens younger than 16, prosecutors can request what is known as a decline hearing . A judge ultimately decides whether to keep the case in juvenile court or decline juvenile jurisdiction .
 Prosecutors have requested a decline hearing for the 15-year-old in the murder case . It wasn't immediately clear on Monday whether Pierce County prosecutors have requested the decline hearing .
 In 2018, first-degree robbery was among a handful of crimes removed from the list of auto-decline offenses . The list also extended juvenile jurisdiction for those specific crimes from age 21 to age 25 .
 The two boys are suspects in the Feb. robbery of Elite Pawn, located in the 29100 block of Pacific Highway South in Federal Way .
 Three male suspects had just driven off in a vehicle, police say . Federal Way police arrived and learned three men had driven off .
 Detectives determined three armed suspects entered the store and ordered employees and customers onto the floor .
 One of the suspects forced the store’s manager to the safe, charges say . The manager put $20,000 in cash and jewelry into a bag the suspect provided, the charges say.
 The suspect later identified as the 15-year-old fired a round into a wall and forced an employee to empty the till . The teen provided $10,000 into a plastic bag the teen provided .
 A customer fired a gun at the fleeing vehicle as the three suspects drove away . The fleeing vehicle crashed into another car but continued north on Pacific Highway South .
 Police found the abandoned car at a park-and-ride lot a mile away . Witnesses told officers that the suspects had fled into a nearby apartment complex .
 Hatfield and the 15-year-old were arrested and police recovered $24,000 in cash and 98 pieces of jewelry . Hatfield, 15, was arrested and the charges say .
 Hatfield and the 15-year-old were released on electronic home detention, court records show . Judge Averil Rothrock ordered Hatfield to be released at their first court appearance .
 Tacoma police responded to a report of an armed robbery and shooting at World of Weed . An employee was found unresponsive with a gunshot wound to the neck, police say .
 Police say two suspects entered the store, ordered everyone to the floor, and provided plastic bags to employees . Police say they learned two suspects enter the store and ordered everyone on the floor .
 One of the suspects, later identified as Hatfield, fired a warning shot into the ceiling . He got into a fight with an employee, grappling with him on the floor, say the charges .
 The second suspect — later identified as the 15-year-old — leaned over the counter and fired a round, hitting the employee in the throat, charging papers say .
 The two suspects and a third suspect apparently drove off in a Chevrolet Monte Carlo, say the charges . The suspects and the third suspect were arrested .
 Tacoma police are investigating a string of marijuana dispensary robberies in King and Pierce counties . The modus operandi was the same in all of the robberies, police say .
 Three armed suspects entered Bellevue Rare Coins in the West Seattle Junction . They ordered employees to lie down on the floor, according to a police blotter .
 Police say they made off with $12,000 and several pieces of jewelry . Police say the group made off from $10,000 to $15,000 .
 Mohamed Abdikadir purchased a one-way ticket to Nairobi, Kenya, four days after he is accused of killing 20-year-old Deandre Meredith .
 King County sheriffs attempted to arrest Abdikadir on Jan. 1 . They learned he had flown to the east African nation on Christmas Day, police say .
Prosecutors have asked that Abdikadir be held in lieu of $5 million bail . Kenya has an extradition treaty with the U.S. and sheriff's officials .
 The owners of a nearly 20-acre horse farm in the 18800 block of Northeast 106th Street rent out a double-wide, manufactured house on the property .
 Meredith and Abdikadir were among the attendees at the party . The house was rented on Dec. 22 for a birthday party .
 The two men got into a fight over Meredith's handgun and the charges say Meredith's friends joined in the beating of Abdikadir .
 During the beating, he was thrown against an oven, shattering the glass window .
 Abdikadir ran to a parked car and was beaten by a group of people . They caught up to him and continued the beating before it was eventually broken up .
 Meredith argued with one of Abdikadir’s friends over a cellphone while holding a gun, say the charges . Meredith then argued with a friend over the phone, though it wasn’t pointed at anyone .
 Abdikadir stood over him and fired multiple times before leaving in a Toyota Camry, according to charging papers .
 Meredith, who was shot approximately six times, died soon after arriving at Seattle’s Harborview Medical Center, the charges say .
 The Camry, which Abdikadir had left in, was found stuck in the mud between paddocks behind the barn .
 The Camry and another vehicle were towed away pending search warrants, according to the charges .
 The day after the shooting, a man matching Abdikadir’s physical appearance showed up at the tow yard . He told staff he had tracked his cellphone to the business, charges say .
 He attempted to persuade employees to let him retrieve his phone but was turned away . He tried to persuade them to let his phone be retrieved but was refused .
Sheriffs seized two cellphones from impounded vehicles . Only one of them was capable of emitting a signal that could allow it to be tracked to the tow yard .
 The teenager was arrested in Kent outside the Maleng Regional Justice Center, police say .
 Montrell Hatfield, 16, charged with first-degree murder and unlawful possession of a firearm . He has yet to be apprehended by police .
 Hatfield is charged as an adult in Pierce County Superior Court . The News Tribune typically does not publish the names of juveniles charged with crimes .
 The 15-year-old was transported to Remann Hall Juvenile Detention Center and booked for investigation of first-degree murder . He was arrested and charged with murder .
 Prosecutors will seek to charge the teenager as an adult . It has not yet been determined whether he will be charged as a juvenile or an adult.
 The pair are suspected in at least 10 armed robberies at pot shops in Pierce and King counties . They are believed to have robbed pot shops.
 Montrell Hatfield, 16, and a 15-year-old boy are wanted for a fatal shooting at a Tacoma pot shop on March 19, 2022 . The shooting happened at the shop on East Portland Avenue in Tacoma .
 The deadly pot shop robbery occurred March 19 at a business in the 3200 block of Portland Avenue .
 Police responded just after 10m. that night when dispatchers received calls regarding an armed robbery there . Police responded to the call at 10pm that night .
 Police found an employee who had been shot and who was declared dead on the scene . When police arrived, they found the employee who was pronounced dead .
 The Pierce County medical examiner later identified the victim as 29-year-old Jordan Brown .
 The robbery occurred three days after the teens cut off home detention monitoring devices they were ordered to wear for home detention . They were arrested for allegedly robbing a pawn shop in Federal Way .
 Video from surveillance cameras showed a person, later identified as Hatfield, fighting Brown . The victim tossed back a trash bag he had been ordered to fill with cash .
 The teenager allegedly broke up the fight by shooting Brown in the neck, and the teens ran out the door, police say .
 Tacoma police began to suspect the robbers were the same people involved in a string of pot shop robberies with similar circumstances in King and Pierce Counties .
 Detectives noticed Hatfield had an 'oddity' in his gait, and footage showed a prosthetic leg beneath his pants as he fought .
 The suspects fit the same description and sometimes wear the same clothing, police say .
 Police were able to identify the teens because they were arrested after allegedly robbing a Federal Way pawn shop in Feb.
 On April 3, Belleview Police Department received a call for a shooting at a residence .
 Christopher Leroy Broad Jr. 16-year-old had been shot when he arrived at the scene . When they arrived, they found him dead .
 He was transported to a local hospital where he died, BPD said in a Facebook post .
 The medical examiner's office said the cause of Broad's death was a single gunshot wound to the chest . The manner of death was listed as homicide, according to the affidavit .
 Vining was arrested Thursday and charged with aggravated manslaughter of a child with a firearm, BPD said . Vining is accused of shooting a child in the head .
 Police say when they arrived, they found Vining doing CPR on Broad . The probable cause affidavit says Vining was doing CPR, police say .
 A second teenager gave police misleading information about the incident, BPD said . The second teenager was charged with providing false information to police .
 Police say a third teenager told them he recorded both shootings using Snapchat on his iPhone . The affidavit says he saved the video of Vining being shot, but deleted the video .
 A technician was able to recover the shooting of Broad, according to the affidavit . The affidavit says the shooting occurred in a residential area .
 Both Vining and the second teen facing charges for providing false information to law enforcement are being charged as adults . Police noted that the two teens are both adults .
 CNN has not been able to determine if either have legal representation at this time . CNN could not reach them for comment .
 The second teen charged was released on a $1,000 surety bond on April 8, according to the county inmate search . The other teen was released April 8 .
 Prosecutors in the State of Mexico said the shootings occurred in the township of Tultepec .
 Seven people died at the scene, and one woman died later at a hospital . Seven people were killed in the incident .
 Tultepec is known for its fireworks workshops, both legal and illegal, and it's notorious for deadly fireworks accidents .
 The latest violence in Mexico comes as President Andrés Manuel Lépez Obrador easily won a divisive referendum on whether he should step down or complete his term .
 Lopez Obrador took office in 2018 championing a "hugs not bullets” strategy to tackle violent crime at its roots .
 Earlier this month, at least three people were killed in a shooting at a beachside restaurant in Acapulco, Mexico .
 The severed heads of six men were discovered on top of a Volkswagen in the town of Chilapa de Alvarez, in Guerrero state . That shooting came just days after the severed heads were discovered .
 Last month, 20 people were shot dead at a venue used to host cockfights in Las Tinajas, Michoacan state .
 Also in March, gunmen killed nine people in an attack on a house in central Mexico . The attack shook a middle-class area of Atlixco, Mexico .
 Authorities in Michoacan said a suspected massacre of about a dozen men seen lined up against a wall by drug cartel gunmen in February may have been a shootout .
 More than 340,000 people have been killed in a wave of bloodshed since the government deployed the army to fight drug cartels in 2006 .
 Thomas Robertson was found guilty on charges ranging from obstruction of an official proceeding to entering or remaining in a restricted building or grounds with a dangerous weapon .
 Monday marked day five of a trial that spanned hours of Jan. 5 . Former colleague Jacob Fracker testified against Robertson as part of his own plea agreement for storming the Capitol .
 The jury deliberated for about 15 hours in a trial that focused on very specific details of Robertson's actions . The trial focused on where he stood and what he was holding .
 Robertson entered the restricted area of the Capitol with the goal of obstructing the electoral vote, jury found . Robertson entered a restricted area.
 He used a wooden stick to push past an officer, which was ruled it could be used as a dangerous weapon . The stick was used to push the officer past .
 Robertson destroyed his phone after he found out about the warrant for his arrest . "anything that may have been problematic has been destroyed, including my phone," he said in a message .
 The jury found he could have corrupted two official proceedings, or his own federal trial, or both . That also means he may have corrupted the Electoral College voting process, the jury found .
 Robertson's lawyers said he was invited into the Capitol by an officer . He stayed for 10 minutes and didn't assault anyone or cause any damage, they said . Robertson's lawyer said he wasn't assaulted or injured .
 The defense brought in two witnesses who each took the stand for less than 8 minutes . The defense had to bring in the two witnesses in less than eight minutes .
 The U.S. attorney's office brought in nine witnesses, who oftentimes took the stand for over an hour . The nine witnesses often take the stand.
 One of the witnesses was Fracker, who stormed the Capitol with Robertson . One of those witnesses is Fracker.
 The jury deliberated for five hours last Friday after closing arguments . The jury deliberations lasted five hours before deciding .
 Robertson was found guilty of obstruction of an official proceeding . Robertson was also guilty of obstructing officers during a civil disorder . He was also convicted of disorderly conduct in a capitol building and obstruction.
 The regulation will address a critical gap in the government’s ability to track them by requiring background checks before purchase and serial numbers on some of the components .
Ghost guns make up a relatively small share of the guns recovered by law enforcement . But they have been seen with increasing frequency in recent years .
 Biden brought one of the kits to the Rose Garden on Monday . He declared the new rules ‘basic common sense’ before holding aloft a weapon made from the gear .
 The kit includes parts that you need and directs the assembly of a functioning firearm . The kit shows the ease of constructing the weapon .
 Biden also named Steve Dettelbach, a former U.S. attorney from Ohio, as his nominee to lead the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives . The former United States attorney is also a former attorney.
 The President’s previous nominee was forced to withdraw amid opposition in Senate .
 The moves came as gun violence and crime have ticked up in the U.S. The White House is expected to announce new regulations on gun violence .
 Four people, including two teens, were shot shortly after a Major League Baseball game in Washington, DC, on Saturday night .
 In Illinois, six people were found injured after a shooting occurred in a residential neighborhood .
 Police are also investigating a shooting at a birthday party in Indianapolis . Six people were shot and one person was killed at the birthday party .
 Two people were killed and 10 hospitalized after a "targeted attack" at a Cedar Rapids nightclub, police say . Police: 10 people were also hospitalized after the attack .
 The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention deemed gun violence a “serious public health threat’s last year .
 Biden has made modest progress on gun control, but major steps like banning assault weapons or closing background check loopholes would require congressional action .
 Gun violence traditionally spikes in the summer months, lending further urgency to Monday’s actions .
 The new rule seeks to rein in a type of weapon that has been seen more and more at crime scenes across the country .
 Ghost gun kits can be purchased online, and a weapon can be self-manufactured in as little as 30 minutes .
Ghost guns are appealing to criminals and those with criminal histories, officials say . Regulators cannot trace them, they say .
 The new rules require anyone purchasing a kit to undergo a background check . Other types of firearm purchases are required for other types of purchases .
 It also requires those selling the kits to mark components with a serial number . The eventual weapon produced can be traced . The kits also require those selling them to mark parts with aserial number .
 firearm dealers add serial number to already built ghost guns they come across in their businesses .
 Mia Tretta was shot and wounded with a ghost gun in a school shooting in California in 2019 . She praised the administration for taking “a critical step” with the new regulation .
 The Justice Department previously launched a national ghost gun enforcement initiative . The initiative will train a national cadre of prosecutors and disseminate investigation tools .
 Ghost guns have been used in multiple recent shootings, including at a Maryland high school in January .
The exact number in circulation is unknowable, given the inability of regulators to track them . The exact number is unknown .
 The agency was able to trace only 1% of them, officials said . Officials said the firearms lack serial numbers .
 Maryland joins 10 states and DC becoming latest to place restrictions on ghost guns . The move comes as ghost guns become more common at crime scenes .
 Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer again decried the use of ghost guns during a press conference Sunday . He called for a crackdown on the rise of the privately made firearms and spoke about a deadly shooting Friday .
 The federal government has the ability through regulation to stop these ghost guns, he said .
 Biden's planned firearm regulation drew backlash from gun rights advocates even before being officially announced . Still, Biden’s planned firearm regulations drew backlash.
 In September, Biden withdrew his nomination of David Chipman to lead the ATF . He faced opposition from Republicans and certain moderate Democrats .
 Chipman, a former career official at ATF, came under scrutiny from gun rights supporters and the National Rifle Association . He was a senior adviser to Everytown for Gun Safety and Giffords .
 Gabrielle Giffords, who was shot at an event in her Arizona district in 2011, was shot in 2011 . She was shot by a fellow member of her district .
 Dettelbach ran unsuccessfully for Ohio attorney general in 2018 after serving as U.S. attorney in the state . She was a United States attorney in Ohio .
 Ohio officials say he should be a noncontroversial candidate . He has a long record of working in law enforcement and for the public safety of Ohio and the American people .
 Information From Online Communities and Unclassified Sources/InFOCUS is a situational awareness report published daily by the Washington State Fusion Center .
 If you no longer wish to receive this report, please submit an email to intake@wsfc.wa.gov and enter UNSUBSCRIBE InFOCUS in the Subject line .
 The Washington State Fusion Center, the City of Seattle, the Seattle Police Department or the Washington State Patrol have been included only for ease of reference and academic purposes . The articles highlighted within InFOCUS are for informational purposes only and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
 If you wish to use copyrighted material for purposes of your own that go beyond 'fair use' You must obtain permission from the copyright owner .