 Russia-backed militants were active all along the contact line and were firing upon Ukrainian troops defending Krymske, Novoluhanske, Svitlodarsk, Zaitseve, Mayorsk, Taramchuk and Avdiivka .
 On July 11 the Mariupol direction once again became the hottest spot in the combat zone . On July 10 the direction of the Mariupsol was the hottest place in thecombat zone .
 Russian proxies were conducting precision fire from grenade launchers, heavy machine guns and small arms upon the Ukrainian troops deployed outside Vodiane, Pavlopil, Talakivka, Lebedynske and Pishchevyk .
 Russia-backed militants used Minsk-proscribed 82-mm mortars for the first time in the past six days . They fired 14 mortar rounds upon the Ukrainian troops defending Pavlopil and Vodiane .
 Foreign Affairs Ministry of Canada issued a statement in advance of the anniversary of the downing of Malaysian Airlines Flight MH17 . It was issued ahead of the Trump-Putin meeting in Helsinki on July 16 .
 The final documents of the NATO Summit took place in Brussels last week . The summit declaration recognizes Ukraine's Euro-Atlantic prospects .
 The document emphasizes that independent, sovereign and stable Ukraine that firmly adheres to the democracy and rule of law principles is a prerequisite for the Euro-Atlantic security .
 At the same time the above documents stipulate clear NATO membership prospects with a respective action plan for Georgia .
 President of Ukraine Petro Poroshenko publicly declared the intention to introduce into the Constitution . Ukraine's aspiration for membership in the North Atlantic Alliance as well as the country’s non-support to EU projects in which Russia is a participant .
 President Poroshenko briefed President Trump in a "very detailed way," he said . "We thoroughly discussed the ‘Nord Stream-2’ issue,’ he added .
 A bilateral meeting between the U.S. and the Russian Presidents took place in Helsinki on July 16 .
 Analysts are convinced that it’s not just the future of Washington-Moscow relations but also the international security in general that depends on the meeting .
 Putin and Trump officially met for the first time at the G20 summit in Hamburg last year . Putin andTrump officially met last year at the summit in Germany .
 The pair talked for an hour and judging by their reactions remained satisfied with the talk they had . Back then they talked for about an hour. Back then the pair continued to talk for about a hour .
 The Helsinki negotiations are to become the second full-fledged meeting of the Presidents . The Helsinki meeting will be the second of the two Presidents .
 Possible lifting or softening of the United States sanctions will be discussed . Possible lifting of the U.S. sanctions could be discussed.
 Trump's consent is not enough to achieve that, according to the law . He might promise to Putin to initiate such a decision and introduce it to the Congress for consideration .
 Putin and Trump may agree over a symbolic step to improve the bilateral relations .
 Following mutual expulsion of the diplomats over the past two years, the diplomatic missions can now be restored .
 Russia’s military training in Eastern Europe, particularly in Poland and in the Baltic States . Russia's another concern is NATO's military training.
 NATO voiced fears that after the Helsinki meeting Trump may freeze the U.S. military support to EU member states .
 The EU leaders were trying to convince him not to do it at the Brussels Summit . The summit was held in Brussels.
 Trump also promised to talk to Putin on the construction of the Nord Stream 2 which he called a catastrophe for the EU . Trump also called the project a catastrophe.
 It is unknown whether the liberation of Ukrainians – Kremlin's political prisoners will be brought up at the meeting . The meeting will be held in Moscow .
 Tusk said he will ask the United States to include the issue of Ukrainian political prisoners’ liberation into the negotiations agenda .
 A Twitter-storm was held calling on Trump to raise the question in Helsinki . July 13 is the birthday of Oleg Sentsov, who was born July 13 .
 John Bolton, the White House National Security Adviser, said that the United States do not expect any “tangible results’ to come from the Trump-Putin meeting .
 Bolton said that the U.S. would not be looking for ‘deliverables’
 The presidential power in the U.S. is not absolute. All the important decisions have to be approved by the Congress and Senate, including the lifting of sanctions .
 One of the Opposition Bloc leaders is negotiating with Rinat Akhmetov and Viktor Medvedchuk to set up a joint political party to campaign at the upcoming elections .
 Lyovochkin suggested nominating Yuriy Boiko as the joint candidate to the President’s post as well as campaigning at the upcoming parliamentary elections as a single party .
 The offer concerns not just the Akhmetov’s wing of the Opposition Bloc but also Vadym Rabinovych . Rabin Yanukovych has been at odds in public until recently .
 Rabinovych must refuse campaigning in favor of Boiko as well as join the party he chairs “Za zhyttia” to the Opposition Bloc Bloc .
 Neither of the possible candidates to the presidential post gets over 10 per cent of the voters’ support . Neither of those candidates get over 10% of the vote .