 Trump Administration is letting Putin write the script on Ukraine .
 President Trump said about possibly recognizing the annexation of Crimea, the peninsular part of Ukraine that Putin illegally seized in 2014 .
 Trump hinted that he might consider recognizing the annexation in Helsinki in the lead-up to his presidential campaign .
 Trump reportedly told fellow leaders that Crimea really belongs to Russia anyway .
 Trump didn't say a word about Ukraine, including Crimea, during the entire press conference .
 Ukraine was discussed in the meeting between the two Presidents and in the wider meeting with advisers from both sides. Subsequently, we have learned from Russian authorities.
 Time and again, we see open disregard for the agreements, as well as an unwillingness to talk to their own people and a reliance on military scenarios . Time and Again, we saw open disregard of the agreements. We see open disrespect for the agreement, and an unwillingness
 We believe that the Minsk Package of Measures provides fundamental grounds for a political settlement of this crisis . The Minsk package of Measures is a political solution to the crisis .
 Putin also raised the idea of conducting a referendum in eastern Ukraine . In a closed session to the same audience, according to press reports, he also raised a referendum .
 Ukraine is an independent state that Putin invaded in 2014, starting with Crimea and continuing into the Donbass region . Ukraine is a state that is independent state, but is not a Russian state .
 The United States should make it clear to Putin that he has no business pushing for another referendum there as he illegitimately did in Crimea . The U.S. should make the case to Putin, he should not push for a referendum there .
Until the use of force by Ukraine’s pro-Russian President Viktor Yanukovych in February 2014, Ukraine had been a peaceful country .
 There were no threats to citizens, including Russian-speakers, living in Crimea . No threats were made to citizens in Crimea.
 The narrative was fabricated by Russian officials and their propagandists after the Euro-Maidan Revolution and after Yanukovych fled for safe haven in Russia . But that was the narrative fabricated by Russia's officials and its propagandist .
 Russian forces and mercenaries crossed the border to stir up phony "separatist" movements in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions . Such movements previously did not exist in eastern Ukraine .
 Through various means, Putin sought to destabilize Ukraine after its Euro-Maidan Revolution . Through various ways, Putin tried to destabilise Ukraine.
 Putin feared a successful revolution in Ukraine might trigger Russians to want the same thing . Putin feared that a successfulrevolution in Ukraine, based on demands for an end to corruption and the freedom to join Euro-atlantic institutions, might trigger Russia to want same thing.
 Putin decided he had to move quickly to stanch any domino effect . Thus, Putin decided to move quick to stench any dominos effect .
 As a result of Putin’s invasion and aggression, the death toll in Ukraine has exceeded 11,000 . The death toll has now reached 11,00 .
 Putin has failed to live up to a single commitment under two ceasefire accords, known as the Minsk agreements, from September 2014 and February 2015 . Putin has not lived up to one commitment under the two ceasefire agreements .
 He even denies that the Russian military plays any role at all in eastern Ukraine . Despite massive evidence to the contrary, he even denies any role in Ukraine .
 The West imposed sanctions on Russia after Putin violated Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 U.S. negotiators Victoria Nuland and Kurt Volker have led nowhere, despite their heroic efforts . It also launched negotiating tracks, a European one and a direct U. S.-Russian one .
 Europe and the U.S. should maintain and even ramp up sanctions unless Russia withdraws all of its occupying forces from all of Ukraine, including Crimea .
 Putin will only change course if the West inflicts more pain through tougher sanctions and isolation, he says . Putin will not change course unless the West imposes more pain.
 The Trump Administration deserves credit for providing Ukraine with lethal military assistance, including anti-tank missiles, to help it defend itself against further Russian aggression . President Obama refused to do.
 The Ukrainian issue was not at the center of the Trump-Putin talks, Russian Ambassador to the U.S. says . The Russian ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Antonov, said Friday .
 Trump should have made it clear in Helsinki that until Putin respects Ukraine as a sovereign, independent state and withdraws all his forces and proxies from Ukrainian territory no normalization of relations with the U.S. is possible .
Russian support for Assad in Syria and interference in our elections, among other matters, to address . Even then, we still have the issues of Russian support forAssad in Syria to address, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Putin was the only one who referenced Ukraine during the Helsinki press conference . Trump has invited him to Washington this fall .
 We can only hope that Ukraine will not be thrown under the bus in the process . We only hope it won't happen again .
 The Polish model did not work until Poland became a Nation . Poland's upper Nobility of morons who lost it all.