 The burden estimate is part of a collection of information . Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of data .
 No person shall be subject to a penalty for failing to comply with a collection of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number . Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person will face a penalty .
 The Library of Congress is a non-profit organization that helps people find out what to do with their work .
 DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Approved for public release; distribution unlimited 13.3%.
 The government’s effort in November 2013 to violently disperse pro-European Union protests backfired, resulting in mass demonstrations in Kyiv and elsewhere in Ukraine .
 For over two months, the government alternated between attempted crackdowns against protestors and conciliatory gestures .
 The violence led to a collapse in support for the government of President Viktor Yanukovych, who fled from Kyiv .
 The parliament is expected to approve a new pro-reform, pro-Western government by early March . The parliament will approve the new government by the end of March .
 The parliament has scheduled new presidential elections for May 25, 2014 . The parliament is scheduled to hold new elections for the next year .
 Ukraine has long-standing problems in attracting foreign investment, in part due to rampant corruption and other shortcomings in the rule of law .
 In the near term, the government’s dwindling foreign exchange reserves have raised the prospect of a default on sovereign debt later this year .
 The Obama Administration reacted positively to the revolution in Kyiv . It could be a step forward to the United States goal of a strong, prosperous, unified, and democratic Ukraine .
 The Administration is working with the EU, the IMF, and other international financial organizations to support a new Ukrainian government committed to reforms . The administration is working to support the new government .
 The Obama Administration requested $95,271 million in U.S. bilateral aid for Ukraine for FY2014 . The Obama administration requested $ 95,271million for the Ukraine in 2014 .
 President Obama and Administration officials have made statements aimed at dissuading Moscow from seeing Ukraine as a geopolitical competition between the U.S. and Russia .
 Moscow's response to the fall of the Yanukovych regime has met with limited success, judging by the harsh public reaction from Moscow . However, this effort has been met with only limited success .
 Some experts fear Russia may take steps to “punish’s new leadership in Kyiv by imposing economic sanctions or encouraging separatism in Ukraine's Crimea region . Russia formally expresses support for Ukraine's territorial integrity .
 The resolution urges the U.S. and EU to work together to promote a peaceful resolution of the Ukraine crisis . The President and Congress should consider targeted sanctions against individuals responsible for ordering or carrying out the violence, the resolution says .
 The resolution expresses support for the visa bans that the United States has already imposed on Ukrainian officials responsible for violence against protestors . It urges the Administration to consider additional sanctions against those responsible for the use of force .
After the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, congressional action may shift from possible sanctions to how the United States should aid the new Ukrainian government to achieve stability and conduct reforms .
 Ukraine, comparable in size and population to France, is a large, important, European state . Ukraine is similar to France and Ukraine is an important state .
 The fact that it occupies a sensitive position between Russia and NATO member states Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania adds to its geostrategic significance . The fact it occupies the sensitive position.
 The United States and European view is that a strong, independent Ukraine is an important part of building a Europe whole, free, and at peace . The U.S. and European views are that Ukraine is a strong and independent country .
 Ukraine's political scene was dominated by President Leonid Kuchma and oligarchic ‘clans’ that supported him . From the mid-1990s until 2004, Ukraine’s politics was dominated.
 His rule was characterized by fitful economic reform, widespread corruption, and a deteriorating human rights record . He was criticized for his rule, but his rule was described as fitful .
 Ukraine’s 2004 presidential elections were marred by electoral fraud, which triggered massive protests .
 The oligarchs chose Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych as their candidate to succeed Kuchma . Yanukovych was chosen as the candidate for the presidency .
 Former Prime Minister Viktor Yushchenko was a pro-reform, pro-Westem figure . He was a former Prime Minister of Ukraine .
 After a November 21 runoff vote, Ukraine's Central Election Commission proclaimed Yanukovych the winner .
 Yushche nk o’s supporters charged that massive fraud had been committed . The fraud is alleged to have been committed by the group's supporters .
 Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians took to the streets in what came to be known as the ‘Orange Revolution’ after Yushchenko’s chosen campaign color .
 They blockaded government offices in Kyiv and appealed to the Ukrainian Supreme Court to invalidate the vote . They blocked government offices and appealed for the vote to be invalidated .
 The "Orange Revolution" sparked a good deal of interest in Congress and elsewhere . The “Orange Revolution’s‘Orange Revolution' sparked interest in the United States .
 Some hoped Ukraine could finally embark on a path of comprehensive reforms and Euro-Atlantic integration after years of half-measures and false starts .
 Orange Revolution supporters were disillusioned with the Orange Revolution in Ukraine and abroad . However, subsequent events led to disillusionment among supporters, both in Ukraine.
 Yushche nk o soon fell into squabbling with Yuliya Tymoshenko, his main backer during the Orange Revolution and his first prime minister . President Yushch o soon got involved in squabbling with Tymchenko .
 Yanukovych, who also served briefly as prime minister during this period, also was involved in this infighting .
 As Ukrainian leaders engaged in three-sided political battle, majority of Ukrainians grew disgusted with the political class, polls show .
 What little remained of the Orange Revolution came to an end with the victory of Yanukovych over Tymoshenko in the presidential election of February 2010 .
 Yanukovych won in Russian-speaking eastern and southern Ukraine . Tymoshenko prevailed in central and western Ukraine, where Ukrainian nationalism is stronger .
 U.S. and EU officials expressed concern over the government's targeting of opposition leaders for selective prosecution .
 Tymoshenko was convicted of abuse of power arising out of her role in signing a natural gas supply agreement with Russia . She was sentenced to seven years in prison in October 2011 .
 Ukraine’s October 2012 parliamentary elections fell short of international standards, according to international election observers . The elections were held in Ukraine's capital, Kiev .
 Ukrainian commentators noted that the new government formed after the election included several new figures that were part of the personal entourage of the President and his son, Oleksandr . These analysts claimed that these moves marked the “Family’s” consolidation of political power .
Until a few months ago, many observers believed that there was little likelihood of public unrest in Ukraine . The Orange Revolution was the result of an Orange Revolution .
 The government made a last-minute decision to not sign an Association Agreement with the European Union . The decision was made due to Russian pressure .
 The first demonstrations in Kyiv in late November were relatively modest in size . The first protests were relatively small.
 Ukrainian special police attacked and viciously beat peaceful protestors in Kyiv’s central Maidan Nezalezhnosti .
 The action outraged many Ukrainians, and resulted in a massive upsurge in participation in the protests in Kyiv .
 Some observers say turnout in Kyiv at times even exceeded those during the Orange Revolution .
Demonstrators were protesting against Ukraine’s failure to sign the Association Agreement . They were also protesting against the government's lack of respect for the basic human dignity of Ukraine's citizens .
 An attempt by riot police to clear the square on December 10 failed due to the resistance of protestors .
 By mid-January, the Maidan protests were continuing, but with fewer protestors than at their peak in early December . By mid January, the protests were still at their highest level .
 Another law requiring all organizations receiving foreign funding to register as foreign agents appears to be based on a similar Russian law . The law is similar to a similar law in Russia .
 Violence between protestors and police increased sharply after their adoption . After their adoption, violence increased sharply .
 At least four persons were killed in the violence, while scores of others were brutalized by police . At least five people were killed by police in the attack .
 Several government ministry buildings in Kyiv were either blockaded or seized by protestors .
 protestors seized control of or blockaded government buildings outside of Kyiv, mainly in western and central Ukraine, but also in some places in the east .
 After this setback, the government again appeared to adopt a strategy of backpedaling and playing for time . The government again appears to adopt an approach of backpinging and playing.
 Ukrainian parliament votes to repeal the “dictatorship laws’ and give amnesty to the protestors . On the same day, the Ukrainian parliament voted to repeal ‘dictatorhip laws'
 On February 18, the government embarked on its most violent crackdown attempt against the Maidan, one that quickly resulted in the regime’s own demise .
 Many casualties were caused by firearms, mainly used by the police, including by snipers .
 The government reportedly had plans to use snipers much more extensively . The government also unsuccessfully tried to order the army to join the crackdown .
 The death toll may have caused support in the Ukrainian parliament for the crackdown and the regime to collapse .
 On February 20, it approved a resolution calling for the pullout of the Interior Ministry and military forces from Kyiv to their bases . It also approved a ban on the use of firearms .
Once the police and military complied with the resolution, groups of protestors seized key government buildings . The resolution was passed by the military and police officers .
 Yanukoyvch and scores of his supporters fled the capital by the 21 st . Many heading for the eastern and southern parts of the country, while others continued into Russia .
 The Ukrainian parliament, now composed mainly of opposition deputies, has rapidly passed sweeping measures with little or no opposition . The parliament is now composed of mostly opposition deputies .
 The parliament deposed Yanukovych as President on February 22 for abandoning his duties . Yanukovych was deposed by the parliament on Feb. 22 .
 The parliament also voted to make Turchynov acting president until new presidential elections are held . The parliament set for May 25 .
 The parliament restored the provisions of the 2004 Ukrainian constitution . It eliminated changes made by Yanukovych to strengthen the presidency .
 Ex-President Yanukovych and dozens of other top officials of the former regime are being sought by police for their part in killing and injuring protestors and other regime opponents .
Until February 2014, the party of the ruling regime and by far the largest faction in the Ukrainian parliament was the largest party .
Eastern Ukraine has drawn its support from eastern Ukraine, where suspicion of Ukrainian nationalism is high . Support for close ties with Russia is strong.
 It defends the economic interests of powerful oligarchic business groups . It also defends the interests of the powerful oligarchs .
 Since the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, scores of deputies have fled from Kyiv or left the party . Most of the rest are apparently unwilling or unable to offer serious resistance to the new leadership .
Fatherland has run on a populist, anti-corruption platform . Founded by Yuliya Tymoshenko, Fatherland is a former Ukrainian prime minister .
 It draws its support from western and central Ukraine, where Ukrainian nationalism is strongest . It draws support from the west and from central Ukraine .
 Fatherland effectively became the leading faction in Ukraine's parliament after the collapse of Yanukovych regime in February 2014 .
 Its platform has been criticized for lacking in specifics . Its platform, while expressing opposition to the former regime's corruption, has been criticised for lack of specifics .
 Freedom receives its support from western Ukraine, where Ukrainian nationalism is strongest . A party espousing extreme Ukrainian nationalism and economic populism .
 Some observers have attributed success to disillusionment with the Fatherland and other opposition groups rather than a surge in support for extreme Ukrainian nationalism .
 Its activists played a key role in fighting against riot police in the Maidan protests . The Maidan protest was the first of its kind in the city .
 Yanukovych-appointed governors and other local officials have resigned in many regions of Ukraine . The resignations are mainly in western and central Ukraine .
 The parliament has dismissed the members of the former government . Parties in the parliament are putting together a “government of national trust’ to govern the country, at least until a new president is elected .
 The proposed choices for a new government were presented to a crowd of tens of thousands in the Maidan on February 26 .
 Both representatives of the opposition parties and Maidan activists are in Maidan . They include both representatives of both opposition parties.
 One is maintaining the support of the social and political forces that have emerged from the Maidan . One is maintain the support for the political and social forces.
Opposition parties have been playing catch-up with sentiment on the streets .
 Observers have witnessed expressions of scorn at times from demonstrators as opposition leaders spoke at the Maidan .
 Poland, Germany, and France brokered an agreement between the regime and the main opposition party leaders . The agreement was frustrating the protests’ main objective, which was to oust Yanukovych and his government .
 The agreement was almost instantly rendered moot when the regime collapsed and armed protestors took over central Kyiv . The agreement had been agreed by the regime .
 Many Maidan protestors view the opposition parties very skeptically, suspecting that they are nearly as opportunistic and corrupt as the Yanukovych regime . The failure of the Orange Revolution 10 years earlier was demonstrated by the failed Orange Revolution .
 Yatsenyuk was reportedly booed on the Maidan when his name was read out as Prime Minister-designate .
 The Maidan are highly respected among many protestors . Due to their key role in defending the Maidan and even taking the fight to the regime, they have suffered a significant number of deaths .
 Some members of the former regime have alleged intimidation and even violence at their hands . Some members have accused former regime members of intimidation and violence.
 As is the case in many revolutions, it is unclear what role the most determined revolutionaries can play when the fighting is over . A return to stability could potentially marginalize them .
 Another issue is possible separatism in the eastern and southern regions of the country . Former regime drew most of its support in the region .
 Top leaders from eastern and southern Ukraine met in Kharkiv on February 22 . They declared that they did not recognize the new authorities in Kyiv and that they would assume responsibility for their regions .
 Clashes between pro and anti-Maidan forces in these regions could also inflame tensions . Clashes could also be seen as small-scale so far .
 The veiled threat of separatism may be a bargaining chip local leaders and oligarchs in the east and south could try to use against new authorities to secure immunity from prosecution and guarantees for their property .
 Some observers believe the situation in Crimea could pose the biggest threat, due to what may be greater support among ethnic Russians in Crimea for union with Russia .
 Crimean leaders to promote union with Russia were headed off in part by deploying “ Berkut ” and other special forces to the peninsula . Previous efforts by Crimean leader to promote Union with Russia are headed off by deploying Berkut and other Special Forces .
 Ukraine's current government is disbanding the Berkut . The perceived weakness of the authorities in Kyiv could potentially be exploited by Crimea and Russia .
 Ukraine is much poorer than other European countries, despite advantages such as rich soil, a strategic location, and a substantial heavy industrial sector .
 In 2011, Ukraine’s Gross Domestic Product per capita in purchasing power parity terms was only 21% of that of the EU average . Only 43% of Russia's GDP per capita was in 2011, according to the European Union .
 In 2010 its foreign direct investment per capita was $979, less than half of that in Russia and about a quarter of Poland’s FDI per capita . In 2010, Poland's FDI was about a third of the world's total foreign direct investments .
 Foreign companies often cite such issues as rampant corruption and serious shortcomings in the rule of law as key stumbling blocks to foreign investment .
 The privatization process under the Yanukovych administration apparently served mainly as a division of spoils among the oligarchs and the “Family of Yanukovych’s’ family .
 Ukraine was hit very hard by the global economic crisis, according to the IMF . Ukraine's economic crisis is blamed for Ukraine's failure to cope with the crisis .
 The economy soon rebounded, growing by 4.2% in 2010 and by 5.2%, in 2011 . The economy grew by 4% in 2011 and 4.3% in 2009 .
 growth slowed to 0.2% in 2012, due to a downturn in the EU and Russia . However, growth slowed in 2012 due to the European and Russian downturn .
 In 2010, the International Monetary Fund approved a $15.15 billion standby loan for Ukraine to support its reform efforts .
 Two tranches of the loan were disbursed, but the IMF declined to release additional ones . Ukraine's refusal to take politically unpopular steps such as increasing energy prices for domestic consumers and devaluing Ukraine’s currency, hyrvnia .
 Ukraine received loans from Russia and China to try to make up for the suspension of the IMF loan . The loans are part of a plan to make it up for an IMF loan suspension .
 Ukraine raised large additional loans on the Eurobond market and on domestic debt markets . Ukraine also raised large extra loans on Eurobonds and on the domestic market .
 The policy appeared to have reached a dead end in late 2013, even before the political turmoil that started in November 2013 . However, this policy appears to have ended in 2013, according to CNN.
 Ukraine’s foreign exchange reserves dropped to dangerously low levels . Fears that Ukraine could default on its sovereign debt in 2014 .
 Efforts to seek additional money on the Eurobond market in mid-2013 failed, due to a lack of confidence in Ukraine’s economic policies . U.S. Treasury's decision to taper its bond-buying program was a global impact of the decision.
 Russia took advantage of this situation to offer to buy up to $15 billion in Ukrainian bonds at a favorable interest rate . In December 2013, Russia offered to buy the bonds at favorable interest rates .
 Given the fall of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014, it appears unlikely that Russia will make further bond purchases .
 Ukraine's political crisis has exacerbated the country’s economic problems. Ukraine's economic problems have worsened since the crisis began .
 Ukraine’s currency has slid by nearly 30% between the start of the crisis on November 21, 2013, and late February 2014 .
 Tax receipts have plunged, and the government is running out of money to pay pensions and government salaries .
 Ukraine’s acting finance minister had called for international donors to supply $35 billion in macroeconomic financing over the next two years .
 IMF, EU, EU and other potential donors warn Ukraine must have a new government in place . Ukraine must be willing to engage in needed reforms before funding can be made available .
 conflict between Ukraine’s political forces has led its foreign policy to appear incoherent, as the contending forces pulled it in pro-Western or pro-Pro-Russia directions or simply neglected foreign policy .
 Ukrainian leaders gave lip service to joining NATO and the European Union . But they did little to meet the standards set by these organizations .
 Ukrainian leaders also promised closer ties with Russia in exchange for Russian energy at subsidized prices . But they balked at implementing agreements that would seriously compromise Ukraine’s sovereignty .
 President Yanukovych’s foreign policy appeared to fit into this pattern . He broke with previous Ukrainian presidents by formally rejecting NATO membership for Ukraine .
 Yanukovych’s last-minute decision in November 2013 to decline to sign an Association Agreement with the EU, due to Russian pressure, caused many observers to express concern about the independence of Ukraine's foreign policy .
 His failure to do so touched off a popular revolt that led to the collapse of his regime three months later . The emergence of what is likely to be a pro-EU, pro-Westem government.
 A new government will have to be installed before Ukraine’s new foreign policy course is formally determined . The new policy course will be formally determined.
 Ukraine is likely to sign the Association Agreement in the next few weeks or months . However, it is likely that Ukraine will sign the agreement in the future .
 The new Russian government may face a backlash from a furious Russian leadership . The new government may faces a backlash.
 Russian responses could involve de facto trade sanctions, manipulation of energy prices and debts, harassment of Ukrainian citizens working in Russia, and support for separatist activity in southern and eastern Ukraine .
 Most EU countries have opposed raising this issue, in part due to the huge burden a large, poor country like Ukraine could place on already-strained EU coffers .
 The Association Agreement is the EU's main instrument to promote European values in these countries and deepen economic ties with them .
 DCFTA further opens potentially lucrative EU markets to Ukraine . It also requires it to adopt EU legislation and standards and to expose its own firms to tough competition .
 Ukraine's government announced on November 21 that it would not sign the agreement at the Vilnius summit . Russia strongly opposed Ukraine’s intention to sign the AA .
 EU officials condemned violence by Ukrainian government and their allies against peaceful protestors . EU officials and officials of EU member governments condemned violence .
 The Ukrainian government has called on the Ukrainian government to quickly adopt the steps needed to end the political crisis in Ukraine peacefully . They call on the government to quick adopt the measures needed.
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso reportedly combined with Vice President Joseph Biden to press Yanukovych on these issues by near-daily telephone calls .
 France, Germany, and Poland came to Kyiv and brokered a peaceful settlement of the crisis . The crisis was almost immediately rendered obsolete by the collapse of the regime .
 The EU at first refrained from imposing sanctions against Ukrainian leaders responsible for the violence . The EU was first refraining from imposing penalties due to divisions among member states .
 Some countries have supported the adoption of sanctions to deter the government from further violence . Lithuania, such as Lithuania, has supported the sanctions .
 Ukraine's leaders could cut off talks with EU and U.S. on a peaceful solution . Other countries, including Germany, have called for caution, believing the prospect of sanctions is sufficient for now .
 The EU imposed a visa ban and asset freezes on Ukrainian officials responsible for violence on February 18 and 19 . The EU decided to impose the ban after a sharp escalation of the violence .
 The EU budgeted €470 million in aid for reforms in Ukraine for 2011-2013 . The European Union budgeted $1.5 million for Ukraine's reforms in the past year .
 Funding totals for Ukraine’s reforms for 2014-2020 are expected to be determined soon . Ukraine's reforms will be determined by the end of the year .
 The EU may provide a possible emergency program to stabilize Ukraine’s finances . This amount would be in addition to any macrofmancial aid that may be provided by the EU .
 Parliament speaker and acting President Turchynov has called for Ukraine to sign the Association Agreement soon after the new government is formed .
 European Commission spokesman says signature should wait until after new president is elected in May or June .
 EU officials are working with the United States, the IMF, and other international financial institutions on an aid package for Ukraine . The aid package could go into effect soon after a new government is formed .
 Ukraine’s closest, yet most difficult and complex, relationship with Russia is with Russia . Russia's most difficult relationship with Ukraine is with Ukraine .
 Ethnic Russians make up 17.3% of Ukraine’s population, according to the 2001 Ukrainian census .
 Crimean people make up 58.3% of the population in Crimea . They form a majority in the Crimea .
 71.6% of the population in Sevastopol, the home base of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, is Russian . The Crimean city is home to the Black Sea fleet, which is based in the Crimea .
 Ethnic Ukrainians in the east and south also tend to be Russianspeaking, and support close ties with Russia . In addition, ethnic Ukrainians in east and South also tends to be Russianpeaking .
 Soviet leaders concentrated important heavy industries in eastern Ukraine, which tied them to Russia economically . Many analysts have viewed the lingering Soviet-style mindset there .
 Many key figures of the former Ukrainian government come from the Donbas region . This is particularly true of the region .
 Russian officials have often tried to play on the ethnic, cultural, and economic ties between Russia and these regions . But not always successfully, they have not always succeeded .
 Russian officials have urged Ukraine to join the Customs Union it has created with Belarus and Kazakhstan . Ukraine has been urged by Russian officials to join Customs Union.
 Many experts in Russia and elsewhere have claimed that the Customs Union and a Eurasian Union planned for 2015 would be economically much less attractive to Russia without the participation of Ukraine .
 Russian officials asserted that if Ukraine signed the Association Agreement, the Customs Union would have to put up customs barriers against Ukrainian products to prevent their own markets being flooded by EU goods .
 Moscow claimed that the effect of the customs barriers in the east and a surge of EU imports from the west would devastate the Ukrainian economy .
 Russian leaders may also fear the impact of the expansion of EU standards of democracy and human rights in the region on the long-term stability of the current Russian regime .
 Russia did not limit itself to verbal warnings. It is perhaps not surprising that it did not .
 Russia banned imports of Ukrainian chocolates from Roshen in August 2013 . Roshen is a company owned by a strong supporter of the Association Agreement .
 Russian officials also briefly held up steel and other key Ukrainian exports to Russia at the border .
 Ukraine bowed to Russian pressure and declined to sign the Association Agreement . Russia moved to reward Ukrainian leaders after Ukraine bowed and declined.
 Moscow granted a large aid package to Ukraine on December 17 . It includes an offer to purchase up to $15 billion in Ukrainian government bonds and cut the price of Russian natural gas supplied to Ukraine by one-third .
 Ukraine's energy minister estimated the yearly savings to Ukraine of the price cut at $7 billion . Ukraine’s energy minister estimates the yearly cost of the country's energy industry is $7billion .
 The terms of the package seemed to indicate that Moscow wanted to keep Ukraine on a short leash . The terms seemed to show that Moscow was trying to keep the country on a leash .
 The first $3 billion purchase of Ukrainian bonds was made in December 2013 . The first purchase of Ukraine's bonds was in 2013 .
 Russia declined to make additional bond purchases due to the unstable situation in Ukraine . However, Russia refused to make more bond purchases .
 The collapse of the regime in February 2014 will likely put an end to the bailout package . The collapse will likely be the end of the package .
 Russia reacted with hostility to the collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014 . Russia reacted to the emergence of a new, more pro-Western leadership .
 The situation in Ukraine posed a threat to the lives of Russian citizens there, he said . He said the situation in the country posed a danger to Russian citizens .
 A Russian foreign ministry statement on February 24 claimed “terroristic methods’ were being used to suppress dissent in the Russian-speaking regions of the country .
 Russia officially supports Ukraine’s territorial integrity, before the collapse of the Yanukovych regime . A key advisor to President Putin called for Ukraine's “federalization,’ which many Ukrainians fear is a code word for the breakup of the country .
 In February 2014, a Russian diplomat in Ukraine claimed that a de facto federalization was already taking place in Ukraine . The Ukrainian government rejected the claim, prompting a rebuke from Russia .
 Some analysts expressed concern that Russia may now step up support to separatist elements in Ukraine, particularly in Crimea . Some analysts have expressed concern about Russia's support for separatists .
 This could involve speeding up the issuing of passports to those in Crimea desiring Russian citizenship . This could be a move to speed up the issue of passports in Crimea .
 Russia announced February 26 that its army and naval forces would hold readiness exercises on Ukraine’s borders starting February 28 . On February 26, Russia announced that its military and navy forces would be holding readiness exercises .
 Russia could try to pressure, punish, punish or destabilize Kyiv by imposing de facto trade sanctions against Ukraine . Russia could also try to expelling or harassing the large number of Ukrainian citizens working in Russia .
 In the recent past, about 80% of Russia's oil and natural gas consumption came from Russia . In the last year, about 70% of its oil and gas consumption was from Russia.
 In 2012, about 60% of Russian natural gas destined for Europe transited Ukraine . About 60 per cent of the natural gas transported to Europe was from Ukraine .
Until the Yushchenko presidency, Russian firms supplied energy to Ukraine at prices far below market rates . Until the president, energy was supplied to Ukraine by Russian firms .
 Energy sales have been conducted by non-transparent intermediary companies, offering the elites of both countries opportunities to profit . Energy sales are conducted bynon- transparent companies .
 Russia’s efforts to greatly increase gas prices for Ukraine provoked a crisis that resulted in a cutoff of Russian gas to Western Europe for several days in January 2006 . Russia's efforts to increase gas Prices for Ukraine sparked a crisis in 2006 .
 Russia has sought control of Ukraine’s natural gas pipelines and storage facilities . Russia has been trying to seize control of the country's natural gas pipeline and storage facility .
 Kyiv’s refusal to cede control of one of its key economic assets has been unsuccessful so far . Its efforts have been unsuccessful due to Kyiv's refusal to take control of its economic assets .
 Russia and some European countries plan and build pipelines to bypass Ukraine . The 2006 and 2009 gas cutoffs have led Russia and other countries to build pipelines . This fact has led Russia to plan to bypass the Ukraine .
 Gazprom has developed gas pipelines under the Baltic Sea and through the Balkans to Western Europe . The company has also developed a network of gas pipelines in the Balkans .
 South Stream has started construction, with first deliveries projected for 2015 . South Stream's first deliveries are expected to be in 2015 .
 Ukraine’s reduced share of gas transport to Europe could give Russia more leverage to demand that Ukraine sell it control of its gas pipeline system at a lower price than it otherwise could .
 Russia could also feel it would have a freer hand to put greater pressure on Ukraine on other issues, including political issues . Russia could feel it could also have more control on Ukraine.
 Key European countries could feel they have less of a stake in Ukraine’s future . If they, like Russia, were no longer dependent on Ukrainian gas transport infrastructure .
 Yanukovych regime supported by oligarchs who control gas imports and own energyhungry steel and chemicals industries . The Yanukovych regime was supported by the Yanukovych regime.
 Yanukovych sharply criticized the gas agreement between Russia and Ukraine in 2009 . He said the gas was far too expensive for Ukraine .
 Russia announced in December it would reduce its natural gas prices for Ukraine by one-third . Underlining the political nature of Russia’s natural gas pricing policy, after Ukraine announced it would not sign the Association Agreement with the EU .
 The collapse of the Yanukovych regime in February 2014 may lead to the termination of the gas price cut agreement . The intensification of Russian pressure on Ukraine over energy prices and debts owed to Gazprom by Ukraine .
 U.S. policy makers focused on improving cooperation with Ukraine in such fields as nuclear non-proliferation and energy .
 They expressed increasing concern about backsliding in the country’s democratic development .
 President Obama and President Yanukovych agreed that Ukraine would rid itself of its entire stock of highly enriched uranium by the time of the Nuclear Security Summit in March 2012 .
 The United States agreed to help Ukraine develop its nuclear research capabilities and diversify its sources of fuel supply for its nuclear reactors . The U.S. will help Ukraine to develop its research capabilities .
 The United States pledged to continue to cooperate with Ukraine on nuclear safety issues . The U.S. also pledged to help with the cleanup of the Chernobyl nuclear site .
 U.S. officials have repeatedly stressed that Ukraine's security depends on diversifying its energy supplies and increasing energy efficiency .
 The trial and other incidents raised ‘serious concerns’ about the government’s commitment to democracy and the rule of law . The statement said that the trial and others raised “serious concerns.”
 President Obama praised Ukraine for removing all of the highly enriched uranium from its territory . President Obama met with President Yanukovych at the March 2012 Nuclear Security Summit .
 President Obama stressed that Ukraine should hold free, fair, and transparent parliamentary elections in October . He expressed concerns about selective prosecutions of the political opposition .
 The State Department says the Ukrainian election was a "step backward" from previous elections . The election was held in October 2012, the Department says .
 The United States has worked closely with the EU to promote the region’s democratic development, rule of law, and closer integration with Western countries .
 Victoria Nuland visited Kyiv to participate in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Ministerial conference . She also discussed the situation in Ukraine with government officials and protestors in the Maidan .
 She stressed U.S. support for those in Ukraine who see the country's future aligned with Europe . She called on government and protestors to resolve the country’s problems peacefully .
 She reportedly received government assurances that force would not be used against the protestors . She reportedly got government assurances of force wouldn't be used.
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry issued a statement expressing the United States’ “disgust’ with the Ukrainian government’s actions . Ukrainian authorities attempted to clear the protestors from the Maidan on December 10 .
 Vice President Biden called President Yanukovych to underline U.S. support for peaceful negotiations to solve the crisis . Biden also condemned the use of violence by any side by the president .
 He warned Yanukovych against taking harsh security measures . He urged the government to ensure the repeal of ‘anti-democratic laws’ by Ukraine’s parliament .
On February 4, Biden made his fourth call during the crisis to reinforce the need for a peaceful solution to the crisis .
 Secretary Kerry said Ukrainians were “fighting for the right to associate with partners who will help them realize their aspirations.’
 They have decided that their futures do not have to lie with one country alone, and certainly not coerced . And that means that they have decided their futures don't have to lying with one nation alone .
 The Administration responded sharply to the Ukrainian government’s attempted crackdown on February 18 .
 Vice President Biden called Yanukovych on February 18 to urge him to pull back government forces in the streets and exercise maximum restraint .
 On February 19, Secretary Kerry said that Yanukovych had a choice between “compromise and dialogue versus violence and mayhem’s mayhem .
 President Obama stressed that the U.S. is not to see as some Cold War chessboard in which we're in competition with Russia .
 The agreement was rendered moot within hours by the collapse of the Yanukovych regime .
 The Administration reacted positively, but cautiously, to the collapse of the Yanukovych regime .
 The U.S. is working with the new Ukrainian leadership, the EU, and the IMF on an aid package to support the new government in Kyiv to stabilize its finances .
 Ukraine received $103,593 million in U.S. aid in FY2012, according to the FY2014 Congressional Budget Presentation for Foreign Operations . Ukraine received more than $100,000 in aid from the United States.
 The U.S. allocated $102,576 million in aid for Ukraine in FY2013, according to State Department figures .
 For FY2014, the Administration requested $95,271 million in aid for Ukraine . For FY 2014, the administration requested $ 95,271million in aid .
 Of this amount, $53,957 million is in the Economic Support Fund account . $4.41 million is for non-proliferation, antiterrorism, demining, and other programs . $28,704m is in AI D and State Department Global Health
 A significant portion of U.S. aid to Ukraine in the ESF account is dedicated to improving the safety of the Chernobyl nuclear facility . A significant part of the aid is to secure and storing nuclear fuel .
 Other ESF programs are aimed at improving governance and increasing accountability and effectiveness of the justice system . ESF is also aimed at increasing the accountability and accountability of the Justice system .
 Global Elealth funding helps Ukraine fight its EIIV/A1DS crisis, which is the most severe in the region, as well as Ukraine’s serious tuberculosis problem .
 Security assistance for Ukraine is aimed at helping Ukraine’s defense reform efforts, improving interoperability with U.S. and NATO forces .
 Law enforcement aid will help Ukraine implement its new Criminal Code and other legal reforms . Law enforcement help will help the country implement new criminal code .
 U.S. aid also helps Ukraine deal with its serious problems with trafficking in persons and cybercrime .
 U.S. assistance has helped Ukraine destroy its stock of SCUD short-range missiles . Ukraine has made progress toward the elimination of the stock of propellant.
 It is helping Ukraine strengthen its export controls and dispose of excess conventional weapons . It is also helping Ukraine stronger its export control and dispose the excess conventional arms .
 The resolution sponsored by Senator Murphy urges the U.S. and EU to work together to promote a peaceful resolution of the Ukraine crisis . The President and Congress should consider whether to apply targeted sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes .
 The resolution, introduced by Representative Eliot Engel on December 16, 2013, contains provisions broadly similar to those of S.Res.9 . The resolution includes raising the possibility of sanctions against Ukrainian leaders if they use violence against protestors .
 The House Foreign Affairs Committee approved an amended version of H.Res. on January 29 . The amended version has been approved by the House Foreign affairs Committee .
 The new version takes into account the events that had occurred since the resolution’s introduction . The resolution's introduction was introduced in 2009 .
 The resolution says the President should increase democracy and human rights assistance to Ukraine . It also halting any security assistance to organizations engaged in repression .
 The resolution says the Department of State should “immediately consider’s sanctions, including visa bans and asset freezes, against “perpetrators of state-sanctioned violence” in Ukraine . The resolution also says the State Department should consider the sanctions .
 Western officials agree that the U.S. and EU should not provide massive aid to Ukraine . Ukraine is not clearly committed to reform, merely for geopolitical reasons, they say .
 Most observers agree that the IMF, other international financial institutions will play the largest role in providing grant aid and loans to Ukraine . There is also the question of what the U.S. can or should do bilaterally to help Ukraine .
 Some experts are skeptical whether the U.S. should play a key role in resolving Ukraine’s crisis .
 A strong U.S. and EU push for a pro-Western Ukraine could exacerbate that split . Others note that the country is divided politically, that a large minority in Ukraine doesn't appear to favor a Western orientation .
 Some analysts believe that a high-profile U.S. and European role could further irritate Russia . Ukraine is a highly sensitive issue .
 Moscow has many powerful means of pressuring Ukraine, they claim . This could have a negative impact on the situation in Ukraine and on Western relations with Moscow .
 Others are skeptical that close cooperation with Russia on Ukraine can work well in practice . Some are also skeptical of close cooperation on Ukraine .
 Moscow, they claim, aims at subordinating Ukraine, or at least the eastern and southern parts of it, to its control . Moscow says it aims to subordinate Ukraine to its own control .
 Moscow views itself to be involved in a zero-sum competition with the West over Ukraine and is deeply suspicious of U.S. and EU motives .