 This precipitated an international crisis due to concerns over a potential invasion . The crisis was sparked by concerns over the threat of a possible invasion .
 Satellite imagery shows movements of armour, missiles, and heavy weaponry . Satellite imagery showed movements of armoured weapons and armour .
 The troops were partially withdrawn by June 2021, though the infrastructure was left in place . The troops are partially withdrawn, but the infrastructure remains in place.
 A second build-up began in October 2021, this time with more soldiers and with deployments on new fronts . By December over 100,000 Russian troops were massed around Ukraine on three sides .
 Russian officials from November 2021 to 20 February 2022 repeatedly denied that Russia had plans to invade Ukraine . The crisis was related to the ongoing War in Donbas, itself part of the Russo-Ukrainian War .
 In December 2021, Russia advanced two draft treaties that contained requests for what it referred to as "security guarantees" The treaties included a legally binding promise that Ukraine would not join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and a reduction in NATO troops and materiel stationed in Eastern Europe .
 NATO rejected these requests, and the United States warned Russia of "swift and severe" economic sanctions should it further invade Ukraine .
 The crisis was described by many commentators as one of the most intense in Europe since the Cold War .
On 21 February 2022, Russia officially recognized the two breakaway regions in eastern Ukraine as independent states . Russia deployed troops to Donbas in a move interpreted as Russia's effective withdrawal from the Minsk Protocol .
 The breakaway republics were recognized in the boundaries of their respective Ukrainian oblasts . The boundaries extend far beyond the line of contact .
 On 22 February, Putin said that the Minsk agreements were no longer valid . Putin said on 22 February that the agreements were not valid .
 Russia launched a full-scale invasion into Ukraine on the morning of 24 February . The Federation Council unanimously authorised the use of military force in the territories .
 Recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics by Russia 4.2.2 .recognition of the Donetsk andLuhansk people's republics by the Russian government .
 Ukraine was recognized as an independent country since 1991 . Despite being recognized as a former USSR constituent republic, Ukraine was perceived by the leadership of Russia .
 In 2009, Romanian analyst Iulian Chifu and his co-authors opined that Russia has pursued an updated version of the Brezhnev Doctrine . The doctrine dictates that the sovereignty of Ukraine cannot be larger than that of the Warsaw Pact's member states .
 pro-Russian Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych and the leaders of the Ukrainian parliamentary opposition signed a settlement agreement that called for an early election . This view is built upon the premise that Russia's actions to placate the West should have been met with reciprocity from the West .
 Yanukovych fled from Kyiv ahead of an impeachment vote that stripped him of his powers as president . The following day, Yanukovych fled.
 Leaders of the Russian-speaking eastern regions of Ukraine declared continuing loyalty to Yanukovych . The 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine has caused pro-Russia unrest in the east .
 War in Donbas started in April 2014 with the creation of the Russia-backed quasi-states of the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics . This unrest was fomented by Russia as part of a coordinated political and military campaign against Ukraine .
 The Minsk agreements allowed the fighting to subside in Donbas, leaving separatists in control of about a third of the region . The agreements allowed fighting to subside in the region.
 Since 2019, Russia has issued over 650,000 internal Russian passports among an unconfirmed overall population . Ukrainian government considered it as a step towards annexation of the region .
 American historian Timothy Snyder described Putin's ideas as imperialism . Snyder describes Putin's idea as imperialism.
 British journalist Edward Lucas described it as historical revisionism . The British journalist called it "historical revisionism"
Russia has said that a possible Ukrainian accession to NATO and the NATO enlargement in general threaten its national security . Other observers have noted that the Russian leadership has a distorted view of modern Ukraine and its history .
 The announcement was made following the Ukrainian government's crackdown on Viktor Medvedchuk earlier that month .
 Medvedchuk was a leading pro-Russian Ukrainian opposition politician and tycoon with close personal ties to Vladimir Putin . He was also a leading Ukrainian opposition leader .
 SBGS border patrol in Sumy spotted a Russian Mil Mi-8 helicopter trespassing 50 metres into Ukrainian territory .
 Russian troops fired mortars at Ukrainian positions near the village of Shumy in Donbas . Ten days later, four Ukrainian servicemen were killed by Russian troops .
On March 24, Zelenskyy announced Ukraine's intent to take back Crimea . Russia refused to renew the ceasefire in Donbas on 1 April .
 NATO began a series of military exercises known as Defender Europe 2021 . The next day Russia sent troops to the Ukraine border .
 The military exercise, one of the largest NATO-led military exercises in Europe for decades, included near-simultaneous operations across over 30 training areas in 12 countries . 28,000 troops from 27 nations were involved in the exercise .
 Russia criticized NATO for holding Defender Europe 2021, and deployed troops to its western borders for military exercises in response to NATO's military activities . Russia criticized the deployment of troops to western borders as a response.
 Russia has a sizable troop buildup along the Russo-Ukrainian border by mid-April . The deployment led to Russia having a sizable deployment along the Russian border by April .
 A Ukrainian estimation placed the deployment at 40,000 Russian forces for Crimea and the eastern portion of the Russo-Ukrainian border . A Ukrainian estimate put the deployment of 40,00 Russian forces in Crimea at the time .
 60,700 Russian troops were stationed at Crimea and Donbas, with 2,000 military advisors and instructors in eastern-Ukraine alone . It was estimated that 60,000 Russian troops had been stationed in Ukraine .
Dmitry Peskov, a spokesman for Vladimir Putin, disagreed with the Ukrainian statements . Komchak says the buildup, expected to increase to 53 battalion tactical groups, posed "a threat" to the military security of Ukraine .
 Between late March and early April 2021, significant quantities of weapons and equipment from various regions of Russia were transported towards the Russo-Ukrainian border and into Crimea .
 The flight allegedly took place on the Russo-Ukrainian border . It was emphasized by the original sources that the flight had allegedly taken place .
 Ukrainian representatives of the Joint Centre of Control and Coordination sent a note to the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine regarding pro-Russian intentions .
 A Ukrainian serviceman was killed as a result of shelling of Ukrainian positions near the town of Nevelske in Donetsk . The next day, the mission confirmed the death of a child in Russian-occupied Donbas .
 The water pumping station in the "gray-zone" between the villages of Vasylivka and Kruta Balka in South Donbas was de-energized, cutting off the water supply to over 50 settlements .
 Ukraine blocked the flow of the Northern Crimean Canal, which had supplied 85 percent of Crimea's water . Crimea was annexed by Ukraine in 2014 .
 Crimea's reservoirs were reportedly depleted and water shortages ensued . Water reportedly only available for three to five hours a day in 2021 . Crimea's water reservoirs were subsequently depleted .
 Crews and ships of the Caspian Flotilla will perform final naval exercises in cooperation with the Black Sea Fleet . Interfax reported on 8 April that the crews and ships will perform the final exercises in cooperate with the Fleet .
 Ukraine's initiative was supported by several countries, but the Russian delegation failed to appear at the meeting . The Russian delegation refused to provide explanations .
 Ukrainian consul Oleksandr Sosoniuk was detained in Saint Petersburg by the Federal Security Service . He was allegedly while "receiving confidential information" during a meeting with a Russian citizen .
 Yevhen Chernikov, a senior Russian diplomat of the Russian embassy in Kyiv, was declared persona non grata in 19 April in Ukraine . He was forced to leave the country within 72 hours .
Ukrainian artillery boats were escorting civilian ships when the incident occurred . The incident occurred when the Ukrainian artillery boats are escorting civilians .
Ukrainian ships threatened to use airborne weapons to deter provocations from FSB vessels . It was reported that Ukrainian ships threatened.
 The incident ended without any casualties . Russia announced the closure of parts of the Black Sea to warships and vessels of other countries .
 The Ministry condemned the decision as a "gross violation of the right of navigational freedoms" The decision was made by the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea . The Ministry said the decision was a violation of rights guaranteed by the convention .
 Russia had concentrated more troops near the Russo-Ukrainian border than in 2014 . Russia must not "obstruct maritime passages of the International strait to ports" in the Sea of Azov, according to convention .
 Russia reportedly imposed temporary restrictions on flights over parts of Crimea and the Black Sea from 20 to 24 April 2021 . Russian Minister of Defence Sergey Shoigu announced a drawdown of military exercises on 22 April 2021.
 Equipment at the Pogonovo training facility was to remain for the annual military exercise with Belarus scheduled in September 2021 . The annual exercise is scheduled to take place in September 2019 .
 Medvedev concluded that Russia should do nothing in regard to Ukraine and wait until a Ukrainian government comes to power that is genuinely interested in improving relations with Russia . He added that Russia knows how to wait .
 Russia has only withdrawn a few thousand troops since the previous military buildup . The U.S. Department of Defense reported on 5 May 2021 that Russia had only withdrawn thousands of troops .
Several Russian units back to their native barracks, vehicles and equipment were not withdrawn, leading to fears that a re-deployment might occur . Despite withdrawals of several Russian units, many Russian units remained in the country .
In early November 2021, reports of Russian military buildups prompted U.S. officials to warn its European allies that Russia could be considering a potential invasion of Ukraine . Experts and commentators believed that Putin was seeking a stronger hand for further negotiations .
 The Ukrainian military intelligence estimated that the figure had risen to 90,000 by 2 November . Russia had again amassed 100,000 troops near the Russo-Ukrainian border .
 Putin denies any possibility of a Russian invasion of Ukraine . Putin also accuses NATO of undergoing unscheduled naval drills at the Black Sea .
 Reznikov estimated that the Russian military buildup consisted of 94,300 troops . Reznikov estimates that the military buildup includes 94,000 troops .
Major elements of the Russian 41st Army and the 1st Guards Tank Army had been re-positioned to the west . The Russian 20th and 8th Guards armies were already positioned closer to the Russo-Ukrainian border .
 Russia is planning an upcoming major military offensive into Ukraine scheduled to take place in January 2022 . Additional Russian forces have been reported to have moved to Crimea .
 Russia began a slow evacuation of its embassy staff at Kyiv beginning in January 2022 . Russia began the slow evacuation in January.
 The motives of the evacuation remain unknown and were subjected to multiple speculations . The motives remain unknown .
 Russia is in its final stages of completing a military buildup at the Russo-Ukrainian border . It is amassing 127,000 troops at the region, according to an intelligence assessment .
 Among the troops, 106,000 were land forces, the remainder were naval and air forces . The remainder of the troops are naval andAir forces .
 There were 35,000 more Russian-backed separatist forces and another 3,000 Russian forces in rebel-held eastern Ukraine .
 The assessment estimated that Russia had deployed 36 Iskander short-range ballistic missile systems near the border . Many are stationed within striking distance of Kyiv . The assessment estimates that Russia has deployed 36 Arekander missile systems .
 The assessment also reported intensified Russian intelligence activity . The assessment was also reported to have intensified Russian Intelligence activity .
In late-January 2022, major Russian military units were relocated and deployed to Belarus under the auspices of previously planned joint military exercises to be held in February that year .
 The Eastern Military District was deployed to Belarus along with combat units drawn from the District's 5th, 29th, 35th and 36th Combined Arms Army .
 On 28 January, Reuters reported that three anonymous American officials had revealed that Russia had stockpiled medical supplies .
 Two of three officials claimed that the movements were detected in "recent weeks" Two of the three officials said that the movement is adding to fears of conflict . The movements are believed to have been detected in recent weeks .
 Zelenskyy warned that Russian forces could invade and take control of regions in eastern Ukraine in 2022 .
On 5 February 2022, two anonymous U.S. officials reported Russia had assembled 83 battalion tactical groups for a full-scale invasion on Ukraine . They predicted that a hypothetical invasion would result in 8,000 to 35,000 military casualties and 25,000 civilian casualties .
Officials anticipated that the possible launch window could start on 15 February and persist until the end of March . Extreme cold weather would freeze roads and assist in the movement of mechanized units .
 The Kaliningrad, a Ropucha-class landing ship, was among the six landing ships departed for Sevastopol on 8 February 2022 . TheKaliningrad was one of the six ships to depart for the Russian city on February 8 2022 .
 The Korolev, the Minsk, and Kaliningrad from the Baltic Fleet, reportedly sailed to the Black Sea for naval exercises . The Olenegorskiy Gornyak from the Northern Fleet reportedly sailed in February .
 The first was a naval exercise on the Black Sea, which was protested by Ukraine as it resulted in Russia blocking the naval routes . The second involved a joint military exercise between Belarus and Russia held in regions close to the Belarusian border .
 Ukraine held separate military exercises of their own, involving 10,000 Ukrainian troops .
 National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan said an attack could begin at any moment prior to the 2022 Winter Olympics at Beijing . Both exercises were scheduled for 10 days .
 media reports based on acquired U.S. intelligence briefed to several allies with specific references to 16 February as a potential starting date for a ground invasion . Separately, the media published several reports based upon acquired U States intelligence .
 The United States ordered most of its diplomatic staff and all military instructors in Ukraine to evacuate . The U.S. also ordered most military instructors to evacuate.
 Numerous countries, including Japan, Germany, Australia and Israel, urged their citizens to leave Ukraine .
 The next day, KLM suspended its flights to Ukraine, while other airlines shifted their flight schedules to limit exposure across the country .
 A Russian military helicopter heading south from Minsk, 23 February 2022 . The helicopter is headed south from Russia's capital Minsk .
 Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba says no response had been received from Russian authorities within the required 48-hour deadline .
 President Biden warned Americans in Ukraine should leave as soon as possible . Russian invasion could begin on 16 February 2022, he said .
 Ukraine requested that an emergency meeting within the OSCE be held within the following 48 hours . Russia was expected to provide a response .
Emergency meeting of the OSCE requested by Ukraine was held on 15 February . The emergency meeting was held in Ukraine on February 15 .
 units from Russia's Southern and Western military districts had begun returning to their barracks following the completion of "exercises" near Ukraine . The Russian delegation was absent from the meeting .
On 16 February, the Secretary General of NATO, Jens Stoltenberg refuted Russian claims of retreating troops . In a press conference held the subsequent day, Biden commented that they could not verify such reports .
 The Russia Foreign Ministry called earlier Western warnings of a Russia invasion on this day ""anti-Russian hysteria" President Zelenskyy called for a ""day of unity"" in anticipation of Russian threats .
 On 17 February 2022, top officials from the U.S. and NATO stated that the threat of an invasion remained . Russia was still actively looking for a casus belli for an invasion against Ukraine .
 Biden announced that he was convinced that Putin had made a decision to invade Ukraine . On 18 February, Biden announced he had been convinced that he had made the decision .
 Belarusian Ministry of Defence announced the continuation of the Allied Resolve 2022 military exercises . Two Ukrainian soldiers were killed while another five were wounded by artillery fire from separatists .
 On the same day, several news outlets reported that U.S. intelligence assessed that Russian commanders had been given orders to proceed with invasion .
 The SBU arrested a Russian military intelligence agent who was attempting to recruit operatives to conduct attacks at Odessa . On 10 January 2022, the SBU announced it had arrested the agent .
 The HUR MOU accused Russian special services of preparing "provocations" against Russian soldiers stationed at Transnistria . It was later suspected that Russian hackers might be responsible for the incident .
 The Biden administration later revealled that the Russian government deployed Russian operatives, trained in urban warfare and explosives, as saboteurs to stage a fabricated attack against Russian proxy separatists .
 The British government said Russia was preparing a plan to supplant Ukraine's government via military force and install a pro-Russian puppet administration . The Russian government denied the claims .
 Both Murayev and the Russian government deny the allegations . The Russian government blames NATO member-states "led by the Anglo-Saxons" for the crisis .
 On 3 February, the United States said that Russia was planning to use a fabricated video showing a staged Ukrainian "attack" as a pretext for a further invasion of Ukraine .
US intelligence sources warned in mid-February that Russia had compiled lists of Ukrainian political figures to be targeted for either arrest or assassination . The Russian government denied any plans to orchestrate an invasion .
 Putin spoke of discrimination against Russian speakers outside Russia . "Russophobia is a first step towards genocide," he said .
 Several international organizations, including the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, found no evidence supporting Russian claims .
 The main geopolitical goal of the U.S. is to push Russia back to the East as far possible . The U. S. is also trying to get Russia to return to the West .
 Russian-speaking population out of their current places of residence is needed . To that end, a policy to force the Russian-language population out is needed.
 Ukrainian Ground Forces announced a meeting in April 2021 regarding territorial defences to strengthen and protect the nation's borders and critical facilities .
 During the same month, Zelenskyy visited Ukrainian defensive positions in Donbas .
 According to Russia, Ukraine deployed 125,000 troops to the Donbas conflict zone in December 2021 . According to the Russian government, the conflict zone was in the middle of the year .
 The U.S. estimated in December 2021 that Russia could assemble over 175,000 troops to invade Ukraine . The United States estimated in October 2021 that the country could assemble more than 175,00 troops .
 Oleksii Reznikov, Ukrainian Minister of Defense, stated that "we have 250,000 official ... members of our army" He said that the army has 250,00 members of the Ukrainian army .
 Reznikov claimed that Russia could launch a large-scale attack on Ukraine in late-January 2022 . Reznikov said Russia could attack Ukraine in January 2022 .
 Ukraine's Territorial Defense Forces recruited additional citizens and trained them in urban guerrilla tactics and firearms use .
 FGM-148 Javelins to be delivered to Ukraine, 21 January 2022 . The U.S. airman of the 436th Aerial Port Squadron at Dover Air Force Base prepares the Javelin for Ukraine .
 NATO member nations in January 2022 began providing military aid, including lethal weapons . The United States gave approval to its NATO allies to send anti-armor missiles and other US-made weapons .
 The first U.S. shipment of 90 tonnes of lethal weapons arrived in Ukraine on 22 January 2022 . The first United States shipment of some 90 tonnes arrived in the country on January 22 2022 .
 The United States provided FGM-148 Javelin antitank missiles, anti-armor artillery, heavy machine guns, small arms, ammunition, secure radio systems, medical equipment and spare parts . US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley threatened
 In December 2021, the U.S. government approved additional defense aid of US$200 million to Ukraine .
 This was in addition to previous aids to Ukraine, making the total defense aid in 2021 worth US$650 million . This was the total aid to Ukraine in 2021 .
 Deliveries of lethal weapons from the United States started the following month and included .50 BMG caliber ammunition, M141 Bunker Defeat Munition and Javelin systems .
The Biden administration approved deliveries of American-made FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missiles to Ukraine . The United States also intends to transfer Mil Mi-17 helicopters to Ukraine, previously flown by the Afghan Air Force .
 In January 2022, the Biden administration granted permission to transfer American-made equipment to Ukraine . The move was approved in January 2022 .
 Estonia donated Javelin anti-tank missiles to Ukraine. Latvia and Lithuania provided Stinger air defense systems and associated equipment . Other NATO members also provided aid to Ukraine .
British and Canadian military training programs were bolstered in January 2022 . Pre-existing British and Canadian training programs had been bolstered .
 The British deployed additional military trainers and provided light anti-armor defence systems . Canadians deployed a small special forces delegation to aid Ukraine .
 Britain supplied Ukraine with 1,100 short-range anti-tank missiles in January . British Defence Secretary Ben Wallace announced that Britain had supplied Ukraine.
 On 20 January, Sky News reported that 2,000 short-range anti-tank NLAW missiles had been delivered via Royal Air Force C-17 transport aircraft between the UK and Ukraine .
Royal Air Force RC-135W Rivet Joint surveillance aircraft being deployed to monitor Russian forces on the Russo-Ukrainian border . Danish government announced they would provide Ukraine with €22 million defense package .
 Poland announced its decision to supply Ukraine with lethal weapons on 31 January 2022 . Ukraine had asked the Netherlands for arms assistance on 20 January, and a parliamentary majority supported it .
 A tripartite format of cooperation was launched between Poland, Ukraine and the United Kingdom . It intended to provide significant quantities of light ammunition, artillery shells, light mortar systems, reconnaissance drones, and Polish-made Grom surface-to-air missiles .
 NATO Enhanced Forward Presence and Operation Atlantic Resolve United States paratroopers of the Immediate Response Force were deployed to eastern Europe to reinforce NATO's eastern flank in February 2022 .
 Spanish Defence Minister Margarita Robles announced that the Spanish Navy was being deployed to the Black Sea on 20 January 2022 .
 The patrol vessel Meteoro, acting as a minesweeper, was already en route . The frigate Blas de Lezo departed on 22 January .
Spain is considering deploying the Spanish Air Force to Bulgaria . She announced that the Spanish government was considering deployment to Bulgaria.
Clashes between Russia and Ukraine fighting in Donbas escalated significantly on 17 February 2022 . Alleged clashes between the two countries began in February 2012 .
 Ukrainian military reported 60 attacks on 17 February . daily number of attacks over the first six weeks of 2022 was 2 to 5 .
Russian state media also reported over 20 artillery attacks on separatist positions the same day . Russian state media said over 20 attacks were carried out on separatists positions .
 Ukrainian government accused Russian separatists of shelling a kindergarten at Stanytsia Luhanska using artillery . Three civilians were injured in the shelling, including three civilians .
 The Luhansk People's Republic says its forces had been attacked by the Ukrainian government with mortars, grenade launchers and machine gun fire . On 18 February, the Donetsk People'sRepublic and the Luhansans Republic ordered mandatory evacuations of civilians from their respective cities
 Ukrainian media reported a sharp increase in artillery shelling by the Russian-led militants in Donbas .
 Five saboteurs were killed in the morning that day in Rostov Oblast . Two infantry fighting vehicles had penetrated the border from Ukraine .
 Ukraine denied being involved in both incidents and called them a false flag . Ukraine denies being involved and says they were not involved .
 The Ukrainian News Agency said that it was forced to shut down as a result . The Ukrainian news agency said that the shut down was a result of the shutdown .
 Donetsk and Luhansk people's republics will be recognized on 21 February 2022 . President Putin, Denis Pushilin and Leonid Pasechnik will sign decrees recognizing independence . The self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic will be recognised by international recognition .
The request was endorsed by Minister of Defence Sergey Shoigu . Putin said that the decision on recognition thereof would be taken on that day . The request is endorsed by the Defence Minister of Defense .
 treaties "on friendship, co-operation and mutual assistance" between Russia and the republics were inked .
 The recognition decision was promptly condemned by President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen and the European Council Charles Michel in identical statements on Twitter .
 Western countries rolled out sanctions against Russia in response to the recognition of the two breakaway republics . Russia has been hit by sanctions in the past.
 UK Prime Minister Johnson announced sanctions on five Russian banks on 22 February 2022 . Rossiya Bank, Industrialny Sberegatelny Bank, General Bank, Promsvyazbank, and Black Sea Bank, and three billionaire associates of Putin .
EU foreign ministers blacklisted all members of the Russian Duma who voted in favour of recognition of the breakaway regions . EU investors banned from trading in Russian state bonds, and targeted imports and exports with separatist entities .
 Japan said it would strengthen its sanctions against Russia to also include financial institutions and military equipment exports . Japan said that it would also strengthen its penalties against Russia .
 New Zealand is prohibiting export of goods to the Russian military and other related security forces . New Zealand also prohibits export of items to Russian military.
 Singapore to block certain Russian banks and financial transactions . Singapore will block certain banks and transactions .
 It will also control the export of items that could be used as weapons against the people of Ukraine . It will control export of goods that could also be used in Ukraine .
 South Korea's government decided to tighten export controls by banning shipment of strategic items . South Korea is the country's largest country in South Korea .
 UK would employ sanctions to target banks, members of Putin's closest circle, and wealthy Russians .
Several independent media outlets confirmed that Russian forces were entering Donbas on the same day .
 The Federation Council unanimously authorised Putin to use military force outside Russia . On the same day, the Federation Council voted to approve the use of military force .
 Ukrainian President Zelenskyy ordered reservists called up, while not committing to general mobilization yet . On 23 February 2022, an unidentified senior U.S. defense official said that 80 percent of Russian forces assigned and arrayed along Ukraine's border were ready for battle .
 Ukrainian parliament approves decree of President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on the introduction of a state of emergency from 00:00 on 24 February 2022 across the territory of all Ukraine, except Donetsk and Luhansk regions, for 30 days .
 Moscow time on 24 February 2022, President Putin announced the beginning of a "special military operation" in the Donbas region .
 Reports of big explosions came from multiple cities in central and eastern Ukraine, including Kyiv and Kharkiv .
 The United States was swift to announce that it would not send U.S. combat troops into Ukraine to intervene militarily . The U.
 The United States repeated its commitment not to send ground troops into Ukraine for fear of provoking war between the United States and Russia . The U.S. has not sent ground troops to Ukraine since the Ukraine crisis began .
 Many observers believed that Russian military operations in Ukraine would inevitably lead to the capitulation of the Ukrainian government and end to the country's national sovereignty .
 Pre-invasion day panorama from southeastern Ukraine, February 23, 2022 .
 CIA director William Burns met with senior Russian intelligence officials in Moscow to convey to the Kremlin Biden's concern about the situation on the Russo-Ukrainian border . Biden also met with Russian officials to convey the Kremlin's concern over the situation .
 CNN reported that Burns spoke by phone with Zelenskyy following the meeting in Moscow .
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken discussed reports of "Russian military activity" in the area with Le Drian . At the same time, Pentagon Press Secretary John Kirby confirmed that the U.S. continued to observe "unusual military activity"" by Russia .
 A week later, the Office of the President of Ukraine acknowledged that Russia was building up "specific groups of troops" near the border .
 Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba urges French and German governments to prepare for a possible military scenario of Russia's actions against Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg in Brussels . Ukraine has intensified diplomatic efforts.
 The new Ukrainian defense minister, Oleksii Reznikov, went to Washington D.C. He met with U.S. secretary of defense Lloyd Austin on 18 November .
 British defence secretary Ben Wallace visited Kyiv on 16 November . Israel maintains strong relationship with both Ukraine and Russia .
 In April 2021, Zelenskyy asked the Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to mediate the situation between himself and Putin .
 Israeli President Isaac Herzog told Zelenskyy that the new Israeli government under Prime Minister Naftali Bennett was willing to resume efforts at Ukrainian mediation .
In late January, the United States was again discussing sanctions with European allies in case of a Russian invasion . Bennett raised the idea in a meeting with Putin two weeks later at Sochi .
 Biden said the sanctions would be "swift and severe, including a ""game over" strategy of targeting Russian banks, bond markets and the assets of elites close to Putin . The sanctions are expected to target Russian banks and bond markets .
 The proposed cut-off of Russian banks from Visa, Mastercard and SWIFT payment systems was withdrawn . This approach was also criticized, and was also criticised .
 Putin promised Macron not to carry out new military initiatives near Ukraine . Macron promised not to carried out newmilitary initiatives near the Ukraine .
 U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Wendy Sherman meets with Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov in Geneva on 10 January 2022 . President Joe Biden and Russian President Vladimir Putin talked by videoconference .
 Biden told Putin that the U.S. did not plan to deploy offensive weapon in Ukraine . Putin's aide said the United States did not want to deploy an offensive weapon .
 Biden also warned that if Russia continued aggression against Ukraine, it would lead to "serious costs and consequences" The U.S. has increased military presence in the eastern members of NATO, and increased assistance to Ukraine .
 Putin's aide says it would cause a total severance of relations between Russia and the U.S. The following day, Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov addressed a question about Russia's security guarantees .
 The United States delivered a formal written response to Russia's security demands on 26 January 2022 . The U.S. delivered the formal written reply to the Russian demands .
 Putin says U.S. response has failed to address Moscow's "three key demands" Putin says the United States failed to respond to Moscow's three key demands . Russia's military infrastructure has been brought back to the status quo of 1997 .
 Russia handed a letter to the U.S. ambassador that blamed Washington for ignoring its main security demands . The risk of Russian invasion of Ukraine was being assessed by the United States and NATO as very high .
 The UN Security Council meeting was convened on 31 January 2022 to discuss the ongoing crisis . The meeting will be held in New Year's Eve .
 Russia tried to block the meeting, but the request was rejected with ten votes for the meeting to go ahead . The meeting was held in Moscow.
 Russia's ambassador to the UN, Vasily Nebenzya, accused the West of "hysterics" and of "whipping up tensions" over Ukraine .
 Ukraine was not abiding by the Minsk Protocols of 2014 and 2015 to end the conflict with the separatists . According to him, Ukraine was "pumping Ukraine full of weapons" contrary to the M Belarus Protocols .
 Russia has deployed 112,000 troops near Ukraine's borders and in Crimea, UN Sergiy Kyslytsya says . 18,000 deployed at sea off Ukraine's coast, with 18,00 deployed off the country's coast .
 China's permanent representative, Zhang Jun, said the meeting was counterproductive and "quiet diplomacy, not megaphone diplomacy" was needed .
 The 21 February intervention in Donbass was widely condemned by the UN Security Council . No resolution was agreed at the meeting .
 Russia invaded Ukraine during this UN Security Council emergency meeting aiming to defuse the crisis . Russia invaded the country during the meeting .
 Russia invaded while holding the presidency of the UN Security Council for February 2022 . Russia has veto power as one of five permanent members .
 NATO and U.S. Responses from NATO and the United States in January 2022 referred to NRC, the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, the Helsinki Final Act and other treaties and forums .
 Reactions to the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis could be merged into Reactions. Reactions will be held in the Russian crisis .
 Please consider summarizing the material while citing sources as needed . Please consider the material as needed.
 Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba said Russian troops' build-up on the north-east border with Ukraine, in Ukraine's eastern war zone, and in Crimea were the gravest since the attack on Ukrainian sailors in the Kerch Strait in November 2018 .
 In November 2021, Kyrylo Budanov, the chief of Ukraine's military intelligence, said that Russia was preparing for an attack by the end of January or February 2022 .
 On 25 January 2022, defence minister Oleksii Reznikov said he saw no immediate threat of a full-scale Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy called on the West not to create a "panic" in his country over a potential Russian invasion . He said constant warnings of an ""imminent" threat of invasion were putting the economy of Ukraine at risk .
 Zelenskyy said that "we do not see a bigger escalation" than in early 2021 when Russia's military build-up started .
 On 12 February 2022, Zelenskyy said of the White House's warnings about the "imminent" threat of the Russian invasion that "the best friend of our enemies is panic"
 Volodymyr Zelenskyy criticized the ""policy of appeasement"" towards Russia . He called on the Western countries to help .
 Ukraine will not respond to provocations by Russian-led militants in Donbas, he says . Two Ukrainian soldiers were killed and two Ukrainian soldiers killed in the region .
 On 22 February 2022, Zelenskyy said he will consider severing Ukraine's diplomatic relations with Russia . He said he would consider cutting ties with Russia in 2022 .
 Russian officials repeatedly denied that Russia had plans to invade Ukraine . Russia's foreign minister Sergey Lavrov meets with United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken on 2 December 2021 .
 U.S. State Department blames "malicious propaganda by the United States State Department for the situation"
 Russian deputy foreign minister Sergei Ryabkov said that Russia does ""not want and will not take any action of aggressive character. On 30 November, Putin stated that an expansion of NATO's presence in Ukraine would be a "red line" issue for Russia .
 Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov accused the U.S. and its allies of waging a "propaganda campaign" about Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 On 21 February, President Putin signed a decree recognizing the two self-proclaimed separatist republics in Donbas as independent states .
 Albania and Kosovo would be willing to deploy Albanian Armed Forces and Kosovo Security Forces in a putative future mission in Ukraine if the U.S. decides to lead such an endeavor .
 Argentina's government issued a statement condenming the use of force in Ukraine on 22 February 2022 . It called for diplomatic negotiations to maintain international peace and security .
 The statement appealed to all parties involved to resolve their differences through dialogue . It says the UN Charter and International Law has full respect for human rights .
 Armenia called on Russia and Ukraine to solve all problems through diplomatic dialogue, negotiations, in accordance with the norms and principles of international law and the UN Charter .
 Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne offered assistance to Ukraine in combating Russian cyber attacks .
 She also urged Australians living in Ukraine to evacuate . She also called on Russia to "de-escalate" tensions .
 Similar sentiments were expressed by Finance Minister Simon Birmingham, who warned that Australia would raise financial sanctions against Russia in the event of hostilities .
 Belarus – President of Belarus and Chairman of the Supreme State Council of the Union State, Alexander Lukashenko, on 21 January 2022 said the Union state ""d not want war" But all those who would threaten Russia and Belarus would find themselves in difficulty .
 On 18 January 2022, the Digital Forensic Research Lab of the Atlantic Council published a review of Russian troops in the Republic of Belarus .
 In particular, it was about unloading Russian BM-27 Uragan multiple rocket launchers at Rechytsa station in the Gomel Oblast north of Kyiv .
 Belarus says it will provide any support to Russia, both military and economic support . The self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk people's Republic will also offer military assistance .
 We will share the last piece of bread with people who suffer in Donbass . We'll share it with them and with those who suffer from Donbass.
 Belgian Chief of Defence Michel Hofman said that Belgian forces were on standby in the Baltic . But today it is too early to say where and how the situation should escalate, he said .
 Putin and Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro arrived in Moscow for trade talks with Putin on 16 February 2022 . Brazil's president Jairbolsonaro and Putin arrived in Russia for talks.
 Bulgaria opposes "escalation of military measures before all other diplomatic means are used" Bulgaria has as of yet ""no national position"" on the situation .
 Canada would provide Ukraine with a CDN$120 million loan, but would not transfer military equipment . In January 2022, Justin Trudeau stated that Canada would give Ukraine a $120 million loans .
 On 14 February 2022, Trudeau announced that Canada would provide a $500 million loan and send $7. million in lethal equipment to Ukraine .
Proposed truce resolution would thus begin on 28 January 2022 and conclude on 20 March 2022 . Under this timeframe, the proposed truce would begin on February 28 2022 .
 Colombia's President Ivan Duque instructed its Chancellery to contact all Colombians registered as residing in Ukraine to offer them repatriation assistance .
 On 15 February 2022, Ivan Duque stated that Colombia will accompany the international community imposing sanctions in case of military aggression against Ukraine . Duque said Colombia will join the international Community imposing sanctions .
 Croatia's President Zoran Milanović stresses his role as Croatia's commander-in-chief . He calls NATO's military build-up in the region "inconsistent and dangerous conduct" in international security affairs .
 Cuba's Miguel Díaz-Canel expressed his support for Vladimir Putin during the crisis . Cuba's President Vladimir Putin has been in power since 2008 .
 Lithuania's State Defense Council convened to discuss Russian-Ukrainian tensions on 10 January 2022 . Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania will meet in January 2022 to discuss tensions .
 The council decided to increase the number of troops and speed up military modernization plans . In response to the aggressive Russian military behaviour, the council increased the number troops .
 Latvia increased its military presence in the eastern part of the country on 17 January . The country's military presence has increased in the past year .
 Prime Minister of Estonia announced an extraordinary increase in defense spending by €380 million for the current fiscal year .
 The Baltic states also decided to accelerate their own weapons acquisitions, including a joint rocket artillery system . The Baltic States also decided.
 Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania also requested increased military deployments of NATO and American troops in the Baltics to deter aggressive Russian behaviour . Estonia, Lithuania and Estonia also requested increase military deployments.
 Finland and Sweden received strong criticism from Russia for not accepting new members . Sweden and Finland had been maintaining neutrality .
 Finland's President Sauli Niinistö and Prime Minister Sanna Marin insisted on Finland's right to decide what alliances it would join . In January 2022, both President of Finland and PM Marin insisted.
 Russian threats sparked a debate in both countries about applying for NATO membership .
 Swedish Armed Forces deployed troops to the strategic island of Gotland on 13 January . It is a response to unusual Russian military activity .
 French Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian spoke with Ukrainian Minister for Foreign Affairs Dmytro Kuleba . France was anxiously monitoring the movement of Russian troops to the Ukrainian border and the temporarily occupied territories .
Kuleba assured Kuleba of France's continued support for Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . He assured France's support for Ukrainian sovereignty .
 German Chancellor Angela Merkel demanded Russia reduce its military presence near Ukraine's borders .
 In December 2021, German chancellor Olaf Scholz warned of "consequences" for Nord Stream 2, a Russian natural gas pipeline project operated by Gazprom .
 Germany had maintained a policy of not providing Ukraine with lethal weapons . Ukraine had been given lethal weapons by Germany .
Germany reportedly blocked Estonia from exporting weapons of German origin . On 21 January 2022, Germany reportedly blocked Estonian exports of German weapons .
 Germany announced it was going to ship 5,000 helmets to Ukraine on 26 January . It said it would not supply lethal weapons .
 Hungarian Defence Minister Tibor Benkő declared that there was no need for NATO to deploy its troops in Hungary .
 India – On 28 January 2022, a spokesperson for the Indian Ministry of External Affairs Arindam Bagchi stated that the situation in Ukraine and the high-level discussions between Russia and the United States were being closely monitored .
 The Indian Embassy in Ukraine asked all Indians living in Ukraine to register so that it could provide information in a swift manner .
 India abstained from the procedural vote at the U.N. Security Council ahead of a meeting to discuss the situation on Ukraine border .
 The Indian Embassy in Ukraine asked all its nationals, especially students, to temporarily leave Ukraine if their stay was not essential . The embassy was prompted by "high levels of tensions and uncertainties"
 Indonesian president Joko Widodo issued statements to urge both Ukraine and Russia sides to de-escalate and avoided war .
 He urged countries to focus on ongoing COVID-19 pandemic rather than intensifying the political rivalry . He also urged the countries tofocus on the ongoing COV-19 Pandemic .
 Widodo urged an end to the war as it endangered the world and humanity suffered . Widodo tweeted after the Russian invasion on 24 February .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs condemns a clear aggression against the territory and sovereignty of a nation .
 Iran's Foreign Ministry urged all parties to avoid escalation, while blaming NATO and the U.S. for provocation . The Iranian Foreign Ministry also blamed NATO for provocation.
 In late January 2022, Israel considered airlifting thousands of Jews out of Ukraine . Israel was considering airlifting Jews from Ukraine in January 2022 .
 On 11 February 2022, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement urging Israeli citizens and diplomats to leave the country .
 In February 2022, the Ukrainian Ambassador to Israel claimed Israeli Foreign Minister Yair Lapid ""reiterates rhetoric of Russian propaganda" Lapid said that Israeli officials ""don't see a violent confrontation soon" between Ukraine and Russia .
 The Israeli Foreign Ministry summoned the Ukrainian Ambassador for an official reprimand . The Ukrainian Ambassador was subsequently summoned for an Official reprimand.
 The Israeli Minister of Foreign Affairs has stated that Israel's official policy in the crisis is in support of Ukraine and the West .
 Israel refused to provide Ukraine with batteries for its Iron Dome's missile-defense system over worries it would damage Israel-Russia relations . Israel refused.
 On 23 February, Israel issued an official statement in support of Ukraine's territorial integrity . Israel stated its readiness to provide humanitarian aid to Ukraine .
 Israel provided official condemnation of Russia's action in the Ukraine crisis . Once again said it was ready to provide humanitarian aid to Ukraine .
 Mario Draghi underlined the importance of working towards a de-escalation of tensions . Draghi said an aggravation of the crisis would have had serious consequences .
 Italian government declares itself ready to deploy 1,000 soldiers to NATO's Eastern border . On 13 February, the Italian government declared itself ready for the deployment .
 Foreign affairs minister Luigi Di Maio travelled to Kyiv on 15 February 2022 to meet his Ukrainian counterpart Dmytro Kuleba . He met with Russian foreign affairs minister Sergey Lavrov on 17 February .
 Italy could not tolerate Russia's prevarications and abuses . Draghi described Russia's recognition of separatist republics as an "unacceptable territorial violation of the democratic sovereignty of Ukraine"
 Japanese citizens advised to leave Ukraine immediately and avoid traveling there under any circumstance . On 11 February 2022, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs advised Japanese citizens to leave immediately .
 Kishida condemned Russia's military attack as a violation of Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . Japan said Japan would impose additional sanctions targeting Russia .
 Kazakhstan President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev says Russian president assured him that the territorial integrity of Kazakhstan will not be questioned by Russia . Reports of a possible Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.
 Kenya abstained from a vote about Russia's conduct in Ukraine to hope for diplomacy . Kenya's representative to the UN, Martin Kimani, abstains from the vote .
 Russia's recognition of the breakaway republics on 22 February 2022. Kimani condemned Russia and said it "breaches the territorial integrity" of Ukraine .
 Prime Minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob expressed sorrow over the situation in Ukraine . He expressed hope for a peaceful solution .
 Opposition Leader Anwar Ibrahim later issued a statement condemning the Russian agresssion .
 Moldova President of Moldova Maia Sandu on 21 January 2022 said that the Moldovan authorities were closely watching into the situation in Ukraine and preparing for potential outcomes of the crisis .
 She also demanded the withdrawal of Russian troops from Transnistria . The breakaway territory is legally and internationally considered part of Moldova .
 Sandu also called for calm from Moldova's citizens in the face of the developments in Ukraine . She expressed her confidence in the possibility of a diplomatic solution .
 Sandu met with Prime Minister of the Netherlands Mark Rutte and discussed with him the tensions in the Russia–Ukraine border . Later, he met with the Dutch Prime Minister and discussed the tensions with him .
 Rutte expressed support for Moldova's territorial integrity in regard to Transnistria . Rutte also expressed his support for the Moldova.
 The New Zealand Government was concerned about the Russian military buildup on the Ukrainian border and in Crimea, and supported Ukraine's sovereignty .
 She urged New Zealand citizens in Ukraine to evacuate while commercial means were still available . She urged citizens to evacuate.
 She called on Russia to reduce tensions in accordance with international law . She also called on the Russian government to lower tensions in the region .
 Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said New Zealand was considering targeted sanctions against Moscow . New Zealand's prime minister said the country was considering sanctions against Russia .
 Pakistan will make a high-level visit to Moscow in 2022 . It was announced on 22 February 2022 that Pakistan would make a visit .
 Polish President Andrzej Duda announced that Ukraine could count on Polish support if Russia attacks . Duda called for a unified stance in Europe .
 The head of National Security Bureau Paweł Soloch stated that supporting Ukraine is one of the key priorities of President Andrzej Duda's policy . Duda and Zelenskyy discussed the possibility of further Polish and NATO defensive equipment deliveries .
 Romania would not be militarily involved but would remain in a strategic relationship with NATO . President Klaus Iohannis urged the Romanian Armed Forces to be prepared for any aggression .
 Iohannis also called for a greater presence from NATO, the United States and other allies in the Black Sea region as a result of tensions between Russia and Ukraine .
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Serbia recommended that citizens of Serbia in Ukraine consider temporarily leaving the territory of that country . Serbia's PM Ana Brnabić assessed that a possible more serious aggravation of the relations between Ukraine and Russia would have serious economic implications for Serbia .
 On 22 February 2022, a spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that Ukraine's sovereignty, territorial integrity 'must be respected' and that all parties concerned should continue to pursue dialogue .
 Moon Jae-in orders government ministries to prepare for the safe evacuation of Koreans in Ukraine . He cites the threat of a looming Russian invasion of Ukraine . South Korea is preparing to mitigate damages.
 Korea is eyeing the building crisis over Russia's military build-up near Ukraine . It stands ready to cooperate with its allies, Defense Ministry says .
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs bans its nationals from traveling to all regions of Ukraine . It urges those staying there to evacuate immediately amid brewing tensions in the region .
 The statement called for Russia to withdraw its forces from Ukraine immediately . It called for peaceful resolution of the conflict . The statement also called for Russian forces to withdraw from Ukraine .
 The Minister of Foreign Affairs of Slovakia, Ivan Korčok, stated that the ceasefire and an increase in Russia's military power on the border with Ukraine are a matter of concern .
 Switzerland continued to facilitate direct negotiations between Russia and the U.S. to avert an armed confrontation in Eastern Europe . On 21 January 2022, Switzerland continued the negotiations .
 Swiss President Ignazio Cassis explained during a press conference in Geneva . Switzerland is concerned over growing tensions .
 The Swiss Federal Council announced adherence to all sanctions imposed by the European Union against Russia on 27 February 2022 .
 Switzerland will not allow direct shipments of arms to the war zone and only support humanitarian missions during the crisis . Switzerland will only allow direct shipment of arms. Switzerland will also only allow humanitarian missions .
 Syrian Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad announced its country's support to the Russian recognition of the republics' independence .
 A commercial Turkish-owned vessel was hit by a Russian bomb off the coast of Odessa .
 Turkish authorities say there were no casualties and the ship safely arrived in Romania . Turkish authorities said there are no casualties .
 On 27 February, Turkey referred to the invasion as a "war" Under the 1936 Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits, Turkey allowed Turkey to prohibit Russian and other foreign warships in the Bosporus and Dardanelles .
 The United Arab Emirates largely remained silent on the issue .
 UAE calls for UN Security Council resolution condemning Russia's invasion of Ukraine . U.S. calls for the Emirates to vote for the resolution .
 The Emirati decision was perceived as an independent foreign policy approach, after it depended on the U.S. for such decisions for a long time .
 Russian oligarchs started viewing the UAE as a safe place to move their assets and wealth to the UAE .
 Investigations revealed that the Russian oligarchs and businessmen moved their yachts to Dubai . Investigations reveal that the oligarchs moved to Dubai.
 Their private jets were also found travelling back and forth between Moscow and Dubai .
 rich Russians began shifting hundreds of millions of dollars into UAE banks from sanctioning countries like the UK and Switzerland .
 Crypto companies in the Emirates received multiple requests from the Russians to liquidate billions of dollars of virtual currency .
 Some wanted to use cryptocurrency to invest in Emirati properties . Others wanted to turn the virtual money into hard cash and to store it elsewhere .
 Deputy Prime Minister Dominic Raab said that there was a very significant risk Russia w invade Ukraine . Raab also said that Russia threatened "very significant economic consequences" if it did .
 Prime Minister Boris Johnson said Britain would not "flinch" as he prepared to deploy Royal Marines, RAF aircraft, and Royal Navy warships to eastern Europe .
 British citizens told to evacuate while commercial means are still available . British citizens were told by the Foreign Office to evacuate .
 On 14 February 2022, Johnson warned that an invasion of Ukraine could take place within 48 hours . The invasion would take place in February 2022 .
 President Biden had his first telephone conversation with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy . U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken gave a speech about a potential Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 President Biden said he believed Russia would invade Ukraine on 19 January 2022 .
 On 22 January 2022, the United States Embassy in Kyiv requested the evacuation of non-essential personnel along with their families . The U.S. Department of State requested the evacuations .
 Biden's national security advisor Jake Sullivan publicly warned of the likelihood of a Russian invasion of Ukraine prior to the end the 2022 Winter Olympics . On 11 February 2022, Sullivan warned of a Russia invasion of the Ukraine .
 On 23 February 2022, Uruguay's Ministry of Foreign Relations condemned the use of force . The government urged all parties to reduce tensions and achieve political agreement .
 The Uruguayan government expressed "concern" about the recognition of the separatist republics of Donetsk and Luhansk as sovereign states by Russia .
 The country considers that the United Nations Security Council Resolution 2202 "provides the way for the application of the Minsk agreements, leading to a peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict" The solution should respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine .
 Nicolás Maduro expressed his full support for Vladimir Putin in a Russian diplomatic delegation visit in the Miraflores presidential palace . Maduro ratifies the way for military cooperation in Venezuela .
Juan Guaidó described the action as an "illegal recognition" and "unilateral action of intervention" Maduro further expressed his support after Putin's recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk and the Russian mobilization into the territories .
 Vietnam on 25 February 2022 said it was seriously concerned about the armed conflict in Ukraine and called for restraint . Vietnam – Vietnam on 20 February 2022 – said it is seriously concerned.
 The Ministry of Foreign Affairs published a statement welcoming the recognition of independence of the Donetsk and Lugansk People's Republics by Russian President Vladimir Putin . The spokesperson said Vietnam is paying special attention to the Vietnamese community in Ukraine .
 President Tsai Ing-Wen suggested the National Security Council establish a task force to monitor events in Ukraine . Taiwan – On 28 January 2022, President Ts Kai Ing-wen suggested that the task force would be established .
 She compared Russia's military buildup around Ukraine to China's repeated invasion of Taiwan's ADIZ . She said that Taiwan has faced military threats and intimidation from China for a long time .
 "We empathize with Ukraine's situation, and we also support the efforts of all parties to maintain regional security," "we also support all parties"
 More than a dozen countries encouraged their nationals to leave Ukraine . Western nations warned that a Russian invasion could be near .
 The United States, the United Kingdom, São Tomé and Príncipe are among the countries that have advised their citizens to leave . Germany, U.S. and the UK are among those who say they should leave the country .
On 24 January 2022, due to the conflict, the European Commission proposed €1. billion financial aid for Ukraine .
 The European Union negotiated for possible liquefied natural gas supplies with the United States, Qatar and Azerbaijan . Russia is expected to stop its gas exports to Europe .
 NATO had repeatedly called on Russia to respect Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity . NATO condemned Russia's 2014 annexation of Crimea and support of separatists in eastern Donbas .
 The NATO Parliamentary Assembly met with Ukrainian leaders to reaffirm the alliance's support for Ukraine . NATO members call upon NATO members to enhance delivery of defensive weapon systems to Ukraine .
 NATO and the U.S. re-affirmed NATO's "open door" policy, maintaining countries should freely choose whether to join NATO or not .
 Russia has a choice to either engage in dialogue with NATO and Western allies or choose confrontation . Russia has been criticized for its actions in the past by NATO and allies .
 We need to be clear-eyed about the prospect that Russia will — once again — use military force against Ukraine . Russia will once again use military forces against Ukraine, says CNN.com .
 Anatol Lieven's paper called for referendum on whether to follow Minsk Protocol or hand over separatist-controlled territories to a UN peacekeeping administration .
 Second referendum in separatist regions would then ask voters to choose to reunite with Ukraine, gain independence, or join Russia . Later, a second referendum in the separatist region would ask voters for a second vote to join Russia or join Ukraine .
 Belarusian hacktivists said they had disrupted Belarusian Railway "servers, databases and workstations" Using ransomware, they left automation and security systems in place .
 50 political prisoners were released and Russian soldiers were prevented from entering Belarus . They promised to decrypt the systems if 50 political prisoner were released .
 Tens of thousands of Belarusians will fight against the Russian Federation on Ukraine's side and defend their country's independence . Dzmitry Bandarenka, coordinator of the European Belarus civil campaign, told Charter 97 on 26 January 2022 .
 Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople called for peace in Ukraine on 13 January 2022 . The Patriarch of Constantinople Bartholomew called for a ceasefire in Ukraine .
 Representants of the Romanian Orthodox Metropolis of Bessarabia in Moldova announced that it was closely looking at the situation at the borders of Ukraine .
 The metropolis also published a statement saying that it was praying for peace .
 90 Russian intellectuals, including Lev Ponomaryov and Svetlana Gannushkina, issued a public statement on Echo of Moscow . They urged the Russian government to avoid starting an "immoral, irresponsible, and criminal" war between Russia and Ukraine .
 As of 7 February 2022, the statement had been signed by 5,000 Russian intellectuals . The statement was signed as of February 2022 .
Retired Colonel General Leonid Ivashov published a statement on 31 January . He opposed the ""criminal policy of provoking a war" and called for Putin to resign .
 On 20 February, Ponomaryov and seven others held solitary street protests in Pushkinskaya Square in Moscow .
 On 5 February 2022, from two to five thousand people in Kharkiv protested against the Russian threat to invade Ukraine .
 On 12 February, two thousand people protested in Kyiv to show unity in opposition to the threat of Russian invasion of Ukraine .
 The ICRC deployed one of its largest contingents to Ukraine . The organization has been active since 2014, working closely with the Ukrainian Red Cross Society .
 The ICRC was active primarily in the disputed regions of the Donbas and Donetsk . Open hostilities between Russian and Ukrainian armed forces broke out on 24 February 2022 .
 Thereafter the fighting moved to more populated areas in the Eastern Ukraine .
 ICRC delegation in Kyiv warned on 26 February 2022 that major cities were becoming the frontline with significant consequences for their populations, including children, sick and elderly .
 The ICRC urgently called on all parties to the conflict not to forget their obligations under international humanitarian law to ensure the protection of the civilian population .
 Elon Musk announced 26 February 2022 that he had activated Starlink internet service in Ukraine as the country suffered power outages and gaps in internet service due to Russia's invasion .
 Ukrainian refugee crisis Charity representatives based in Kyiv reported movements of Ukrainian population away from the front lines upon the beginning of the invasion on 24 February 2022 . Ukrainian refugees are expected to arrive in Ukraine in February 2022.
 Moldova, Slovakia, and Poland pledged to keep their borders open to Ukrainian refugees . Poland, Moldova and Slovakia also pledged to open their borders to Ukraine refugees .
 On the first day of the invasion, Moldovan government reported 4,000 Ukrainian refugees, for whom tents were set up by the authorities .
 The following day, Ana Revenco, the Interior Minister of Moldova, 15,800 Ukrainian civilian arrivals . The next day, the interior minister of the country, was the first to arrive in Moldova .
 The Romanian Ministry of Internal Affairs reported around 10,000 Ukrainians refugees in their country upon the start of the invasion .
 There were minimal applications for refugee status in Moldova and Romania . There were no applications for refugees in both countries .
 In Romania, out of 10,000 Ukrainian refugees, only 11 applied for refugee status . In Poland, approximately 100,000 people had crossed the Poland–Ukraine border within two days .
 Poland was admitting children from Ukraine with birth certificates instead of passports . Poland admitted children from the country with birth certificate instead of passport .
 By February 28, more than half-a-million refugees had departed Ukraine . More than half a million refugees had left Ukraine .
 Poland had 281,000, 84,500 were in Hungary, 36,400 in Moldova, 32,500 in Romania, and 30,000 in Slovakia . Poland had 283,000 people in Hungary and 84, 500 in Romania .
 By the end of the second week, there were 2. million refugees abroad . Both the United States and the UK have admitted relatively few refugees .
 Currently, only family members of Ukrainians already residing in the UK can be admitted as refugees to Great Britain . Only family members already living in Britain can be accepted as refugees .
 The United States has only admitted 4,264 refugees in 2019 from the Ukraine . Most of them are barred from entry by lengthy immigration application protocols .
 DEFENDER Europe 21 included a greater number of NATO ally and partner nations conducting activities over a wider area than what was planned for in 2020 . The plan was severely restricted due to the COVID-19 pandemic .
 More than 28,000 multinational forces from 26 nations conducted near-simultaneous operations across more than 30 training areas in a dozen countries . More than 30,000 troops from 26 countries were involved in training areas .
 DEFENDER Europe 21 also included significant involvement of the U.S. Air Force and United States Navy . DEFENDer Europe 21 includes significant involvement with the United States Air Force .
 The exercise utilized key ground and maritime routes bridging Europe, Asia and Africa . The exercise used key ground, maritime routes.
 The exercise incorporated new or high-end capabilities including air and missile defense assets, as well as assets from the U.S. Army Security Force Assistance Brigades and the recently reactivated V Corps .
 Defender Europe 21 was one of the largest U.S.-Army, NATO-led military exercises in Europe in decades . It was part of a series of large-scale military exercises.
 It included "nearly simultaneous operations across more than 30 training areas" in Estonia, Bulgaria, Romania, Kosovo and other countries .
 The two 'people's republics' carved out over the past seven months by pro-Russia rebels have not been recognised by any countries . The rushed vote to elect governments on Sunday was declared illegal by Kiev, Washington and Brussels .
 Croatia will send weapons worth €16. million to Ukraine and provide health care to refugees from the country . Croatia's defence and health ministers said Monday .
 Croatia has decided to grant Ukraine's request for weaponry and will send infantry weapons and protective equipment in the amount sufficient for four brigades . Defence Minister Mario Banožić says Croatia will send the weapons to Ukraine .
 Hrvatska, izjavio je ministar obrane Mario Banožić u ponedjeljak. HrVatska će, na zahtjev Ukrajine, poslati toj z
 The government decided to donate 4,000 artillery shells to Ukraine for about CZK 37 million .
 Defence Minister Jana Černochová sees it as a significant act of solidarity .
 The Czech Republic wants to use the donation to strengthen Ukraine's defense capabilities . The donation will be used to bolster Ukraine's military capabilities .
 American officials had expected additional Russian troops to stream toward the Ukrainian border in December and early January . The force is expected to reach a force of 175,000 .
Russia has amassed more troops on the Ukrainian border than at any time since 2014 . Russia has amassed a total of more troops in Ukraine than ever since 2014, according to Russian media .
 Photographs were taken by Maxar Technologies . The images were taken in Ukraine .
 Ukrainian estimates provided to the OSCE in June 2021 show that only 12,000 Russian forces were removed from the border . The rest remain in place .
 U.S. officials have promised to roil major economies, particularly those in Europe . The response could threaten stability of the global financial system, analysts say .
 The lesson of the past year may be that while the Cold War is long over, Cold War-like behavior lives on . The lesson is that while Cold War has ended, it may not be over .
 The tension between the world's two principal nuclear adversaries has never been worse . In the three decades since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the tension has never be worse .
 The Soviet Union's sphere popped like a balloon in a Chuck E Cheese brawl . This practice lost favor, perhaps not coincidentally, right around the time the USSR's sphere appeared to pop .
With growing shakiness of Pax Americana, this ugly game is rebooting yet again, Andreas warns . Now, he says, with the growing shAKiness of the Pax Americaa as Chinese and Russian powers grow, it's rebooting again .
 A trilateral cognitive institutional approach of the crisis decision-making process . The approach is a trilateral Cognitive institutional approach to the crisis.
 Conceptually, Russia sees Ukraine within the sphere of own 'privileged interests' It means a modernized version of Brezhnev's doctrine of 'limited sovereignty' realized after the occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1968 .
 Putin makes a statement following the Security Council meeting on Donbass recognition on YouTube . Putin made the statement after the meeting on YouTube.
 Russia fulfilled all its obligations, we withdrew troops from Germany, from the central and European countries . It made a huge contribution in overcoming the legacy of the Cold War .
 The North Caucasus is a region in the North Caucasus . The region is home to a number of terrorist attacks .
 At that point, his own party abandoned him and called for a vote to take place . He called for the vote to be held .
 leaders of Russian-speaking eastern provinces voted to challenge anti-Yanukovich steps by the central parliament . Ukraine's regional divisions are a key part of Yanukovich's government .
 The top aim is federalization of the country through all-Ukrainian referendum, one step from secession from the nation .
 Russian-Ukrainian relations are a single whole, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Historically speaking, the idea that a dictator in another country decides who is a nation and who is not known as imperialism is a "imperialist"
 Moscow has a distorted view of modern Ukraine and the goals it wants to achieve there . But that fear has gone hand-in-hand with chauvinistic bluster that indicates Moscow has been distorted .
 Vladimir Putin's inaccurate and distorted claims are neither new nor surprising . Putin's incorrect claims are not new or surprising .
 The result heightened Kremlin's fears of encirclement and of losing the strategic depth that enabled Russia to prevail over Western invaders twice . No amount of assurances that NATO is not a threat to Russia, that its purpose is purely defensive .
 He wants to rebuild the former Soviet sphere of influence that extended from Central Europe through Central Asia . He views this effort as a restoration of Russian greatness .
After the Inauguration of President Joe Biden, America's allies in Kyiv decided to get tough on Medvedchuk .
 The Ukrainian government took his TV channels off the air, depriving Russia of its propaganda outlets in the country .
 NATO warships are entering the Black Sea ever more frequently . The number of such visits increased by one-third last year .
 Russian government appears to turn down the heat on deployments . Minister Shoigu ordered troops to return to their permanent bases by May 1 .
 equipment and weapons of the 41st Army are to remain at Pogonovo, a military training ground 17 kilometers south of Voronezh .
 The Russian military did order some units back to their barracks by May 1, officials say . They did move from the border, officials said .
 Many units left their trucks and armored vehicles behind, a signal that they could go back if President Vladimir V Putin of Russia decided to deploy them again .
 The costs and difficulty of such a move appear to have been sufficient to dissuade Russia for now . In Washington, senior officials believe that an incursion to secure the water supply remains a real threat .
 The Kremlin says Medvedev's article "runs in unison" with Russia's view of the current Ukrainian government . The Kremlin said later Monday that Medvedeva's article "" runs in unison"" with Russia.
Fabrice Cofferini, Oksana Manchuk, and Bloomberg News updated 1 December 2021 .
 In recent weeks, Russian tanks have been moving west towards Ukraine once again . U.S. intelligence circles have warned a cross-border offensive could be on the cards .
 Ukraine's president has said some 100,000 Russian troops are amassed near his country's border . Ukraine's President has said the troops are in Ukraine's border with Russia .
 The U.S. map puts the number at 70,000 . Ukrainian assessments have said Russia has approximately 94,000 troops near the border .
 U.S. and NATO allies are conducting an unscheduled, drill in the Black Sea, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "I want to stress that it is unscheduling, and it is not a drill"
Russian Ministry of Defence Press Service. Photo by Russian Ministry of Defense Press Service .
 Ukraine's defense minister estimates that Russia has amassed more than 94,000 troops near their borders . There is a probability of a "large-scale escalation" in late January, he says .
 Hese units include elements of the 41st Combined Arms Army's 74th and 35th Motorised Brigades, 120th Artillery Brigade, and 119th Missile Brigade, as well as limited elements.
 Janes has identified the likely deployment of several new units to the Crimean Peninsula since the start of October .
 This includes elements of the 247th Airborne Regiment, at least one 42nd Motorised Division T-72B3 battalion . The 34th Motorised Brigade battalion tactical group is likely from the 90th Air Defence Brigade .
 Subsequent video footage indicates some of the equipment has since returned to its base in the Caucasus Mountains .
 U.S. intelligence officials have determined that Russian planning is underway for a possible military offensive against Ukraine . It would include an estimated 175,000 personnel, according to an administration official .
 Russia recently deployed other critical combat capabilities to the region . Russia has also deployed other combat capabilities .
 Numerous sources indicated Russian troops' movements in various parts of Russia, in Belarus and in Crimea .
 Ukrainian officials have warned that Russia could launch an attack on Ukraine from various directions, including from its ally Belarus .
 Aamer Madhani, Ellen Knickmeyer, Geir Moulson, Lorne Cook and Yuras Karmanau have contributed to this article .
 A senior Biden administration official said the Russian troop deployment to Belarus raises concerns that Moscow may be planning to stage troops there to stretch Ukraine's defenses with an attack from the north .
 Yes, I think he will, but he'll pay a serious and dear price for it, she says . He doesn't think now will cost him what it's going to cost him, she adds .
 Russia has a history of people who used to have family links to Russia . I will say realistically if Russia decides to enhance their escalation, of course they are going to do this on those territories .
 If we are going to protect ourselves against one of the most powerful armies in the world, then this will be war . The U.S. military is the world's most powerful army .
 If this will be war, it's going to be a very strong war, and everyone will lose, says CNN's John Sutter . "Everyone will lose," he says .
 Ukraine has accused Russia of blocking its access to the sea as Russia prepares for naval exercises next week . Russia is preparing to hold naval exercises amid spiralling tension in the region .
 The United States acquired intelligence that Russia is looking at Wednesday as a target date . A U.S. official familiar with the findings says the intelligence was obtained .
 Australia, Italy, Israel, Netherlands, Netherlands and Japan have told their citizens to leave Ukraine . Many countries, including Australia and Italy, have said they will leave the Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian army is trying to stage pretext, false-flag operations to provide an excuse for invading Ukraine . They are present in Donbas, and we have seen attempts to stage a pretext for invasion, we say .
 Alexander Zemlianichenko Jr., Vadim Ghirda, Patrick Semansky, Richard Drew, Shamil Zhumatov, Evgeniy Maloletka, Emilio Morenatti, and Geert Vanden Wijngaert .
 The State Security Service of Ukraine is based in Ukraine . It is the country's largest security agency .
 The White House accused Moscow of sending saboteurs into eastern Ukraine to stage an incident that could provide President Vladimir V Putin of Russia with a pretext for ordering an invasion of the country . The incident could provide Russia with an excuse for an invasion, the White House said .
 Report contribued by Frank Jordans and Aritz Parra . The report is based on the findings of a report by the Associated Press .
 Yevhen Murayev, the new leader of Ukraine's parliament, is the country's new leader . The Russian government was considering trying to make a Russia-leaning former member of the parliament .
 UK warns of Russian 'plot' to replace Ukraine government .
 Russia has drafted lists of Ukrainian political figures and other prominent individuals to be targeted for arrest or assassination in the event of a Russian assault on Ukraine . Four people familiar with U.S. intelligence said that Russia has draft lists of Ukraine political figures .
Credible information indicates Russian forces are creating lists of identified Ukrainians to be killed or sent to camps following a military occupation . Wesian forces will likely use lethal measures to disperse peaceful protests .
US accuses Moscow of creating Ukraine invasion pretext with 'genocide' claims . Photographs by Sergei Supinsky .
Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine. Photograph by Andrew Harnik .
 Ukraine is committing atrocities against its Russian-speaking population in the country's east . There is proof that Ukraine is committed atrocities against Russia's Russians .
 Allegations that Ukraine is attacking its own territory and persecuting its own citizens are absurd . Allegations are absurd.
 The programs are part of the country's strategic defense plan in the event of a potential invasion by Russia . They are designed to foster a civilian resistance that can carry on the fight if the Ukrainian military is overwhelmed .
 He describes how volunteers might resist based on the tactics of Islamist militias in Aleppo, Syria . He described how the volunteers may resist.
 Nikolai Petrov is the head of the Russian Defense Ministry . He has been in charge of Russia's defense ministry since 2007 .
 Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia also have received permission from the Biden administration to send U.S.-made weapons Canada . Canada also has a military training program with Ukraine, and Ottawa recently sent a contingent of special forces to assist Kyiv .
 He pointed to American support for the mujahedeen in Afghanistan against the Soviet invasion there in the late 1970s and 1980s . He also pointed to the rise of the Taliban in Afghanistan in the 1980s.
 The level of military support for a Ukrainian insurgence would make our efforts in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union look puny by comparison .
 French President Emmanuel Macron said Tuesday that Russian President Vladimir Putin told him that Moscow would not further escalate the Ukraine crisis . Macron said that Putin said he would not escalate the crisis .
 Macron said it would take time to find a diplomatic solution to the rising tensions . The tensions represent the biggest security crisis between Russia and the West since the Cold War .
 The Israeli position is like the position of the entire West – everything must be done to avoid an armed confrontation with Ukraine . Israel's position is similar to that of the rest of the West, according to the West .
 Reuters. million refugees fleeing Ukraine in just 12 days, mainly into five neighbouring countries . Reuters.
 Agreement on measures to ensure security of The Russian Federation and member States of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Agreement on Measures to ensure the security of the Russian Federation .
 Treaty between The United States of America and the Russian Federation on security guarantees . Treaty between the U.S. and Russia was signed in 2009 .