 United Nations S/PV. Sixty-ninth year 7165 th meeting Tuesday, 29 April 2014, 5.55m. U.N.
 Power Agenda Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council . The letter contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches.
 They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506 .
 The meeting was called to order at 5.55m. Please recycle 0 Accessible document S/PV.
 Ukraine's representative to participate in this meeting. In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative of Ukraine to participate .
 In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in this meeting .
 The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda . The security council will now start its consideration on the issue .
 There was a glimmer of hope within the Council for the first time in weeks . The four-party talks were to be held in Geneva the following day .
 The emerging spirit of compromise of 17 April appears to have evaporated . Today, we regret that we regret the emerging spirit.
 The implementation of the Geneva statement has stalled as parties have sought to give different interpretations of what had been agreed upon . The Geneva statement is expected to be released on Monday .
Unhelpful rhetoric on the part of many has further escalated the already high tensions . Unhelpful language on the parts of many have further escalated tensions .
 The situation in parts of eastern and southern Ukraine continues to deteriorate . Meanwhile, the situation in the east and south of Ukraine is deteriorating .
 On 25 April, a group of military monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and accompanying Ukrainian staff were captured and detained . The group of monitors were captured by Ukrainian officials .
 One monitor has since been released, but the rest remain in detention . The rest of the monitor has been released .
 The United Nations strongly condemns this act and urges those responsible to release monitors and staff immediately, unconditionally and unharmed .
 I urge all those with influence on this situation to assist urgently in resolving it . I urge everyone with influence to help in resolving this situation .
 Groups of militia and armed civilians are increasing in number and springing up in more and more cities across the region . They seize buildings, mounting roadblocks and shutting off whole towns and communities from the rest of the country .
 There are increasing reports of torture, kidnappings and violent clashes . There are also reports of kidnapping, torture and kidnappings .
Self-declared separatist groups reportedly began an operation to take control of Lugansk . Earlier today, self-declaring separatist groups reported to have begun an operation .
 Just a few hours ago, they stormed the police headquarters in the city . They opened fire with automatic weapons and threw stun grenades at police officers still inside the building .
 Earlier in the day, they seized a number of other buildings, including the regional administration building and the prosecutor’s office .
 The State security building in Lugansk, seized in early April, continues to be under the control of these groups .
 Hennadiy Kernes, the mayor of Kharkiv, was shot in the back by unknown assailants, he remains in critical condition . Self-declared separatists seized a local Government building in Kostiantynivka, also in Donetsk oblast, while in Donetsk itself
 What I just described are developments that have occurred only in the past four days, says CNN's John Sutter . The developments have occurred in the last four days .
 The United Nations human rights monitoring mission provides fact-based and publicly available information on the state of human rights in Ukraine .
 The Secretary-General has continued his high-level engagement with world leaders . He has continued to engage with the world leaders.
 He is the Council’s partner in using his good offices to bring about a return to diplomacy and a peaceful resolution .
 Secretary-General: "We must find a way back to the spirit of compromise exhibited on 17 April in Geneva"
 The United Kingdom requested this meeting because we are deeply concerned by the deteriorating security situation in southern and eastern Ukraine . The Geneva agreement of 17 April is not yet achieving its objective to restore stability in Ukraine .
 It is vitally important that the Security Council maintain its close scrutiny of events in Ukraine and the consequent threat to international peace and security . The Security Council is monitoring the situation in Ukraine .
 Russian claims that it is the actions of the Ukrainian Government that are destabilizing the south and east of the country .
 Russia has taken further dangerous steps aimed at fomenting instability in Ukraine . In fact, it is Russia that has taken more dangerous steps .
 It has directed paramilitary actions in Sloviansk, Kramatorsk, Lugansk and other towns in eastern Ukraine . It has also directed paramilitary action in Slovakia.
Russian military jets and helicopters have made incursions into Ukrainian airspace . Russian military jets, helicopters have been making incursions in Ukrainian airspace.
 Russian armed forces have held further military exercises on Ukraine’s border . Russia has held further exercises on the border with Ukraine .
 The Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation has asserted that Russia has a legal basis to intervene in Ukraine in accordance with the right of self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations .
 This is a claim that takes Russia’s distortion of international law to a new level . This is an attempt to take Russia's distortion of law to new level, it says . Russia's claim is a claims that takes Russian law distortion to new levels .
There is no justification or legal basis whatsoever for invoking Article 51. There is no legal basis for invoking the Article 51 .
 This is deeply irresponsible rhetoric intended to threaten and intimidate the Ukrainian Government and provide a bogus pretext for further illegal breaches of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity . The rhetoric is deeply dangerous and dangerous, says the author .
Security situation in eastern and southern Ukraine has deteriorated, says Mr Feltman . As a result of Russia's activities, there has been a further marked deterioration in the security situation .
 OSCE member urges Russia to use its influence to ensure this happens without further delay . We call upon those responsible to ensure the safe treatment and immediate release of the team .
 On 17 April, talks between Ukraine, Russia, the U.S. and the European Union succeeded in agreeing steps to reduce tensions .
 The United Kingdom welcomed that agreement and the opportunity it offered for restoring stability in Ukraine . The United States welcomed the opportunity to restore stability.
 Since 17 April, Kyiv and Moscow stand in stark contrast to the actions undertaken by the two cities . Since 17April, the actions by Kyiv have been in stark Contrast .
 Geneva agreement calls for all sides to refrain from violence, intimidation and provocative actions . First, the Geneva agreement says all sides should refrain from violent acts .
 Ukrainian Government has acted with commendable restraint when dealing with armed groups illegally occupying Government buildings and forming checkpoints .
 The Ukrainian Government has the right and responsibility to uphold the rule of law and protect both its citizens and its officials on Ukrainian territory .
 Russia continues its military manoeuvres and aggressive rhetoric . Russia, on the other hand, continues to be aggressive .
 The agreement called for all illegal armed groups to be disarmed . The agreement also called for an end to the use of armed groups .
Ukrainian Government started to collect illegal weapons almost as soon as it came to power .
 There are now no illegally armed protesters on Maidan Square . There are no armed self-defence groups patrolling the streets of Kyiv .
 Russia has heavily armed paramilitary forces in Sloviansk and other eastern cities . In Slovakia, they are armed with automatic rifles and rocket-propelled grenades . But in other Eastern cities, we continue to see, encouraged by Russia .
 The agreement called for all illegally seized buildings, occupied streets and public places to be vacated . Thirdly, the agreement calls for all illegal seized buildings and occupied streets to be abandoned .
 The Ukrainian Government has been systematically removing barricades around the Maidan and the protests there are gradually shrinking .
 Russia has refused to use its influence to restrain armed groups in the east . By contrast, Russia has not used its influence.
 Foreign Minister Lavrov stated on 23 April that Russia will not call for these illegal militias to put down their arms and vacate buildings . In fact, Lavrov stated in fact, that Russia won't call for them to put their arms down .
 barricades and roadblocks in eastern and southern Ukraine have been reinforced . Instead, barricades have been steadily reinforced in the east and south .
 The abuses include at least 11 kidnappings, among them several Ukrainian and international journalists . The torture and murder of a Ukrainian local official and two other local people are also reported .
 The deplorable shooting of the Mayor of Kharkiv was another sign of violence being instigated against those who have opted to support a united Ukraine .
Ukraine has begun an inclusive process of constitutional reform on the decentralization of power . Ukraine has begun a process of decentralization. Ukraine has started a process that has been in place for years .
 It has announced measures to guarantee the protection of the Russian language . It has condemned instances of anti-Semitism and xenophobia . Russian rhetoric continues to whip up tensions with false claims that Russian language is under threat in Ukraine .
 When one lays out the facts, they cut through the fiction of Russian propaganda . When one lay out thefacts, they cuts through the reality of Russianaganda .
 Russia is now destabilizing southern and eastern Ukraine as part of its plan to undermine the ability of the people of Ukraine to determine peacefully their own future .
 We urge Russia to abandon the dangerous course it is pursuing and to take urgent steps to implement the Geneva agreement . Russia should abandon its dangerous course, we say .
 The Ukrainian Government is striving to take forward a programme of democratization and inclusive constitutional and economic reform that aims to correct the long period of misgovernment and corruption .
 This is not about zero-sum game politics, it is about restoring stability to Ukraine and to the wider region and allowing all the people of Ukraine to determine their own future . This is about restore stability to the country and allowing people to decide their future .
 Since early April, the situation in Ukraine has deteriorated continuously . Ukraine's situation has deteriorated since early April .
 In several eastern cities, armed militants have taken possession of public buildings . The militants are acting in a professional and synchronized manner .
 The similarity of the operations that were observed in Crimea is striking. The similarity to the operations in Crimea are striking .
 Seven observers of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe were taken hostage on 25 April . Seven observers were held hostage on April 25 .
 Kharkiv's mayor was the target of an attack and is in a serious condition . On Sunday, the mayor of Kharkov was the victim of a terrorist attack .
 We are witnessing a subversive operation that has been planned, barely disguised and orchestrated by Russia . We are witness to a covert operation that is barely disguised. We are witnesses to a subverted operation.
 Some time ago, our Russian colleague denied their involvement in Crimea, while his President recognized it . A few days later, President recognized Crimea's involvement .
 No doubt, he will do the same with respect to current events in Ukraine, he says . No doubt.
 France strongly condemns Russia's attempts to destabilize Ukraine . France strongly and unequivocally condemns those unacceptable attempts by Russia to destabilise Ukraine .
 We must halt this course of confrontation and work towards de-escalation, we must stop this course. We must stop the violence and work to de- escalate, we need to stop it .
 The joint declaration agreed on in Geneva on 17 April by Ukraine, Russia, the U.S. and the European Union shows the way forward .
 It calls on all parties to refrain from violence and acts of intimidation or provocation . It also calls on the world to stop using violence and intimidation .
 It provides for the disarmament of illegal armed groups, evacuation of occupied buildings and public places . amnesty for those who lay down their arms, with the exception of individuals with blood on their hands .
 The Ukrainian State can re-establish its sovereignty over its territory. It is essential that the declaration he implemented by all parties without delay and in good faith, he says .
 The OSCE’s special monitoring mission has been asked to play an important role in implementing de-escalation measures . It is essential that it be allowed to act without hindrance, says the OSCE .
 Since the declaration’s adoption we have seen two distinct attitudes .
 The Ukrainian Government has shown its good faith in implementing the declaration by drafting an amnesty law, launching the process of constitutional reform and accelerating the dismantling of barricades and armed groups in Kyiv .
 Ukrainian security forces have responded appropriately to the repeated destabilizing actions they are dealing with, he says . In that regard, I commend the restraint and composure of the Ukrainian security force .
 We can only imagine what any other Government would have done in the face of such provocation on its national territory . We can't imagine what would have been done in such provocation.
 The Russian side has complied with none of the 17 April commitments . On the other hand, the Russian side have complied with no commitments . The Russian team have not yet met any of their commitments .
 There has been no condemnation of the separatist actions that have spawned new violence . No call for public buildings to be evacuated .
 Russia is calling the mission’s presence in eastern Ukraine a provocation .
 Flowever hope that the halt to Russian military manoeuvres on the Ukrainian border is true . It will be the first step in a genuine de-escalation, Flowever says .
 With every moment that passes, the risk of anarchy and bloody incidents grows . The risk of Anarchy and violence grows, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The Russian authorities should choose the path of de-escalation through the immediate demonstration of respect for the commitments made in the Geneva declaration. That is why we call on the Russian authorities to choose the paths of deescalation .
 The EU and the U.S. adopted new targeted sanctions yesterday, the EU says .
 If the situation worsens, we will be forced to ratchet up the sanctions once again . The sanctions will be imposed again if the situation deteriorates .
Presidential elections will be held on 25 May . The election will be free, inclusive and transparent . International observers will be present .
 The possibility that some violent groups could threaten the holding of this democratic exercise is unacceptable, says author .
 We support constitutional reform that would ensure respect for minorities and some decentralization . We also support respect for minority groups and decentralization.
History and geography can bring about an inevitable and desirable reconciliation between Ukraine and Russia . The Russian Federation will renounce its dangerous nationalist illusions .
Madam President. I would like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this emergency meeting on Ukraine .
 The Ukrainian people and the international community will not judge us on the number of public briefings we organize in the Council or the toughness of our statements, hut on our political will and how we use our influence to help Ukrainians resolve the crisis in their country .
 We are witnessing a situation that is deteriorating every day and leading slowly to an open war that might involve countries of the region and beyond . The situation in the region is becoming more and more serious .
 The developments of the last few weeks are alarming and have undermined the diplomatic efforts to defuse the situation . The developments are alarming, and have been undermined by the developments .
 Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, is Ukraine's second- largest city . Hennadiy Kernes, the Mayor of Kharkov, is the mayor of the city . He has been accused of trying to assassinate Kernes .
 The joint de-escalation measures agreed on in Geneva on 17 April . Many of those measures have not been implemented, we are concerned .
 We urge all parties to implement their parts of the agreement, and especially to disarm all military groups and restore all seized buildings . The agreement was signed in 2007 .
 OSCE monitors must play a role and to fulfil their mandate, as stipulated in the joint declaration . The monitors must be allowed to play a part in the OSCE monitoring process .
 Rwanda reiterates its call for respect for Ukraine’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity .
 We believe in the right to peaceful demonstration, but we firmly condemn the use of violence, the seizure of public buildings and the installation of illegal checkpoints by armed protesters .
 Ukraine, like any other country, has a right to restore public order, says Ukraine . "We therefore believe that we have the right to restored public order," says Ukraine's government .
 The crisis in eastern Ukraine is not merely a matter of public order but a political issue that must be resolved through genuine dialogue with all Ukrainian parties . The Russian-speaking minority, including the Russian- speaking minority, are at risk .
 The only way to solve the crisis in Ukraine is through the exercise of political will and influence of all the countries and regional organizations involved, says the Council .
 I would like to thank Mr Feltman for his update on the situation in Ukraine . I would also like to thanks him for his updates on the Ukraine situation .
 I would also like to ask the Council why we are having this meeting. I am wondering, and I am also wondering, why we have this meeting . The Council is holding a meeting on Tuesday night .
I also ask myself another question, not out of false piety but out of sincerity . I also ask himself another question. Not to be false piety, but to be out of sincere .
 Pope Francis asked a few days ago when he received Mr Yatsenyuk. He gave him a pen with which he might sign a peace .
Today my country will merely reaffirm two convictions. It is for that reason that today my country is merely reaffirming two convictions .
 Russia, the United States, the European Union and Ukraine all expressed a willingness to reach an agreement at Geneva . That is in the dialogue of constructive diplomacy that was initiated on 17 April .
 What we saw as willingness to agree, the whole world saw as a source of hope, we say . We saw as willing to agree. What we see as willingness was seen as a Source of hope .
 We must urge the parties to return to a constructive dialogue, we say . Today, however, we must urge them to return. Today, we need to talk again, but we must be more constructive .
 The difficult situation facing Ukraine cannot be resolved through unilateral actions of any sort . The situation facing the country cannot be solved through unilateral action of any kind .
 It is essential that we strictly abide by the principles of the Charter of the U.N. and not intervene in matters under the domestic jurisdiction of the States .
 The Council is meeting today. We have come to say that it is understandable that it's understandable that the council is meeting .
 Argentina calls for immediate and unconditional release of the military observers of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe who are being held hostage . The other reason we are here is to reject violence involving two concrete events, namely, the attack against the Mayor of Kharkiv, in eastern Ukraine,
 Ukraine's people deserve peace, says U.S. ambassador to Ukraine . Ukraine's government says it is ready to help Ukraine emerge from this difficult situation . Ukraine is seeking peace from its crisis .
 On 17 April, Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the European Union and the United States issued a joint statement to de-escalate the crisis that brings us together this evening .
 The statement outlined a series of concrete steps to end the violence, halt provocative actions and protect the rights and security of all Ukrainian citizens .
 Kerry said on 17 April, “All of this, we are convinced, represents a good day’s work. As Secretary Kerry said, ‘We are convinced'
 The day’s work has produced principles and it has produced commitments and produced words on paper . The day's work has also produced commitments.
 Secretary Kerry commended Lavrov and the Ukrainian Foreign Minister for their cooperation in achieving a hard-negotiated agreement . Secretary Kerry also commended Foreign Minister Lavrov and Ukrainian foreign Minister for cooperation .
 The Government of Ukraine has been implementing its commitments in good faith . Since then, the government has been carrying out its commitments.
 Most of Ukraine, including eastern Ukraine, is peaceful, observers say . OSC monitoring mission says most of Ukraine is peaceful .
 The exceptions are in such areas as Donetsk, Luhansk and Sloviansk . Pro-Russian separatists continue to occupy buildings and attack local officials .
 Pro-Russian separatists armed with baseball bats stormed the Government buildings in Luhansk today . They seized control of the centre of municipal activity in one of the largest cities in eastern Ukraine .
 That kind of thuggery mimics the seizures of police stations, city halls and other Government buildings in Donetsk and surrounding areas .
Gunmen kidnapped a senior police officer in Luhansk over the past two weeks . In addition to occupying Government buildings, gunmen kidnapped a police officer .
 In Donetsk, pro-Russian thugs armed with baseball hats attacked peaceful participants at a pro-unity rally . At least 15 people were injured, including 15 people who were injured .
Pro-Russian groups continue to hold 17 buildings in Donetsk, including the regional television broadcasting centre . Also in the Donetsk region, pro-Russian group continues to hold a TV station .
 In Sloviansk, the mayor was kidnapped, as were several journalists . The mayor was abducted in the city of Slovakia .
 Three bodies were pulled from a river nearby, each showing signs of physical abuse . One has been identified as a local politician, another as a 19-year-old pro-unity student activist .
 It is a well-orchestrated campaign, with external support, to destabilize the Ukrainian State . It is an attempt to destabilise the Ukraine State, says a spokesman .
 Pro-Russian separatists in Donetsk have kidnapped and held seven international inspectors . They have openly declared as members of a Vienna document mission, along with Ukrainian escorts .
 My Government joins with responsible Governments everywhere in condemning that unlawful act . The exhibition is before the media of those international public servants .
 The Vienna document was agreed upon by all 57 participating States of the OSCE . It has been a lasting source of cooperation and military transparency . The document has been agreed on by the 57 participating states .
 We call for the immediate and unconditional release of the inspectors and their Ukrainian escorts and their escorts . We call, with others, for their immediate release .
 Russia is signatory to Vienna document to secure release of abducted monitors . We also call upon Russia to help secure their release, even if belatedly, for the record that the abducted monitors were part of a legitimate mission .
 The Government of Ukraine has acted in good faith and with admirable restraint to fulfil its commitments . Since 17 April, the government of Ukraine have acted inGood faith and in admirable restraint .
 The Kyiv city hall and its surrounding area are now clear of all Maidan barricades and protestors . The city hall has been cleared of all the barricades .
 Ukraine voluntarily suspended its counter-terrorism initiative over the Easter holiday . Ukraine chose to de-escalate despite its right to provide security on its own territory and for its own people .
 Ukraine has cooperated fully with the OSCE special monitoring mission . It has allowed its observers to operate in regions about which Moscow had voiced concerns about treatment of ethnic Russians .
 Prime Minister Yatsenyuk has publicly committed his Government to far-reaching constitutional reforms . The reforms will strengthen the power of the regions, he says .
 He has appealed personally to Russianspeaking Ukrainians . He has pledged to support special status for the Russian language and to protect those who use it .
 Russia has not seen a single positive step by Russia to fulfil its Geneva commitments . Russia has been accused of failing to fulfill its commitments to Geneva .
Russian officials have refused to publicly call on separatists to give up their weapons and relinquish their illegal control of Ukrainian Government buildings . Instead, Russian officials have called on the separatists to hand over their weapons .
 Russia continues to fund, to coordinate and to fuel the heavily armed separatist movement . In fact, Russia is still funding the separatist movement.
 Russia has continued to engage in threatening troop movements outside of Ukraine’s border . Russia has also engaged in threatening movements that are designed not to calm tensions .
 The U.S. remains committed to supporting the principles of the Charter of the United Nations . Ukraine will continue to uphold the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine .
 Ukraine is a peaceful, democratic, inclusive and united Ukraine, says Ukraine's president . Ukraine is holding elections in the coming months . Ukraine has been in the throes of a political crisis for years .
 Russia seems committed to destabilization and fantastical justifications for its actions . We remain committed to a diplomatic process, but Russia seems to be committed to its actions, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The truth about what is happening in Ukraine should guide our discussion, says Julian Zelizer . "Truth is the only foundation on which an equitable and lasting solution to this crisis can he based," he says .
 The crisis in Ukraine is the result of a complex fabric of historical and contemporary factors . The crisis is a result of historical, contemporary factors, says the author .
 To tackle the crisis at its roots, both the current situation and the historical facts must be considered . To take into account the legitimate rights, interests and demands of the various regions and ethnic communities of Ukraine, the author says .
 For some time now, various parties including China have been vigorously engaged in mediation efforts and pushing for talks to ease the crisis in Ukraine .
Tensions in eastern and southeastern Ukraine have worsened, with each side more vehemently accusing the other . The tensions have worsened in the region .
 China hopes that all parties concerned will keep in mind the broader picture of regional peace and stability, and the fundamental interests of all ethnic groups in Ukraine .
 China's position on Ukraine remains objective, impartial and responsible . China’s position on the question of Ukraine is objective and impartial . It is also impartial andresponsible .
 China has called on all parties to seek a political solution through dialogue rather than confrontation . China supports international mediation efforts conducive to de-escalating the situation, says China .
 China will continue to play a constructive role in mediation efforts and pushing for talks . China will also continue to push for talks with other countries .
 The Republic of Korea is deeply concerned over the continuing tensions in eastern Ukraine .
 The situation in Ukraine is showing no signs of abating. Despite the agreement reached in Geneva on 17 April, the situation is not abating .
 The city of Kharkiv has been targeted by illegal armed groups, including the seizure of key public buildings and a recent assassination attempt against the Mayor of the city . The city's mayor has been attacked by armed groups in recent months .
 All provocative actions and hostile rhetoric aimed at destabilizing Ukraine must cease immediately . The Ukraine government must stop all provocative actions by Ukraine .
 All illegal armed groups must be disarmed and all illegally seized key public buildings vacated, Geneva statement says . The Geneva statement is part of the Geneva statement .
 We strongly condemn the detention of military monitors of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe . We also strongly condemn detention of Ukrainian staff by illegal armed groups . We strongly condemned the detention.
 The OSCE monitoring mechanism is an indispensable tool for implementing the Geneva statement . It should be noted that the OSCE Monitoring mechanism is a vital tool for Geneva statement.
 It is unacceptable to target international observers who are working to de-escalate the volatile situation . It's unacceptable to targets international observers. It's not acceptable to target observers who have been working to calm the situation .
 The safety and security of all international personnel must be fully guaranteed by all actors on the ground . All actors must also be fully assured of all security and safety .
 constructive dialogue among all concerned parties will be the only way to achieve a peaceful solution. In the light of the ongoing situation in Ukraine, we reiterate that constructive dialogue is needed .
 Geneva statement calls for all parties to implement their commitments . The Geneva statement was released on Monday .
 Ukraine is holding critical elections in May. Ukraine is all the more important to ensure fair and free elections in the country . Ukraine's elections will take place in May .
We hope that the Ukrainian Government will lead an inclusive and transparent constitutional process . We hope that it will lead a transparent and inclusive process .
 We reaffirm our full support for Ukraine’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity . We once again reaffirm their full support.
 I join others in thanking Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on the developments concerning Ukraine .
 The situation in eastern Ukraine is deteriorating alarmingly, especially in Kharkiv, Luhansk and in the Donetsk area .
 We are deeply concerned by the actions of the pro-Russian separatist militias backed by Russia . They are aimed at destabilizing eastern Ukraine and preventing the holding of the presidential elections on 25 May .
Ukrainian security forces have increased attacks against the Ukrainian security forces and violence against the local population . These destabilizing actions have intensified again in recent days, says the author .
 peaceful demonstrators in favour of the unity of the Ukraine were attacked by armed pro-Russian gangs in the city of Donetsk .
 Hundreds of pro-Russian demonstrators seized the building of the regional administration and the prosecutor’s office in the city of Luhansk .
 We condemn those actions and attacks targeting political figures in the strongest terms . We condemn the attacks against political figures.
Horlivka city councillor Volodymyr Rybak's remains were found last week near Sloviansk . The torture and murder of the Horlivka councillor attest to the high level of violence .
 Henadiy Kernes was the target of an assassination attempt . There are differing interpretations with regard to the party responsible .
 The violence of recent days shows once again the need to urgently de-escalate the situation . The violence is once again a need to urgent de- escalate the situation.
 Ukraine, Russia, the European Union and the U.S. welcomed the positive steps taken by Ukraine to fulfil the commitments set out in the Geneva statement .
 The Ukrainian Government has proposed an amnesty for those who leave the buildings they occupy in eastern Ukraine .
 It is ready to launch an inclusive national dialogue on constitutional reform and decentralization . It has acted with restraint in response to the actions of armed militias in the east .
 The international community expects Russia, for its part, to take concrete steps to bring the separatists in eastern Ukraine to de-escalate in accordance with commitments undertaken in Geneva statement .
 We expect Russia to use its influence over separatist movements to convince them to seek dialogue with the Ukrainian Government instead of fighting .
 Russia should publicly condemn the actions of the separatists aimed at destabilizing Ukraine . Russia should call on armed militants to leave the illegally occupied buildings .
 The withdrawal of Russian forces from the Ukrainian border is an essential step for de-escalating tensions, especially in eastern Ukraine . Russia's withdrawal of forces from Ukraine is a key step for easing tensions in Ukraine .
 Two members of the OSCE special monitoring mission in Yenakiyeve were detained on 27 April . We also condemn the temporary detention of two members of a special monitoring team .
 The safety of international observers deployed anywhere in Ukraine must be ensured by all parties . All parties must ensure the safety of observers in Ukraine .
 The OSCE monitoring mission must be able to fulfil its role in the implementation of the Geneva statement . The mission must also fulfil the role of the monitoring mission .
 OSCE inspectors have been held hostage in Sloviansk for the past four days, as well as Ukrainian personnel accompanying them . We call on Russia to continue to use all of its influence on pro-Russian separatists to encourage them to release unconditionally .
 We condemn restrictions on media freedom and on the freedom of expression . We also condemn the restrictions on press freedom .
 The detention and intimidation of journalists have increased over the past two weeks in the east of the country . The detention of journalists has increased in recent weeks .
 The day before yesterday, pro-Russian separatists took control of the regional public television station in Donetsk . It was the same day as the day before .
 Dunja Mijatovic has repeatedly warned against misinformation and propaganda . The Serbian politician has warned against propaganda .
 I would like to join her appeal and highlight that any limitations on the freedom of the press is unacceptable . I would also like to highlight that the limitations on freedom of press are unacceptable .
 Nothing can take the place of direct, substantive dialogue between Kyiv and Moscow to find a diplomatic solution to the Ukraine crisis. Nothing can be done with the Ukrainian crisis.
 It will have harmful consequences for the entire region, Europe and beyond . It will be a problem for the whole of Europe, Europe, and beyond.
 The alternative to dialogue and to de-escalation would have incalculable consequences for international peace and security . The alternative would be more likely to be more peaceful and less violent .
 I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman, for his briefing and to express our grave concern over the deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine .
 Jordan would like to reaffirm Ukraine’s right to protect its territorial integrity and sovereignty and its citizens from threats by the rebels .
 What is happening in eastern Ukraine at the hand of the rebels is a breach of law, says the U.S. embassy in Ukraine .
 The occupation of buildings and installations by means of armed force and the threat to the lives and security of people is not a peaceful expression of opinion . The occupation is not an expression of the opinion.
 If those committing those acts believe that their claims are legitimate, their resort to force removes any legitimacy from their actions . If those commit those acts, they will be forced to stop them .
 Jordan would like to call for immediate release of hostages detained by the rebels in Sloviansk . Jordan would also call for the release of monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
We call on the parties concerned to implement the agreement concluded in Geneva on 17 April . We call on all parties and actors in eastern Ukraine to disarm, withdraw from the installations and buildings they occupy .
 We call upon Ukrainian authorities to work for a peaceful solution to the crisis, we say . We call on Ukraine to abide by international norms in dealing with the mutiny .
 Ukrainian authorities to respect international sanctions criteria and the primacy of international law . That indicates the readiness of the Ukrainian government to respect sanctions criteria .
 We call on all the parties concerned to push for the restoration of stability and security in eastern Ukraine . We also call for a comprehensive dialogue with all linguistic groups and communities .
 The presidential elections are scheduled in May 2014 . President Barack Obama is expected to hold the presidential elections in May .
 Under-Secretary-General Feltman and the convening of this meeting at this delicate moment for Ukraine and the region . We welcome the briefing by Under- Secretary-General.
 Since the last time the Council met to discuss the situation in Ukraine, the crisis has intensified in the eastern area of the country, in particular in Donetsk, Sloviansk, Kharkiv and Luhansk .
 Chile would like to express its serious concern regarding the grave and even fatal consequences of the escalation of the crisis . Chile would also express itsserious concern about the situation .
 The monitors are from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and Ukrainian security staff in Sloviansk .
 We call for their physical and psychological health to be preserved and for their immediate and unconditional release . We also call for the release of their psychological and physical health .
 Council contribute to promoting maximum restraint and moderation by parties, says Council . It is essential to promote maximum restraint by the parties, Council says .
 It is urgent that tensions he reduced and that we return to the spirit of compromise evidenced in the Geneva talks of 17 April, which led to the joint statement .
 Chile believes to he is essential to reducing tensions and restoring security for all citizens . That statement listed concrete steps that he believes to be essential to reduce tensions and restore security .
 We believe it is equally important that a broad and transparent constitutional process be launched, leading to the immediate establishment of an inclusive national dialogue .
 We reiterate again the need to respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine . We reiterate the need for respect for Ukraine's sovereignty.
 Member States must abstain from resorting to the use or threat of use of force against territorial integrity and political independence of any State .
 We call for the parties to find a peaceful solution to the crisis through direct political dialogue . We also support the international mediation initiatives, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/262 .
 That process should be inclusive and ensure respect for the rule of law, human rights and fundamental freedoms and full respect for minorities. That process is needed to be inclusive, says the judge .
 U.N. human rights monitoring group for Ukraine and OSCE aimed at establishing the facts, reducing tensions and helping to create a climate conducive to presidential elections on 25 May .
 I thank Under-Secretary General Feltman for his briefing and his warning to the Council . I thank him for his briefings and his warnings to the council .
 Australia strongly supported calls for the holding of tonight’s briefing to give the Council an up-to-date sense of the continuing destabilization and increased tensions in eastern Ukraine . Much of which has evidently been sponsored and condoned by the Russian Federation .
 The 17 April agreement reached in Geneva on steps to de-escalate the crisis . It includes commitments to refrain from further acts of violence and provocation . The rest of the Council welcomed the agreement .
 A demonstration of serious commitment to reduce tensions and work cooperatively towards a diplomatic and political solution to the crisis. That was a positive development, we hoped, says the British Foreign Minister .
 It has submitted to Parliament a draft law on amnesty for protesters who surrender their weapons . It has been submitted to the Parliament for the first time .
 It has initiated a process of constitutional reform aimed at decentralizing power . The process has been called for decentralization of power .
 It has committed to holding a broad public debate on possible constitutional changes . It has also sought proposals for constitutional reform .
 It has strongly condemned xenophobia, intolerance and anti-Semitism . It has begun an investigation into the distribution of anti-Semitic leaflets in Donetsk .
 It has invited all political groups to discuss ways to resolve the crisis in eastern Ukraine . It has supported the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in its work to de-escalate tensions .
 All evidence at hand points to Russia's continued determination to promote instability and challenge Ukraine’s authority over its sovereignty .
 Russia’s claims that it has no agency in or influence over the actions of armed militia groups operating in eastern Ukraine are not credible .
 The seizure of OSCE observers on 25 April in Sloviansk is a deplorable and cynical act against impartial international personnel working to bring peace and stability to the region . The seizure is clearly intended to impede the ability of all OSCE monitors to work in eastern Ukraine .
Russian military aircraft reported violations of Ukrainian air space by Russian military aircraft . We have also witnessed continued and extreme provocations on the Russian side of the Ukrainian border .
Horlivka City Council representative was abducted and killed by Kharkiv Mayor of Kharkov . Horlivka Council representative died in the shooting on 28 April .
 Government buildings in Lugansk are being occupied by well-armed and coordinated paramilitary groups . We are seeing continued occupation of Government buildings.
 We are seeing the increasing intimidation of local populations and illegal detentions . We are also seeing the increase in illegal detents and intimidation of locals .
 Under-Secretary-General Feltman has just reported to us increasing reports of violence . People killed, wounded, beaten and tortured, he says .
 Ukrainian Government to take measures to ensure security and protect its citizens in its own territory . In those circumstances, it is appropriate and necessary for the Ukrainian Government itself to take steps .
 It has shown considerable restraint in the face of extreme provocation . It has a right to enforce the rule of law and respond in a manner proportionate to the circumstances .
 Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs Lubkivsky said Ukraine would protect its people from provocation in a civilized manner so as to avoid bloodshed .
 Ukraine's recent acceptance of jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court with respect to crimes committed in its territory from November 2013 to February 2014 .
 We urge Ukraine to extend the ICC’s jurisdiction to crimes committed beyond that date and to accede to the ICC Statute . Ukraine should extend the jurisdiction of the ICC to crime committed beyond the date .
 For its part, overwhelmingly, the international community remains united in its support for Ukraine’s sovereignty and territory integrity . The international community is in its position that Russia cease its illegal intervention and interference in Ukraine .
 Security Council members confirm confirmation of other Security Council member statements . The Security Council has been briefed on the matter .
 Australia continues to call on Russia to meet its Geneva commitments . Australia is calling for Ukraine's elections on 25 May to proceed without interference or obstruction .
 Russia's efforts to defuse it are imperative. Active, genuine and immediate efforts by Russia are imperative . Russia has been trying to stop it from happening .
 The recent events in south-eastern Ukraine and the country as a whole are of the most serious concern . The events in the country are of a serious concern, say experts .
 The Kyiv regime, spurred on by Western well-wishers, are stubbornly pushing the country to disaster . The Kyv regime is being pushed to disaster by the West .
 Western colleagues have spoken many critical words regarding the activities of protesters in south-eastern Ukraine .
 If Western colleagues had actually demonstrated a tenth of that commitment to maintaining order during the events at the Maidan, the crisis could have been prevented .
 On 17 April in Geneva, agreement was reached that all sides should refrain from any types of violence, intimidation or provocation .
In just a matter of days, there was a resumption of the so-called counterterrorist, but actually punitive, operations — out and out violations of that agreement . In just a few days, the counterterrorist operation was resumed .
 In the south-east, there was a deployment of roughly 15,000 military personnel, tanks, armed vehicles, artillery, aircraft and aircraft .
 sub-units are staffed by those from the west of the country . First attempts to bring military pressure to bear on the south-east led to defection of some Ukrainian military .
Political and psychological effect that has had on the south-east and how it ties in with the task of ensuring the territorial integrity of the country .
 Kyiv Government authorities did not intend to implement the agreement of 21 February . It became clear that they had no intention of implementing the agreement .
Real Ukrainians should have collaborated with Hitler to establish a new order in Europe. Pursuant to those declarations, real Ukrainians should not have collaborated.
 I would recall that the collaborators and followers of Bandera killed not only Jews, Poles and Soviet soldiers but also Ukrainians who refused to subscribe to their sloganeering .
 In Geneva, Geneva, there was agreement on the need for a full rejection of extremism . There was also agreement on a need for the full rejection.
 The Right Sector Banderists headed to the east of Ukraine, headed to Ukraine . However, they did not lay down their weapons, instead of laying their weapons .
 Neither the Right Sector with its Nazi slogans nor any other radical organizations have laid down their arms .
Military battalions with names like Dnepr and Donbass in their ranks . They are forming military battalions. They are formed with names such as Donbass and Dneps .
Ukrainian armed forces and the so-called National Guard, comprised of fighters from the Right Sector, are in Sloviansk . How could the militias in the east be convinced to disarm or vacate buildings?
 In Geneva, there was agreement that there had to be a single approach to all illicit activities in Ukraine from whichever side they might emanate . That is from Kyiv, the west, the east or the south .
C cement blockades are still in place in the Maidan city of Kyiv . Several buildings in Kyiv are still occupied, as are several buildings .
 In Washington, D.C., they are saying, uncritically, that the buildings have been legally rented . They are saying that they are not renting them .
 In Geneva, Geneva, there was agreement that there should he amnesty for protestors . There was agreement in Geneva that he should be allowed to walk free .
 Pavel Gubarev, the People's Governor of Donetsk, never had weapons in his hand . He remains in prison . He never had a weapon in his hands .
 He was arrested just because he called for a referendum on the federalization of Ukraine . He is a political prisoner, arrested just for calling for the referendum .
 The monitors of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe confirm that he was tortured and that he is now engaged in an indefinite hunger strike .
 Mr Gubarev is far from being the only political prisoner of the Kyiv regime . He is far away from being a political prisoner.
 One can speak of widespread witch hunts for those who have dared to express their disagreement with the Government in the Maidan . One can also speak of a widespread witch hunt for those.
 In Donetsk region there are already about 10 cases of politically motivated kidnappings . The kidnappings were later transported to Kyiv by special services .
 On 28 April, there was an attack on the life of the popular mayor of Kharkiv, Hennadiy Kernes .
My colleague from the United Kingdom rushed to say that the protesters in the south-east participated in that crime .
 Mr Kernes had indeed spoken out about the chaos in other regions of Ukraine . There were serious political battles between him and one of the heads of the defence and law-enforcement agencies .
 On the same day, the presidential candidate's plane was blocked at the Kherson airport .
 He was the only candidate for the presidential election without State protection . He was only candidate without state protection .
 Mr Tsarev was stripped of his right to participate in the televised debates . He has been stripped of the right to appear in televised debates.
 The key point of the Geneva agreement was broad national dialogue . It was to take into account the interests of all regions and political formations .
 Kyiv Government made certain promises with regard to constitutional reforms and upholding the rights of minorities . The Kyiv government also made promises to uphold rights of minority groups .
 Mr Yatsenyuk submitted to the Rada some sort of draft constitution . According to meadia reports, he submitted to a draft constitution.
 The draft was immediately criticized in the Rada by all sides . It is no surprise that the draft is immediately criticized by the RADA .
 It seems such things are to be substituted by some type of broadening of municipalities . It seems that such things have been replaced by some kind of broadened municipalities .
 The U.S. and European Union have preferred to make strong insinuations against Russia, they say . Instead of genuine collective work to bring Ukraine out of the crisis, our colleagues from the United States and the European Union should have done more .
 Ukraine, Europe and the world are not being considered by these people, says David Cameron . The responsibility for the future of Ukraine and Europe is not considered by some, he says .
 The result is that the Government in Kyiv has done nothing to implement the Geneva document . The result has been that the government has not implemented the Geneva Document .
 Our Western colleagues, first and foremost our American colleagues, do not want, or have not been able, to convince the Government to uphold its obligations .
 Ukraine must clearly understand scope of their responsibility if situation in Ukraine continues to deteriorate. They must understand the scope of the responsibility if the situation continues to worsen . The situation in the Ukraine is expected to worsen.
 It is difficult for us in Russia to see the chaos in such a close, fraternal country. It is very difficult for them in Russia, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 The protests in the east and south brought about the protests. But we understand the reason that brought about them, we say .
 The Kyiv Government is made up of oligarchs . They do not recognize the legitimacy of the Kyiv government .
 In response, they have been accused of terrorism and punished by military operations . In response to the allegations, they are accused of terrorist acts .
 There is a need to lift the order on using arms against civilians, as well as to free the political prisoners and disarm the Right Sector .
 A full constitutional process must take place, including representatives from all regions . A full Constitutional process must be held in place .
 The OSCE mission, headed by Mr Apakan, will provide the Kyiv Government with assistance in establishing national dialogue and seeking understanding with the people in the southeast .
 Most important work to de-escalate should be done by the Kyiv Government, as they call themselves . However, the most important work is needed by the government, says the government .
 I should now like to say a few words with regard to the issues touched on by colleagues . I would like to be able to talk to colleagues about what has happened to me . I should say a couple of words with regards to issues touched by colleagues.
 OSCE monitors in Sloviansk were requested by the Kyiv Government . As such, they were responsible for their security .
 That was either a provocation by the Kyiv Government or just simple stupidity . The Kyiv government was either provocation or just plain stupidity .
 One prisoner has already been released due to health reasons . We are doing everything we can for the freeing of those prisoners, says one .
 With regard to armed forces, our armed forces are on Russian territory, says Russian government .
 An American vessel has remained longer than it was invited to do. They are in Australia, Lithuania, Poland and on the Black Sea . The vessel is in Australia and Lithuania .
 The UK and U.S. are upholding all existing international agreements . But they do so in a transparent manner and while upholding all international agreements, they say .
 Kyiv Government should keep a cool head and not engage in reckless activities with respect to the people in the south-east of the country, where there are many Russian citizens as well .
 Nigerian presidency convening an open meeting, which does not cease to surprise us, judging by some of the statements we have heard . Let me thank the Nigerian presidency for convening this open meeting .
Russian colleague from Russian Federation. I might refer to some of the comments by our colleague from the Russian Federation .
 I would also like to thank Under Secretary General Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing . I would like to thanks Under Secretary general for his briefings .
 The international community had placed high hopes on international mediation and monitoring efforts . The 17 April Geneva statement on Ukraine was released on 17 April .
 The Ukrainian authorities have taken a number of concrete steps to follow up on the Geneva statement . Despite growing provocations, the Ukrainian authorities are taking steps to respond .
 I recall my French colleague referring a number of times to the Internet and Google . I also recall my colleague referring to Google and the Internet .
 The Kiyv city administration building has re-opened . The main thoroughfare of the city, Khreschatik, has been re-opening .
 Important proposals regarding the status of the Russian language, amnesty, greater rights for the regions, as well as limitations on the President's power, have been put forward .
 constitutional reform was being discussed by the Parliament in a public session, Ambassador Churkin said .
 A major debate that includes criticism is a sign of democracy. But, again, a major debate includes criticism of the government .
Unanimous decisions and acceptance of whatever is put on the table is something that ahelongs to regimes, not democratic Governments . Unanimous decisions are something that is ahelong to regimes.
 Kyiv has to do, and should he do actively while involving all the regions and populations, because it affects the lives of the entire population of Ukraine . It is necessary and it is something Kyiv must do, says the Ukrainian president .
 Other issues discussed today include decentralization, constitutional reform, checks and balances, the powers of the President in the future .
 Preparations are taking place for the national elections to be held on 25 May .
 In stark contrast to those efforts, armed separatists, aidead and abetted by Russia, are continuing their assault on Ukraine . Russia is continuing its assault on the Ukraine, adding violence to force and lawlessness.
Men armed with clubs and metal bars smashed windows and doors in Mykolaiv and Konstiantynivka .
 A prounity rally was attacked by men in military fatigues, leading to over a dozen injuries among pro-Ukrainian protesters .
 A few days ago, a Ukrainian helicopter was downed by a rocket-propelled grenade, hardly a weapon so-called peaceful protesters — as labelled by the Russian side — can buy at the local corner market .
 Displays of brutal force, beatings, disappearances, torture, killings and hostage-taking have become a daily reality in eastern Ukraine .
 Russia has yet to issue a single condemnation of the violence carried out by armed separatists . Russia is quick to condemn and brand Ukrainian authorities for alleged crimes .
 The legitimate right of Ukraine, to which our Australian colleague has referred, to defend its territory and its State has been exercised with incredible restraint and caution . Russian propaganda machinery portrayed by the Russian propaganda machine as a bloodbath and a valid cause for intervention .
 From the speaker before me, we heard references to military punitive operations and acts . The speaker before him, he said, "We hear references tomilitary punitive operations"
 Ukraine is carrying out a military punitive action in the eastern part of its country . It is probably the most invisible, impossible military action on Earth .
 To exaggerate to such an extent is going a long way in terms of exaggeration, says John Sutter . Sutter: "To exaggerate" to such a extent, it's going to go long way. It's not a good thing to exaggerate.
 Russia recently ordered Ukraine to withdraw Ukrainian troops stationed on Ukraine’s own soil . On the other hand, in a threatening tone, Russia recently orders Ukraine to pull troops from Ukraine .
 We firmly reject all of Russia’s attempts to validate its intentions and threats to use armed forces or to send Russian peacekeepers into Ukraine .
 As a permanent member of the Security Council, Russia should know better than to exploit the name of peacekeeping to cover up its aggressive expansionist aims .
 The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Representative on the Freedom of the Media, Mr Dunja Mijatovic, is sounding increasing alarm about the treatment of journalists in eastern Ukraine .
 In areas under the control of pro-Russian militants, journalists are attacked, detained, harassed and their equipment taken or smashed .
There is probably something to hide if there is such a distaste and dislike of free media in Ukraine . There is probably a thing to hide, says one journalist .
 We also call for a thorough investigation of kidnappings, torture and killings . We also want to insist that the perpetrators of all such acts he brought to justice .
 U.N. human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine will issue report in mid-May . Report will address growing cases of human rights violations, violent deaths, abductions and disappearances .
 The report will look into the human rights situation in occupied Crimea . We also hope the report will also look into human rights in Crimea .
 A group of camouflage-clad men stormed the Tatar Assembly offices and tore down the Ukrainian flag there .
 The director and editor of Crimean Tatar programmes on Crimean State television have been forced out by local authorities because they had spoken against increasing censorship .
 A new level of banditry by the separatists in eastern Ukraine was reached on 25 April . The separatists kidnapped a group of OSCE representatives .
 The separatists were quoted as saying that they needed to speak to the competent authorities in the Russian Federation .
 My delegation strongly condemns the kidnapping of unarmed OSCE military verification mission observers and Ukrainian security personnel .
 separatists seek to disrupt international observation so that they can continue attacking Ukraine out of sight of the international community . Such acts, as well as the public parading of hostages, speak loudly to the true character and intentions of the separatists .
 The parties with influence on the militant separatists, first and foremost Russia, must take all necessary steps to bring about the immediate release of all hostages, without preconditions . Russia must take the necessary steps.
 The international monitoring and mediation efforts of the United Nations, OSCE and other regional bodies must be fully supported, guaranteed safety and security, and allowed full freedom of access on all of Ukraine’s territory .
 Ukraine prepares for the 25 May nation-wide elections . Those opposed to Ukraine's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity are at it again .
 The intent here could not be more clear — it is to prevent Ukraine’s return to normality . The intent is to stop Ukraine's return to normalcy .
 There are legitimate complaints in south-eastern Ukraine, borne out of decades of mismanagement and corruption and misrule . The previous President, Yanukovych, fled the country in disgrace .
 It is time for the current Government to start seriously addressing issues of socioeconomic development . A lot of discontent is based on the socioeconomic concerns of the population .
 Once separatism is addressed, the level of so-called separatism will diminish, he says . "Once those issues are addressed, I am sure, will diminish," he adds .
 That should not happen, according to some, because it would go against the scenario . Some say it would be a bad idea, but others say it should not .
 My Government condemns the actions of armed separatists and their external sponsors, aimed at further undermining the territorial integrity, sovereignty and independence of Ukraine .
 The onus is now on Russia to stop interfering in Ukraine’s internal affairs and fomenting unrest in Ukraine . Russia has threatened to use force in Ukraine.
 Ukraine is doing its part to implement the Geneva agreement on Ukraine . Ukraine has agreed to implement its own part of the agreement .
 It is time for Russia to live up to its own commitments and to reclaim respect for the Charter of the U.N. and international law . Russia should be more serious about its commitment to international law.
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr Feltman, for his briefing . I would like to thank him for his briefings .
 Chad is extremely concerned by the deterioration of the situation in eastern Ukraine . Chad, like other Member States, is very concerned about the situation .
Following a period of relative calm following the Geneva declaration, we are now faced with new circumstances, marked by the kidnapping of members of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe mission, the attempted assassination of the mayor of Kharkiv .
 Chad condemns those violent acts, which undermine negotiation and reconciliation efforts in Ukraine . Chad condemns the violent acts .
 Chad calls for the release of the hostages and for all parties to he calm and restrained . Chad calls on the hostages to be restrained and calm and calm .
 Chad reiterates its appeal to those countries with influence over the parties to use every possible means at their disposal to give initiate dialogue between them .
 We are convinced that the solution to the problem in Ukraine can only be political . We are also convinced that a political solution is not the only solution .
 It should be sought with respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and unity of Ukraine, pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations .
 Security Council urged to redouble efforts to pursue mediation to bring two sides closer together in seeking a peaceful solution in full respect for human rights .
 The situation in Ukraine remains tense, and the risk of further escalation remains a matter of grave concern to the international community .
 Utmost care needs to be taken to ensure that the crisis does not degenerate into a civil war. Ut most care is needed to ensure the crisis not degenerates into a war .
 If it does, it might become an internationalized conflict, with attendant reverberations everywhere . If it happens, it could become an Internationalized conflict with attendant effects .
 The talks were held about two weeks ago in Geneva between Ukraine, the U.S. and the Russian Federation .
 At the meeting, they agreed on initial concrete steps to de-escalate tensions and restore security for all citizens .
 All sides must refrain from violence, intimidation and provocative actions . It was decided that all sides must stop from violence.
 The meeting specifically called for the disarmament of all illegal armed groups and the return of all illegally seized buildings to the legitimate owners .
 It was agreed that protesters who laid down their arms and vacated the buildings they occupied would be granted amnesty . Significantly, it was agreed they would be given amnesty .
 We believe that the agreement reached in Geneva constitutes the basis for the peaceful resolution of the crisis in Ukraine . We believe the agreement reaches in Geneva.
 Under-Secretary-General Feltman has aptly characterized it. That scenario offered a glimmer of hope, he says .
 Armed men continue to occupy buildings in cities across eastern Ukraine . The level of violence is escalating .
 The capture and detention of monitors from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe is an affront to the international community . The monitors are designated and expected to play a leading role in implementing the de-escalation measures .
 The Secretary-General says international missions working in Ukraine must be allowed to perform their duties unimpeded .
 We call for the immediate release of the OSCE monitors . We urge those with influence in the capitals to use it to that end .
 As in every conflict, the way forward to lasting peace, security and stability in Ukraine lies in dialogue between all the parties concerned .
 The alternative of a military option would only bleed Ukraine’s already open veins . The alternative would only bleeding Ukraine's open veins.
 The Geneva agreement provides a strong surgical procedure that can mend those veins . We believe that the Geneva agreement is good for those with veins .
 The Security Council and the international community constitute the surgical team .
 Let us stabilize and restore the patient to health, or many more may bleed. Let us stabilize and restore patients' health, we say .
Madam President Madam. I thank you for convening this meeting, Madam President, and for the opportunity to address the Security Council . The meeting will take place in the United States.
 Under-Secretary-General Feltman has been briefed by the Council . He has also been given a briefing by the Under- Secretary-General .
 It has been a month since Russia illegally occupied and annexed Crimea, using its military forces and brutally violating international law . Russia's military forces have used its military force and brutally violated international law.
 Russia has not stopped there, and apparently its leaders are now targeting other parts of Ukraine and interfering in its internal affairs . Unfortunately, Russia's leaders are not stopping there .
 The agreements reached at the Geneva meeting of the Foreign Ministers of Ukraine, the Russian Federation, the U.S. and the European Union on 17 April .
 The Government of Ukraine immediately took the necessary practical steps to de-escalate the situation in the eastern regions of Ukraine .
 The Government suspended the active phase of its anti-terrorist operation within just one week . The main objective was the restoration of law and order and the protection of civilians .
 It approved the concept of local administrative reform, whose main principles are decentralizing power in the country . It significantly empowering local communities and improving management at the regional and district levels .
 A draft law on amnesty for participants in the uprisings in the eastern regions has been prepared . It would apply to those protesters who surrender their weapons and evacuate illegally seized administrative buildings, except for those suspected of committing serious crimes .
 The parliamentary coalition has invited all political parties represented in the Ukrainian Parliament to sign a memorandum of understanding on ways to resolve the situation in eastern Ukraine . The coalition wants all parties in the Ukraine to sign an understanding on how to solve the crisis .
 The Minister of Internal Affairs and Security Services has continued implementing a nationwide campaign to seize illegal arms from the population . More than 6,000 weapons have been handed over recently .
 Russia is seeking new ways to destabilize the situation in eastern Ukraine . Russia is preparing and carrying out numerous armed provocations through its agents .
 Russian-sponsored illegal paramilitary units have continued to destabilize the situation in eastern Ukraine . The situation is preparing the ground for a new stage of military aggression .
 The Russian leadership has done nothing to publicly dissociate itself from the armed separatists and provocateurs or to urge them to immediately lay down their arms and release captured administrative buildings . The Russian leaders have not publicly dissociated themselves from armed separatists or from the separatists .
 Russia has not even condemned the seizure of hostages, including journalists, or separatists’ open acts of xenophobia and anti-Semitism .
 Any attempts by Russia to show that the Ukrainian Government is trying to use force against the peaceful Ukrainian population are lies. Any attempts to show the Ukrainian government is using force are lies, Russia says .
 Our Government respects freedom of expression and the right to peaceful assembly, which are guaranteed by the Constitution of Ukraine .
 heavily armed groups led by Russian military seize law-enforcement facilities and administrative offices, kill Ukrainian police officers and take hostages, they are operating like terrorists .
Ukrainian counter-terrorism operations targeted exclusively at illegal armed groups threatening civilians . Ukrainian counter-terror operations are targeted exclusively.
 Russian-controlled army groups are in fact holding the entire civilian population of several towns in the eastern region hostage and have thus transgressed the bounds of humanity .
 Three Ukrainian law enforcement officers were abducted, brutally beaten, tortured and presented to the Russian media as Ukrainian spies, blindfolded and with their hands tied .
 Ukrainian and foreign journalists are being kidnapped, while Russian journalists are allowed to operate in the areas controlled by illegal armed groups . Ukrainian journalists are also being systematically kidnapped .
 A military helicopter was destroyed with a man-portable air defence guided missile . The missile was launched from the air defence system .
 peaceful protesters cannot buy MANPADs in shops. It should be understood that peaceful protesters can't buy them in shops . It should not be thought that protesters can buy MAN PADs.
 Representatives of the military verification mission of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe taken hostage in Sloviansk .
 The detention by force of international observers is yet another testament to the criminal and terrorist nature of the separatist armed groups . The detention is yetanother testament to a criminal andterrorist nature of separatist armed Groups .
 The Russian Federation made no such demand; nor have its leaders in Moscow . In contrast to the demand voiced in many of the statements in the Council today that those hostages be released .
 The leaders of the illegal armed groups have publicly admitted responsibility for all the crimes, even on television . What is important is that they have publicly confessed responsibility for the crimes — even on TV .
 Many members of the illegal militant groups are citizens of the Russian Federation . They are not even trying to hide it, publicly displaying their identification .
Ukrainian law-enforcement agencies have credible evidence of these persons’ involvement in serious crimes . Ukrainian law- enforcement agencies have evidence of those involved in serious crime .
 Volodymyr Rybak, a member of Horlivka’s City Council, and Yuriy Popravko, a 19-year-old activist from Kyiv, were martyred by members of terrorist groups .
 Their bodies, mutilated by torture, were found in the Torets River in Sloviansk .
 Volodymyr Rybak disappeared on 17 April in Horlivka after he tried to remove the separatists’ flag from the building of Hor livka City Council .
 The true identity of the Russian agent has been established as Colonel Igor Girkin of Russian military intelligence . Girkin is registered as a permanent resident of Moscow .
 The Government of Ukraine strongly condemns the acts of terror and violence, including yesterday's attempt to assassinate the Mayor of Kharkiv .
 Russia has not even publicly condemned or dissociated itself from those acts of terror and violence perpetrated by illegal militants since the Geneva agreement . Unfortunately, Russia hasn't even publicly condemn or dissociate itself from such acts .
 I would like to remind the Council that Russia used to deny that its armed forces participated in the occupation of Crimea . I would also remind the council that Russia use to deny it participated in Crimea's occupation .
 Moscow denies any Russian military involvement in organizing and guiding illegal armed groups in eastern Ukraine .
Russia is now threatenting to use force, as demonstrated by its concentration of armed forces directly on the eastern border of our country . Russia is now threatening to use forces, according to the Russian government .
Senior Russian officials have threatened to send Russian troops into the territory of Ukrain under various pretexts . President Putin, Minister Lavrov and Minister Shoigu have been threatening to send troops into Ukraine .
 Russian military activity near the Ukrainian border in the past month has not been routine in nature, but directly related to the developments in Ukraine .
 The withdrawal of troops announced by Minister Shoigu yesterday has not come true . Unfortunately, the withdrawal of soldiers has not been confirmed .
 Russia would remember the provision to use armed forces in Ukraine given to President Vladimir Putin by the Federation Council . British colleague has given us information.
 He also said that Russia had an international legal basis for sending its peacekeeping troops into Ukraine . He said Russia had a legal basis.
 He referred to the right to self-defence under Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations . Russia used during the conflict in the Caucasus in 2008 .
 Let me remind him that Ukraine has never threatened Russia, and never will . Let me reminding him that Russia has never threats Russia, but never will.
 The highest level of cynicism is the Russian reference to the right of self-defence in a situation in which it is acting as aggressor . Russia is interfering in the internal affairs of Ukraine, destabilizing it and trying to create an explosive situation in the eastern regions .
 The scenario that is prepared for eastern Ukraine might be similar to the one implemented by Russia in Abkhazia . Unfortunately, we are deeply concerned .
 Donetsk, Slovansk and Kharkiv have already seen that step taken against the will of the vast majority of the local population and against the Ukrainian Constitution .
 Some Russian heavy military vehicles spotted near Ukraine's borders bearing signs indicating “Peacekeeping Mission’ in the Russian and Ukrainian languages, exactly as happened in Abkhazia, Ukraine .
 presidential elections scheduled for 25 May are a top priority for the Government and for the people of Ukraine . One of the main purposes of that scenario is to disrupt the presidential elections .
 Our steps have been acknowledged and supported by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other parties involved .
 It should make a high-level statement calling on its proteges to free all hostages, to disarm and to vacate all seized administrative premises . It should also make a statement calling for all hostages to be freed .
 It has to condemn all terror and violence committed by those groups and to disassociate itself from such activities . It also has to condemned all terror. and todisassociate themselves from those activities .
 Thirdly, it should stop its war-like rhetoric and start to act in a constructive and civilized manner, says John Sutter .
 We call on the Security Council to give the most serious assessment of the actions and statements hy Russia regarding Ukraine . The Security Council should take the most decisive steps to stop its aggressive appetite and to protect Ukrainian territorial integrity .
 The Russian Federation has asked for the floor to make a further statement . The representative of the Russian Federation wants to make an additional statement .
 The simplest of answers would he to again read the statement he made earlier, which refletcts our vision and position . The simple answer would be the same as the statement I made earlier .
 A great deal has been said here about some sort of wrong interpretation of our positions and statements in various forums and situations .
 Ukrainian colleague even began to depict some fantastic scenario of how he views the further developments unfolding in Ukraine .
 The only scenario that I would want to hear — but do not — is one that includes genuine efforts by the authorities in Kyiv to implement the Geneva document .
 Mr Feltman began by saying that there were various interpretation of the document . He then said that there are various interpretations of that document .
 Kyiv authorities in Kyiv are backing it up, but need to be taken by the authorities in the country .
 The group's lack of action is reflected in the statement I made earlier today. Unfortunately, their lack of actions was reflected in their statement .
 The Security Council has concluded the present stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda . The security Council has thus concluded the current stage of the consideration of it .