 Ukraine put its troops near the Russia border on combat alert following an incident that according to Russia was an attempted terrorist attack . The incident is the latest escalation between the Kremlin and Kiev .
 Russia's secret service says it foiled ‘terrorist acts’ prepared by Ukrainian military intelligence . The aim is to disrupt Russia’s parliamentary elections due on 18 September .
 Putin said he was pulling out of international peace talks on the conflict in eastern Ukraine . In response to the alleged operation, Putin says he is pulling out.
 He said he was no longer ready to meet his Ukrainian counterpart, Petro Poroshenko, and German and French leaders in the so-called Normandy format . The Normandy format has been used for negotiations for negotiations .
 Putin's accusations that Kiev is committing terrorist acts in the disputed peninsula . Ukraine promptly denied all accusations .
 Vladimir Putin summoned his security council and the Russian Navy announced war games in the Black Sea . Putin accused Ukraine of trying to provoke a conflict over Crimea, which Moscow seized and annexed in 2014 .
 The Russian Defence Ministry said its Black Sea Fleet is based in Crimea . Its navy would start to hold exercises in the area to practice repelling underwater attacks by saboteurs .
 There were reports on Thursday evening that the authorities had cut off Internet access in northern Crimea close to Ukraine .
 Ukraine has called the accusations false and says they look like a pretext for Russia to escalate hostilities . Ukraine says the accusations are false and that Russia is trying to escalate its hostilities .
 Putin could use escalation to demand better terms in Ukraine peace process, or to inflame nationalist passions at home . Russian parliamentary elections next month .
 The Russian leader met his top military and intelligence service brass on Thursday . He reviewed "scenarios" for counter-terrorism security measures along the land border, offshore and in Crimean air space .
 Russia has deployed its advanced S-400 air defense missile system to Crimea, Russian news agencies report . The move is part of a retaliatory re-escalation, Russian media reports .
 The announcement comes two days after President Vladimir Putin promised to take counter-measures after clashes between Russian forces and Ukrainian saboteurs in northern Crimea .
 Ukraine will protest vocally against what it will call an unprovoked aggression by Russia, but also NATO, which as reported in late May, launched the long delayed U.S. missile shield called Aegis Offshore .
 Putin appoints a low-profile former diplomat his new Kremlin chief of staff . Sergei Ivanov, a long-time ally, had asked to step down, says Putin .
 The switch comes just over a month before nationwide parliamentary elections . It follows a reshuffle of regional leaders last month .
 Putin named Anton Vaino, 44, to the important post which involves drafting laws for the president to submit to parliament, monitoring their enforcement, and conducting analysis of domestic and foreign affairs .
 Vaino used to work in the Russian Embassy in Japan . He has worked as deputy head of the Kremlin administration since 2012 .
 Ivanov was once spoken of as a possible presidential contender . He is not a household name in Russia unlike Ivanov, who was once considered a presidential candidate .
 Ivanov said he had asked Putin to move him on from the important post after four years . Ivanov, 63, said he wanted to leave the post at the top of the Kremlin .
 Ivanov worked as Putin's deputy when Putin ran the FSB security service . Ivanov also worked for Putin when he was Putin's FSB's deputy .
 He has served as defense minister and first deputy prime minister . He has also served as first deputy PM and defense minister .
 It is unclear as of this moment if this major move at the Kremlin is a harbinger of more political fallout behind the scenes in Putin's closest circle .