 The muzzle of a Ukrainian militar y vehicle is seen in front of a Ukraine flag at a checkpoint in Mariupol .
 Rebels pressed ahead with a referendum on self-rule in east Ukraine on Sunday . The conflict has raised fears of civil war and pitched Russia and the West into their worst crisis since the Cold War .
 The effects of the crisis in the region of Crimea and eastern Ukraine have received much attention . There has been less analytical focus on the possible ramifications for the international system .
 The study found that there is no way back to a status quo ante .
 The contours of a new situation in strategic affairs can be clearly discerned, but the long-term impacts and effects are yet to be seen . The contour of the new situation can be seen.
 The fragmented and at times chaotic information environment, forms part of the challenge for analysis of an ongoing crisis . The fragmented information environment is the challenge of analysis of the ongoing crisis.
Unlike the FOI study1 on the Russian-Georgian war in September 2008, we do not have the advantage of studying a conf lict where the military operations have clear start and end points framing the analysis .
 Events may unfold that could turn the analytical work on its head, rendering parts of the study moot .
 In spite of these apparent risks, it is our view that even an incomplete study will contribute to future analysis .
 Even though the time-frame was short we were able to include many topics of significance .
 The secondary aim is to create a set of analytical jumpingoff points that can contribute in focusing future research, analysis, studies and debate on the relevant issues . The secondary aims are to create an analytical jumping off point for future research .
 The first chapter summarises some of the possible effects of the crisis . It asks to what extent we are facing a systemic shift in world affairs . The second chapter is a look at the potential effects of this crisis .
 Setting the Scene gives a background and analysis the underlying factors and drivers of the crisis from a Ukrainian, Russian and EU perspective .
 Russian 1 Larsson, Robert , Det kaukasiska lackmustestet: konsekvenser och lärdomar av det rysk-georgiska kriget i augusti 2008 .
 A thematic approach, in the areas of international law, economy, energy and sanctions, follows . The approach follows in the area of international Law, economy and energy .
 The next chapter explores the security policy and strategic consequenses of the military . The next chapters will explore security policy, strategic consequences .
 We analyse some global implications for key actors, regions and conf licts . We also analyse some of the implications for the world's most important actors .
 Each chapter has one principal author, with others having contributed specialist writing and advice . Each chapter is written by a principal author .
 The draft chapters were reviewed by the project manager and two co-editors, Dr. Dr. John Sutter . The chapters were written by a team of project managers and two colleagues .
 Former Director of Studies at FOI, Johan Tunberger, cast a reviewing eye on chapters . This was followed by a final seminar, where Mr Tunberger cast a review eye on the chapters .
 Sanna Aronsson, Ebba Lundin and Heidi Askenlöv kept the progress of the work on track . They also gave invaluable support in a million other vital details that helped the work process run smoothly .
 A complex of fast-moving developments that will most likely prove to be a strategic game changer. Hopefully, the result of our efforts during the winter and spring of 2014 will be of use in the further analysis of the complex .
 Russian aggression towards Ukraine in the spring of 2014 was a rude awakening . The Russian aggression against Ukraine in 2014 was an awakening .
 The rest of the world had only a limited and initially feeble response to the world's response .
 Russia appears to have succeeded in its endeavours to illegally annex a part of another country, despite the international norms and rules to which it had signed up . In the short term and on the tactical level, it appears to be successful in its efforts .
 In the longer term and on the strategic level, the outcome is far from certain . The outcome is not certain in the long-term, says the author .
 knock-on effects are now in motion and have yet to settle down again . A number of knock- on effects are in motion .
 The crisis in Ukraine has already gone so far that there is no way back to the status quo ante. Nevertheless, it is clear that the crisis has already went so far .
 The scope of possible outcomes is wide and that the crisis will have local, regional and global effects . In this study, we argue that the scope of potential outcomes are wide .
 Forecasting the outcome is difficult, primarily because the logics and dynamics set in motion vary and interact .
Financial markets react instantaneously, while adjustment of energy infrastructure and dependencies take years . For example, financial markets react instantly, while adjusting of energy and dependencies takes years .
 This makes analysis of a developing crisis kaleidoscopic in nature and presents a level of complexity that is a challenge for politicians, diplomats and analysts alike .
 Seemingly and usually disconnected factors may suddenly interact in unforeseen ways and with different internal logics and speeds, complicating prediction and analysis . The effects of these factors can be unpredictable and unpredictable .
 However, capabilities, infrastructure, cultural patterns and past experiences change more slowly and shape and develop the situation in ways that may narrow the scope of possible future outcomes .
 The breach of trust and clashing interests between an authoritarian Russia and the West is profound and cannot be easily mended . An attempt at a synthesis is an attempt to a synthesis .
 How Russia acts in global economics and security affairs must be considered in combination . Russia's role in the world's economic affairs must also be considered as a factor .
 Russia has an interpretation of its strategic interests where military security is the dominant paradigm . Economic affairs is subordinated to military security . Russia's economic affairs are subordinated .
 The current political leadership acts as though the country can go it alone and take advantage of, or even abuse, international interdependencies to achieve security .
 Russia builds its own multilateral institutions, such as the Eurasian Customs Union . Russia also has its own international institutions, including the European Union, and the EU .
 The goal is for Moscow to be in the centre, with former Soviet republics as dependent satellites . Former Soviet Republics are now dependent satellites in Russia .
 There has been a strong belief in economic interdependence as a tool for peace for a long period of time .
 It has been seen as an important vehicle for integrating Russia in the international community after the Cold War . It is seen as a key vehicle for integration in the world after the war .
 Russia has been reluctant to be integrated on globalised terms . Russia has chosen a path with state capitalism and a high degree of centralism .
 This has lead to growth from extraction of natural resources, but limited innovation and growth in other sectors . This has led to growth in the extraction ofNatural Resources, but also limited innovation in other areas .
 arguments for Russian autarchic policies have been voiced in order to limit Russia's exposure to economic sanctions and dependence on the global economy .
 Absolute security is the goal, which if successful would mean absolute insecurity for everyone else . The goal is to ensure that everyone else is secure .
 Russia has focused on rebuilding its military capability in the last decade . The belief in the military instrument is strong, and Russia has a strong belief in it .
 use of force against smaller neighbours and illegal annexation is a part of the policy . Use of force is part of a policy against small neighbours .
 In Crimea operation, Russia used a combination of tried and tested measures to achieve operational success . The Crimea operation was carried out in Crimea .
 New operational concepts have been under development based on strategic thinking in the Russian general staff . Russia's general staff have been developing new operational concepts in recent years .
 It is debatable whether the operation constitutes anything new . However, it isdebatable whether it is anything new.
 Russia has chosen a path of ‘strategic solitude’ with its behaviour in international affairs . In time it will bring about a higher degree of isolation from the rest of the world .
 The breach of trust brought on by Russia’s actions against Ukraine will take a very long time to rebuild . The breach will take place in the next few months .
 For EU member states, this rude awakening presents a serious challenge in how to cooperate and coordinate policies and actions internally and externally .
 A measured response has to weigh short and long-term interests if it is to be credible . A measured reaction has to be measured and a measured response must be considered .
 The EU project has been so successful that open inter-state conf lict between member states has been ruled out . The project has so far been successful that the EU project will be ruled out.
 In the last decade or so, military modernisation has focused on conf licts outside of the EU . territorial defence has been put on the back burner and defence spending has gone down .
 The EU is now facing a qualitatively different perception of security in its dealings with an authoritarian Russia . Internal success has inf luenced views on security, according to EU officials .
 A different ‘dialect’ on security issues has suddenly presented itself to the EU members .
 What was once written off as part of history has returned with a vengeance. What was written off is now a vengeance .
 Speaking different security ‘dialects’ poses political, ideological and economic challenges in EU-Russian relations . The EU-Russia relations have been tense for years .
 The United States has for a number of years tried to normalise relations with Russia . The U.S. has tried to Normalise Relations with Russia for years .
This policy could also be seen against the backdrop of the earlier US interventionist policies . This policy could be seen as a result of earlier US interventions .
 U.S. priority was on rebalancing to Asia as China’s rise in world affairs gained momentum .
 In the aftermath of 9/11, the United States has spent blood and treasure on interventions with meagre results . The U.S. has spent a lot of money on interventions.
 An old debate on transatlantic burdensharing has returned to the agenda . The debate on the issue is back on the agenda.
 NATO had to a large extent transformed its force structure towards out-of-area operations and crisis management abroad .
 United States military forces and assets 11 based in Europe were primarily thought of as a forward-basing for engagements elsewhere .
 The United States has a global perspective and security commitments worldwide . EU member states at most have a regional perspective with the main interest to keep the United States committed to Europe .
 The EU’s NATO members are strategically dependent on the United States for their military security .
 Amongst themselves, they are still insufficiently coordinated in their military posture to project stability . They remain focused on their own national security issues .
 With the end of the Cold War, the European security architecture has to a large extent focused on crisis management and peace support operations abroad .
 Gradually, structures and institutions have developed to address these tasks . The task is to address the problem of building structures and structures .
 NATO and the OSCE managed to adjust to a post-Cold War world . Two pillars of European security architecture during the Cold War .
 The OSCE had a mission to help with the transition and build confidence after the end of the Cold War . NATO went out-of-area in order not to go out of business .
 The OSCE has been starved of resources and political attention in the past decade . The task of the OSCE remains unchanged, but the institution has been starving of resources .
 NATO has been a key player in transforming nationallyoriented defence forces to be interoperable in a multilateral setting with a focus on out-of-area operations . NATO has also been a major player in changing national defence forces.
 The crisis will force NATO to reassess and refocus its defence posture . The crisis is expected to force the military to re-evaluate its posture .
 For the OSCE, confidence and security-building measures might be back on the agenda . The OSCE has been criticized for its lack of security measures in recent years .
Both institutions will again have to refocus and adjust in order to stay relevant . Both institutions will need to adjust and adjust to remain relevant .
 The EU has the most to lose from the effects of Russian aggression towards Ukraine, says the EU . The EU is most likely to lose the most from Russia's aggression towards the Ukraine .
 The EU's military capability is insufficient or non-existent in many areas, and it is unsure of what it stands for in external affairs . Many basic values are shared within the EU.
 Russia has had plenty of success in bi-lateralising its relations 12 with many EU member states . The EU has been late to raise the issue to the multilateral level .
 The EU took a long time to deal with its dependency on Russian energy in a coordinated fashion . For example, it took long time for the EU to deal.
 With 28 member states, it generally takes a long time for the EU to coordinate a response . With 28 members states, the EU generally takes time for a response.
 When its member states come to decision, what has been lost in the decision-making process is made up for in legitimacy . However, when its member state comes to decision.
 The EU stands out as the weakest link in establishing a cohesive and timely response, while the U.S. has many other priorities on the agenda .
 Europe over the medium to long term is likely to diversify its energy mix and import from more countries than it does today . Russian energy will be available for others, according to the EU .
 China depends on the global liberal economic world order for its development and rise as a global power. Second, on the grand strategic level, China relies on the liberal economic order .
 China may have to change its policies and its approach towards the United States as the primary upholder of this order . If Russia is seen as an unreliable actor and spoiler rather than a trusted partner, China may need to change.
 Despite the so-called pivot to Asia, Chinese-US relations might benefit from Russia’s current behaviour .
 Russian aggression towards Ukraine might provide an example for Chinese actions in its perceived sphere of interest . Third, on the tactical-operational level, Russian aggression might provide a example for China's actions .
Interference in internal affairs must be avoided in the international system. On the one hand, interference in international affairs must not be avoided .
 Europe stands up for human rights and attaches conditions to economic affairs . China may have two different problems at hand, says Peter Bergen . Europe unites in response to Russian actions, Bergen says .
 The ongoing war in Syria has deepened over the last few months and its resolution seems even more remote .
 The modicum of agreement between the U.S. and Russia has evaporated and a negotiated solution is now less likely . The United States and Russia have not been able to reach an agreement .
 The power balance in the Black Sea region has shifted and Turkey's aspirations to be a regional great power may trigger an overreaction . Turkey’s aspirations to a region great power could trigger anOverreaction.
 The domestic politics of Turkey, with an increasingly authoritarian leadership, push it away from European integration, while increasing tensions with its southern and eastern neighbours . The country's authoritarian leadership pushes it away.
 Iran's nuclear policies have been a problem for the international community for many years . Iran’s nuclear policy has been a issue for the world community for years .
 The possibility of a settlement has improved with Rouhani’s leadership, according to Rouhani . Rouhani's leadership has also improved, says Rouhani .
 The U.S. and Russia may stall or attempt to scuttle the negotiations . However, the current tensions may prompt Russia to stall or try to scutttle the talks .
 The outcome of this process, be it positive or negative, will affect regional security among the Gulf states and Iran . It will also have implications for the Syrian conf lict as well .
 Russian aggression towards Ukraine will have implications for individual states, but also for the international system .
 One key issue concerns reform of the United Nations and by extension the capability of the system to manage international affairs . The U.N. has been criticised for its lack of ability to handle international affairs.
 The UN saw a revival after the end of the Cold War and was able to function for a while as originally intended . The UN had a revival in the aftermath of the war .
 There is now a debate on the relevance of the organisation, given its post-World War II structure . Nevertheless, there is still a debate about its relevance .
 The organisation needs reform to address pressing issues and better ref lect the present distribution of power .
 Several states aspire for a seat on the UN Security Council and reform has been on the agenda for some years . Several states have been interested in a seat for years .
 Russia and other ‘former’ great powers among the permanent members of the UNSC . Any reforms seem unlikely for the foreseeable future .
 Russia may see an expanded UNSC in its interest, but its veto power is not up for negotiation . Russia might see an expansion of the UNSC with an expanded power .
 Other members of the permanent five, such as the UK and France, are probably in favour of status quo .
 Relevant and properly functioning multilateral institutions are key for the effective management of international conf licts . Relevant, properly functioningmultilateral institutions is key to the success of the world's largest conf lictations .
 Short-term gains have taken priority over long-term adherence to universally established principles in international law .
 Rather than applying the law thoroughly and objectively, a twisted and selective application of legal precedence has been used to legitimise political preference .
 The law has been used as an instrument for political power and the international community has lost confidence in Russia . The law is being used as a political instrument.
 Russia's actions will continue to shape debates and research agendas for years to come . Russia’s actions will be seen as a key part of the world's future .
 Russia has shown that it is a force to be reckoned with in the international system . Russia has been a force in the world for years .
 We are most likely only at the beginning of a long process of structural changes that will have an impact on the local, regional and even the global level. We are likely to be at the start of the long process, says author .
 The European security architecture, the level of defence expenditures, the robustness of energy policies, and great power relationships in Europe, Asia and the Americas . The wider developments challenge regional cooperation around the world .
 The crisis has acted as a catalyst and speeds up the process of transformation of the international order . The crisis is a catalyst for the change of the world's order .
 Adjustment becomes qualitatively different when regularly incremental changes are disrupted by several factors . Several factors change both quickly and simultaneously .
 The crisis has triggered intense soul-searching on what it means to be European and what a globalised world stands for .
 The global liberal world order stands against an authoritarian, state-capitalistic model, says John Sutter .
 The chapter shows that the increasingly problematic Ukraine-Russia relationship has recently spurred conflicts within Ukraine . Ukraine has simultaneously witnessed a process of consolidation, the chapter says .
 Ukraine is a country of great internal diversity both geographically, ethnically and socially . From Independence to the Orange Revolution Ukraine is an ethnically- and socially- diverse country .
 Large Russian communities exist only in Crimea and the Donbas . But substantial groups of Russians also live in major cities all over Ukraine .
 Ukrainians as well as ethnic minorities in the country have Russian as their first language . Many have only rudimentary knowledge of their ethnic language .
 29. per cent of the total population claimed Russian as their native language . According to the same census.
Almost 40 per cent of Ukrainians spoke Russian at home, according to a recent survey . Almost everyone in Ukraine switches between Ukrainian and Russian without any problems, survey finds .
 At the time of its independence from the Soviet Union, support for independence had come from all over the Ukraine .
 The Supreme Soviet of the Ukrainian SSR adopted the act of independence on 24 August 1991 . Other minorities include Moldavians/Romanians, Belarusians, Bulgarians, Poles, Hungarians and other minorities .
 Most minorities are to be found in the border regions close to their native countries . Most minorities found in border regions near their native nations .
 On the same day, the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet called for a referendum supporting the Declaration of Independence .
 More than 90 per cent of the electorate voted in favor of independence in 1991 . The independence referendum was held on 1 December 1991 .
 support was strongest in the Western and Central Ukrainophone regions . Support was still more than 80 per cent in more Russophone regions in Eastern and Southern Ukraine .
 Crimea and Sevastopol are the only two regions where the Russians constitute the ethnic majority . The support for Ukrainian independence was more than 50 per cent in Crimea .
 Ukraine had never experienced independence before, and political leadership lacked the experience for the task . Support for independence had been widespread, but support for independence was widespread .
 Leonid Kravchuk is Ukraine’s first president, the former Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the Ukrainian SSR . He took over many elements of the national agenda of Rukh, those concerning language and the 'Ukrainianess' of the new state .
 He also tried to develop contacts with the West and resisted pressure from Russia . But he failed to reform the economy, and failed to improve the economy .
Voters of industrial and predominantly Russian-speaking southeastern Ukraine supported Kravchuk’s rival in the presidential election of 1994 . Leonid Kuchma was the former head of a missile factory in Dnipropetrovsk .
 Kuchma promised closer ties to Russia and to make the Russian language the second official 18 language of Ukraine . He eventually followed Kravchuk's policy on the national agenda .
 In both agreements, Russia committed itself to respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity, including Crimea and Sevastopol . In both cases, Russia agreed to respect its territorial integrity .
 Kuchma’s second term in office was overshadowed by scandals, increasing authoritarianism and corruption of his regime .
 This made him more vulnerable to economic and political pressure from Russia . This makes him more susceptible to political and economic pressure .
 By the end of the Kuchma period, Russia had substantially strengthened its grip on Ukraine . Russia had significantly strengthened its Grip on Ukraine by the end.
 Viktor Yanukovych, former governor of the Donetsk region, was chosen as ‘Russia’s candidate’ and Kuchma's crown prince . In the presidential elections of 2004, the Prime Minister, Viktor Yanukovych was chosen to be Ukraine's president .
 The years of corruption and misgovernment had created a strong political opposition in the Verkhovna Rada, the Ukrainian parliament .
 The opposition's candidate was Viktor Yushchenko, a former Prime Minister and former head of the National Bank . The opposition’s candidate was a former PM and former National Bank head .
 The election campaign was marred by fraud, massive corruption and even violence by the authorities . The notorious dioxin poisoning of Yushchenko, which almost took his life, almost killed him .
 The result in the second round of the election on 21 November 2004 was declared in favor of Yanukovych . This despite opinion polls and exit polls that showed a clear advantage for Yushchenko, which in turn triggered the Orange Revolution .
 The Orange Revolution succeeded after several weeks of daily protests by hundreds of thousands of supporters at the Maidan Nezalezhnosti, in Kyiv .
 The results of the original run-off were annulled . Ukraine’s Supreme Court ordered a new vote to be held on 26 December 2004 .
 Yushchenko was sworn in as president in January 2005 . Under intense scrutiny by domestic and international observers, the second run-off was declared to be ‘free and fair’
 Yushchenko’s pursuit of NATO membership and staunch support for Geogia during the Russian-Georgian War of 2008 led to a serious deterioration in Ukraine-Russia relations .
 The absence of political and economic reforms and the constant power struggles within the orange camp also disappointed Ukrainians . The lack of political reforms and constant power struggle within theorange camp also disappointment Ukrainians .
This time, the election was judged by international observers to be honest and transparent . This time, this time, it was judged to be honesty and transparent.
 On a non-constitutional basis, a new parliamentary majority was formed, that re-installed the Constitution of 1996 .
 Some of Yanukovych’s political opponents, Tymoshenko among them, were sentenced to prison terms on political grounds . Some of the Yanukovych's political opponents have been sentenced to jail terms .
 A tougher climate for media, and restrictions on democracy, confirmed Ukraine’s path to authoritarianism . Ukraine's path to an authoritarianism was confirmed by Ukraine's president .
 Yanukovych signed an agreement with Russia on the extension to at least 2042 of the Russian Black Sea Fleet’s basing in Sevastopol . In 2010, Yanukovych signed a deal with Russia in exchange for cheaper gas in the region .
 Yanukovych's decision on 21 November 2013, to pause negotiations on signing the Association Agreement and Deep & Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement with the EU, was met with strong protests from pro-EU demonstrators in Kyiv .
Thousands of protesters crowded the Maidan Nezalezhnosti in a new wave of protests . The protests came to be known as EuroMaidan .
 The bulk of the protesters of EuroMaidan were ordinary citizens . There were also radicals and extremists as in any revolutionary situation .
 The radicals formed self-defence forces at Maidan and many of them died in fights with the Berkut riot police .
 Yanukovych was forced to seek an agreement with the political opposition on 21 February 2014 . After three months of constant protests and repeated, deadly fights in Kyiv, between Maidanists and the Berkut riot police, culminated in the shooting by snipers of more than a hundred protesters .
Under supervision of the foreign ministers of Poland, Germany and France, this agreement reinstated the Constitution of 2004, limiting the powers of the President, and announced early presidential elections .
 The Ukrainian president left the capital the same evening, only to reappear a week later in Russia .
 Yanukovych had forfeited his legitimacy as the country’s president . By failing to comply with the agreement, Yanukovych had forfeit his legitimacy .
 Oleksandr Turchynov took over as acting president and an interim government . Opposition leader Arseniy Yatseniuk was supported by the new majority in the Parliament .
 The Russian language was given the status of a regional language in 13 of Ukraine’s 27 regions . The new parliamentary majority withdrew a controversial language law from 2012 .
 The damage was already done in the primarily Russianspeaking regions of Ukraine . Even if the new acting president repealed the decision, the damage was done .
 The whole peninsula was captured by Russian regular forces based in Crimea together with military personnel without insignia and nationality identification deployed from Russia .
Pro-Russian separatist authorities in Crimea organised an unconstitutional ‘referendum’ on independence . Crimea was annexed by the Russian Federation in March .
 Russia unilaterally terminated the agreement on the Russian Black Sea Fleet . It also lost the income from the 21 Russian lease of the Sevastopol base .
 Ukraine’s military position in the Black Sea became more exposed as a result . Ukraine's strategic position in Black Sea has become more exposed .
 Ukraine's decision to keep its military and naval forces on its bases on Crimea raised doubts as to whether Ukraine was prepared to defend its country militarily . Ukraine’s decision to stay on its base in order to avoid bloodshed has raised doubts .
 Pro-Russian separatists, again likely supported by Russian special forces, started occupying official buildings in Donetsk and Luhansk .
 Local politicians in Donbas started to raise the issue of federalisation of Ukraine . Local politicians are raising the issue.
 Kyiv launched a half-hearted anti-terrorist operation after some weeks of refraining from answering the violence perpetrated by armed groups of separatists .
 There are few grounds within Ukraine for ethnic tensions and violent separatism of the kind that have been going on in Crimea and southeastern regions .
 More than 20 years of independence have thinned out differences between the regions .
 According to the 2001 census, the Russian minority had already decreased from 22. per cent in the last Soviet census of 1989, to 17.2 per cent .
 Some three million people have moved to Ukraine, according to the Ukrainian government . The increase is due to a strengthened national identity in an independent Ukraine .
 This gathering around the concept of Ukraine can also be noticed in voting patterns in the national elections . This gathering will also be seen in the Ukraine's national elections.
Western and central Ukraine had voted for national-democratic parties, and southern and eastern Ukraine . The sharp line noticed during the first decade of independence .
 Almost all of Ukraine votes for national-democratic parties, with Donbas as the only exception . Today, there is practically no difference in the voting pattern as almost all votes for the national- democratic parties .
 Most of the local population in Ukraine's southeastern regions did not feel any pressure or threat that had to do with the language they spoke .
Only 12 per cent and 16 per cent would have supported the decision by the Russian Federation to send its army to protect Russian-speaking citizens of Ukraine .
Support for Ukraine’s territorial unity and unitary political system was also strong in the southeastern regions .
 Federalisation and language issues are not a priority for residents of Ukraine’s southeast .
 About 70 per cent of the local population did not support the idea of secession from Ukraine . About 70% of the locals did not back the idea.
 More than 64 per cent of the local population believed that Ukraine should be a unitary state . Only 11 per cent viewed federalisation as a way to preserve the country's unity .
 11 per cent of residents in southeastern regions want Russian to become the second official language .
 Even during a period of increased pro-Russian separatist activism in eastern Ukraine, the actual support from the local population remained limited .
 It can be assumed that the separatist tensions and the idea of federalisation and secession of regions from Ukraine were largely imports from Russia .
 Pro-Russian separatism has taken root in Donbas, spurred by the increasing number of victims of Kyiv's anti-terrorist campaign and effective Russian propaganda .
 The question is whether Russia is going to annex Donbas or create a quasi-state like Transnistria .
 Russia might continue to destabilise the rest of eastern Ukraine and possibly also the south . Russia might also continue to undermine the other parts of Ukraine .
 Russia has been explicit with its world view for years . President Vladimir Putin, 12 December 2012, has been explicitly explicit with his world view .
 The policy of strategic solitude with a focus on Russian interests has long been in place . The policy is to focus on Russia's interests.
 On the domestic scene, the political system had become increasingly authoritarian . The political system was becoming increasingly authoritarian.
 Crimea and Sevastopol were incorporated into the Russian Federation . It was a surprise to all, but the speed with which they were incorporated came as a surprise .
 This chapter analyses the underlying factors in Russian domestic policies, foreign policy, and military strategic thinking that led to the current situation . This chapter also examines the impact of Russia's foreign policy and military thinking .
 Crimea and Sevastopol were illegally annexed by Russia on 18 March 2014 . Crimea and Crimea were illegally annexed by Russia .
 Russia has demonstrated that it does not refrain from using military force to achieve its objectives . Again, Russia had shown that it doesn't refrain from use military force .
 Russia had broken against the principle of noninterference in other countries’ internal affairs . Russia had previously been a foundation in Russian policy .
 It is hoped that Ukraine will eventually join the Economic Eurasian Union .
 The naval base in Sevastopol is of military strategic importance to Russia . The base is a key military base for Russia .
 Vladimir Putin wants to unite the country around traditional values . He wants to make it clear that no Maidanstyle demonstrations would ever be tolerated in Russia .
 The Russian leadership has a geopolitical view of the world, which inf luences the current foreign and security policy . The Russian leader has a global perspective on the world .
 Inf luence in the world is seen as a zero-sum game, where ‘you win, I lose’ characterises the mind-set .
 At the strategic level Russia chose the path of strategic solitude years ago, with an increased focus on Russia’s national interests 25 years ago .
 Europe was considered weak and decadent, as it had failed to play a dominant role in the world . Europe had been considered weak, decadent and weak . Europe was also considered weak.
 Ukraine closely collaborating with the EU would soon enough drift into the sphere of Nato . From Moscow’s horizon, a Ukraine closely collaborated with the European Union .
 In the period since Vladimir Putin returned to the presidency in 2012, some modifications to Russia's security policy can be discerned .
 The anti-American line became more pronounced than before and it became more authoritarian at home . It became more repressive at home and more authoritarian.
 The objective for Russia ‘is to be strong and to increase its authority in the world’ Putin claimed when the new Foreign Policy Concept was launched in 2013 .
 An implicit fear of the breakup of the Russian Federation colours the threat assessment . The Russian Federation has been accused of breaking up in recent years .
 It shows that the trauma of the fall of the Soviet Union is very much alive, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It shows that it shows that this trauma is verymuch alive"
 The Russian leadership sees Russia as surrounded by enemies approaching its borders . The Russian leader says Russia is surrounded by its enemies .
 The Arab Spring might be an example of how wars are fought in the 21st century . The Chief of the General Staff, Valerii Gerasimov, has observed that the Arab Spring may be a model for how wars will be fought .
 Russia has struck back against an aggressive West, using many of the same weapons as the West and the USA have used for the past fifteen years . In Ukraine, according to a line of military thinking, Russia has striking back against a aggressive West .
Focus of Russia’s policy has been on Russian interests and ethnic Russians .
 Now it is ethnic Russians who need to be protected, not socialist states. Now it's ethnic Russians, not Socialist states .
 Putin’s mandate to use the Armed Forces in Ukraine, secured on 1 March, goes further in that it covers the so called compatriots as well as the personnel of the naval base in Sevastopol .
 In explaining Russia’s actions in Crimea, military interests are important, says CNN's John Sutter . Russia's military interests in Crimea are important in explaining its actions, he says .
 Sevastopol is the base of the Russian Black Sea f leet . It is the easiest access for the Navy into the Mediterranean .
 It is an excellent location, which facilitates the 26 protection of naval ships and conceals their activity . It is a great location for naval ships, and it's a great place to hide .
 New naval base in Novorossiisk on the Russian Black Sea coast has more open location . This is one of the most important reasons why it is superior to the new naval base .
The importance of Sevastopol was highlighted by president Putin in his speech on 18 March . The importance of the town was highlighted in Putin's speech .
 He stated that a Ukrainian NATO membership and an increased naval presence by the alliance on Crimea would pose a threat to Southern Russia . He said that a Ukraine NATO membership would pose an threat to the region .
 Russia experiences most challenges, primarily from the Caucasus . It is in the Southern strategic direction that Russia experiences the most challenges .
 The foreignand security policies have largely been determined by the domestic political situation . The domestic scene has been the focus of the foreign and security policies .
 The room for manoeuvre has become more limited as regime survival is a top priority for the Russian political leadership . The room to manoeuvre is more limited.
 The anti-regime demonstrations in 2011–12 rattled the political leadership, who saw a concrete threat to political stability . The anti regime demonstrations in 2011-12 rattled political leadership .
 Russia's political system became increasingly authoritarian after the re-election of Putin to the presidency in March 2012 .
 More and more spheres of society are affected, according to a report . Crimea has seen a trend that has accelerated as events in Crimea unfolded .
 The few free media outlets that had still been active became restricted or came under threat in 2013–14 . The freedom of the few free press outlets that were still active became under threat .
 The ownership structure for the liberal radio station Ekho Moskvy changed, and the editor-in-chief for lenta.ru was fired . For example, the ownership structure of the radio station changed .
 The Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology and Mass Media was instrumental in closing down news outlets under different pretexts . The service was instrumental to closing down media outlets under various pretexts, including ‘inciting riot’ to spreading information harmful for children .
 The most noticed victim of the new media policy became the television channel Dozhd . The most noticeable victim was the channel's new TV policy .
 The channel was in effect closed down in February 2014 . Under the pretext that Russia’s television providers did not want to cooperate with the channel, the channel was closed down .
 At about the same time, different initiatives to curb freedom on the internet were suggested and adopted . At the time, the internet was being used as a way to curb internet freedom .
 Bloggers that had more than a certain amount of readers were categorised as media outlets with all of the responsibilities that this entails . Federal Security Service can intercept and 27 eavesdrop without having to present a court order .
 Russia was a country with political prisoners, most notably the people in custody for participating in the meetings on Bolotnaia Square in Moscow, on 6 May 2012 . Earlier, the freedom of assembly had been subject to restrictions .
 Eight of the people charged with participating in mass riots and using violence against representatives of the state received their sentences, four years in prison, during the unfolding crisis .
 Aleksei Navalnyi has been charged with embezzlement and libel . The blogger and anti-corruption activist is under house arrest awaiting further trials . He is forbidden to post blogs .
 A draft law proposed by a Duma deputy would make it an administrative offense to encourage Russophobia . Another Duma Deputy from United Russia in May suggested that deputies in the Duma who voted the 'wrong way' should be deprived of their seats in parliament .
 Putin branded those who opposed the Russian policy on Crimea as ‘the fifth column’ and ‘nationaltraitors’ which creates an atmosphere where the freedom of speech is at peril . This is in conjunction with Putin’s speech, on 18 March 2014, where he
 This could also apply to think-tanks and research institutes in the near future . This could be used to develop new research centres in the future .
 The next sphere of society that feels the heavy weight of increased control and reduced freedom of action is the cultural sector . The cultural sector is the next sphere that feels a heavy weight.
 The famous Taganka Theatre in Moscow has come under attack from a senator in the Federation Council for staging a performance that was termed decadent and unpatriotic . The performance was dubbed 'd decadent' and 'unpatriotics'
 New rules prohibit the use of swearwords threaten to further undermine artistic freedom . New rules also threaten to harm artistic freedom.
 The political leadership is actively promoting Russian nationalism under the name of patriotism . In parallel with the creation of an increasingly authoritarian political system, the leadership is promoting nationalism . The political leaders are actively promoting patriotism.
 As is usually the case, promoting a feeling of ‘us’ is accompanied by pointing out who is the enemy .
 The enemy, according to Russia’s political leadership, is the morally depraved West that seeks to undermine Russia and deny it inf luence in the world .
 Putin talked of how the orchestrated orange revolution and later Maidan were directed against Ukraine and Russia .
 Inside Russia, not only enemies, but also militant islamists, homosexuals and illegal immigrants, are branded as national traitors .
 The policy of patriotism and the focus on ‘traditional values’ show that Russia has chosen a path of its own, not one dictated by the West .
 This policy underpins much of the thinking behind the aggressive policy towards Ukraine . This policy is underpin much of what is being done by Ukraine's government .
 Later, he specified areas as Novorossiia, and named Odessa, Nikolaev, Kherson, Donetsk, Lugansk, Kharkov . Later he specified the areas as Odessa and Nikolaev. Later, the areas he specified were Novor
 These regions had been conquered under the reign of Catherine II at the end of the 18th century . These regions were conquered by Catherine II in the early 1800s .
 The use of history has become an increasingly important strategy for nation-building in Russia . The Great Patriotic War is being given an exceptional place.
 The 2009 National Security Strategy stipulates that ‘…attempts to revise the history of Russia, her role and place in world history…’ have a negative inf luence on Russian national security .
 A law was passed, in April 2014, that makes it a criminal offense to ‘rehabilitate nazism’ with a possible prison sentence of up to five years . It was passed in April.
 Russian nation-building today rests on three pillars, a strong state, strong armed forces, and a strong Orthodox Church .
 Putin celebrated the Soviet notion of the 'new historical community' in 2012 . He encouraged ideas that would promote something similar in contemporary Russia .
 The theme of national identity was discussed at the Valdai Club 10-year celebration conference in September 2013 . The theme was discussed.
 He noted that two Russian empires had collapsed during the last century, in 1917 and 1991 . He said the two empires had fallen during the past century .
 The Soviet period was a good example to follow regarding its nationality policy, Putin thought . Putin thought. The Soviet era was a great example for Russia .
 A sinister part of this identity-seeking concerns Putin’s views on Russian patriotism, and what it means to be Russian .
 Putin claimed on 17 April 2014, that a people that lives on a territory, has a common culture and history, and a certain climate, develops certain traits . Putin claimed in April 2014 that people that live in a territory have certain traits.
 A Russian is characterised by being focused not on himself, but on the greater good . A Russian, according to Putin, is characterising himself as a Russian .
 He said that, in the Russian world, death is beautiful, and to die for one’s friends, one's people, the Fatherland is beautiful . He said, in Russia, death was beautiful .
 The encouragement of such thinking, with elements of racism, is, however, a dangerous path, says the author .
 It might feed extremist tendencies within Russia of xenophobia, as well as religious tensions, including anti-Semitism, which will be difficult to control . It may also feed extremism in Russia, including religious tensions and anti-Semitic tensions .
 The annexation of Crimea received overwhelming support among the Russian population . The view of the people Against this background, the Crimea annexation received overwhelmingly support .
 The majority of the population was convinced that the Russian media reported events objectively, according to a poll by the Levada Center in March 30 2014 .
 Radical nationalists had come to power in Kiev, or that there was no united political leadership in Ukraine . They had also drawn the conclusion that radical nationalists had came to power .
 A majority also believed that it was legal to use Russian troops on Crimea and other regions of Ukraine .
Out of this majority, 65 per cent said it was legal because these were essentially Russian territories . The majority of those who say it is legal said it is because they are essentially Russian territory .
 Levada Centre poll: 50 per cent of people were negative in March 2014 . Now, the majority is even more solid, according to the poll .
 Less than 50 per cent of respondents were positive to it, in March 2014 . The share that was negative had increased from around 20 per cent in 2012 to over 40 per cent .
 A majority of Russians, well over 50 per cent in 2014, believe that there is an external military threat to Russia . The Levada Center’s opinion polls say that a majority of Russian people believe there is a military threat .
 Russians appear to have picked up the trend of an increasingly authoritarian political system . Russians also appear to be picking up a trend of authoritarian political systems .
 In the 2000s, Russian respondents had become increasingly concerned about a return to mass repression .
 To summarise, Russia is authoritarian and riding on a nationalistic wave. Russia is 'riding on aNationalistic wave' Russia is an authoritarian country, says author .
 Tolerance of dissenting views is diminishing swiftly, at the same time as far-reaching expectations of future Russian assertiveness and national grandeur have been created .
 Russian political and military leadership sees an encircled Russia. Military thinking at the strategic level, says the Russian political, military leadership . Russia's military and political leadership is seen to be at risk, according to the Kremlin .
 It views the West and the 31 USA with increasing apprehension and hostility . The West and 31 USA view the 31 U.S. with increasing apprehensions and hostility.
 Russia’s actions in Ukraine can be said to be the mirror-image of its perceptions of Western behaviour in Iraq, Afghanistan, and North Africa .
 The issue of missile defence is one of the thorniest in the relations between Russia and NATO . Russia senses that its voice is never listened to by Russia .
 The demand for ‘legal guarantees’ that the system is not to be directed against Russia was written into the Foreign Policy Concept .
 The Chief of the General Staff, Valerii Gerasimov, pointed out there are important lessons for 21st century warfare to be learned from the recent conf licts in North Africa and the Middle East .
 Non-military means are now much more effective than the power of the gun in achieving political and strategic objectives. Non- military means now much less effective than military means .
 It is a telling illustration of how the military leadership sees modern conf licts . It is an example of how military leaders see modern conflicts, it says .
 The figure shows an awareness of the changes in warfare and does not confirm a picture of Russian military thinking as lagging behind .
 To complete this discussion, the operational side of events is analysed in chapter six, The Crimea Operation . To complete the discussion, this discussion is also discussed in chapter 6 .
 In doctrines and in key speeches the political and military leadership has stated its intentions . In key speeches, the leadership has said its intentions.
 In 2008, Russia demonstrated that it was willing to use military force to achieve its policy goals in a neighbouring country .
 The policy of strategic solitude to a large extent ref lects the leadership's thinking about whether the rest of the world listens to it or not .
 The Russian political system had grown increasingly authoritarian in the previous two years . The Russian government has become increasingly authoritarian .
 Crimea and Sevastopol were incorporated into the Russian Federation . The underlying world view and mind-set of the political leadership should not have been a surprise .
 Persson, Gudrun ‘Russian History – A Matter of National Security’, FOI Briefing No. 19 .
 The Soviet Legacy (Det sovjetiska arvet – in Swedish) is the name of a Swedish arvet. Persson, Gudrun the Soviet Legacy, is the title of a Soviet Legacy .
 A free trade agreement with Ukraine was not a core issue for the EU . It proved to be a red line for Russia's willingness to accept western expansion into what Russia considers its area of influence .
 This chapter gives a short overview of EU’s relations with Russia and Ukraine . This chapter also gives an overview of the EU's relations with Ukraine .
 Prior to the crisis, the European and Russian perspectives on international affairs were different, without the EU member states fully realising it .
 The crisis has made the EU members acutely aware of Russia's perspective on the world . The EU does not accept Russia’s worldview, the latter has become a necessary factor to consider .
 The EU and its member states have had to react to Russia’s policies and actions . Since the Russian illegal annexation of Crimea, the EU has had to reaction to Russia's actions .
 The lack of a proactive stance is a result of the EU’s difficulties in agreeing on a common approach to Russia .
 This is due to the specific economic and political ties of the member states to Russia, and their differing focus on trade and security . This is because of the different economic andpolitical ties of member states .
 The EU has found it difficult to come to a common position on Russia . Due to a number of diverging national interests and different historic relations to Russia among the EU members .
 Russia was initially part of what the EU first called Wider Europe, that was later eplaced with ENP in 2004 . It is notable that Russia was originally part of the EU's first Wider European Union .
 The cooperation covers four policy areas and political dialogue ranging from external security to research and education . The cooperation is based on the cooperation of members of the United States and other countries .
 The talks have now been suspended by the EU with reference to Russian aggression in Ukraine . The talks are now suspended with the reference to Russia's aggression in the Ukraine .
 The character of EU actions is largely due to the stance of its most influential member states . The EU's most influential states are the most powerful member states.
 The three biggest member states, Germany, France and the United Kingdom all have different profiles in their relations with Russia . The UK, Germany and France all have a different profile in their relationship with Russia.
 Many EU member states expect Germany to take the lead in developing EU-Russia relations . Germany's role as the key state during the economic turmoil in the EU and its deep ties to Russia .
 The current German government has expressed its intentions to pursue a more active foreign policy . This position has also suited the ambitions of the current government, which has said it wants to be more active .
 Germany, France and Poland have taken the lead in negotiations with Russia and Ukraine . This has caused Germany, together with France and Polish, to take the lead. Germany and Poland are in talks with Russia, Ukraine .
 relations with Russia have followed the path that was set by the German Ostpolitik towards the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc in the 1970s and 1980s .
Trade and cultural exchange as well as high level relations were believed to create so much economic interdependence and interaction between nations that conflicts and war would be impossible .
After the end of the cold war, the high point for these policies occurred during the chancellorship of Gerhard Schröder . The high point of these policies was during the Chancellorship.
 Germany has maintained its economic relations and understanding attitude towards Russia . However, Germany has also maintained its relationship with Russia .
 A special concern for Germany is its dependence on Russian gas, oil and raw materials . Germany's dependence on Russia is a concern for the country .
 Germany claims that this does not make the country vulnerable in the long run . Most of the imports are replaceable, according to Germany .
 Germany believes Russia is more dependent on German technologies than Germany is on Russian energy . Germany believes that Russia is less dependent on Germany than Russia is on energy .
 Historically, Russia and France have had a special relationship in a variety of ways, from economy to culture . France and Russia have had special relationship.
 In recent years, the two have seriously diverged on key issues, including the Syrian conflict and energy strategy .
 France’s trade with and direct investments in Russia, as well as dependence on Russian energy, are less than Germany's . France's trade with Russia is less than German's .
 A large part of Germany's business community has continued to argue for not letting the crisis in Ukraine influence economic relations .
 France has been selling two modern naval ships to Russia . The sale is a special concern for the country .
 Other large European countries, such as Spain and Italy, are also guarded when it comes to far-reaching economic sanctions . Other large countries, including Spain, are still struggling to escape the crisis .
 The UK has taken a rhetorically firm position on the crisis, while acting cautiously in imposing sanctions on Russia . The United Kingdom is acting cautiously on the issue .
 UK’s trade with Russia is insignificant, but financial sector in London is a considerable hub for Russian investments .
 The UK's position in the EU has been weakened as a result of the British government’s EU policy .
 EU membership more in line with UK's domestic eurosceptic opinion than it was before . But it makes it difficult for the country to play a key role in the referendum .
 Poland appears to be the negotiator on behalf of the EU that has proved to be most willing to make its own political and economic sacrifices to block Russia . Poland has shown its own economic and political sacrifices in the past .
 The different priorities and interests among the leading European states as well as EU's internal problems make it difficult to agree upon a common EU policy on Russia .
 The economic crisis in Europe has created a hotbed of eurosceptic political parties and movements in the member states . Europe's economic crisis has created an economic crisis.
 The increasing influence of these parties in national politics and in the European Parliament can become a future obstacle for the consolidation of EU and its common foreign and security policy .
 Many of these movements share values with Putin's Russia, and have proved willing to defend Russia’s standpoints over Ukraine . In addition, many of them have shown their support for Ukraine .
 This may affect both EU’s engagement in the eastern parts of Europe and future prospects for enlargement .
 Most European states have an interest in good relations with Russia . However, most European states will try to balance their security concerns and economic interests .
 Russia will try to maintain good bilateral relations with key countries in order to prevent a more coherent EU policy . The answer is most likely that their interest for EU is low, while Russia is low .
 Cooperation such as this is a source of friction between the EU and Russia, since it touches upon the geopolitical future of Ukraine .
 The ENP was established in 2004, after the enlargement of the EU with ten new member states . The EU was enlarged in 2004 with ten member states.
Aim was to avoid new dividing lines between countries inside and outside the EU . Aim was to bring the EU member states and their eastern and southern neighbours closer together .
 This is mainly a bilateral policy between the EU and each partner country . The EU and its partner countries have different bilateral policies .
 The EU backs its political, institutional and economic reform processes, says the EU . In practice, the EU backs their political and institutional reform processes .
 This is consistent with the original ideas behind European integration and the EU as a peace project for Europe . This is the same as the original idea behind the European Union's plan to integrate .
 Several EU members, such as France and Germany, are sceptical about further enlargement . Others, like Poland, are more favorable, while others are more skeptical .
 The EU and the partners stressed the sovereign right of each partner freely to choose the level of ambition and the goals to which it aspires in its relations with the EU .
 Since 1998, the PCA between the EU and Ukraine has provided the framework for cooperation in a number of reform areas . The PCA has been in place since 1998 .
 Between 2007 and 2011, a new Association Agreement, including a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area, was negotiated . The agreement was negotiated between 2007-2011 .
 At the summit, then-President Viktor Yanukovych refused to sign the agreement . The agreement was signed at the end of the year .
Pro-EU demonstrators erupted in Kyiv after Yanukovych's decision to step down from the presidency .
 The EU has, in strong wording and on several occasions, expressed its political support for the new ukrainian government . It has condemned the unprovoked violation of Ukrainian sovereignty.
 The EU members also provide financial support for Ukraine . The EU also provides financial support.
 The signature is ‘a concrete sign of the European Union’s solidarity with Ukraine.’ According to Herman Van Rompuy, President of the EU, the signature is a ‘concrete sign’ of the Union's solidarity with the Ukraine .
 The remaining parts of the Association Agreement, concerning a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area, are still to be signed . However, the remaining part of the Agreement is not yet signed .
 This might take place as early as 27 June 2014 at the next meeting of the European council .
 The disassociation of the political chapters from the economic chapters of the EU-Ukraine AA has faced some criticism . There has been speculation about the reasons why the disassociations have been criticised .
Every AA is a bilateral 5 Foreign Affairs Council, EU condemns Russia’s actions in Ukraine . Some critics argue that the EU wants to be prudent for the sake of its own relations with Russia .
 At the EU-Russia summit in January 2014 the EU promised to pursue bilateral consultations with Russia .
 The EU has suspended bilateral talks with Russia on visa matters and economic issues . Since then, the EU has been in talks with the Russian government .
 In any case, the issues at hand will have to be addressed in a new international security climate .
 It is feasible for Russia to intervene or even illegally annex territory in neighbouring states. Our main conclusion is that it is feasible to intervene again, again, or even annex territory .
 Most vulnerable are those bordering Russia and where Russia has military assets in the country . The most vulnerable are the country's military assets .
 Several commentators have claimed that Russia displayed new military capabilities in Crimea .
 The Crimea operation illustrates Russia’s ability for strategic coordination of military and non-military means, but not Russia's military capability in terms of war fighting .
 It also worked as a military diversion, since Kyiv had to pay attention to it and was consequently less able to focus on events in Crimea .
 At the same time, infiltrated Russian special forces in Crimea assaulted key objects . Military intelligence officers organised the ‘self-defence’ units that undermined Kyiv’s control .
 Reinforcements came in the shape of airborne forces inserted from Russia and Russian naval infantry units already deployed in Crimea .
 Russia moved in heavier regular infantry units with support units facilitating both defensive and offensive operations . After these spearheading lighter forces had taken control of key objects, the territory was secured .
 Russian Black Sea Fleet and next door Southern MD could provide air defence for the operation . Meanwhile, the Russian Black sea Fleet and Southern MD are also being considered .
 As of May 2014, the pattern of special forces operations and local pro-Russian ‘self-defence’ units was being repeated in eastern Ukraine . This is not discussed further here .
 Many Russians support the goal of the current political leadership to restore Russia as a great power . As shown in chapter 4, many Russians support current political leaders .
 Russia’s intervention in Georgian territories, Abkhazia and South Ossetia, is a step in a piecemeal approach to assert Russian influence in former Soviet territories . Russia's intervention in the Georgian territories is a part of a plan to assert Russia's influence.
 In Russia’s view, this is merely doing what the West has done elsewhere . In Russia's view, it is merely what theWest has done in the past .
 This and other aspects of Russia’s wider military thinking as well as its domestic driving forces are analysed in chapter four .
 The speed and determination of Russia’s Crimea operation took both Ukraine and the international community by surprise .
Russia managed to get inside the decision-making loops of both the Ukrainian government and the outside world . Russia managed to manage to get into both the government and outside world.
 The swift and unexpected operation and the heavy use of propaganda have prompted many to claim it was a new generation of Russian warfare . Many have claimed that it was the first generation of Russia's warfare .
Military means, propaganda and political-military coordination reveals what was actually new . A closer look at military means and propaganda reveals what's actually new.
 Russia’s Armed Forces beat most international expectations as to what they could do, given the general perception that their capabilities have declined since 1991 . Russia's Armed Forces have been criticized for their performance in the 2008 war against Georgia .
 Russia’s military capability is clearly growing. With five years of increased defence spending and more exercises for its forces, Russia's military capabilities are clearly growing .
 As for personnel, light forces have a higher share of contract soldiers, also for operations abroad .
 Their limitations include endurance and the ability to hold territory in regular warfare . They are also limited to their ability to carry out regular warfare.
 In Crimea, they were gradually replaced by regular infantry units . They were largely replaced by one-year conscripts .
 Russia's Armed Forces reshaping is a well-known choice in the reshaping of Russia’s Armed Forces . Having high-quality units with more contract soldiers is the result of a well known choice .
 The reorganisation of Russia’s Armed Forces since 2009 resulted in fewer military districts, regionalised command of operations and a brigade-based structure .
 One-year conscripts make 42 up a fair share of the soldiers . In the ground forces, the biggest branch of the services is the biggest.
 It appears that no new major equipment system played a key role in the operation . In addition, it appears that there were no new equipment systems .
 Crimea operation provides few new conclusions about Russia’s military capabilities, but does illustrate a comprehensive approach for dissuading an opponent from resisting .
 For many, Russia’s brazen and persistent propaganda created a sense of novelty . For many it created asense of novelty.
 Despite the media image of a military operation, the centre of gravity was not territory, but Ukraine’s will to resist . Ukraine's military operation is not territory.
 The information environment was key for enabling political propaganda and subversion for creating favourable military operational conditions . The information was key to enabling political propaganda and subversion .
 A key aim was to control both information content and transmission infrastructure . The aim is to control the content of both information and transmission of information .
Russian soldiers secured infrastructure, such as TV and radio stations, as well as mobile phone operators . Russian soldiers secured the infrastructure, including TV, radio stations and mobile phone networks .
 It was crucial early on to project the image of Crimea as a done deal militarily and politically . It was important to project Crimea as an image of the Crimea.
 Russia’s dominating state-controlled media demonised the Maidan movement and the new Kyiv government .
 Russian authorities actively sought to control the information environment, for example, by manipulating the social network VKontakte .
 The VKontakte shut the pro-Ukrainian groups down . Later, the Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology and Mass Media ordered the VKontakhte to shut down .
 Military maskirovka is not a new feature in Russia, nor is political propaganda . It is not the new feature of Russia's military .
 Preparations probably included both war games and exercises, but were obviously kept secret .
 The well-planned and executed operation’s political and military co-ordination appeared 43 to work smoothly, both top-down and between units .
 The operation's execution showed good awareness of their forces’ strengths and limitations . The operation’s execution showedGood awareness of the forces' strengths.
Having contract soldiers, rather than conscripts, probably facilitated this. Having contract soldiers likely facilitated this, according to reports .
 Skilful use of propaganda and light forces say little about Russia’s Armed Forces as a whole .
 If Russia's military capabilities were underrated before, there is a risk they will be overrated now . Russia’s military capabilities have been overrated before, say experts .
 Many factors in Crimea were very favourable for Russia, some within its control, others external . Many factors were very favorable for Russia .
 Crimea related factors favoured Russia among Russia-controlled factors . Russia's key military element was surprise, both on the strategic and tactical levels .
 Russia also had quality forces able to operate in Crimea’s unstable environment . Russia also has quality forces in Crimea .
Non-military DIME resources, clearly more forceful than those of the new Ukrainian government, allowed Russia to dominate any escalation . Russia's military resources were more forceful.
 Good co-ordination facilitated strategic and tactical synergies as well as quick decisive action . GoodCo-ordinations facilitated strategic, tactical and tactical synergy.
 Another key Russian military advantage was having a major military base in the operational area, the Black Sea Fleet base in Sevastopol .
 The 810th Naval Infantry Brigade facilitated taking the military initiative on land . Its ground force unit, the 8 10th Naval Brigade, facilitated the initiative . The brigade is based in the U.S.
 Naval units could protect against air and sea attacks, especially during the vulnerable early phases of the operation . Ukrainian navy could block the Ukrainian navy in port, and block air attacks .
 Fewer units had to be moved from Russia. With forces already in the area, fewer units needed to be relocated .
 The number of administrative and military facilities, roads, harbours and airports to control is limited .
 Crimea is fairly easy to defend especially from an attack over land . Once taken, Crimea is a relatively easy place to defend .
 Crimea was a clearly defined administrative and geographical entity in Ukraine . Crimea was also a clearlydefined administrative and geographic entity in Crimea .
 Russia could, on its own territory, move sizeable military assets close to Ukraine and close to the Crimean peninsula . Russia could make the invasion threat credible .
 Forces in Russia were available for diversion and for reinforcing Crimea . Forces in the Crimea were also available to reinforce the Crimea .
 The proximity to the peninsula facilitated supplying both the forces and the population in the peninsula . The proximity of the peninsula helped supply both the troops and the populations .
 Russian soldiers could talk to ordinary citizens, and to Ukrainian military and civilian officials, without interpreters . Russian soldiers can talk with ordinary citizens and Ukrainian military officials without interpreter .
 Many ordinary citizens and officials in Crimea are pro-Russian, susceptible to Russian propaganda and less likely to oppose intervention . Many ordinary people and officials are more likely to support Russian propaganda .
 Russian agents set up and led ‘self-defence’ movements, reinforced by young men transported to Crimea from Russia .
 New, inexperienced government had to handle a collapsing economy and barrage of criticism from Russia .
 Ukraine’s Armed Forces had for decades lacked adequate funds, training and functioning equipment . Militarily, Ukraine's Armed Forces lacked adequate funding and equipment .
Both the Ukrainian government and the military units in Crimea were passive and disorganised . Both the Ukrainian and military units were passive.
 The intervention in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea cost Russian resources and attention, reducing the chances of successfully repeating the same type of operation elsewhere . At least not until Russia’s aggression in Ukraine is over .
 Moscow still has sizeable DIME assets and can use them again where and when it chooses . Moscow can still use them once again when and where it chooses.
 Russia’s Armed Forces can repeat the good planning and execution of operations, the use of high quality light forces and close political and military co-ordination . Russia's armed forces can repeat their good planning, execution of Operations .
National coordination of DIME resources may be limited to one direction at a time, since it absorbs the attention of the highest military and political decision-makers .
 The number of available special forces units may also limit operations to one direction at a time .
 In Moldova’s separatist region, Russia has a peace-enforcement force and encourages militias . In Transnistria, Russia encourages militias and encourages them .
 These countries are the most vulnerable militarily, especially when bordering Russia . The countries are most vulnerable, especially in Russia .
 Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan and mainland Ukraine have long borders with Russia . Among countries without Russian bases, Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan have long border with Russia.
 Russia lacks both borders with and bases in Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan . Russia has no borders with or bases in both countries . Russia also lacks both bases in Uzbekistan and Turkmanistan .
 Of the three external factors, the first is that an area is ‘doable’, sizewise, applies only partially to former Soviet states . The first is the first area that is 'doable'
 All countries with Russian bases have smaller DIME assets than Russia . Georgia and Belarus, which directly border Russia, may seem ‘doable’
 Armenia and Moldova are small enough, but lack borders with Russia, making annexation difficult . Armenia, Moldova and Armenia have small enough. Russia is small enough but lacks borders.
 Russia would also need transport of any additional forces through Azerbaijan, or Georgia, and Ukraine, respectively . For these two countries, Russia would need secure transport through Azerbaijan and Georgia .
 Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan are probably too large and mountainous to control with available Russian forces . The same goes for KyrgyZstan, which is also too big and mountainous.
 Azerbaijan and Ukraine are too big to control militarily with available forces, but could still be destabilised and become subject to annexation of border areas . Azerbaijan, especially, is too big for available forces to control .
 Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan are big and distant, making annexation impossible and destabilisation difficult .
 Few areas are as delimited, geographically and administratively, as Crimea . Crimea is Crimea, Crimea .
 The second factor, again, is that geographical, cultural, cultural and ethnic proximity matters . The third factor is that the proximity of the region is also important .
 Ex-Soviet republics are close to Russia and often host pro-Russian sentiments . Moscow can define as theirs to protect .
 Examples include Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia and as seen recently, in southern and eastern Ukraine .
ProMoscow movements are likely to be seen as tell-tale signs indicating possible Russian intervention . ProMoscow movements may be a sign of Russian intervention, say experts .
 The cultural and political proximity aspect may be weaker in former Soviet areas where another nationality dominates . The cultural, political and political close proximity aspect could be weaker.
 Most are already vulnerable and volatile, and Russia could probably easily destabilise them further . Most of the world's most vulnerable are already volatile and volatile . Russia could be easily destabilising them further, according to experts .
 The focus of many leaders is regime survival and some may even welcome Russian military intervention . Some may welcome Russia's intervention .
 The Baltic States are less vulnerable to annexation, but not necessarily to Russia-orchestrated destabilisation . With stable democratic systems and democratic systems, the Baltic states are less likely to be annexed .
 Crimea was a relatively small area, cultural and geographical proximity to Russia . With forces in or near the small area and a weak opponent offering no military resistance, taking Crimea was arguably, uniquely simple .
 One country at a time is likely, since top-level political and military coordination is needed . One country is likely.
 Any on-going operation absorbs DIME-resources that can't be used elsewhere . Any operation absorbs the DIME resources that cannot be used other ways .
 Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kazakhstan and mainland Ukraine are all bordering Russia . The region is all bordering Ukraine and Azerbaijan, which is also bordering Ukraine .
 Georgia’s South Ossetia has, for all practical purposes, already been annexed by Russia . Russia has already annexed Georgia's South Ossetsia .
Georgia and Belarus have Russian military bases on their territories . Georgia and Belarus, soon, will also have Russian bases .
 Both are fairly small and hence more ‘doable’ than bigger countries such as Kazakhstan and Ukraine . Both are relatively small and therefore more 'doable' than bigger nations such as Ukraine .
 Armenia and Moldova are also relatively small and have a Russian military presence . But Russian acts will be hampered by the lack of direct borders. Armenia, Moldova and Armenia are relatively small.
 Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan are also isolated and have difficult terrain . Mountainous KyrgyZstan, Tajikstan and Kyrgstan are alsoisolated .
 Russia has always had a hammer. With nuclear weapons and sizeable conventional forces, Russia has had to have a hammer .
 The skilful use of military and political means in Crimea shows it also has tools for operations other than conventional warfare, such as destabilisation .
 This was unexpected and was therefore perceived by some observers as something new . This was also perceived as a new thing by others .
Russian military capabilities are a failure of imagination rather than novel Russian military capabilities, according to Russian military officials .
 Military-strategic options, and possible risks, for Moscow’s government, FOI Memo 4904, April 2014 .
 A Catalog of modi operandi, FOI-R --3658--SE, 2013, Stockholm Franke, Ulrik and Vendil Pallin, Carolina Russian Politics and the Internet in 2012 .
 Russia has tried to destabilise the Donbas as well, complete with all the same elements diversion, occupation of official buildings, proposals on referendums of independence and the threat of military intervention .
 The proportion of the Russian population in those regions is much smaller and the territory is much larger . The territory is also much larger than the size of the country .
 The support for separatism is much weaker than in Crimea, but it has the potential to increase, if the situation does not calm down . The support of separatism in Crimea has been much weaker.
 Opinion polls from the region indicate that the people of southeastern Ukraine prefer to live within a united Ukraine rather than independently . Still, opinion polls show that people of the region prefer living in the Russian Federation rather than in Ukraine .
 Russia has not changed its mind about the current political leadership in Kyiv . Russia's political leadership is not changing its mind, it says .
 The EuroMaidan is perceived as a ‘Westernsponsored fascist coup d’etat’ It logically does not recognise the current leadership in Kyiv . Since the Kremlin, at least formally, still considers Viktor Yanukovych to be the legitimate president .
 The post-revolutionary leadership in Kyiv behaved in a mostly responsible manner, given the tense situation . It was questioned in the east of the country .
 The elections were implemented in a democratic and transparent way, in itself not an easy task . 51 given the diversity and conf licts in Ukraine, 51 given Russia’s multiple opportunities for obstructing the process through provocation and support of separatism .
 Russia did not recognise the interim leadership in Ukraine . It did not recognize its decisions either, including the proclamation of the pre-term presidential elections .
 Ukraine needs the support it needs from its own people, as well as from the international community . Only by having a democratically elected leadership that carries out a responsible policy, can Ukraine get the legitimacy and support from its people, says David Cameron .
 A legitimate leadership will increase the price for Russia for its provocations and destabilisation . A legitimate leader will increase Russia's price for itsprovocations and instability .
 Kyiv's actions towards Kyiv will have to subside, and be replaced by more constructive policy . Kyiv has been criticized for its actions towards the country .
 With new legitimate leadership there are better chances than before to stabilise the situation in Kyiv and in Ukraine as whole. With the new legitimate leaders there are more chances of stabilising the situation than before .
 Ukraine will continue to be one of the most misgoverned and corrupt states. If the new leaders fail, Ukraine will remain one of most corrupt states . The path will only lead to further disintegration.
 A key element of Russia’s policy towards the new government of Ukraine, concerns demands for a constitutional reform that would transform the country from a unitary into a federal state .
 Such a change in Ukraine's administrative system would enable Moscow to put pressure on Ukraine’s central government via the regions . Such a move would allow Moscow to pressure the government through the regions.
 Russia has been pressuring Kyiv to establish a constitutional assembly in a form that would guarantee the endorsement of solutions dictated by Russia . In order to achieve its objectives, Kyiv has been pressured by Russia to create a constitutional Assembly .
 Russia has been demanding Ukraine give up one of the fundamental sovereign rights of a state, the right to freely determine its system of government . In other words, Russia is demanding that Ukraine gives up its sovereign rights .
 There seems to be a growing consensus in Ukraine that the centralist model of state governance is no longer a feasible alternative for the country . Ukraine needs reform, greater decentralisation and self-governance for the regions, says the author .
 Ukraine has to find a way to carry out decentralisation, regionalisation and reforms within its current structure and territorial division . Through dialogue with the regions, and with the support of the international community, Ukraine needs to find out how to change its structure .
 The alternative, again, will be further disintegration, separatism and, in the end, the loss of sovereignty . The alternative will be more disintegration and separatism, says author .
 Yanukovych’s decision to ‘pause’ the process towards the signing of the Association Agreement with the EU in November 2013 was the start of the political crisis in Ukraine .
 The EuroMaidan government signed the political Association Agreement in March 2014 . The new government signed a core elements of the political agreement .
 More substantial parts of the agreement were postponed until after the 25 May early presidential elections . However, more substantial parts were postponed .
 Ukraine's democratic development is firmly connected to its association with Europe and potential future membership in the European Union .
 75 per cent of the votes accrued to presidential candidates with a clear pro-EU and Western-oriented message . This makes Ukraine more pro- EU than most of the countries that are members of the union .
There was a manifested lack of support for right-wing extremist parties in Ukraine . Compared to the EU Parliamentary election held in the same day, there was no support for extremist parties .
 Freedom's Oleh Tyahnybok and Right Sector’s Dmytro Yarosh received less than two per cent . It refutes the Russian narrative about ‘fascism’ taking over in Ukraine .
 More effort has to be made to inform about the benefits of integration in Europe . In order to prevent further disintegration within Ukraine, more effort has been made .
An association with Europe does not exclude close relations with Russia . An association with the European Union is not an exclusive relationship .
 Ukraine should not have to choose between the Association Agreement with the EU and a free trade zone with Russia and the CIS . The proposed Eurasian Economic Union, with Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, would be the only trade zone in Ukraine .
 It is too controversial a question, not only for Ukraine but for Russia and NATO itself . It's too controversial for Ukraine and for Russia to answer it .
 Kyiv's main street, Khreshchatyk, remains occupied by military tents and barricades . More than three months after the resignation of Yanukovych, Kyiv’s Maidan Nezalezhnosti and main street remain occupied .
 Hundreds of the most militant Maidan veterans continue to live in the square . Many dressed in uniforms and organised in paramilitary units .
 Maidan has turned into a city within the city of Kyiv following its own rules . Maidan is a city in Kyiv.
 The legal authorities of the city and the Ukrainian state have few possibilities to interfere . The city's legal authorities have few opportunities to interfere.
 For 53 the veterans and hard-core nationalists, Maidan is ‘the Masada of Ukraine’ The last bastion to fall before the end. For 53 of the veterans, it is the last bastions to fall.
 Within the Maidan movement, there is a split between those that regard themselves as being 'truly independent' and those that are more aligned with the government .
 The former see Maidan protests as a means of inf luencing the government . They believe it should be continued in order to press the new leadership not to forget about Maidan's ideals .
 Maidan is an uncontrollable force which can mobilise its dissatisfaction with the current policy of any authority . Maidan has been described as an 'unstable force' which can mobilize its dissatisfaction.
 Any attempt by the new leadership to challenge Maidan may result in a backlash . Any attempt to challenge the new leader may be met with backlash .
 Ukraine's new leadership is a huge task for the new leadership of Ukraine . In addition to the acute tasks of retaining the territorial integrity of the state, ending Russian-sponsored separatism and avoiding state bankruptcy is a big task for new leadership .
 Nevertheless, tackling it is paramount in order to move Ukraine forward .
 It will need financial and political assistance from Western countries for a long time to come. It will be a long-term problem for the country .
There is a chance that Ukraine will have a true reformist government, says CNN's John Sutter . Ukraine's pre-term presidential elections will be held in February .
 The events since November 2013 have shown that a truly independent Ukraine’s future is within Europe . Ukraine's future is in Europe, according to the European Union .
For Russia, they likely amount to decreasing interaction with the West and increasing interaction with Asian countries . For Russia, the decrease is likely to increase interaction with other countries .
 The loss of more territories in the east and south of the country would mean that a very different Ukraine emerges .
For the West,e.e. the EU, NATO and the US, the crisis over Ukraine will mean a much more adversarial relationship to Russia . The crisis will pose a major challenge to the liberal, rules-based international order in Europe .
 Russia has intervened militarily in Ukraine, but is also undergoing change at home as a direct result of this . Consequences for Russia and Ukraine have been revealed .
 The speech on Crimea had all the formal and dramaturgical trappings of a programme speech . Putin delivered to parliament on 18 March 2014 .
 Putin appealed openly to Russian nationalist sentiments . He accused the West of attempting to undermine Russian stability .
 The Russian population overwhelmingly supports this new policy line, according to opinion polls .
 The domestic political scene has changed and it will be costly, not to say highly risky . Not to deliver on the nationalist expectations that have been created .
 The View from Russia will limit Russia’s foreign policy choices . Nationalism and strong enemy images coupled with an increasingly authoritarian rule, as was shown in chapter four .
 Russia will find itself looking to the east for trade and other forms of cooperation . Increasingly, Russia will look to the East for trade.
 Russia's political leadership appeared to have consigned itself to this reality. Already in April 2014, Russia’s political leadership seemed to haveconsigned itself.
 He stated that Russia 57 could modernise on its own and in spite of sanctions and lack of cooperation with the West . He said that Russia could modernised on its Own and in despite sanctions and the West's failure to cooperate with Russia .
 In April, Crimea's annexation of Crimea was the most visible economic consequences of the illegal annexation . The reduced value of the rouble and therefore higher prices on foreign goods in the shops .
Capital f light and investors turning elsewhere is also a major problem . Capital f light is a big problem for investors and investors in the capital .
 Russia’s reliability as a trading partner and more specifically as an energy provider to Europe is undermined . In a long-term perspective, the greatest threat is that Russia's reliability in the world is undermined.
 If Europe increasingly turns elsewhere for its energy imports, Russian economic growth will decrease even further . Russia's economy will decrease further if Europe turns elsewhere.
 The Russian state budget is still highly dependent on incomes from energy exports . The Russian government is still heavily dependent on energy exports.
 Reduced energy incomes will make it difficult to deliver on promises, for example, to raise pensions and benefits, and to provide better health care and education .
 These are important concerns for a large section of Putin’s electorate .
 Further losses of territory would mean that a very different Ukraine emerges . Further losses would mean the Ukraine emerges from the Ukraine .
 The pro-Russian minority is more motivated than the majority who are loyal to Ukraine . Pro-Russian separatism is still not widespread in eastern and southern regions of Ukraine .
 Those loyal to Ukraine have been threatened and frightened enough not to show their preferences .
 The idea of a united Ukraine is currently dominant, but the situation in the east continues to destabilise and turn extremely violent . The risk increases that the western and central regions will start to consider the separation of Ukraine as not necessarily being bad thing .
If the eastern and perhaps even the southern regions leave Ukraine, the national electoral preferences of the central and western regions will completely dominate in the rest of Ukraine . If the eastern regions leave the country, the country's electoral preferences will dominate .
 A difference between the Orange Revolution of 2004-2005 and the recent EuroMaidan was that the former was driven by opposition parties and the latter by civil society .
 The Orange Revolution was the annulment of the fraudulent second round of the election . The opposition leader Yushchenko and his subsequent installation as president was the result .
 Tents and barricades can be removed, but Maidan will continue to be a power to count on . Maidan is still a power.
 In 2009, the Obama administration tried to mend relations by launching its so-called ’reset’ policy . It included a new set of policies promoting US-Russian cooperation in a number of areas, including nuclear disarmament, Iran, and Afghanistan logistics .
 Northern Distribution Network allows transportation of goods to and from Afghanistan through Russia .
 Some worried about ‘US disengagement’ from its European allies .
 Some of them connected the Obama administration with a policy of ’off-shore balancing,’ suggesting a complete withdrawal of US military engagement in Europe .
 At the same time, many U.S. analysts argued that Russia was no longer a global superpower, but merely a regional power .
 When the civil war in Syria intensified in the summer of 2013, the signs of a change in the Obama administration’s policy towards Russia became obvious .
 The U.S. frustrations with the Russian support for the Assad regime in Syria aggravated the general relationship . This continued through the initial phases of the crisis over Ukraine .
 The United States administration’s reactions to the Russian overt and covert actions in Crimea and eastern Ukraine have been highly critical . The U.S. administration's reaction to the Russia's actions has been critical .
 Russia was supposed to be a partner, not an enemy, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: This was not the planned course of events for the US-Russian relations .
 Unfolding events will most likely lead to a lasting adversarial relationship between the two countries . But enough hard words and some actions have already been in play for a sufficiently long time .
 The state of their relationship affects the actions of Russia in the international arena and how it prioritises relations with other countries . Russia's relationship with the other countries affects its relationship with other nations .
 Russia wants to be acknowledged by the U.S. as a great power and an important partner . Russia wants the United States to acknowledge its role in Russia's role in the world .
 The fact that the U.S. does not do this constitutes a fundamental problem in their relationship, says the author .
 Russia opposes the dominance of the United States in international affairs . It sees itself as being marginalised, and instead promotes a multipolar world order .
 The UN Security Council is one of the few forums where Russia is on par with the U.S. and can veto its initiatives . Russia can veto the United States' initiatives .
 Russia disapproves of the United States’ circumvention of the UN Security Council and its unilateral actions, in the invasion of Iraq, for example .
 The Commonwealth of Independent States is a sensitive issue for Russia . Outside involvement in its sphere of inf luence, Russia is asensitive issue .
 The U.S. views the ’colour revolutions,’ from 2003-2005, and the prospect of a NATO Membership Action Plan for Georgia and Ukraine, in 2008 .
 Russian relationship with the U.S. has gradually deteriorated since 2003 .
 The lack of appreciation by the United States for its contributions in ’the war on terror,’ the invasion of Iraq, the Balkans, missile defence and NATO enlargement. Also adding to this was, from a Russian perspective, the lack of recognition by the U.S.
 The Magnitsky law is aimed at Russian officials suspected to be involved in the death of the lawyer . The law prevents U.S. couples from adopting children from Russia .
 The renewed engagement of the U.S. in Ukraine makes a rapprochement unlikely, from a Russian perspective . A continuingly problematic relationship can be expected .
 This does not bode well for bilateral relations, but will most likely inf luence multilateral contexts as well . This doesn't bodewell for bilateral Relations, but it will most probably inflencemultilateral contexts .
 The UN Security Council could become an arena for antagonism and impede conf lict resolution . For example, the UN Council could be an arena of antagonism .
 Difficult relations between the countries could become noticeable on issues where Russian cooperation would be essential, for example in the negotiations with Iran on its nuclear programme .
 The EU has stressed its special responsibility for peace and security in Europe and the EU3 – France, UK and Germany – has emphasised EU's primary role in finding a solution .
 There is a clear risk that EU’s credibility as a crisis manager will be further questioned . The present situation in Europe is a crisis in Europe where the impact of EU measures taken is seen as negligible .
Under the surface the different national relations with Russia affect their views of what the next step of the EU should be .
 Energy policy is not new on the EU's political agenda, but the Ukraine crisis is increasing interest in the issue .
 The geopolitical dimension of energy demonstrates the vulnerability and dependence that many EU countries have on energy imports from Russia .
 This has already led to various initiatives that more or less directly aim at finding alternatives to Russian energy . This has led to other initiatives to find alternatives to Russia's energy .
For several years, there has been a discussion about the lack of long-term direction and strategy in the EU’s foreign and security policy .
 Those who require an updated version of the European Security Strategy could now find new arguments for their cause . Those who need a new version of this year's Security Strategy will now have new arguments to argue .
 The Ukraine crisis exposes the different approaches of the member states. It can be argued that it makes it even more difficult to agree on a common strategic direction .
 It is sometimes claimed that the first ESS was born out of EU members’ disagreements over Iraq .
 The defence issue will take up more space on the EU's agenda in light of the Ukraine crisis .
 European Council on Defence and in capability development programmes. This can manifest itself in an increasing interest in the implementation of the conclusions from the latest council on defence and in capabilities development programmes .
 A renewed discussion about the Common Security and Defence Policy could also be on the agenda . A renewed talk about the common security and defence policy could be a topic .
 Pertinent questions will likely be whether CSDP is better suited for civil-military operations outside Europe than for a crisis inside Europe .
 There is an obvious need to review the program and the EU’s long-term planning in the region . There is a need to reviewed the program.
 During the last 20 years, NATO has focused on operations abroad, often in faraway places . NATO has been in the Middle East for 20 years .
 The weight of NATO’s traditional raison d’etre has been very light during the same time-frame .
 The alliance adopted new defence plans for the Baltic States and Poland in 2010 . Germany went to great lengths in reassuring Russia that these plans were not meant to portray Russia as a potential enemy .
 Currently, updating NATO’s defence plans – especially for the member states bordering Russia – is a key and ongoing task for the alliance .
International operations and partnerships with countries like Sweden and Finland will see their significance reduced . This means that other issues such as international operations and partnership with countries such as Sweden and Finns will be reduced .
 NATO's Baltic air policing mission has been expanded substantially and swiftly . NATO’s Baltic air patrols have been expanded significantly and swiftly.
 Bilateral US-Baltic exercises on the ground, in Poland and Baltic states, have been limited . This has coincided with numerically limited, but politically highly significant bilateral US- Baltic exercises .
 The U.S. has also augmented its air force detachment in Poland in the same context .
 The pattern of the U.S. quickly moving its forces to the assistance of threatened or vulnerable allies is likely a template for future contingencies in Europe .
 The U.S. military presence in Europe has for its European allies and partners . This underlines the importance that the continued U. S. military Presence in Europe is for its allies and partner .
 NATO officials have already been talking about a need for the permanent stationing of allied troops in countries close to Russia . The move would be a tripwire force rather than a defence force .
 A small force of U.S. troops under a NATO 62 umbrella could not really defeat an attack, nor pose a real threat against Russia . But it might be highly effective as a deterring tripwire force .
 If the current trajectories continue, there will probably be some kind of permanent NATO military presence in primarily the Baltic States and Poland . This might be based on rotational units, as with the current air policing mission .
 Russia might perceive such a development as provocative and that it will increase tensions between NATO and Russia . Russia may perceive it as provocative .
 The views might be reconciled in the long-term, but they are reinforced by other controversies, such as the NATO/US missile defence system, different arms control treaties .
 A continuation of very tense or directly adversarial NATO-Russian relations is highly likely . At least until a fundamental political solution of the crisis in Ukraine is reached .
 This presents a fundamental challenge to the permanent formation of a liberal, rules-based security order in Europe .
This has been at the center of political efforts in Europe during at least the last quarter-century . This has been a key part of Europe's political efforts during the last century .
 geopolitical struggle and traditional balance of power issues have been brought out into the security policy daylight again. What has happened, as an immediate consequence of the crisis over Ukraine, is that geopolitical struggle.
This may inf luence the European security order in a long-term perspective . This may inflence the EU security order. This could inflent the European Security order in the long- term perspective .
 The current antagonism between Russia and the U.S. generates several forms of negative spirals . The United States and most of Europe are most likely to be involved in the conflict .
 First of all, the military situation on the ground in and around Ukraine will generate its own action-reaction logic .
 This will in turn lead to a much more divisive and acrimonious political relationship between Russia and the Western world . This will be in turn leading to a more divisive political relationship.
 Such an unfriendly, or downright hostile, political relationship might likely drive new arms build-ups on both sides .
 Russia often argues NATO countries ‘promised’ that they would not accept new members after the fall of the Soviet Union . This might affect global 6 Russia .
 What happens in Europe is also noted among distant countries, especially those that are also allies of the United States .
 The interaction between the West and Russia has been framed by two very different security policy languages . It started after the first eastward enlargement of NATO in 1999 .
 The one of the West has been liberal and values-based, emphasising the right of all countries to choose their own destinies . The West has also been liberal in terms of alliance memberships and other fundamental issues .
 The language of Russia has been traditionally geopolitical, indicating that great powers are special and not ‘normal’ powers . Russia prefers to have no interference by outside powers .
 The current events in Ukraine mean that a geopolitically-inspired discourse has collided with a liberal discourse . The former will probably have a great impact on the future lingua franca of European security, says Peter Bergen .
Each aspect of law raised, either through events or through rhetoric, is complex and can be held to constitute a separate scientific field of law . Each aspect of Law raised, or through events, can be used to create a separate field of Law .
 This chapter does not embark on a thorough analysis of the legal aspects of the events leading up to the illegal annexation of Crimea . It does not delve into the legal implications of the Crimea annexation .
 This chapter briefly addresses some of the legal concerns triggered by the law . The chapter also addresses some legal concerns .
 Analysis reveals that Russia has utilised law as a tool for power, and thus violated principles of international law . Russia has also violated established principles of International law.
 Ukraine gained independence from the former Soviet Union on 24 August 1991 . Sovereignt y of states Ukraine gained sovereignty from the Soviet Union .
 Ukraine obtained both legal and factual sovereign rights as a state . Ukraine thereby obtained bothlegal and factual sovereignty rights as state .
 sovereignty has been defined as the existence of rights over territory . It entails both rights and obligations, such as rights to exercise jurisdiction over its territory and over its permanent population .
 It also included assurances against the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of Ukraine .
 Thereby, the sovereign rights of Ukraine are recognised both through established principles of international law, and through the Budapest memorandum .
 The non-intervention principle is a fundamental principle in international law . It is closely related to the sovereignty of states .
 A provision of the inadmissibility of intervention has been included in a number of legal instruments . U.N. General Assembly resolution 2131 stipulates that o state has the right to intervene, directly or indirectly, in the internal or external affairs of any other state .
All other forms of interference or attempted threats against the personality of the State or against its political, economic and cultural elements are condemned .
 Arguably, the non-intervention principle has come under increased pressure in the 21st century . The non-Intervention principle is under increasing pressure in this century .
 The Kosovo crisis raised the question of legitimacy of humanitarian intervention in certain situations . The Kosovo bombing campaign was conducted without U.N. Security Council authorisation .
 There was no formal endorsement of the NATO action in Kosovo . There was also no condemnation of the Kosovo action .
 The doctrine on humanitarian intervention was neither enabled nor condemned by the UN, but it received meagre support .
 The existing doctrine on humanitarian intervention today, RtoP, is limited to situations entailing serious and specific atrocities . The existing doctrines on humanitarian Intervention today are limited to cases of serious or specific atrocities.
 The UNSC requires that any action taken by individual states or as collective action is authorised by the UNSC . It also requires that the action is undertaken in accordance with the United Nations Charter .
 The nonintervention principle stands firm in the international arena, despite the Kosovo crisis in 1999 . The Kosovo crisis was the subject of a debate on humanitarian intervention .
 The prohibition of the use of force, stipulated in the United Nations Charter article 2, constitutes a fundamental principle in international relations .
 The principle is also considered as customary in nature, and it is as such binding on all states .
 U.N. Article 2 prohibits the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state . The United Nations says it is not inconsistent with its purposes .
 The prohibition also includes a ban on organising, instigating, assisting, or participating in civil strife or terrorist acts in another state . The ban also includes the encouragement or formation of armed bands.
An agreement between Russia and Ukraine permits Russian armed forces on Ukrainian territory and military training activities within specific training centres and position areas . An agreement between the two countries allows Russia to train its armed forces in Ukraine .
 Russia has reportedly transferred a large number of military troops and vehicles into Ukraine . The act does not benefit from consent from Ukraine, according to reports .
 activities by Russian armed forces in Ukraine are in material breach of the agreement . As such, the activities by Russia's armed forces are inmaterial breach of agreement .
 The action therefore constitutes a violation of article 2 of UNC, and possibly an act or a crime of 66 8 See United Nations General Assembly, A/RES/60/1 , para 138139. aggression .
 Russian authorities have taken control over governmental buildings and organised self-defence groups in Crimea .
 The prohibition of the use of force is also illegal to use force against a state . In addition, the prohibition of force in a state is illegal to force a state to force .
 That may necessitate a distinction between using force in a state, and using force against a state . That may consequently require a distinction.
 The purpose of the force is thus central to establish legality of the use of force . The purpose is to establish the legality of force used .
 The purpose of the activities by Russian actors in Crimea was reportedly to instigate a referendum and to enable an annexation of Crimea to Russia .
 Thereby, Ukraine, is a state of Ukraine, but it is not in Ukraine . Thereby's activities undoubtedly constitute force against rather than in Ukraine, says the Ukrainian government .
 Such acts can be held to constitute a violation of the territorial integrity and political independence of Ukraine . Such acts may constitute a crime of aggression,9 or an act of aggression .
 There are credible indications that the activities involving take-over of government buildings and arming of ‘self-defence’ groups in Crimea were orchestrated by Russian government officials .
 If there is a factual relationship between individuals engaging in a certain conduct, and a State, the conduct may be attributable to the State . The State may be responsible for the conduct .
 The illegal Russian activities in Crimea trigger the question of the relevance and applicability of the law of occupation . The law of occupied Crimea triggers the question.
 An occupation exists when a state exercises effective control over a territory on which it has no sovereign title, and without consent, according to a law .
 It holds that the occupant state does not obtain sovereign rights over the territory . It also prohibits forced enlistment, confiscation of property, and so on .
 The law of occupation does affect the legality of the actions taken by the occupying force . This chapter does not specifically analyse the applicability or the effect of the law on the situation in Crimea .
 examples of actions affected are the holding of a referendum and decisions regarding annexation . Examples of actions are the hold of a vote and decisions on annexation .
 The referendum and decision on annexation may therefore be illegal and thus invalid . The referendum may also be illegal, and therefore invalid .
 The rhetoric of self-defence and international law has been used during the course of events leading up to both the illegal occupation and the illegal annexation of Crimea .
Self-defence is a right afforded to states through article 51 of UNC . But it is limited to very specific situations, such as the case of the U.S.
 The term likely refers to the Russian-speaking population of Ukraine, Russian nationals or ethnic Russians .
 The rhetoric used raises the question of whether or not a legal right to use force to protect national interests abroad, and without consent of the host state, exists .
 There are obvious divisions, both between states and between scholars, on the question of a right to extraterritorial self-defence .
 States that have argued in support of the existence of such a right have often referred to the right to self-defence stipulated in the UN Charter .
 That article does not entail explicit support for the existence of a right to extraterritorial self-defence . It does not mean that the article supports such a right .
 Most cases in which extraterritorial force has been used with the express purpose of protecting nationals were in fact pretexts for intervention, and can therefore not be considered legal, for that reason . Most cases have been used to protect nationals.
 Russian activities in Crimea were to instigate a referendum and enable annexation of Crimea to Russia . The purpose of the Russian activities was to instigated a referendum .
 There were no credible signs of widespread or systematic threats against Russian nationals, ethnic Russians, or the Russian-speaking population in Crimea .
 It can be concluded that Russian activities were not, in fact, aimed at protecting nationals, but rather constituted a pretext for other aims . It can thus be concluded.
 Thereby, irrespective of the legality of extraterritorial use of force for the purpose of protecting nationals in international law, the activities undertaken by Russian forces in Crimea must be considered illegal .
Self-determination Self-determination has been held by President Putin to constitute a valid and legal reason for the annexation of Crimea . President Putin has said that self-determination is a valid reason for Crimea's annexation .
 The principle is a fundamental yet enigmatic principle of international law . The principle of the international law is an enigmatic yet enigmatic concept .
 It has often been described as a basis for peace and friendly relations and as a prerequisite for human rights . It has been described by some as a precursor to human rights.
 instruments that include reference to the right to self-determination focus on the obligation of states not to refuse or supress such rights by force . But it has explicitly avoided wording that awards national liberation movements theright to use force .
 In contemporary legal doctrine, there is no support for the right to use force to attain selfdetermination outside the context of decolonisation, or illegal occupation . In contemporary law, the right is not allowed to be used in such circumstances .
 There is also less support by states for the right of ethnic groups to use force to secede from existing states .
 There is seemingly some support for the stance that when claims to secession are met by forcible suppression, the case for self-determination may be strengthened . However, there is also some support.
 Legal rhetoric that is applied selectively and used for the purpose of legitimising political preferences is consequently invalid . Legal rhetoric used for political purposes is also invalid, says author .
 Russia has been both selective in the choice of legal references, and used the law with an aim to support political objectives . Russia has also been using the law for political purposes .
This contrasts with rule of law principles which are universally accepted pillars of international law . This contrasts with rules of law which are widely accepted by the world .
 Russian officials' legal arguments put forward by Russian officials are legally invalid, and the manner in which international law has been applied contrasts with established principles of international law . The way in which the law was applied is different from established principles.
 It challenges the predominant paradigm of economic cooperation as a model for building peace and security . It might also have a profound impact on transnational economic relations, says author .
 This chapter explores the economic consequences of the crisis for the Russian and Ukrainian economies . This chapter also explores the impact of the Ukrainian crisis on the economy .
 It also discusses the impact on the European energy markets and the role of sanctions as a crisis-solving tool . It also talks about the impact of sanctions on energy markets .
 Ukraine is the only former Soviet Republic that has a lower GDP today than it did when it became an independent country in 1991 . The IMF figures show Ukraine has a low GDP today.
Post-Soviet political leaders have been part of oligarchical groups more interested in enriching themselves than stimulating economic growth .
 Russia announced a doubling of the gas price to US$480 per thousand cubic meters in the initial phases of the negotiations . In addition, the country has unpaid gas debts to Russia of about US$3. bn .
 Ukraine needs radical economic reforms to improve its economy, including increasing competition, scrapping of energy subsidies to domestic users and structural loans .
 The loan package put together by the IMF in the spring of 2014 amounts to around US$17 bn. The IMF has put together a loan package for around US $17bn.
 Ukraine received another IMF financial support package in 2010, which was frozen when the government did not follow through with the reforms .
 The polarised political situation has its parallel in the economic landscape, says the IMF . IMF World Economic Outlook: April 2014 .
 The Ukrainian economy is divided into a predominantly agrarian West and a heavily industrialised East .
 The ‘Orange revolution’ of 2004 was supported by the western regions, which had a lower standard of living and a high dependence on transfers from the state budget . The eastern regions that supported former President Yanukovych were relatively richer .
 Russian GDP contracted by 8 per cent and Ukraine’s GDP by 15 per cent in the 2009 economic crisis . The present crisis shows a similar political divide .
 Dnipropetrovsk, and Donetsk are the strongest regions economically and key centres for the nuclear, arms and space industries . Donetsk is the strongest region in the world and is a key centre for nuclear and arms industries .
 The Donets Basin is a vast geographical area that has coal deposits, metallurgy and other heavy industry . They are located in the Donets basin.
 The link between eastern Ukraine and Russia is underpinned by strong industrial cooperation and interdependence, not least in the defence sector .
 The south-east regions have lost in relative standard of living after the economic crisis . The South-east region has seen a drop in living standards since the financial crisis .
 For the EU, more trade and cooperation with Ukraine is plausible, but enlargement is hardly an option due to the high costs involved . For the European Union, moretrade and cooperation is plausible.
 It is also questionable from an economic perspective if Russia would be interested in taking on the eastern regions . It is not clear if Russia will take on the Eastern regions .
 Some regions are relatively richer than in western Ukraine and some are at a similar level . But the standard of living is considerably lower than in Russia .
 The population of the leading eastern regions of Donetsk, Dnipropetrovsk, Kharkiv and Luhansk amounts to a third of Ukraine’s population .
 The heavy industry of Ukraine is at least as inefficient and obsolete as it is in Russia . It would not survive competition with the West and would not be able to compete with West .
 eastern Ukraine instead looks to Russia. While western Ukraine looks west and sees more dynamic European countries with higher growth and less corruption .
 The crisis over Ukraine has not only hurt political and diplomatic relations between Russia and the West, but also economic contacts . The crisis has also hurt the West's diplomatic relations with Russia .
 Good business relationships need mutual trust and this will take time to rebuild after Russia’s annexation of Crimea .
 The uncertainty created by the crisis will do serious long-term damage to Russia’s economy . The sanctions implemented so far will have only a limited effect on the Russian economy .
 Financial markets have reacted instantaneously to the crisis over Crimea . Financial markets reacted instantly to Crimea crisis .
 Standard & Poor’s downgraded many Russian stocks and bonds to a rating just above ‘junk status’ due to the higher risk . The Moscow Stock Exchange had fallen substantially .
 The economic setbacks have not yet sufficed to make President Vladimir Putin revise his policy on Ukraine .
 At least in the short term, he will be able to blame Western sanctions for Russia’s gloomy economic prospects .
 Russian GDP increased at an annual average rate of around 7 per cent in 2008 . Putin managed to take credit for this development .
Last few years have seen both lower and gradually decreasing rates of growth . However, the last few years has seen both higher and lower growth rates of the past decade .
 In late April, the IMF decreased its forecast for Russian economic growth in 2014 from 1 per cent to only 0. per cent . The caveat that further downward revisions could not be ruled out .
 The bleak economic outlook for the Russian economy will be a challenge for Putin . The Russian economy is expected to be a major challenge for the president .
 The high rates of growth in the 2000s enabled a rapid increase in Russian military expenditure . Several programmes of military modernisation have been launched .
 Russia is the World’s third largest military spender after the United States and China . With military expenditures 74 around US$90 bn in 2013, Russia was the world's third largest spender in 2013 .
 Ukraine, by comparison, spent US$5. bn on defence in 2013, having increased its military expenditure, in real terms, by 17 per cent in 2012 . Ukraine's military expenditure was 16 per cent higher in 2013 than in 2012 and 2013 .
 According to plans, Russian military expenditure will rise in the coming years . Russia's military expenditure to rise in coming years.
 Without revisions to these plans, the burden of military expenditure will increase even further . Without revisions, the cost of military spending will continue to rise, says author .
 Russian people presently supports Putin's policies on Ukraine, it is more doubtful whether they will continue to do so when the full cost of these policies becomes apparent .
 The present crisis over Ukraine puts the spotlight on European energy security . Energy interdependency is a key factor in the Ukraine crisis .
 Russian security challenges both Russian security of demand and European security of supply . It challenges both Russia and Europe's security.
 The way Europe and Russia solve this energy conundrum will influence the structure and operation of European energy markets, says David Frum . Europe's energy markets will influence Europe's future energy flows, he says .
 Russian energy leverage might still be used to stymie efforts to improve European security well into the next decade . However, Russian energy use may still be still used to improve security in Europe .
 If Russia drastically reduced or cut off gas exports to Europe, it would be a shock to the European economy . Russia's gas exports could be cut off if Russia drastically cuts or cuts gas exports .
 Most European countries are dependent on imported energy and for many of them, Russia is a significant supplier . Russia is the largest supplier of energy to Europe .
 One-third of EU's imports of both crude oil and coal comes from Russia, as well as one-fourth of its natural gas .
In terms of European energy security, import of Russian oil and coal is not an issue . In terms of Europe's energy security. The issue is not a problem for the EU .
 One supplier can be substituted by another within only a few weeks or months . One supplier could be replaced by another in just a few months .
Natural gas distribution is limited to pipelines and markets tend to be local or regional . However, natural gas distribution in the United States is limited.
 When one supplier cannot easily be replaced by another, there are incentives for monopolistic behavior . In previous conflicts between Russia and Ukraine, there were incentives for monopoly behavior .
 Even during some of the frostiest years of the Cold War, imports of Russian gas flowed continuously to western Europe .
 Most countries are heavily dependent on Russian gas for large parts of 75 their overall energy needs . Most countries rely on Russia for large part of their energy needs for large amounts of gas .
 The interdependence of energy trade is highly asymmetric and to Russia’s advantage . Russia's advantage is due to the interd dependence on energy .
 Russia has taken advantage of the energy leverage in its bilateral relations with Europe . Russia has been taking advantage of Russia's energy leverage.
 Russia has used differentiated and discriminatory price policies, says David Frum . Russia has raised the prospect of investments in new pipeline infrastructure and threatened with actual reduction or interruption of gas flows, Frum says .
 Half of Europe's gas supply from Russia passes through Ukraine . Previous Russia-Ukraine gas disputes became a watershed in EU energy policy .
 Several EU members were hit in 2009, which paved the way for the EU’s third energy package . Several EU member countries were hit.
 Its purpose is to deepen EU integration in the energy sector, increase intra-EU trade and diversify access to suppliers .
 Fully implemented, it will mitigate Russian influence on the European gas market . Fully implemented will mitigate Russia's influence on Europe's gas market.
There are European business interests in the energy sector that benefit from the present situation . There are European businesses in the Energy sector.
 President Putin addressed 18 European leaders in a letter in April 2014 . He warned that there could be a reduction in future deliveries to Europe, if Ukraine failed to pay its gas bills on time .
 Russia renounced its role as a reliable energy supplier to Europe . Russia officially renounces its role in Europe's energy supply .
 Russia is using the export of natural gas as a strategic weapon to further its own interests . Russia is also using the gas export as aategic weapon, according to the report .
 This shows Russia’s approach to solve the present distrust and clash of interests between Russia and Europe as regards energy security . This shows Russian's approach to solving the present mistrust and clash.
 Russia’s reorientation has been slow and without obvious benefits . However, Russia's reorientations have been slow, without obvious benefit .
 The 30year gas supply contract with China that Russia secured in May 2014 saw agreement first after ten years of negotiation . Russia secured the deal with China in April 2014 .
 The immediate impact of the deal is actually small, even if it is estimated to be valued at US$400 bn . Russia has been communicated by Russia as a break-through in Sino-Russian energy relations .
 The 38 bn cubic meters Russia plans to export to China is just a fourth of what Russia exported to Europe in 2013 . It is just one fourth of the total export of Russia's gas export to Europe .
 Russia will also have to find the means to pay to build the pipeline infrastructure to China . Gas will only be transported from 2018 .
 It is likely that China received concessions on price as the price has been a major obstacle in the negotiations . China has other options and China has more options .
 Russian exports to China will not replace the revenue that Russia gets from its European customers . Thus, Russian exports will not be replaced by European sales .
 It is more probable that Russia makes itself more dependent on China than vice versa . It is thus more likely that Russia is more dependent than China .
 This is because of the expansion of interconnecting gas pipelines that allow the reversal of gas flows between European countries . This is due to the expansion. This is the result of the growth of the gas pipelines .
 Russia cut-off by Russia is limited to the transit through Ukraine . The North Stream pipeline could replace some of the loss .
 The North Stream pipeline is not yet at the capacity it was designed for . The pipeline was designed to be used for the North Stream project .
 Storage capacity for natural gas has increased somewhat since 2009 . Current market conditions eliminate the financial motive for keeping gas in store and developing capacity further .
 Russian gas as well as stored gas and available liquefied natural gas will not be sufficient to replace imports, even if they are combined with other energy sources like coal .
 Persistent gas shortages would be a challenge to European solidarity and the EU's efforts to improve its energy policies .
 To some extent, shrinking gas production within the EU countries and decreased imports from Russia could be compensated for by pipeline gas from Norway, Algeria, or the Caspian basin .
Developing effective transatlantic energy security will take time. Developing effective Transatlantic security will be difficult, say experts .
 LNG trade across the Atlantic is limited, not least due to growing Asian demand, lack of ships for LNG transport and suitable infrastructure .
 The EU members have different perspectives on energy security and would not suffer to the same extent in a crisis, says the EU . The EU member states would not be affected by the crisis.
 The successful management of the challenges to European energy security could be a problem similar to the Eurozone crisis . The success of energy security is similar to that of the European energy crisis .
 The continuous growth of global and European energy demand makes energy security hard to achieve, says energy security expert . The global demand for energy in Europe is growing faster than ever, says expert .
Sanctions are a key tool for states reluctant to use military power to uphold their geopolitical interests . Sanctions are key to countries reluctant to take action to uphold geopolitical interests.
 An important trend in contemporary use of targeted sanctions is the increasing sensitivity of the sender to the expected costs . In fact, an important trend is the increase in use of sanctions .
 Until now, sanctions have been cheap and easy to adopt, but they are becoming an increasingly important factor . The expected or unintended costs to the sender from enforcing sanctions are becoming increasingly important .
 The many sanctions regimes at work and their regulatory impact on politics and markets cause friction in the global economy .
 A number of Russian officials, as well as pro-Russian actors in Ukraine, have been subjected to sanctions . The sanctions include a number of Russia's top officials and pro-Russia actors .
Few companies, nor entire economic sectors, have been designated . Few companies, or entire sectors, are designated .
 West's economic cost for the West has been acceptable and based on solidarity action . So far, though, the economic cost is acceptable, based on the solidarity action.
 EU sanctions against Russia may come at a much higher price and burden for individual EU member states and specific companies .
 There is also a cost factor relating to the target’s counter-actions, especially if it retaliates . In addition to the self-inflicted harm of preventing trade.
 The potential harm would be profound to European economic interests in the case of a retaliatory Russian cut-off of its gas exports. For instance, the potential harm could be profound, says the author .
 Western governments are concerned about when and how to adopt sanctions, as well as to what degree . In recent years, both these factors have contributed to increasing concern .
 governments are reluctant to widen sanctions that harm their own business interests . Governments are cautious and reluctant to expand sanctions that hurt their own businesses .
 The EU applies sanctions on Russia, but individual member member members are more sceptical about sanctions .
 EU member states have had to make a domestic political and economic cost-benefit calculation . EU members have to take a position on sanctions in order to take the position .
 One of the staunchest critics of the use of sanctions in the EU-Russia conflict is Germany . Germany is one of the most outspoken critics of sanctions .
 There is considerable domestic lobbying of the German government to refrain from adopting far-reaching sanctions . There is also significant domestic lobbying.
 Germany derives one-third of both its gas and oil from Russia . It is also worth noting that Germany derives a third of its gas.
 UK has considered implications for its financial sectors in light of assets freeze measures . France has had to consider the implications given its trade relations with Russia .
 Economic warfare will be waged in different ways depending on interests, economic and political costs, and actual geopolitical stakes and counter-actions .
 The costs of sanctions over Ukraine look very differently across Europe’s capitals . That will shape the contours of western sanctions policy for years to come .
 Can Growth be Restored within the System, FOI-R-3876-SE, May, Stockholm, Stockholm . Can growth be restored in the System. Can Growth Be Restored inside the System .
 Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea and the Ukraine crisis have direct political repercussions and implications for states, security dynamics in different regions, and on-going armed conflicts, both near and distant from the European landmass .
 Russia’s role as a globally influential political actor and great power implies that its actions in one area create significant ripple effects in others . geographical proximity is a variable.
 This chapter highlights and discusses how the crisis over Ukraine, not least Russia’s occupation of Crimea, impacts key state actors, regions and conflicts . This chapter also discusses how Russia's occupation of the Crimea, which has been in Crimea for years, impacts state actors and regions .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine have strategic implications for Russia's neighbours and former Soviet Republics . Iran's nuclear programme, the war in Syria, and the great power politics of China and India are among them .
 The reactions to the crisis in Crimea and the developments in Ukraine from those European states that border Russia and that have been part of the Soviet Union, or the Eastern Block, differ .
 Most reactions mirror a balance between a fear of the long-term political consequences of Russia’s actions, and the short-term economic consequences of their economic and energy dependence on Russia, coupled with sanctions imposed by the West .
 The Russian policies and actions are of a kind that have been expected for quite some time . From the perspectives of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lithuania and Poland, the Russian policies are of the kind that are expected to be expected .
 Russia has declared a willingness to pay the economic price that comes with a decrease in trade, or import of gas and oil, from Russia . To do so, states have advocated strong economic sanctions against Russia .
 Poland and Lithuania have called for consultations in accordance with NATO’s article 4 . They have demanded, together with Estonia and Latvia, the permanent deployment of NATO forces on their soil .
 All four states have declared that they intend to increase their defence spending . All four have also declared they want to increase defence spending.
 Estonia and Poland have also decided to accelerate their defence reform programmes . In the latter case, it includes a missile defence system . Poland and Estonia are also accelerating their programmes .
 Poland and Baltic states will continue to emphasise the need for territorial defence within NATO . It is most likely that Poland and the Baltic States will take the opportunity to continue to emphasize the need to play an active role in the region .
 EU reactions from the EU have been too weak and slow, while NATO has shown its value . According to these states, the reactions from these states are too weak, slow .
An increased U.S. military presence in Europe will be considered to be of great importance . The trust in Germany as a local security provider or framework nation might be questioned .
 The Russian-Georgian War in 2008 had negative short and long-term inf luence over the direct and transit trade between the Baltic States and Russia . The conf lict in Ukraine will most likely also bring a similar result .
 In the long run, the already established economic relations between Russia and the Baltic States will continue . But new investments in Russia will be made cautiously, or not at all, according to CNN .
 Russian energy supplies will be accelerated in the energy sector . The intention of becoming independent from, or finding alternatives to, Russian supplies to be accelerated .
 Most of the concerns and actions of the Baltic States and Poland are also true for Romania, with its border with Ukraine, and fears for a similar development in Moldova .
 Visegrad group of Central European states has likened Crimea to the Soviet Army’s crackdown on the Budapest uprising in 1956 . The Warsaw Pact's invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 has also been likened to the Warsaw Pact invasion in 1968 .
 Both the Czech and Slovak Republics are dependent on Russia for their gas and oil . Both have stopped short of calling for sanctions .
 The conf lict between Russia and Ukraine has highlighted a split in Bulgarian society . Bulgarian society has its historical ties to both East and West .
 Responses range from sympathy for the Russians to fear of Putin’s power games .
 Bulgarian dependency on Russian energy and income 82 brought by Russian tourists has dampened the reactions from Sofia . Sofia's dependency on Russia's energy has dampen the reaction from the country .
 It is not likely that these countries will be pushing for an increased NATO presence . They will follow the core NATO and EU members in search of improved security and alternatives to Russian energy supplies .
 Central Asia, the Caucasus, Moldova and Belarus Russian pretexts for intervening in Ukraine concern many former Soviet republics. Central Asia and the Caucasus are concerned by Russia's actions .
 Similarly to Ukraine, all have Russian minorities and most are weak states . All have Russian minority states and most have weak states.
 Russia has military assets in Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Georgia, Moldova and Belarus . Russia has assets in KyrgyZstan, KyrGYzstan and Armenia, Armenia and Georgia .
 Moscow has made it clear that no-one is safe. By ignoring international law and explicit commitments, Moscow has ignored international law . Most notably, the 1994 Budapest memorandum, where Ukraine gave up nuclear weapons in exchange for a binding agreement of territorial integrity .
 The Ukraine crisis has prompted discussions in both Kazakhstan and Ukraine about the two countries' approach to nuclear weapons .
 Many of the countries keep a low profile on Ukraine so as to avoid provoking Russia . Many of these countries keep an low profile.
 Ukraine's loss of territory has raised the price for any overtures to the West . Ukraine’s losses of territory have raised the cost of any overture to the west .
 Russian assertiveness will promote both anti-Russian feelings and domestic political unity . At the same time, Russian assertivity will promote anti-Russia feelings and unity .
 Russia's Ukraine approach likely undermines Moscow’s Eurasian integration project, economically, politically and with regard to security . Russia's approach to Ukraine is likely to undermine Moscow's Eurasian Integration project .
 Russia’s ability to uphold its ambitions to ensure stability by military means in volatile Central Asia and the Caucasus decreases as forces are committed to handle Ukraine . Russia's ability to upholding its ambitions is also decreasing in the Caucasus .
 Russia’s preoccupation with Ukraine reduces its ability to compete for inf luence elsewhere, creating opportunities for other forces to strengthen their positions .
 Central Asia increasingly turns to Asia, with growing economic activities in the region by China, Japan and South Korea . For example, Central Asia is turning to Asia for economic growth .
 Kazakhstan, Russia’s key Eurasian integration partner, has regions, like Crimea, with many Russian inhabitants . Kazakhstan is the country's most populous region .
 Uzbekistan’s rather independent-minded foreign policy could become more careful . Uzbekistan is an independent country with a more independent foreign policy .
 Relatively isolated Turkmenistan remains vulnerable to intervention, while unstable Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan have no choice but to rely on Moscow for security .
 Growing geopolitical rivalry could make balancing between the West and Russia more difficult . The West's relationship with Russia could make it more difficult.
 Armenia is poorer and militarily weaker than Azerbaijan and will remain dependent on Russia for security . Armenia is poor and will still be dependent on Russian for security.
 Georgia's leadership signalled that it wanted to avoid being a problem for the West's relation to Russia . Russia's aggression against Ukraine has led to Russia's annexation of Crimea .
 separatist regions Abkhazia and South Ossetia should be on the EU-Russia political agenda. One way was to tone down demands that its separatist regions should be included in the EU's political agenda .
 Russia does not prioritise good relations with the West. This approach may come into question as Russia doesn't prioritiseGood relations with West .
 Minority protection may not prompt Russian intervention, but closer Georgian relations to the EU and NATO might .
 Moscow’s levers include military forces stationed in and near Georgia and possible illegal annexation of South Ossetia .
 For Moldova, the main problem remains pro-Russian separatism in Transnistria and Gagauzia .
 The weak government promotes ties to the West, but faces elections in late 2014 . The weakgovernment promotes ties with the West .
 Political instability and a weak economy will make it hard to counter Russia’s political and military inf luence .
 Belarus' political leadership focuses on regime stability and will remain closely allied with and dependent on Russia . Belarus’ political leadership, while initially critical of Russia’s actions, focuses on the regime stability .
 A 'Maidan' in Minsk is unlikely, it might even prompt an invitation for a Russian intervention . But it is unlikely to prompt an invite from Russia .
 The crisis over Ukraine presents Turkey with significant challenges, says Turkey . The crisis is a major challenge for Turkey, according to the government .
 Turkey's political will to directly challenge and confront Russia over its actions in Ukraine is limited . Turkey’s political will is limited, but it is clearly aligned with its European and NATO allies .
 Ankara instead assumes a pragmatic approach to the crisis in its northern neighbourhood . The city has been in a crisis of crisis for years .
 Russian energy, and Black Sea security, are key reasons for Russian energy . The Montreux Convention guarantees Ankara sovereign control over the Turkish Straits . It regulates naval access to the Black Sea .
 The Convention strictly limits the total tonnage of the naval force that non-littoral states may maintain in the Black Sea . It is impossible for non-Black Sea NATO 84 members to freely amass a large naval presence there .
 Turkey has few viable options in the short term to diversify its energy sources and decrease its dependency on Russia so as to mitigate Moscow’s political inf luence .
 The Ukraine crisis places Ankara in an awkward and unwanted diplomatic position . Second, the Ukraine crisis puts Ankara in a awkward and awkward position .
 Ankara will seek to keep any international political debate on the Montreux Convention off the agenda . Ankara will try to keep the political debate off the agendas of the Convention .
 The centrality of the Convention to Turkey’s security, sovereignty and Black Sea policy underscores Ankara's unwillingness to accept any challenge to its legitimacy . The Convention is a balancing act regarding its implementation .
 Turkey will not undermine the Convention in order to acquiesce to either Russian complaints or NATO’s need for operational freedom of action in the Black Sea . The alliance is collectively at war.
 instability in the Black Sea region exacerbates this Turkish dilemma . Russia has already produced undesirable Russian criticism against its hitherto resolute implementation of the Convention .
 Pragmatism, with an emphasis on self-interest and stability, prevails in Turkey’s approach to events in Ukraine, partly due to Turkey's current political insecurities and approaching elections in 2014-15 .
 The NATO alliance remains a key pillar of Turkey's defence policy . Turkey has far from forgotten its Cold War role and position as NATO’s southern f lank .
 Turkey still maintains the second largest armed forces in the alliance . Turkey is the second biggest military force in the country .
 Russian action in Ukraine is another confirmation for Turkish defence planners and politicians that they are right, for many reasons, to maintain and make longterm investments in the defence sector and armed forces .
 The recent developments in Ukraine underline the question of whether Russia's deteriorating relationship with the West could affect Iran and the nuclear negotiations .
 They share a common critique of the current world order, and their strategic interests sometimes coincide . But they also have a common view of the world order .
 The relationship is not characterised by trust, but by pure pragmatism . The relationship isn't based on trust or trust, it is based on a relationship .
 A common Iranian viewpoint is that Russia has used Iran as a pawn and that its policy mainly has benefitted Russia itself . The Iranian view is that the Russian policy has benefited Russia itself.
 Russian rhetoric, which defends Iran’s nuclear rights, and Russian actions, are different . This is illustrated by the discrepancy between Russian rhetoric and the UN Security Council's actions .
 With the introduction of direct US-Iran talks, Russia’s inf luence has been diminished .
 Russia's actions in Ukraine could change that, due to the existence in Iran of two competing views on Ukraine . There is a slim chance that Russia’s actions in the Ukraine could changed that, according to a report .
 Iran’s interests will be of little importance on the day of rapprochement. Iran should refrain from taking sides between Russia and the West, because previous experience shows.
 Ukraine presents the perfect excuse for Iran to sabotage the nuclear negotiations by siding with Russia and getting Russia to honor the deal on the coveted S-300s .
 Iran’s conservative camp decides that negotiations are not worth pursuing . The former view is prevailing, but it is possible that that could change if Iran's conservative camp decided not to pursue .
 Russia would be willing to support the Iranian conservative camp in order to deny the Obama administration of an important diplomatic victory .
 The Syrian war has always had its own inner logic. War-Torn Syria – Worsening Prospects for Peace .
 Russia, Iran, Russia and Iran have been involved in Syria's military operations . The US, Europe, Turkey, Turkey and the Gulf Cooperation Council have also been involved .
 Russian-brokered deals to rid Syria of its chemical weapons stockpiles are underway . But the Assad regime may use the shifting of international attention towards the Ukraine to delay the process even further .
 The process by which their removal was agreed has been agreed has for the time been bought the regime legitimacy and immunity from direct foreign attacks . The process was agreed by which they were removed from the regime .
 Washington decided not to militarily after chemical weapons were used in August 2013 . It dented U.S. credibility in the Middle East as it dented United States credibility .
 The regime has everything to win from delaying and sustaining that current balance, and Russia nothing to lose as it diverts attention away from Syria . Russia has nothing to lost from delaying or sustaining thatCurrent balance, the regime says .
 Talks between the Syrian regime and a sizable part of the rebel opposition have stalled . Meanwhile, talks between the regime and the opposition are stalled .
 The U.S. and Russia are unable to work candidly on the process . Efforts to revive them may not succeed, but they are even less likely to resume anytime soon .
 The civil war in Syria has been intertwined with regional and superpower politics from its inception in 2011 . Syria's civil war began in 2011 and has been linked to the region since then .
 Russian and Iranian support for Assad regime on the one hand and Western and GCC support for the rebel cause on the other has ensured the US-Russia linkage to the conf lict . The US and Iran have also supported the Assad regime.
 Backers of the Assad regime have looked to Russia as a leading actor for protection . Backers have been looking to Russia for protection in recent years .
Already in 2011 rebels turned to the U.S. in the hope that it would back decisive interventions to topple the regime, as was done in Libya .
 Russia vehemently rejected what it saw as a dishonest use of the UN mandate in order to support regime change in Libya . Russia vehemently rejects what it sees as a dishonourable use of UN mandate .
 Moscow's position on Syria ref lected this, as did its veto of any UN action that could be used to justify intervention . Moscow’s position on Syrian ref lecting this was also lected by Moscow .
 The mosaic of conf licting parties in Syria will be less affected by great power politics . Syria's power politics will not be affected by big power politics, says the author .
 The Ukraine crisis has led to diminishing Russian, American and European ability to focus on the Syrian crisis .
Having fewer actors interested in a resolution to the civil war means that the war is more likely to escalate .
Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey and GCC countries with stakes in the war will become more important . Support from local actors will be more important for local actors .
 More support to fighting parties will f low in, the conf lict will become even more entrenched and the Syrian situation will deteriorate further . More support for fighting parties in Syria will become more entrenched, the report says .
 This is only marginally an effect of the Russian intervention in the Ukraine, but one that may have long-term implications for talks and negotiations geared towards finding a solution for a stable Syria in the future .
 The crisis over Ukraine is unlikely to change India’s strategic outlook and security policy in the short-term . India and China will not be able to change their strategic outlook or security policy .
 New Delhi’s strategic calculus and behavior could change in the long-term . However, if the crisis results in significant and lasting changes in the great power relations between China, Russia and the US, it could change .
 India has responded to the events in Ukraine by refraining from criticising Russia and by not supporting sanctions . India has not supported sanctions in Ukraine .
 The former Indian national security advisor, Shivshankar Menon, has stated that Russia has ‘legitimate interests’ in Crimea .
 India 87 does not want to upset Moscow, since relations with Russia are of strategic importance . India obviously does not wants to upset Russia, since it is a strategic importance.
 India is the world’s largest importer of military equipment . About 80 per cent are imported from Russia .
 Russian weapons, technology and assistance are crucial for the modernisation of India’s armed forces .
 Moscow has long been an ‘all-weather-friend’ of New Delhi and has often supported India in multilateral fora. Second, Moscow has also been an 'all- weather-friend' of India .
 India relies on the Russian veto in the UN Security Council to block initiatives with regard to the Kashmir issue . The Russian veto is perceived to favor Pakistani interests .
 India has much to lose in its relationship with Russia by taking a tough stand on its role in Ukraine . In short, India has a much to lost in its relations with Russia .
 In the longer term, India’s strategic interests could force India to rely less on Russia and more on the West .
 The strategic relationships with the U.S. and other Western states have gradually deepened . The strategic relationship with the United States and other western states has graduallyDeepened .
 India and the U.S. have converging interests in balancing China’s military rise, as well as in expanding economic relations .
 Both states view each other as important strategic partners in the future, primarily on the basis of China's China challenge .
 India is likely to gravitate increasingly towards the West if Ukraine crisis is the return of Cold War dynamics between the West and Russia . If this, combined with other factors, results in closer relations between China and Russia.
 The trend of deepening relations between India and the U.S. is then likely to accelerate . The importance of Russia in the Indian strategic calculus would decline .
 Nehruvian non-alignment and keeping good relations with Russia, while expanding ties with the West . However, the preferable Indian option is non- alignment .
 The Ukraine crisis has had little direct effect on China’s security policy, economy or energy imports .
 larger principles related to territorial disputes and economic sanctions policy have larger principles . However, larger principles such as territorial disputes have not been fully implemented .
 Crimea presents China with political dilemmas that are likely to have implications in the short, medium and long term. Indirectly, Crimea presents the country with a political dilemma .
 Unease about the military intervention and meddling in the internal affairs of Ukraine is in conf lict with how Beijing values its special relationship with Russia .
 Neighbours and great powers alike carefully watch how Beijing handles itself . China is also well aware of the symbolic and normative impact any reaction to the crisis will have .
 It is closely coupled to the territorial integrity of China and the status of Taiwan, Tibet and Xinjiang . It is close to China's territorial integrity .
 These issues are highly sensitive, as they are linked directly to the legitimacy of the Communist party . The issues are linked to the Communist Party's legitimacy .
 China’s grievances from colonial times reinforce the importance of its nonintervention policy . The strategic competition with other East Asian powers centred on territorial disputes .
 The strategic partnership with Russia continues to be a useful tool for China . The strategic partnerships with Russia continue to be useful.
 It is a proven way of managing and limiting geostrategic tensions in Asia . It is also a proven method of managing, limiting and limitingGeostr strategic tensions .
 Russia is a partner in pushing for a US-critical, multi-polar agenda . Russia is also a partner for a U.S.-critical,Multi-Polar agenda.
 China’s reaction to Ukraine is an indicator of how much it values this partnership. In a sense, China's reaction is an indication that it values Ukraine's relationship with China .
 China’s official comments at the UN have underlined its commitment to non-intervention . China has chosen to refrain from taking sides .
State media have blamed the West for making incursions into Russia’s sphere of interest and thereby triggering the current dynamics . Still, officially sponsored comments in state media have been made by state media .
 Crimea presents a special historic circumstance that the West does not understand and respect . Crimea, Crimea, so the argument goes, presents aSpecial historic circumstance .
 Crimea is a special case and it will not be copied and applied elsewhere. According to these views, Crimea is an "special case"
 The successful Russian use of politico-military means is likely to become a case that will be intensely studied by political and military planners .
 China's neighbours are worried that Beijing in the future may seek to employ similar methods against them . China’s neighbours are concerned that Beijing may use similar methods.
Official U.S. warnings to China in April 2014 triggered official American warnings to the country .
 China has managed to pursue its diplomatic approach without drawing heavy critique . For the moment, China has pursued its diplomatic approaches without drawing criticism .
 If Russia occupies more parts of Ukraine, China will become hard-pressed to find a balanced reaction . If the use of force continues, China may be hard to find an balanced reaction.
 This is especially true should the separatist movement in Ukraine become a more potent force. This is particularly true should it become more potent.
 A series of recent high-profile attacks in China has increased China’s sensitivity towards separatist movements . The attacks have increased China's sensitivity towards separatists .
 de-escalation of Ukraine-Russia tensions is definitely in China’s interest, as is supporting a strong UN role .
Short-term Chinese concerns in the wake of the crisis relate to disrupted trade f lows and energy dynamics . Short-term China concerns relate to disruption of trade and energy.
 China's opposition 89 to sanctions against Russia highlights Beijing’s main concern that sanctions may hurt the economy . China's main concern is the impact of sanctions on the economy, with a direct impact on China .
 China seems to benefit from continued tension between Russia and the West in the short to medium term . This is a sphere where China is benefiting from continued tensions between the West and Russia .
 The closing of the gas deal between Russia and China in May 2014 is a sign of China capitalising on the crisis . Russia wants to diversify its energy exports while China wants to invest in energy exports .
 Geographical distance is not necessarily an insurance against increased political and systemic uncertainty . Geographical distances are not necessarily a insurance against increasing political and political uncertainty .
 The consequences and implications for China are different from those experienced by Moldova, Turkey or Iran . All are still affected by the events in Ukraine, but the consequences are different .
 Russian aggression will have long-term strategic implications, manifested in different ways and to varying degrees, for Ukraine and beyond .
 Iran Review, 28 October, 2013. Suggested reading Noori, Alireza, ’Iran and Opportunity to Strike a Balance in ’Either United States or Russia’ Option’.
 In Setting the Scene, a background to the crisis from a Ukrainian, Russian and an EU perspective explains some of the underlying factors and drivers behind the crisis .
 What specific consequences for defence and security affairs might ensue is outlined in the next chapter . The next chapter will see the consequences of defence and Security affairs .
 We analyse some implications for key actors, regions and conflicts outside the region . We also look at some implications of key actors and regions .