CRISNO 28

CORFU INCIDENT

Background:

Greece was confronted with a foreign policy crisis over the island of Corfu from 31 August to 29 September 1923.

Pre-crisis The commission appointed by the Conference of Ambassadors to delimit the Albania/Greece border (see Case #23--Albanian Frontier, in 1921, in Italy/ Albania/Yugoslavia PC) resumed its work in May 1923. From the outset the relations between the commission, especially its Italian Chairman, General Enrico Tellini, and Greece were strained: the Greek delegate openly claimed that he was partial to Albania's claims.

On 27 August Tellini and three assistants were murdered by unknown assailants at Kakavia near the Greek/Albanian frontier within Greek territory. Two days later Italy delivered a seven-point ultimatum to Athens demanding compliance within 24 hours. The Greek prime minister made counterproposals on the 30th, to no avail. The next day a protest note from the Conference of Ambassadors, with Italy's concurrence, was presented to Greece.

(It was learned later that, in July-August 1923, a secret decision was taken at the highest level, by Mussolini himself, to occupy Corfu in case Greece reacted adversely to Italy's proclamation of sovereignty over the Dodecanese Islands, long part of Greek territory. Military preparations to that end were taken in August.)

Italy's behavior was a classic example of a "pure opportunity" crisis actor. According to a definitive biography of Mussolini, "[H]e was casting about for some striking act of international brigandage that would eclipse memories of D'Annunzio's invasion of Fiume.... [I]n July 1923, ... he ordered plans to be prepared for a landing on the Greek island of Corfu ... in reply to the Greek 'provocations' that he intended to organize" [Smith 1982, 72].

Summary:

On 31 August, the same day as the protest note from the Conference of Ambassadors, Italian naval forces shelled and occupied the unfortified Greek island of Corfu, triggering a crisis for Greece. Denouncing the seizure of Corfu as a "warlike" act, Greece appealed to the League of Nations on 1 September under Articles 12 and 15 of the Covenant. On the 2nd it pledged cooperation to the Conference of Ambassadors and proposed an international inquiry.

The League Council debated the issue on the 4th despite Italy's contention that it lacked competence in the matter; but the Council virtually withdrew from the task of crisis management by transferring the dispute to the Conference of Ambassadors. The Conference ruled in favor of Italy on the 5th: Greece was ordered to pay an indemnity of 50 million lira to Italy, clearly implying Greece's guilt for the Tellini murders. Four days later Greece accepted the demands of the Conference and Italy regarding reparations, in principle. Italy was to evacuate Corfu, which it did on 27 September; but it escaped censure for its self-declared "temporary occupation" of the island. The crisis ended on the 29th, when Greece agreed to pay the indemnity under protest.

There were many involved actors in the Corfu Incident of 1923: the members of the Conference of Ambassadors--Belgium, France, Japan, and the U.K., apart from Italy; Albania and Yugoslavia; and the League of Nations Council.

(A related dispute between the U.K. and Albania over mine-laying operations in the Corfu Channel during World War II, which caused damage and casualties to ships of the Royal Navy in 1946, was resolved by an even-handed ruling of the International Court of Justice in April 1949 without becoming a full-blown international crisis: the IJC awarded damages to the U.K., but British mine-sweeping operations in 1946 were termed a violation of Albanian sovereignty [see also Case #71--Invasion of Albania, in 1939, in Italy/ Albania/Yugoslavia PC].)

References:

Documents on British Foreign Policy (DBFP) (Medlicott et al.) 1983; Barros 1965; Carr 1945; Cassels 1970; Dexter 1967; Eagleton 1957; Smith 1982; Toynbee 1927c; Walters 1952.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


