CRISNO 270

ENTEBBE RAID

Background:

Jewish hostages were held in Entebbe in a PLO-generated crisis for Israel and Uganda from 27 June to 4 July 1976.

Background Guerrilla war against Israel by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) took several forms, including the hijacking of planes from Israel's national carrier, El Al, or other airlines carrying Israeli passengers. After strict security controls were instituted, these acts diminished in number. However, the security conditions at some airports remained less stringent. One of these was Athens.

Summary:

On 27 June 1976 an Air France plane en route from Tel Aviv to Paris was hijacked shortly after a stopover in Athens by an armed group belonging to the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP), including persons from Germany's Bader-Meinhof terrorist organization. This triggered a crisis for Israel. The pilot was forced to fly to Libya where the plane spent nine hours. Later it reached Entebbe in Uganda. The passengers were taken to the airport's former terminal building and divided into two groups--Israelis and Jews, and members of other nationalities. The latter were released shortly thereafter. The French crew remained with the former.

When it became apparent that Uganda's President, Idi Amin, had no intention of pressing for the release of the Jewish and Israeli passengers, Israel began to consider a military operation for their rescue. A decision to that effect was made on 1 July. On the 3rd three Hercules transport planes carrying Israeli commando troops landed in Entebbe, fought Ugandan soldiers in a one-hour battle, and succeeded in rescuing the hostages still being held at the airport. The arrival of Israeli troops and the military hostilities triggered a very short crisis for Uganda. The crisis ended on the 4th when the rescue team, together with the hostages, landed safely in Israel after a stop for fuel at Nairobi Airport. After the rescue, Amin blamed Kenya for aiding Israel and instituted several economic measures against its neighbor. In Arab League discussions Israel was condemned for the raid on Uganda, but no resolution was passed.

The UN, the U.S., and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1976; AR 1976; ARB 1976; Ajomo 1977; Ben-Porat and Schiff 1977; Dan 1976; Grahame 1980; Green 1976; Maoz 1981; Ofer 1976; Rabin 1979; Stevenson 1976; Ya'akobi 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


