CRISNO 64

MUNICH

Background:

The Munich crisis--for Czechoslovakia, France, the U.K., and the USSR--took place from 7 September to early October 1938.

Background The annexation of Austria by Germany in March 1938 (see Case #60--Anschluss, in Europe: Non-PCs) created an immediate threat to Czechoslovakia, which feared that its German-speaking areas would be Hitler's next target. Czechoslovakia sought assurances from France and the U.K., which refused to give firm guarantees. In April Anglo-French leaders met in London to seek a solution to the problem. In order to avoid the possibility of war with Hitler the two powers began to press Czechoslovakia to make concessions over Sudetenland. In the third week of May rumors reached Prague that large German military forces were gathering near the frontier in Silesia and northern Austria, possibly in preparation for an operation against Czechoslovakia (see Case #62). The activity of the Sudeten German Party (SdP), which was strongly supported by Germany, was intensified. Its leader, Konrad Henlein, presented the party's demands in the Karlsbad Programme on 7 June. In June, July, and August there was an intensification of SdP activity. On 18 July the British government decided to send a mediator to Prague and, on 3 August, Lord Runciman arrived. A "Third Plan" was presented by the Czechoslovak government on 24 August, which proposed a compromise between its original proposals over the Sudetenland and the SdP's demands. As tension in the country built up, Runciman came up with a "Fourth Plan" between 3 and 7 September, leaning strongly toward the earlier Sudeten German demands. The Nazi Party Congress convened at Nuremberg on 5 September.

Summary:

On 7 September 1938 tension in Czechoslovakia escalated when 82 members of the Sudeten German Party were detained in Moravska Ostrava for arms smuggling and other offenses against the state. The SdP, for its part, charged the Czechoslovak police with violence, and Hitler ordered Henlein to break off all negotiations with Prague. That day, too, the Times of London published a leading article supporting the "Fourth Plan" as the solution to the Sudeten problem. The arrests on 7 September, which had effectively laid to rest any hope of reaching a compromise solution through the Runciman Mission, triggered a crisis for Czechoslovakia. This was followed by almost daily demonstrations accompanied by acts of violence by the SdP. On the 9th President Benes addressed his people and attempted to win goodwill for the "Fourth Plan."

On 12 September a crisis was triggered for France and the U.K. when Hitler addressed the Nazi Party Congress and demanded self-determination for the Sudeten Germans. That evening riots began in the Sudeten districts. The French and British responses came the following day: Prime Minister Chamberlain cabled Hitler that he was willing to travel to Germany to seek a solution to the crisis. That day, too, Premier Daladier requested Chamberlain to arrange a Three-Power Conference to allow the transfer of Sudetenland to Germany. Several French economic and financial decrees were prepared, as well, in case of war.

On 15 September Chamberlain met with Hitler at Berchtesgaden. He returned the next day, bringing his colleagues and the French government Hitler's plan for the cession of the Sudeten districts to Germany. Anglo-French discussions began in London on 18 September to work out a proposal that Chamberlain could bring to Hitler at their forthcoming meeting in Godesberg. The Anglo-French Plan, announced on the 19th, called for the immediate transfer to Germany of Sudeten areas with over 50 percent German inhabitants and the acceptance by Czechoslovakia of a neutralized status, which would require the abrogation of its treaties with France and the USSR.

That day a crisis was triggered for the Soviet Union when President Benes requested USSR affirmation of the Soviet-Czechoslovak Pact. The Soviets responded the same day by affirming the Pact on condition of prior French action. On 20 September Czechoslovakia rejected the Anglo-French Plan. But on the 21st Prague reversed its decision and accepted the Plan, after having been served an ultimatum by both Britain and France.

The Godesberg meeting between Hitler and Chamberlain took place on 22 and 23 September. The German leader increased his demands and issued an ultimatum for the territorial transfer by 1 October, the date originally set by Hitler in April. Benes ordered general mobilization in Czechoslovakia. On the 23rd the USSR warned Poland that it would denounce the Soviet-Polish Pact of Non-Aggression if the Polish government persisted in sending troops to the Czechoslovakia-Polish frontier. A partial mobilization in France was ordered on 24 September. On the 25th the British fleet and its auxiliary air force units were mobilized. Hitler spoke at the Sportspalast on the 26th, stating that the Czechoslovaks would have to come to terms peaceably with their non-German minorities. Chamberlain sent a message to Hitler that Britain would support France if it were drawn into war over Czechoslovakia. A final appeal to Britain to avoid war was sent by Hitler on the 27th. A conference among Italy, France, Germany, and Britain was called.

The signing of the Four-Power Agreement at Munich on 30 September 1938 terminated the crisis for France and the U.K. Czechoslovakia was forced to accept the terms. War with Germany had been temporarily avoided. The Soviet termination date was sometime early in October, once German troops were in occupation of all the German-claimed territories and war had been averted.

Other involved actors were Italy and the U.S. Mussolini formally proposed the terms--secretly drawn up by the German foreign office--that were incorporated in the Agreement. President Roosevelt sent personal appeals to all actors on 26 and 27 September to refrain from the use of force. There was no League of Nations involvement in this crisis.

References:

Documents on British Foreign Policy (DBFP) 1949-52; Documents Diplomatiques Français (DDF) 1964; Documents on German Foreign Policy (DGFP) 1948; Baynes 1942; Beloff 1947-49; Bonnefous 1965, 1967; Braddick 1968-69; Bruegel 1973; Bullock 1962; Butler and Sloman 1975; Carr 1945; Cowling 1975; Dilks 1971; Eden 1962; Eubank 1965; Feiling 1946; Fuchser 1982; Henderson 1940; Lacaze 1995; Laffan 1951; Middlemas 1972; Perman 1962; Robbins 1968; Schuman 1939; Shirer 1964, 1985; Smelser 1975; Smith 1982; Taylor 1979; Thorne 1967; Weinberg 1980, 1988; Wheeler-Bennett 1948.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


