CRISNO 161

WEST IRIAN I

Background:

The Netherlands experienced a crisis over West Irian (West New Guinea) on 1 December 1957. The crisis faded until it erupted into a new crisis almost four years later.

Background and Pre-crisis In order to prevent last-minute obstacles to the Dutch-Indonesian agreement of 1949 concerning the transfer of power from the Netherlands to the Republic of Indonesia (see Case #127), the issue of West Irian (West New Guinea) had been left open. In November 1957 talks were held between Australian and Dutch leaders on practical measures for improving their joint administration of West Irian. Indonesia, which had begun a campaign for its liberation, viewed this as an attempt to undermine a peaceful outcome to Indonesia's claim to West New Guinea.

Summary:

A crisis for the Netherlands was triggered on 1 December 1957 when Indonesia's minister of information authorized a general strike by all Indonesian workers employed by Dutch enterprises. This was followed by a ban on all Dutch publications and on KLM landings in Indonesia. A large number of Dutch businesses were seized by groups of Indonesian workers and youth. The Dutch response, on 3 December, was a statement by the prime minister pledging the safeguarding of Dutch national interests in Indonesia. On 5 December the Indonesian minister of justice announced that some 50,000 Dutch nationals would be expelled and that all Dutch consulates, with the exception of the one in Djakarta, would be closed. On the 6th the Netherlands government called for an urgent session of the North Atlantic Council, which met but did not issue an official statement. This was followed on 9 December by an Indonesian decree placing all Dutch-owned estates and plantations under the control of the Indonesian government. Another Netherlands attempt to gain international support was made on 23 December with a letter to the UN Secretary-General asking that the situation be brought before the General Assembly and the Security Council. In the meantime two Dutch navy destroyers were dispatched to reinforce troops already in the New Guinea area.

There is no clear termination date. The issue lingered on at below-crisis level until 1961 (see Case #187).

The U.S. was marginally involved in this crisis, the USSR not at all.

References:

See sources for Cases #109 and #116.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


