CRISNO 37

CHACO I

Background:

A crisis between Bolivia and Paraguay occurred between 5 December 1928 and 12 September 1929.

Background The Chaco Boreal consists of 116,000 square miles of territory that had been claimed by Bolivia and Paraguay for 150 years. The area is mostly swamp, with very few inhabitants, and its agricultural or industrial value was as yet unexplored. It represented the only Bolivian access to the sea. Army patrols and forts were maintained by each state on its side of the Chaco. Notwithstanding agreements between Bolivia and Paraguay in 1913 and 1915, the dispute remained unresolved.

Summary:

A crisis for Bolivia was triggered on 5 December 1928 when Paraguayan troops captured and destroyed a Bolivian fort. The Bolivian government immediately severed diplomatic relations with Paraguay, mobilized its reserve forces, and, on 14 December, retaliated with a military attack to reoccupy the captured fort and occupy a second one. This triggered a crisis for Paraguay, which regarded Bolivia's military advance as a serious threat to its territory. On 17 December Paraguay proclaimed general mobilization and sent reinforcements north to halt what was believed to be an impending assault.

The adversaries seemed to be on the brink of a war that neither desired. Paraguay appealed to the League of Nations. But the prime mover in mediation was the Pan American Conference on Conciliation and Arbitration, a body that had been organized by the Pan American Union, a predecessor of the Organization of American States (OAS). The conference was composed of representatives from the U.S., Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, and Uruguay, as well as the two crisis actors. Of the participants in the neutral five-nation committee, the U.S. was the most active in the crisis and even offered its good offices on 14 December, before the Conference began its mediation efforts. The activities of the Conference led to a Conciliation Protocol signed in Washington on 3 January 1929. It called for a restoration of the status quo ante and the resumption of diplomatic relations between the two states, and set up a commission of inquiry. A proposed arbitration convention on 31 August 1929 was rejected by both parties. The crisis ended on 12 September 1929 when Bolivia and Paraguay ratified a resolution presented by the commission.

(The status quo as of December 1928 was restored on 4 April 1930, but no effort had been made to resolve the basic territorial dispute. The issue erupted again in 1932 [see Case #41--Chaco II].)

The League of Nations Council warned the two parties against further military activity and urged them to resolve the dispute peacefully. However, its mediation effort yielded to the Pan American Conference when the Pan American Union took up the matter. The United States was the most important contributor to crisis abatement, along with other members of the Pan American Union.

References:

See sources for Case #41; Garner 1966.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


