CRISNO 374

SYRIA INTERVENTION IN LEBANON

Background:

Syria experienced a crisis from 15 February to 6 April 1987 as a result of a sharp escalation in fighting among the contending factions in Lebanon.

Background and Pre-crisis After three decades of coexistence between Lebanese Christians and Muslims, framed by the "National Pact" of 1943, civil war erupted in April 1975. It was compounded by the presence of a large visible Palestinian refugee community in southern Lebanon, under the leadership of the PLO.

There were several international crises in Lebanon during the next decade (see Cases #265--Lebanon Civil War I, in 1976; #289--Litani Operation, arising from Israel's first major incursion into Lebanon, in 1978, in Arab/Israel PC; #337--War in Lebanon, triggered by Israel's large-scale invasion, in 1982-83, in Arab/Israel PC). Earlier, the Arab League had legitimized Syria's primacy in Lebanon by creating an Arab Deterrent Force (ADF), composed almost entirely of Syrian troops. Internal strife--among the paramilitary forces of Amal, the largest Shia militia in Lebanon, Hizbullah, the "Party of God," a pro-Iranian, extremist Shia militia in south Lebanon, the Druze forces in the Shouf mountains near Beirut, and PLO forces, mostly in the south--was endemic: from mid-October 1986 to January 1987 it became more visible, including the kidnapping of Western journalists and clergymen.

Summary:

Fighting between Amal and other competing groups in Lebanon escalated sharply on 15 February 1987: Amal militiamen laid siege to Palestinian refugee camps, blocking convoys of food and medical supplies. The renewed instability triggered a crisis for Syria, threatening its self-asserted hegemony over its western neighbor.

On the 19th Shia leaders, fearing an Amal defeat, requested Syrian intervention to take control of security in west Beirut--east Beirut was controlled by Christian militias, notably the Lebanese Forces. Factional fighting intensified on the 20th, with 200 killed. Internal instability was compounded by Hizbullah's escalation of cross-border raids into, and shelling of, northern Israeli border settlements. In fact, Syria perceived Iran, Hizbullah's mentor and arms supplier, as the source of threat to its primacy in Lebanon.

On 22 February Syria responded to a perceived threat to its influence in Lebanon by dispatching ADF (really Syrian) forces to take control over west Beirut. Only the PLO denounced this intervention. Even Israel, through Defense Minister Rabin, declared that Israel would not oppose the ADF (Syrian) deployment provided it was limited to Beirut. Within a day Syrian forces controlled all of west Beirut. However, on the 24th, they killed 26 Lebanese in the Bourj Hammoud district of the capital, including 18 members of Hizbullah and 3 from Amal. This led to a demonstration of 10,000 supporters of Hizbullah: the incident occurred while Iran's Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Velayati, and its Revolutionary Guards Minister, Muhsin Rafiqdost, were meeting with President Asad in Damascus. On the 25th the head of Syria's forces in Beirut, Brigadier-General Ghazi Kan'an, announced that they would not be deployed in the south Beirut Shia suburbs. And on 4 March Amal, under Syria's pressure, freed 600 PLO prisoners.

Syria and Iran shared a common interest--hostility to Iraq. However, the former's secularism clashed with the latter's Islamic fundamentalism: Iran objected to antifundamentalist measures adopted by Syria, whose troops pressed Lebanese men to shave their beards and women not to wear the chador (veil): President Khamenei indicated Iran's displeasure with these acts and criticized Syrian soldiers on 6 March. Iran's interior minister conveyed this message to Asad the same day.

Syria's behavior was motivated by the determination to brook no interference with its hegemony in Lebanon. This included the posting of a 500-strong force along the Beirut-Sidon coast road and the use of Special Forces whenever deemed necessary. Finally, on 6 April a Syrian-mediated cease-fire agreement came into effect and ended the Amal siege of the Palestinian refugee camps: trucks carrying food and medical supplies were allowed to enter the camps. Although clashes between Amal and PLO forces erupted again near Sidon on 19 July--and continued to erupt periodically over the years--this specific crisis, with Iran perceived as the source of threat, ended with the cease-fire agreement of 6 April.

There was no UN or Arab League involvement in this crisis. Both superpowers, too, remained aloof.

References:

Keesing's 1987; MECS 1987-88; MEJ Chronology 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


