CRISNO 237

INVASION OF CAMBODIA

Background:

A crisis over Cambodia occurred from 13 March to 22 July 1970. The crisis actors were North Vietnam, Cambodia, South Vietnam, and the United States.

Pre-crisis Despite Cambodia's declaration of neutrality in the ongoing war in Indochina, eastern Cambodia was being used by the Vietcong (Front Liberation National or FLN) and North Vietnamese as a base for launching military operations against South Vietnam. From March 1969 the United States had been secretly bombing enemy sanctuaries in Cambodia. As a result, the Vietcong began to move deeper into Cambodia, bringing them into increasing conflict with Cambodian authorities. The situation, coupled with Cambodia's deepening economic crisis, placed ruling Prince Sihanouk in a precarious position. On 8 March and again on the 11th, while Sihanouk was in France for medical treatment, there were violent demonstrations in Phnom Penh demanding the removal of Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops from Cambodia. These demonstrations were denounced by Sihanouk. On 12 March the two houses of the Cambodian parliament met in a joint session and adopted a resolution condemning the presence of the Vietcong and North Vietnamese on Cambodian territory and demanding that the Cambodian army be expanded. On 12 March an announcement was made suspending the trade agreement that allowed the Vietnamese to use Sihanoukville Port and purchase supplies in Cambodia.

Summary:

A crisis for North Vietnam was triggered on 13 March 1970 when the Cambodian foreign ministry sent notes to the Vietcong provisional government and to the North Vietnam government demanding that all Vietcong and North Vietnamese troops be withdrawn from Cambodia within 48 hours. Sihanouk left Paris for meetings in Moscow with President Podgorny and Premier Kosygin in order to get their support in persuading Hanoi and the FLN to curb their activities in Cambodia. On 18 March he traveled to Beijing for the same reason. That day the Cambodian National Assembly deposed Prince Sihanouk. The following day it declared a state of emergency, suspending a number of civil liberties. On the 21st Cheng Heng became the new Head of State.

The crisis trigger for Cambodia came on 23 March when Sihanouk issued a proclamation dissolving the new government in Cambodia and announcing his intention of forming a Government of National Union and a National Liberation Army. Mass demonstrations in support of Sihanouk began on 26 March, with the Cambodian armed forces being placed on alert. Vietcong troops moved deeper into Cambodia; and on 31 March North Vietnam responded to the crisis by attacking a Cambodian regiment 100 miles northeast of Phnom Penh and five miles from the frontier, marking the beginning of the combined Vietcong, North Vietnamese, and Sihanoukist invasion of Cambodia. By early April these forces had reached the Svay Rieng province known as "Parrot's Beak," which was surrounded by South Vietnam territory on three sides.

The crisis trigger for South Vietnam occurred on 10 April when Cambodian troops were forced to evacuate border positions in Parrot's Beak. Cambodia's major response to the crisis came on the 14th, when Premier Lon Nol stated that, due to the gravity of the situation, the Cambodian government was prepared to accept foreign aid from all sources. A request was sent to the United States the next day and again on 20 April.

The U.S. crisis began on 21 April when communist forces attacked the town of Takeo, cutting the road connecting it with Phnom Penh. The U.S. response, on the 28th, was a decision by Nixon to send U.S. troops into Cambodia. South Vietnam's response, the next day, was to send troops into Cambodia. U.S. troops remained in Cambodia until 30 June 1970, the termination date for North Vietnam and the United States. The crisis for Cambodia and South Vietnam ended on 22 July with the beginning of South Vietnam's withdrawal from Cambodia.

Although Nixon termed the campaign a complete success, the situation in Cambodia remained more or less the same. South Vietnam obtained a victory in Parrot's Beak, and North Vietnam obtained a strong foothold in Cambodia.

The UN was approached by Cambodia on 30 March. Secretary-General U Thant proposed peace negotiations, but this had no effect on ending the crisis.

The USSR continued to provide political support to North Vietnam.

References:

Gordon and Young 1970, 1971; Isaacson 1992; Kalb and Kalb 1974; Kissinger 1979; Nixon 1978; Shawcross 1979; Sihanouk 1970; Simon 1974; Steinberg 1996.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


