CRISNO 358

EGYPT AIR HIJACKING

Background:

Egypt and Libya were enmeshed in a crisis from 23 November to 3 December 1985.

Background Tension between these North African neighbors had existed for more than a decade. Libya's Colonel Qaddhafi, who overthrew the Libyan monarchy in 1969, was an ardent Nasirite and considered himself the successor to Egypt's charismatic leader when he died in 1970. Relations between Qaddhafi and President Sadat of Egypt, during his tenure from 1970 to 1981, were, at best, distant: they differed on ideology, policies toward the U.S. and the USSR, attitudes toward the legitimacy of political terrorism, and peace with Israel. Relations with President Mubarak, who continued Sadat's policies in all these domains, were no better: the Libyan leader's mercurial behavior and his image as inspirer, protector, and supporter of militant antiestablishment groups within and outside the Arab world fostered mistrust and instability in the Egypt/Libya relationship.

Summary:

A crisis for Egypt was triggered on 23 November 1985 by an air piracy incident: five members of an anti-Mubarak group, "Egypt Revolution," took control of an Egypt Air flight from Athens to Cairo, with 92 passengers. One of the hijackers was killed and an Egyptian security guard was wounded in an exchange of fire during the flight. Egypt and several Western states condemned Libya for giving active support to the terrorists, who were thought to be members of the anti-Arafat "Al-Fatah Revolutionary Command," headed by Abu Nidal. Egypt put its armed forces on alert, along with a military buildup on its border with Libya, triggering its crisis.

The plane landed in Malta, despite the refusal of its civil aviation authorities to authorize a landing. The hijackers demanded that the plane be refueled; but Malta's Prime Minister, Dr. Carmelo Bonnici, insisted that all passengers first be released. The hijackers set the West European, North American, Australian, and Israeli passport holders apart from the rest and shot some of them, killing one person.

Egypt's major response to its crisis was an antiterrorist military operation. On the 24th, 75 Egyptian commando troops were secretly dispatched to the airport in Malta; three U.S. officers joined the Egyptian force. That evening they stormed the plane. During the fighting and fire that ensued, about 60 people were killed.

The U.S., the U.K., and Israel supported the Egyptian rescue mission. Malta's prime minister declared that he supported the assault because the hijackers continued to shoot hostages and threatened to blow up the plane in midair. The Greek ambassador protested to Malta's foreign minister on the 26th for not consulting Athens before allowing the Egyptian rescue mission, since a large number of passengers were Greek nationals. The same day, President Mubarak claimed that the leader of the hijacking group was living in a Tripoli hotel. Egypt requested the extradition of the one surviving hijacker; but this was denied, in the absence of an extradition treaty between Egypt and Malta.

Despite rumors of an impending Egyptian attack on Libya, tension eased. And on 3 December Mubarak declared that it was impossible for Egypt to "fight an Arab or African brother." This terminated the crisis with Libya.

There was no UN, Arab League, or OAU involvement in this crisis. The U.S. was active on the periphery of the rescue mission. And the USSR confined its activity to verbal criticism of the charges of Libyan complicity in the hijacking.

References:

ACR 1985; AR 1985; ARB 1985; ARec 1985; Keesing's 1985; MECS 1985-86.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


