CRISNO 427

US EMBASSY BOMBINGS

Background:

Between 7 and 20 August 1998, a crisis occurred, pitting the US against both Afghanistan and Sudan.

Background

Osama bin Laden, a rich Saudi dissident, helped build and lead a militant Islamic network, known as al-Qaeda. Bin Laden and his network had a history of specifically targeting and threatening US and other Western interests, over resentment for the support of Israel and pro-West regimes such as that in Saudi Arabia. Bin Laden helped bring the Taliban to power in Afghanistan, and the Taliban, in turn, allowed him to use Afghan territory for training and building his network. His network also maintained a presence in other predominantly Muslim countries in the Middle East and Northern Africa, such as Sudan.

Summary:

On 7 August 1998, powerful bomb explosions occurred, almost simultaneously, near the US embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salam, Tanzania. This triggered a crisis for the United States. It also triggered a crisis for Afghanistan, which was blamed for harboring Osama bin Laden, who was held responsible for orchestrating the attacks.

Over 200 people, mostly Kenyan nationals, were killed in the bombings; over 5000 were injured. Saudi dissident Osama bin Laden, based in Afghanistan, was blamed for being responsible for the attacks. US President Bill Clinton was joined by world leaders in condemning the attacks on the two embassies. The US government demanded that Osama bin Laden be handing over to them by the Afghan Taliban regime.

On 19 August, Taliban chief Mullah Mohamed Omar said that the Taliban would protect bin Laden at all costs and would not hand him over to the US government. Following this, on 20 August, the US launched air strikes against targets in Afghanistan and Sudan. This triggered a crisis for Sudan. The two attacks focused on an alleged training base for terrorists about 100 miles south of Kabul, Afghanistan and a pharmaceutical factory capable of producing chemical weapons in Khartoum, Sudan. The Taliban claimed that about 15 people were killed in the air strikes; seven people were reportedly killed in the Khartoum strike.

The air strikes of 20 August signaled the end of the crisis for all three crisis actors. In the aftermath of this, however, the US government and Bin Laden warned each other of further attacks. The Sudanese government categorically denied that the pharmaceutical plant was making chemical weapons, and asked the UN to investigate whether the factory was making chemical weapons or legitimate pharmaceuticals. The US claimed that the factory had been making nerve gas.

This crisis had an important impact on the rules of the games in international politics. The Sudanese government intended to complain to the UN that the bombing had been undertaken without obtaining international support. The US government, however, asserted that it had been exercising its right to self defense after identifying bases linked to anti-American terrorist activity. The muted international response to US air strikes signaled a growing acceptance that self-defense could involve taking preemptive action, in addition to attacking direct threats.

References:

Keesings Online; Agence France Presse.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


