CRISNO 227

PRAGUE SPRING

Background:

There were six actors in the Prague Spring crisis: East Germany, Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary, the Soviet Union, and Czechoslovakia. It lasted from 9 April to 18 October 1968.

Background and Pre-crisis During late 1967 domestic unrest and political conflict within the Czechoslovak Communist Party led to the overthrow of Antonin Novotny as First Secretary of the Communist Party on 5 January 1968 and as the State President on 23 March 1968. Alexander Dubcek, his successor as party leader, proposed an "Action Program" that was accepted by the Czechoslovak Party Central Committee. The program proposed solutions to the Czech. economic crisis, the Slovak question, the rehabilitation of party leaders sentenced during the purges of the 1950s, and a way to deal with the dissent of students and intellectuals. Censorship was abolished, economic controls and central planning by the government were reduced and restructured, and new members were appointed to political posts. A more independent foreign policy was pledged, but it would conform to the interests of the Warsaw Treaty Organization (WTO) in general and the USSR in particular.

Polish leader Wladyslaw Gomulka and East German leader Walter Ulbricht feared that the infection of liberalism, already in its early stages in their countries, would spread and undermine their respective positions. In the Soviet Union apprehension increased that the "Prague Spring" would encourage Ukrainian nationalist sentiment; and the possibility emerged that liberalization would spill over into neighboring states. Furthermore, the unity and strength of the Warsaw Pact as a whole were seen to be in jeopardy with Czechoslovakia's decreased reliability as an ally. The possibility of military intervention in Czechoslovakia alarmed Hungary and Bulgaria, which perceived a threat to their own political regimes.

Warsaw Pact delegates met in Dresden in March 1968 to discuss the situation. Military exercises of the WTO were decided upon, to be held in June 1968.

Summary:

The publication of Czechoslovakia's Action Program on 9 April 1968 triggered a crisis for East Germany and Poland. A crisis was triggered for Bulgaria and Hungary on 8 May after they had participated in a meeting with delegates from the Soviet Union, Poland, and East Germany: it was at that time that Bulgaria and Hungary became seriously alarmed over the situation in Czechoslovakia, since military intervention now appeared as a very real possibility. The stability of East Europe, including Bulgaria's own regime, seemed at stake. Hungary was concerned over the possibility of having to participate in a military attack initiated by the Soviet Union and East Germany.

An open letter in Prague on 27 June, "Two Thousand Words," which called for the speeding up of Czechoslovak democratization and criticizing the conditions inside the Czechoslovak Communist Party prior to the January reforms, triggered a crisis for the Soviet Union: Moscow interpreted this letter as proof that the political situation in Czechoslovakia was out of control. Due to increasing tension, the Warsaw Pact Command delayed removing its troops from Czechoslovakia upon completion of the military exercises held there.

The responses of Hungary, Bulgaria, Poland, and East Germany were contained in an ultimatum to Czechoslovakia on 15 July. A letter, signed by the USSR and these four East European states, singled out the Two Thousand Words manifesto as a threat to the vital interests of the whole communist community. When the Czechoslovak head of defense and security criticized the Warsaw Pact structure, the USSR demanded his dismissal. Dubcek acceded, signaling that military resistance was no longer a realistic option for Czechoslovakia. Intense diplomatic negotiations followed at a meeting held between Czechoslovak leaders and nine of the 11 members of the Soviet Politburo. The result was verbal promises to resolve the crisis, confirmed on 3 August by the Bratislava Declaration. WTO troops were withdrawn from Czechoslovakia but remained concentrated along its borders.

Ulbricht met with Dubcek on 12 August and reported to the Soviet Politburo that the Czechoslovak leaders were unwilling to live up to the terms of the Bratislava agreement. Reports about the enthusiastic reception in Prague of Yugoslav President Tito and Romanian party leader Ceaucescu irritated the Soviets, who feared Czechoslovak influence on other Pact members that might undermine their loyalty to the Soviet Union. The major response of the Soviet Union, East Germany, and Poland to the crisis, the invasion of Czechoslovakia, was decided on 17 August after three days of talks among their military leaders.

Dubcek, who continued to disregard unmistakable signs of a new Soviet debate on Czechoslovakia and who did not wish to create anti-Soviet feelings, did not inform the Czechoslovak President, Svoboda, about warnings received from Hungarian leader Kádár or those contained in a letter from the Soviet Politburo on 19 August. The invasion of Czechoslovakia began on 20 August. It was the crisis trigger for Czechoslovakia and the termination date for Bulgaria, Hungary, East Germany, and Poland. The Warsaw Pact armies acquired total control of Czechoslovak territory within 36 hours. The Czechoslovak response, on the 21st, was compliance. Svoboda flew to Moscow for talks with the Soviet leadership and pressed for the release of Czechoslovak leaders Dubcek, Cerník, and Smrkovska, who had been taken prisoner during the invasion. With Czechoslovak promises to control and arrest "counterrevolutionary" elements, the Moscow Protocol was signed on 18 October 1968 legalizing the presence of Soviet troops in Czechoslovakia and terminating the crisis for the USSR and Czechoslovakia.

The destruction of the Czechoslovak reform movement was viewed as a victory by Bulgaria, East Germany, Poland, and the USSR. However, Hungary was not pleased by the triumph of the hard-liners within the Soviet bloc, since it might threaten Hungary's own modest reform movement.

A UN Security Council draft resolution censuring the invasion as a violation of the UN Charter was vetoed by the Soviet Union on 21 August.

U.S. President Johnson condemned the Soviet actions and canceled all diplomatic activities scheduled with the USSR regarding future SALT I (Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty) talks. NATO foreign ministers discussed the situation on 8 October, but no meaningful decisions were taken.

References:

Bethell 1969; Bohlen 1973; Brandt 1976; K. Dawisha 1978, 1980, 1984; Golan 1971, 1973; Grey 1967; Johnson 1971; Jones 1975; Kramer 1992, 1993; Mlynar 1980; Paul 1971; Shawcross 1970; Skilling 1976; Szulc 1971a; Tatu 1981; Valenta 1979a, 1979b; Vertzberger 1997; Westwood 1973; Windsor and Roberts 1969; Wolfe 1970.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


