CRISNO 367

MOZAMBIQUE ULTIMATUM

Background:

Malawi experienced a crisis with Mozambique from 11 September to 18 December 1986.

Background and Pre-crisis Mozambique's relations with its neighbors had deteriorated since the early 1980s. On the one hand, South Africa accused it of providing a sanctuary for the African National Congress and allowing ANC fighters to launch raids into South Africa from its territory (see Case #323). Moreover, Mozambique accused Malawi of supporting the Resistencia Nacional Mocambicana, the Mozambique National Resistance (MNR): this charge was publicly made by the Chief of Staff of Mozambique's armed forces, Colonel-General Sebastiao Mabote, in July 1986.

Summary:

On 11 September 1986, at a minisummit of black African leaders in the Malawi town of Blantyre, President Machel of Mozambique threatened to deploy missiles along the border with Malawi and to close the border. This triggered a crisis for Malawi. President Banda of Malawi denied any kind of involvement in MNR activities. President Kaunda of Zambia also threatened to close its borders with both Mozambique and Malawi unless the latter changed its policy.

Banda responded on the 17th by announcing that he would no longer permit the MNR to maintain bases in Malawi and by proposing a joint security commission with Mozambique. And in early October he issued an expulsion order against MNR fighters in Malawi. Bilateral relations improved thereafter, despite an accusation by Foreign Minister Botha of South Africa on 6 November that Zimbabwe and Mozambique were involved in a plot to overthrow the regime of President Banda. There were some minor clashes--but not as a technique of crisis management; rather, both parties relied on negotiation. The crisis ended amicably on 18 December with an accord on mutual cooperation and a protocol covering defense, state security, and public order.

There was no involvement in this crisis by the UN, the OAU, the U.S., or the USSR.

References:

ACR 1986; AR 1986; ARB 1986; ARec 1986; Keesing's 1986.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


