CRISNO 321

CHAD-LIBYA V

Background:

France and Libya, the two major powers in this PC, experienced a crisis from 6 January to 16 November 1981 over the latter's merger plan with Chad.

Pre-crisis Fighting between Habré's Forces Armées du Nord (FAN) and Goukouni's Forces Armées Populaires (FAP) resumed in March 1980. On 6 June the former took control of Faya-Largeau, a strategic town in northern Chad. Goukouni's transitional government responded by signing a Treaty of Friendship with Libya on 15 June. Toward the end of 1980 the balance of political and military power in Chad changed dramatically following a large-scale intervention by Libyan troops in support of forces loyal to Goukouni, who launched an attack on the capital, N'Djamena, on 6 December. On 14-15 December Habré's FAN evacuated their positions, and a cease-fire agreement was signed the next day.

France, too, despite a warning to Libya and an expression of "grave concern" on the 13th, decided in principle to withdraw all the forces it had stationed in Chad since independence.

(Tension between France and Libya had become exacerbated by France's military support for Tunisia after an attack on the Tunisian town of Gafsa in January 1980, allegedly with Libyan involvement [see Case #311--Raid on Gafsa, in Africa: Non-PCs]. France was also concerned about a possible military confrontation with Libyan forces in Chad.)

Summary:

The catalyst to the fifth international crisis in the protracted Chad/Libya conflict was a joint communiqué by Goukouni Oueddei and Qaddhafi in Libya's capital, Tripoli, on 6 January 1981 announcing that they had decided "to work to achieve full unity between the two countries." The merger plan evoked strong adverse reaction in Africa. It also triggered a crisis for France, which responded on the 8th with a sharp condemnation of the merger plan. Libya's leader tried to offset the hostile reception by redefining the goal the following day as "full unity, rather than a merger."

On 11 January, two days after President Giscard offered to increase French garrisons in friendly African states, a fresh contingent of French troops arrived in the capital of the Central African Republic. This triggered a crisis for Libya, which was accentuated on the 15th when France's Mediterranean fleet was placed on alert.

During the following month Libya and France exchanged recriminations and threats: by Libya, to impose an economic boycott including an embargo on oil; by France, to act if Libyan troops in Chad moved to invade another state in Africa. In response to a series of threatening French words and deeds and in another attempt to deflect widespread criticism of the merger plan, Qaddhafi promised on 15 February to withdraw from Chad as soon as its government deemed the presence of Libyan forces no longer necessary. In March and again in May he announced the intention to withdraw the estimated 7,000-12,000 Libyan troops in Chad; but only 200 were evacuated.

Goukouni, along with France and several African states, was dissatisfied. In late April 1981 clashes occurred between Goukouni's forces and those of Libya's ally in Chad, Foreign Minister Ahmad Acyle. The calls for Libya's withdrawal from Chad became increasingly insistent after a series of Libyan air raids on border villages in Sudan, where the FAN was believed to be rearming and regrouping its forces. Moreover, Libya's approval of President Sadat's assassination on 6 October heightened tension with Egypt and other countries that feared further Libyan destabilization attempts in the region: Qaddhafi had already called upon the Touareg, desert nomads, to revolt against Niger and Mali.

Pressure from France and several African states finally led Goukouni to seek the withdrawal of Libyan troops from Chad. This was formally requested on 29-30 October. Nigeria provided the most important source of mediation, which enabled all parties to reach an acceptable resolution. An airlift of Libyan troops began on 3 November. And by 16 November all Libyan soldiers had departed, marking the end of the crises for Libya and France and the international crisis over the merger plan.

The most highly involved actor in this crisis, other than France and Libya, was Africa's regional organization. Following the announcement of the merger plan an OAU ad hoc committee held an emergency summit meeting in Lomé, Togo, and sharply condemned Libya's military presence in Chad. It rejected the merger scheme and called on Libya to withdraw its forces from Chad so as to enable the OAU to arrange elections in April 1982. This démarche helped to abate the crisis. The superpowers were minimally involved. The U.S., which had been providing military aid to Habré's FAN, issued a statement of support for Sudan, then experiencing border attacks from Libyan forces in Chad. The USSR, long a patron of Qaddhafi's Libya, continued its close military and economic relations but played no role in this crisis per se. The UN Security Council was apprised but did not take any specific measures to abate the crisis.

References:

ACR 1981; AR 1981; ARec 1980-81; ARB 1981; Amoo and Zartman 1992; Keesing's 1981.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


