CRISNO 328

CAMEROON-NIGERIA I

Background:

A long-standing border dispute generated the first of several crises between Nigeria and Cameroon from 15 May to 24 July 1981.

Background On 31 May 1975 General Yakubu Gowon, Nigeria's Head of State, and President Ahmadou Ahidjo of Cameroon signed an agreement in the Cameroonian town of Maroua: the access channel to the port of Calabar was to remain within Nigeria's territorial waters; and the rights of Nigerian fishers within a two-kilometer strip were not to affect the territorial waters between the two states. However, after the fall of Gowon in July 1975, the Maroua Agreement was not ratified or implemented by Nigeria. The territorial waters dispute remained unresolved.

Summary:

On 15 May 1981 a Cameroonian patrol boat fired on Nigerian soldiers on the Cameroon/Nigeria border, killing five and wounding three. This triggered a crisis for Nigeria. On the 18th Nigeria's foreign minister issued a formal protest condemning the attack as occurring within Nigeria's territory and warned that Nigeria would "fight back" if pushed further.

This verbal response triggered a crisis for Cameroon. On the 24th President Ahidjo delivered a message to Nigeria's President Shehu Shageri, expressing "regret" for the killing and calling for a joint commission of inquiry to resolve the crisis. Nigeria rejected the proposal and demanded an unqualified apology, full reparations, and the punishment of Cameroon's soldiers who opened fire. It also pressed for international arbitration of the dispute.

Pressure for a military response, including pressure from the speaker of the house of representatives, grew in Nigeria. On 27 May a group of Nigerians damaged Cameroon's embassy in Lagos. Nigeria's attempt to place the issue on the OAU agenda at the Nairobi summit in June failed; and it boycotted the meeting. Mediation efforts in July by Kenya's foreign minister, Dr. Robert Ouko, and the OAU Secretary-General, Edem Kodjo, were more successful in bringing about crisis abatement. On 20 July Cameroon's president reportedly offered to pay compensation to the families of the five Nigerian soldiers. On the 22nd Ahidjo accepted an invitation to visit Nigeria. And on the 24th a letter from Shageri accepted Cameroon's offer of compensation, along with its agreement to international arbitration to resolve the border dispute.

This terminated the first of several full-scale crises between these West African neighbors (see Cases #377 and #410).

There was no UN, U.S. or USSR involvement in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1981; AR 1981; ARB 1981; WA 1981; Keesing's 1981.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


