CRISNO 279

BELIZE II

Background:

Guatemalan claims to Belize caused a second crisis for the U.K. from 25 June to 28 July 1977.

Background and Pre-crisis Belize's independence had been delayed for many years because of Guatemala's threats to invade the territory once it became independent, claiming historic rights to its annexation. In 1975 Britain perceived a threat that Guatemala would invade Belize (see Case #262--Belize I). The issue had been discussed in the United Nations General Assembly year after year. In the early summer of 1977 the possibility of independence for Belize once more precipitated Guatemalan action. On 17 June Guatemala's defense minister stated that his country's forces were waiting for word from the president to begin the recovery of Belize.

Summary:

On 25 June 1977 Guatemalan troops were deployed to the Belize border area, and reservists were called up. This action triggered a crisis for the U.K., which was responsible for Belize's security. It was followed by a statement from President Garcia on 1 July affirming Guatemala's rights to the territory. The U.K. responded on 6 July by dispatching air, infantry, and naval forces to the area. HMS Achilles took up position in Belizean waters, and British troops were moved to within two miles of Guatemala's border. At the request of the United States, British Minister of State Edward Rowlands visited Washington to hold talks with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance. Vance then held separate talks with Guatemala's Foreign Minister Adolfo Molina and a Belizean delegation led by Premier George Price. These talks focused on decreasing the military tension in the border region, and it was decided that Rowlands would visit Guatemala. He did so from 26 to 28 July and provided assurances that the U.K. would not be an aggressor. A joint communiqué was issued on the 28th in which both sides agreed to take steps to reduce the border tension, adding that there would be no sudden move to independence for Belize, thus terminating the U.K. crisis over Belize.

The United States welcomed the outcome of the talks. The UN was not involved in this crisis.

(The independence of Belize was proclaimed in 1981.)

References:

See sources for Case #262.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


