CRISNO 35

SHANTUNG

Background:

China and Japan were enmeshed in a two-stage crisis over the former's northern province of Shantung from 28 May 1927 until 28 March 1929. It was the first military-security crisis in their post-World War I protracted conflict.

Pre-crisis Nationalist forces under Chiang Kai-shek advanced northward during the spring of 1927. Newly appointed Japanese Prime Minister Tanaka perceived this as a danger to Japan's primary interest in mainland China, namely, the strategic and resource-rich northeast region of Manchuria. Thus on 20 May 1927 Japan's ambassador to China was instructed to offer moral support to Chiang in his attempt to suppress the communists. Moreover, inducements were offered to northern warlord, Chang Tso-lin, to concentrate his forces in Manchuria. Both steps were designed to ensure Japan's control over Manchuria.

Summary:

The potential collapse of Chang Tso-lin's forces led to the dispatch of Japanese troops to Tsinan on 28 May, triggering a crisis for China. The next day the nationalist Nanking regime protested Japan's action as a violation of the Sino/Japanese treaty of 1922 regarding China's sovereignty, triggering a crisis for Japan. Japanese forces landed at the port of Tsingtao on 31 May and began to march on Tsinan. On 1 June the Beijing government added its voice of protest on the same grounds.

A direct military confrontation between Japan and China was averted on this occasion: Japanese troops entered Tsinan on 16 June; and two days later Chiang's forces were defeated by Chang Tso-lin.

The result of Japan's incursion into Shantung was a wave of anti-Japanese sentiment in China including the boycott of Japanese goods. On 13 July the Beijing regime demanded the withdrawal of Japanese forces. On 29 August Tokyo announced its intended evacuation, which occurred on 8 September 1927, ending China's crisis and the first phase of the Shantung crisis.

In late December, following an inconclusive meeting between Chiang and Tanaka, rumors surfaced about a renewed northward offensive by China's nationalists: this alarmed Japanese decision makers, concerned about the implications for their goal of hegemony over Manchuria.

Boycotts of Japanese goods reappeared in China in March 1928. Early in April Chiang did, in fact, renew his advance northward. And on the 17th an antinationalist counterattack by Chang Tso-lin's forces failed. Two days later Japanese troops were dispatched from Tientsin to Tsinan, a response to a perceived escalation of the crisis: they arrived on the 20th. The Beijing regime immediately protested Japan's "show of force," as did the Nanking regime on the 21st. A minor skirmish between Japanese and Chinese troops was reported on the 30th, followed by a more serious confrontation at Tsinan on 3 May. A truce was arranged on the 5th. However, two days later a Japanese ultimatum called for the withdrawal of Chinese forces from Tsinan within 12 hours. When the deadline went unheeded hostilities resumed, and the Chinese were forced to evacuate the city on the 11th.

In the meantime both the Nanking and Beijing governments protested to the League of Nations, alleging a violation of China's territorial integrity and political independence. They offered to accept arbitration or an international inquiry; but the world body took no action.

Tension persisted, exacerbated by Tanaka's memorandum on 16 May asserting that Japan would use force to protect Manchuria from Chiang and Chang Tso-lin. Both Chinese regimes protested once more. Japanese troops remained in Tsinan throughout 1928. Serious negotiations began in October. A formal agreement was signed on 28 March 1929 providing for the withdrawal, once more, of Japanese forces from Tsinan. This ended Japan's crisis and the lengthy crisis over Shantung.

The U.S. alone among the powers with a stake in China was an involved actor: it offered good offices to both China and Japan to help end the fighting. The offer was declined; but the U.S. consul in Tsinan reportedly helped to wind down the hostilities.

References:

Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) 1927, vol. 2 (1942), 1928, vol. 2 (1943); Bamba 1972; Beasley 1964; MacNair and Lach 1955; Morton 1980; Toynbee 1929a, 1929b, 1930; Walters 1952.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


