CRISNO 313

OPERATION SMOKESHELL

Background:

Angola experienced another crisis with South Africa from 7 June to 2 July 1980.

Summary:

Angola's crisis was triggered on 7 June 1980, when units of the SADF penetrated deep into Angola from South-West Africa and carried out large-scale operations in Angola's southern border provinces of Cunene and Cuando-Cubango. Prime Minister Botha of South Africa described the raid as a "shock attack" designed to destroy the operational headquarters of SWAPO.

Angola's major response was a request on 26 June for an urgent meeting of the Security Council. The next day it warned the Council that, if Angola's forces were unable to repel the SADF in the fierce fighting then raging, it would request outside help, implying Soviet or Moscow-backed Cuban intervention. On 27 June, too, the Security Council passed a resolution condemning South Africa for its raid and called for the withdrawal of SADF units from Angola immediately. This had a decisive impact on crisis resolution: on the 30th Pretoria notified the UN that all its forces in Angola had been withdrawn; but this claim was disputed by Angola.

At the beginning of July Angolan troops claimed to have reoccupied several villages and towns. Crisis termination occurred on 2 July: that day the SADF flew Western journalists and military attachés to the border zone, where they were briefed on Operation Smokeshell as an incident that had passed into history. SADF raids continued, but at a subcrisis level of intensity.

Neither the U.S. nor the USSR was active in this crisis, causing dissatisfaction by Angola. By contrast, as noted, the UN was highly involved. The global organization had been involved in the South-West Africa-Namibia Question since its creation in 1945, as the successor to the League of Nations Mandate over that territory. For years it had tried, without success, to arrange negotiations between South Africa and SWAPO to move toward independence for Namibia. The OAU reinforced the UN posture during this crisis. On 30 June its Council of Ministers condemned South Africa's intrusion into Angola and called upon the Security Council to impose comprehensive mandatory economic sanctions against the Pretoria regime. These were to come many years later.

References:

ACR 1980-81; AR 1980; ARB 1980; ARec 1980; Keesing's 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


