CRISNO 202

CYPRUS I

Background:

From 30 November 1963 until 10 August 1964 the historic rivals, Turkey and Greece, along with Cyprus, were direct participants in the first of several international crises over the new Mediterranean island-state.

Background The Zurich and London Conferences of 1959 worked out arrangements for Cypriot independence, subject to the terms of a series of interrelated agreements known as the Zurich-London Accords. According to these Accords, the interests of both the Greek and Turkish communities in Cyprus were recognized and safeguarded under a republican form of government, with several provisions insuring the fair participation of both autonomous communities in legislative functions. Once Cyprus became independent, however, each community became suspicious of the other's intentions. The Turkish minority, feeling that it did not receive all of the rights granted by the constitution, made frequent use of its legislative veto power. President Makarios, who felt that effective operation of his government was being hampered, acted often without legislative approval.

Summary:

Turkey's crisis and the international crisis as a whole were triggered by a memorandum from the President of the Cypriot Republic, Archbishop Makarios, to Vice-President Kutchuk on 30 November 1963 containing 13 proposals for the amendment of the 1960 constitution which would change Cyprus into a unitary state with guarantees for the Turkish minority. The trigger for Cyprus and Greece was an announcement on 6 December by Turkish Foreign Minister Erkin, rejecting the amendment proposals as totally unacceptable. The Turkish government also threatened to intervene in Cyprus if the constitution was altered in any way, accentuating a perception of high threat for Cyprus and Greece. Within this tense atmosphere, an incident on 21 December, when a Greek police patrol insisted on searching a Turkish car, sparked the outbreak of fighting between the Greek and Turkish communities in Nicosia, which spread quickly to other areas in Cyprus. Three days later the Greek Cypriot forces were on the verge of completely overrunning the Turkish section of the capital. On 24 December the Turkish Cypriots appealed to Turkey for assistance. Turkey replied that, if the fighting continued, it would intervene under the terms of the Treaty of Guarantee.

Turkey's major response, on 25 December, took the form of a series of non-violent military acts. Orders were given to the Turkish army contingent in Cyprus to move out of its camps and take positions controlling the road to Kyrenia. The Turkish fleet left the Istanbul area for the eastern Mediterranean. Its armed forces were put on alert. More troops were moved into areas that were in easy striking distance of Cyprus. And Turkish aircraft flew over Nicosia.

The Greek response, the same day, was an announcement that, if Turkey intervened in Cyprus, Greece would do likewise. Makarios, hoping to gain Security Council condemnation of the Zurich-London Accords, accused Turkey of interference in the internal affairs of Cyprus, at a session of the Security Council on 27 December. No resolution was passed at that time.

On 28 December Britain's Commonwealth Secretary, Duncan Sandys, met with Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders, as well as with the ambassadors of Greece and Turkey in Cyprus. A cease-fire and the setting up of neutral zones on 29 December reduced the stress level for Turkey. The United States participated in the cease-fire talks. NATO, which was repeatedly warned by the USSR to keep out of the internal affairs of Cyprus, met in an emergency session in Paris.

A conference in London on the Cyprus issue began on 15 January 1964. A British proposal for an international peace force composed of units from NATO members was ultimately accepted by Makarios if the forces were formally dispatched by--and responsible to--the UN. Soviet Premier Khrushchev protested NATO involvement in a letter on 7 February to the U.K., the U.S., France, Greece, and Turkey. In the middle of February a Turkish threat of intervention posed the danger of renewed fighting.

The UN Security Council convened on 14 February and adopted a resolution on 4 March to establish a UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. On 13 March Turkey threatened to intervene militarily unless attacks against the Turkish community ceased immediately. The Peacekeeping Force was formed on 27 March, easing but not ending the concerns of Turkey and Greece.

Turkey's crisis escalated on 27 May 1964 when conscription orders to the Cypriot National Guard were announced for all men between the ages of 18 and 59. Despite British, Greek, and Turkish protests that the conscription bill was in violation of Cyprus's constitution, it was passed on 1 June. Greece and Turkey intensified their supply of arms to their communities on the disputed island. It was also learned that the Cyprus government was purchasing heavy arms from abroad. On 4 June, in response to the conscription bill, Turkey reaffirmed its protector role for Turkish Cypriots. However, in the face of a blunt U.S. warning the same day not to invade Cyprus, along with a threat to suspend U.S. military aid and to remain neutral if the Soviets intervened, Turkey's President Inönü announced on 5 June that it had abandoned plans to land forces in Cyprus. (Ten years later it was to do so [see Case #257--Cyprus III].)

During June tension rose again with the return of Greek General Grivas to Cyprus. The Greek and Turkish prime ministers were invited to Washington for talks in late June. Proposals by U.S. special mediator Dean Acheson were rejected by Greece. During July the UN mediator held talks in Geneva with the Greek and Turkish ambassadors.

On 4 August Greek Cypriot patrol boats fired on vessels in the Turkish Cypriot harbor of Kokkina further escalating Turkey's crisis. During the next two days several Turkish Cypriot villages fell to Greek Cypriot forces, largely because of the restrictions placed upon the UN forces by Makarios. Turkey appealed to the Security Council on the 7th and warned Makarios of possible retaliation. The following day Greek Cypriot troops attacking Kokkina were bombed by the Turkish air force. On the 9th Greece issued a threat to Ankara that, if attacks did not cease within 36 hours, Greek Cypriots would be assisted with all military means at Greece's disposal. Greek planes flew over Cyprus that day. On 9 August, too, the Security Council adopted a cease-fire resolution. The NATO Council met as well. Makarios appealed to the USSR and received a promise of Soviet support if the island were invaded. Turkey was warned to stop its military operations. President Johnson sent urgent appeals to Cyprus, Greece, and Turkey to settle the crisis peacefully. An unconditional cease-fire was accepted by Cyprus and Turkey on 10 August 1964, ending the crisis for them and for Greece. Continuing tension escalated into crises with the same actors in 1967 and 1974 (see Cases #223 and #257).

This crisis found the UN, the U.S., the U.K. and NATO acting as mediators in the crisis to various degrees and effects. The UN was the most active mediator during the crisis, but it is likely that the U.S. -- through Johnson’s pleas to all actors and warning to Turkey that it would no longer automatically be under U.S. protection if it should invade Cyprus -- was the most effective mediator.

References:

Ball 1982; Bitsios 1975; Black 1977; Day 1987; Denktash 1982; Ehrlich 1974; Kosut 1970; MEJ Chronology 1963, 1964; Miller 1967; Papandreou 1970; Salih 1978; Wiener 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


