CRISNO 209

YEMEN WAR II

Background:

Yemen, Egypt, and Sa'udi Arabia experienced intra-war crises from mid-May until 8 November 1964.

Pre-crisis Fighting among the adversaries broke out immediately after the cease-fire of April 1963 and continued throughout the year. President Sallal visited the Soviet Union in March and the PRC in June 1964. President Nasir visited Yemen in April 1964. (Jordan, which had at first supported the Yemen Royalists, gradually withdrew as its ties with Egypt became closer. It was not a crisis actor in any of the ensuing crises pertaining to the war in Yemen.) Reports by UN Secretary-General U Thant indicated a reduction in Egyptian forces in the area and an increase in supplies to the Royalists for the period preceding this crisis. The military situation had been fairly quiet, and the report indicated a stalemate. Republican and Egyptian forces controlled the mountains, the coastal plain, and the south of Yemen, while Royalists carried on guerrilla warfare in the mountain and desert areas of the north and east.

Summary:

In mid-May 1964 a retaliation attack was launched by the Royalists, triggering a crisis for the YAR and Egypt. Their response, in August, was the successful Horadeh offensive to seal the border with Sa'udi Arabia and thus prevent supplies from reaching Yemen. This triggered a crisis for Sa'udi Arabia. By 11 September the UN Yemen Observer Mission (UNYOM) had terminated its activities and left Yemen. The Sa'udi Arabian response to the crisis was Prince Faisal's visit to Alexandria on 11 September 1964 for talks with Nasir. Presidents Ben Bella of Algeria and Aref of Iraq served as mediators. The mediation led to an agreement between Sa’udi Arabia and Egypt to abide by an agreement to be administered between the royalists and the republicans in November. In this regard, peace talks were held in early November, and a cease-fire came into effect on 8 November 1964, the termination date for all three actor-cases.

Neither the U.S. nor the USSR was involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #195.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


