CRISNO 60

ANSCHLUSS

Background:

The Anschluss crisis between Austria and Germany took place between 12 February and 14 March 1938.

Background Relations between Germany and Austria, after the 1934 Putsch attempt (see Case #45), had been governed by the Agreement of July 1936. The interpretation of that agreement, however, was marked by wide differences of opinion on the part of the two states. The government of Austria hoped to work these out in a meeting with Hitler. Accordingly, on the evening of 11 February 1938 Chancellor Schuschnigg left for Germany accompanied by his secretary of foreign affairs.

Summary:

A crisis for Austria began on 12 February 1938 when Hitler presented Schuschnigg with an ultimatum: the Austrian government was to recognize the Nazi Party and National Socialism as perfectly compatible with loyalty to Austria; the Minister of the Interior would be the Nazi Seyss-Inquart; an amnesty for all imprisoned Austrian Nazis was to be proclaimed within three days; and dismissed Nazi officials and officers would be reinstated. Finally, the Austrian economy was to be integrated with that of Germany, and Fischboek was to be appointed Minister of Finance. The Austrian chancellor signed the papers agreeing to Hitler's demands the same day.

By the end of the first week of the crisis Schuschnigg had decided upon some action to ensure the Austrian government's mastery of its own house. He called for a plebiscite on 13 March in which the Austrian people would be invited to declare whether or not they were in favor of an independent Austria.

The crisis trigger for Germany occurred on 9 March when Hitler was informed of Austria's plans to hold a plebiscite. A surprised Führer, furious at this obstruction of his plans, responded the next day with a decision to invade Austria. A special messenger was sent to Mussolini asking him not to interfere. By the 11th German army trucks and tanks were already on their way south. Schuschnigg offered to delay the plebiscite, but Göring demanded his resignation and the appointment of Seyss-Inquart as Chancellor. President Miklas at first refused to do so, but at midnight on 11 March he complied as preparations for a German invasion of Austria proceeded seriously. On 13 March Seyss-Inquart secured the passage of a law by the Austrian government annexing Austria to the Third Reich. On the 14th the crisis ended for both actors when Hitler made his triumphal visit to Vienna. This was accompanied by strong anti-Semitic demonstrations.

While Austria had no illusions about Britain's and France's willingness to act in its favor, it perceived that opposition by Italy might serve as a deterrent to Hitler. When Italy refused to take any action against Germany, Austrian decision makers concluded that they had no choice but to comply with Hitler's demands.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Ball 1937; Bullock 1962; Carr 1945; Edmondson 1978; Gedye 1939; Gehl 1963; von Papen 1952; Schuman 1939; Shirer 1964; Smith 1982; Thorne 1967; Villari 1956; Weinberg 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


