CRISNO 451

ISRAEL-LEBANON WAR II

Background:

A crisis occurred between Israel and Lebanon from 12 July 2006 to 8 September 2006 after Hezbollah guerillas crossed the Lebanese border into Israel and took two Israeli soldiers hostage, leading to a full-scale war.

Background and Pre-crisis: Relations between Israel and Lebanon have been extremely tense for decades, resulting in multiple cross-border clashes on both sides of the UN designated border, despite the presence of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). The incidents increased in early 2006, most notably in May when the Israeli air force attacked Palestinian bases deep within Lebanon after cross-border fighting erupted when militants fired rockets into northern Israel. The attack placed additional strain on Israeli/Lebanese relations.

Summary:

On 12 July 2006 Hezbollah guerillas crossed the Lebanese border into Israel and attacked an Israeli army patrol near Shtula killing three Israeli soldiers and taking two others as hostages. Hezbollah also launched rocket attacks at several Israeli villages and army posts at the same time. This attack immediately triggered a crisis for Israel. Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert described the Hezbollah attack as "an act war" and warned that Lebanon would bear the consequences of Hezbollah's actions. Following this threat, Israel imposed an air and sea blockade on Lebanon. That same day, Israel also launched a massive assault on southern Lebanon (Operation Just Deserts) by land, air, and from navy gunboats, triggering a crisis for Lebanon.

The Secretary General of the Hezbollah movement, Shaikh Hassan Nasrallah, stated that the seizure of the Israeli soldiers was designed to draw international attention to the plight of Lebanese, Palestinian, and Arab prisoners held in Israeli prisons. Meanwhile, the Lebanese government held an emergency Cabinet meeting, where they denied responsibility for the escalation of violence on the border with Israel and called for an urgent meeting of the UN Security Council.

Israel continued its assault over the next few days, conducting air raids over Lebanon and killing dozens of people, including a significant amount of civilians. In return, Hezbollah declared open war and fired rockets into Israel, killing several soldiers. On 16 July a fierce rocket attack on Haifa which killed eight Israeli civilians and wounded many others prompted a psychological escalation of the conflict. Israel stepped up its assault and continued to carry out air raids. Thousands of Lebanese citizens evacuated the country.

The war drew a great deal of international attention and calls for a ceasefire. The actions of both sides were condemned by many countries and organizations, including the United Nations. On 18 July, the UN sent a delegation to Israel in an attempt to broker a ceasefire. U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice also visited Lebanon and Israel, attempting to establish a ceasefire and offering humanitarian aid. However, the mediation attempt by Rice turned out to be ineffective as her proposals were rejected by both sides. On 26 July representatives from the U.S., the UN, the EU, the World Bank, and several other countries attended an international crisis meeting in Rome. The Rome conference expressed a determination to work immediately to reach a ceasefire and called on the UN to authorize an international force to support UNIFIL and help stabilize the area. The League of Arab States also condemned the actions of Israel and urged the UN to protect Lebanon.

Despite the international pressure for a ceasefire, the fighting continued to escalate. On 27 July Israel's Security Cabinet approved call-ups for 30,000 reservist troops and continued the aerial bombardment and ground assault. The next day, Hezbollah unleashed powerful new rockets, hitting multiple targets deep within Israel. On 30 July an Israeli attack on Qana resulted in the deaths almost 60 civilians, 37 of them children, which provoked an international outcry. Israel apologized for the deaths and agreed to suspend its aerial bombardment for 2 days to allow for an investigation into the attacks; however, their bombardment of southern Lebanon continued the next day.

The violence continued into August, with aerial bombardments and rocket attacks continuing on both sides of the border. The Israeli offensive continued to deal devastating blows to Hezbollah. Prime Minister Olmert claimed that Hezbollah's infrastructure had been destroyed. Despite this claim, Hezbollah managed to fire more that 200 rockets into Israel on 2 August. On 8 August the Israeli Security Cabinet voted to approve the Chief of Staff's proposal for a major escalation of the conflict, authorizing the army to advance still further into Lebanese territory.

Throughout this time, the UN Security Council was working tirelessly to pass a resolution ordering a ceasefire in the area. Several drafts were rejected by Israel and Lebanon before UN Security Council Resolution 1701 (2006) was approved. The resolution called for "a full cessation of hostilities based upon, in particular, the immediate cessation by Hezbollah of all attacks and the immediate cessation of Israel of all offensive military operations." It also provided for the deployment of a Lebanese armed force of 15,000 troops in southern Lebanon alongside an expanded UNIFIL force.

The cessation of hostilities was to take effect on the morning of 14 August. The Israeli military appeared determined to maximize its control over southern Lebanon and the ground war continued on 12 and 13 August with renewed intensity. On 14 August the ceasefire officially took effect; however, Israeli and Hezbollah fighters remained close together on the ground and several skirmishes were reported. Despite these minor clashes, Hezbollah did not launch rockets into Israel and Israel carried out no aerial attacks on Lebanon. Israel slowly began to transfer control of the area to Lebanese troops, supported by the existing members of UNIFIL.

Even though Israel and Hezbollah experienced a full-scale war with each other for over a month, Lebanon as a crisis actor did not engage in violent attacks against Israel. Lebanon's crisis management technique throughout the conflict consisted of non-violent activities such as negotiation and mediation.

The small skirmishes between Israel and Hezbollah continued into late August. Matters were further complicated when Prime Minister Olmert stated that Israel would not accept additional peacekeepers to the area from countries that did not have diplomatic relations with Israel. UN Secretary-General Annan visited Lebanon on 28 August, the first stop on an extensive Middle East tour, in order to shore up the fragile truce while more UN peacekeeping troops continued to arrive in the area. After intense negotiations with the UN, Israel agreed to lift the blockade on Lebanon. On 7 September Israel lifted its air blockade on Lebanon; the sea blockade was lifted the following day, ending the crisis for both Israel and Lebanon on 8 September 2006.

The U.S. was involved in the crisis both politically and militarily. As soon as the crisis started, the U.S. issued political statements condemning the actions of Hezbollah against Israel. The U.S. also tried to mediate between Israel and Lebanon but its efforts turned out to be fruitless. Later on the in the crisis, the U.S. provided military aid to Israel by sending precision-guided bombs which were used in the air campaign against Hezbollah targets in Lebanon.

References:

Keesing’s Record of World Events, Lexis-Nexis Online, CIA World Fact Book Online, International Crisis Group

Last Updated: 2/6/2009


