CRISNO 348

BASRA-KHARG ISLAND

Background:

During the third phase of the Iran/Iraq War (1980-88) Iraq and Iran, along with Kuwait and Sa'udi Arabia, experienced a fresh crisis from 21 February to 11 July 1984.

Pre-crisis The year 1983 witnessed several inconclusive attacks and counterattacks by the two protagonists in the war. The first was a major Iranian offensive in the area of Misan west of Dezful on 7 February (Wal Fajr I) but the initiative quickly petered out. Iraq counterattacked in late March but made no progress. A fresh Iranian offensive from 10-17 April, aimed at capturing the heights along the front north of Fuka, was indecisive. Iraq responded with air strikes on Iranian civilian targets in May and sought a cease-fire, without success. On 23 July Iran launched another offensive and advanced 15 kilometers within Iraq.

Iran's strategy of attrition was designed to exert pressure on the weakening Iraqi economy with the aim of toppling the Saddam Hussein regime. Wal Fajr IV, from 30 July to 10 August 1983, aimed at clearing the heights above Mehran. Iraq responded with more intense missile and air raids on Iranian towns and oil installations--and the use of mustard gas against Iranian troops. A major target was Iran's oil export installations on Kharg Island. Iran countered with attacks on shipping in the Gulf. However, none of these attacks in 1983 achieved the goal of a decisive defeat of the enemy's forces.

Summary:

In February 1984 Iran launched four separate attacks on Iraqi forces, one in the north on the 12th near Nowdeshah, the other three in the south. It was Wal Fajr VI, launched on 21 February near Dehloran and aimed at cutting the vital Basra-Baghdad road, that triggered an intra-war crisis for Iraq. However, as was often the case in the Iran/Iraq War, it turned into a battle of attrition: Iran's sole victory was the conquest of the oil drilling complex on Majnoon Island, the site of rich oil fields in southern Iraq.

Iraq responded with a major attack on Iranian oil installations on Kharg Island on 1 March 1984 triggering an IWC for Iran. The latter's "Operation Badr" from 11 to 23 March, designed to capture Basra or cut it off from the rest of Iraq, reached the Basra-Baghdad road. Perceiving a threat of grave damage if Iranian forces succeeded, Iraq committed an elite Republican Guard division and its air force to the defense of Basra. By the 18th they recaptured all of Iraq's lost positions.

Kuwait became a crisis actor on 13 May 1984 when one of its tankers, transporting oil to the U.K., was damaged near Bahrain. Another Kuwaiti tanker was hit the following day. Kuwait accused Iran of the hostile acts. Iran responded that, if the passage to and from Kharg Island was not safe, no other routes in the Gulf would be secure. Sa'udi Arabia became a direct participant in the Basra-Kharg Island crisis as a result of the "tanker war": one of its ships was set ablaze on 16 May by Iranian aircraft firing within Sa'udi territorial waters north of the port of al-Jubay.

Kuwait's response to Iran's attacks was a request on 30 May for U.S. Stinger antiaircraft missiles, along with a U.S. naval escort for its tankers. Sa'udi Arabia responded militarily on 5 June: Sa'udi F-15s, assisted by U.S. advanced early-warning (AWACS) reconnaissance planes, shot down an Iranian F-4 fighter.

Crisis termination occurred on different dates for the four actors. As noted, Iraq's intra-war crisis ended on 18 March when it succeeded in thwarting Iran's attempt to capture Basra or to isolate that city from the rest of the country. Iran's IWC ended on 10 June when it agreed with Iraq to a moratorium on the shelling of civilian areas, brokered by the UN Secretary-General. On 20 June Sa'udi Arabia created an air defense zone, blocking further Iranian incursions into its airspace and ending its crisis. And Kuwait's crisis ended on 11 July, when it signed an arms deal with the USSR. This marked the end of the Basra-Kharg Island crisis as a whole; but the war continued unabated for another four years.

As in earlier phases of the Iran/Iraq War, all attempts to end the war--by the UN, the Gulf states, the Non-Aligned Movement, and various Islamic organizations--failed, though, as noted, the UN Secretary-General arranged a brief moratorium on the bombing of civilian areas.

France continued to be a major arms supplier to Iraq, whose war effort was heavily financed by Kuwait and Sa'udi Arabia. The U.S. goal throughout Gulf War I was to keep the Strait of Hormuz open to the steady flow of oil to its allies in Europe and Japan. Secretly it provided Iraq with valuable technological assistance and intelligence information throughout the war, and antiaircraft missiles and a naval escort for Sa'udi ships. The USSR provided arms to Iraq, notably SS-12 ground-to-ground missiles. Other suppliers of military equipment to Iraq were Egypt, Brazil, China, and Chile.

Except for Syria, the Arab world supported Iraq: both the Gulf Cooperation Council and the Arab League condemned Iran. And the latter sought UN intervention. On 21 May 1984 the Security Council adopted a resolution calling on all parties to respect freedom of navigation in the Gulf. By late August both superpowers shifted their stance from apparent impartiality to open support for Iraq.

References:

See sources for Case #317 (Chubin and Tripp, Cordesman and Wagner, Karsh, O'Ballance); and Abdulghani 1984; Keesing's 1984; MECS 1984; New York Times 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


