CRISNO 435

INDIAN PARLIAMENT ATTACK

Background:

Another crisis for India and Pakistan was triggered on 13 December 2001 and lasted until 12 January 2002. This was the twelfth crisis between the states since 1947.

Background

Following the terrorist attacks on the US in September 2001, Pakistani President Parvaz Musharraf agreed to requests from US President George W. Bush to work with the US to remove the extremist Taliban government from power in Afghanistan and to seek out members of the al-Qaeda terrorist network, suspected to be living and training in Afghanistan. Pakistan was seen as an ally in Bush's "war against terrorism," but India was quick to point out to US leaders and to the international community that the Pakistani government had sponsored what it considered to be a terrorist campaign against India in the disputed territory of Kashmir. Throughout November, fighting along the Line of Control (LoC) in Kashmir escalated between militant separatists, believed to be supported by Pakistan, and Indian forces.

Summary:

On 12 December 2001 a group of 5 armed gunmen stormed India's Parliament building in New Delhi, leaving 14 people (including all of the attackers) dead. This attack triggered a crisis for India, who blamed Pakistan for the massacre. As a result, the attacks also triggered a crisis for Pakistan. New Delhi police stated that all 5 attackers were Pakistani nationals, and the Indian government assessed blame for the attacks on two Islamic separatist organizations, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and Lashkar-i-Toiba (LiT), both of which India believes to be supplied and trained by the Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI) agency of the Pakistani military. Pakistan's Musharraf condemned the attacks but demanded evidence that the separatist groups were to be blamed for the attacks.

Following the attack and assignment of blame, both India and Pakistan placed their military forces at a heightened alert status and escalated troop mobilization along the LoC as well as along the India-Pakistan border outside of Kashmir. On 21 December, India recalled its High Commissioner to Pakistan, for the first time since 1971. In addition, India cut off routes for land transport between the countries, and India and Pakistan both imposed a ban on the other country's airlines flying in its airspace. As the crisis continued into early January, the leaders from India and Pakistan both attended a summit of the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation, but despite attempts by Musharraf, the two leaders did not speak to one another directly, and India continued to demand that Pakistan take responsibility for the Parliament attacks and extradite 20 alleged terrorists to India.

The crisis ended following a televised speech by President Musharraf on 12 January, in which he announced that Pakistan would be cracking down on terrorists in the country and in which he condemned sectarian fighting. While he did not accept all of India's conditions in this speech (notably, he rejected the extradition request), tensions between the two sides eased after this speech.

While there was no mediation in this crisis, there was notable international activity. US President George W. Bush spoke with leaders of both countries at the end of December, urging India to be cautious and Pakistan to be more responsive to Indian demands. In early January, British Prime Minister Tony Blair visited both India and Pakistan in an effort to ease tensions between the states.

References:

Kessing's Record of World Events Online; Lexis Nexis Online, CIA World Fact Book Online.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


