CRISNO 312

OPERATION IMAN

Background:

Morocco experienced another crisis with Polisario in their long-standing conflict over Western Sahara from 1 March to mid-May 1980.

Pre-crisis Mauritania withdrew from the southern part of Western Sahara in August 1979: it had received the area in 1976 via an agreement with Morocco as the successors to Spanish Sahara (see Case #261--Moroccan March). In an attempt to fill the vacuum, both Morocco and Polisario renewed their spasmodic military operations in various parts of the disputed territory during the succeeding months; but these incidents were routine, not crises.

Summary:

A crisis for Morocco was triggered on 1 March 1980 when Polisario forces reportedly defeated units from Morocco's Zegalla column dispatched to clear the area of Oued Draa in the north toward the Western Sahara frontier with Morocco. Serious clashes continued throughout the first two weeks of the month.

On 9 March the Moroccan force began the second part of its mission--to relieve the besieged Moroccan garrison of 4,000 at Zag. The Polisario Front claimed a major victory, a turning point in the war, in which they "put out of action" 2,000 Moroccan troops and caused heavy damage to Moroccan equipment. While Morocco denied these claims, it confirmed that serious fighting had taken place. And a call by Morocco's King Hassan to his troops on 14 March "to make the necessary sacrifices ... for the defence of the territorial integrity of the country" indicates a serious military setback: it appears that Moroccan forces were forced by Polisario guerrillas to withdraw to Jbel Ouarkziz.

On 24 March Polisario reportedly submitted to the UN, the OAU, and the Non-Aligned Movement documents purporting to prove collusion between Morocco and South Africa, which allegedly provided weapons in the campaign to subdue Western Sahara. But the international organizations did not respond.

Fighting broke out in the area again on 6 May after a few weeks of calm. Moroccan forces were more successful in this phase, claiming to have destroyed several "enemy centers" in a "large-scale mopping-up operation" against the "mercenary elements filtering across the Algerian border." Morocco also renewed its criticism of Algeria and Libya for allegedly providing Polisario with North Korean military equipment.

Clashes continued on 9 and 10 May and then tapered off.

In the nature of this protracted conflict, incidents continued to erupt, reportedly in early June, on 21 June, on 10 July, and again in July-August. Thus the conflict continued unabated--and is still unresolved. However, the March-May 1980 round of serious clashes related to Morocco's "Operation Iman" wound down by mid-May 1980.

The U.S., the USSR, and the UN were not involved in this crisis.

References:

Foreign Broadcast Information Service--Daily Report/Middle East and Africa (FBIS-DR/MEA) 1980; ACR 1980; AR 1980; ARB 1980; Keesing's 1980; SWB 1980; WA 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


