CRISNO 430

KOSOVO

Background:

A crisis occurred among the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), ten NATO members (USA, UK, Spain, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Canada and Portugal) and Albania from 20 February to 10 June 1999.

Background and Pre-Crisis

Kosovo had been part of Serbia since 1913, even though its population is about 90% Albanian. The ethnic differences occasionally led to internal tensions and movements for Kosovar autonomy. In January 1998, a sequence of spiraling violence began between the Serbian police and the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK), which declared itself the armed forces of the Kosovo Albanians. The genocidal crackdown by the Serbs against the ethnic Albanians drew a great deal of international condemnation. In addition, there was concern about the flood of Kosovar refugees fleeing the region, and fears that the conflict would spread into the surrounding countries, threatening regional stability.

A UN Contact Group, comprising delegations from the US, the UK, France, Germany, Italy and Russia, was formed to pressure the FRY to engage in negotiations with the UCK. On 26 March 1998, the Contact Group sent a mediation delegation to Serbia to try to expedite the peace process. On 31 March 1998, the UN Security Council passed a resolution that placed an arms embargo on the FRY to further pressure the Serbians and Kosovar Albanians to end the violence. NATO also became involved in the situation and began to form contingency plans for troop deployment on 28 May 1998. Over the next eight months, NATO built up forces in the area, as negotiations between the FRY and the ethnic Albanians in Kosovo stalled. In February 1999, a peace deal seemed to be near completion, and NATO insisted on sending its forces to ensure compliance, once it was signed.

Summary:

The 20 February 1999 deadline passed without an agreement. This triggered a crisis for the NATO members that were likely to use force, as NATO threatened to attack if a settlement was not reached by the 23rd. A tentative agreement for Kosovo autonomy was reached on 23 February, but only after there was evidence of heightened NATO mobilization.

Since the FRY failed to secure a lasting peace agreement, on 24 March 1999, NATO aircraft began an attack against FRY military targets under Operation Allied Force, triggering a crisis for the FRY. The bombing continued for three months. The NATO crisis actors primarily relied on air attacks and imposing an embargo to pressure FRY President Slobodan Milosevic to the negotiation table. The use of ground forces was often threatened but never implemented. While the NATO targets were only military and political in nature, the bombings occasionally extracted collateral civilian casualties. The most egregious instance occurred on 7 May, when a US bomb struck the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade, killing four Chinese nationals. On 9 June 1999, leaders of NATO and the FRY signed a technical agreement that promised the withdrawal of FRY forces from Kosovo. The crisis ended for all actors the following day as the UN resolved to send a peacekeeping force to secure peace and monitor compliance.

Albania was the recipient of a large number of Kosovar Albanian refugees fleeing the FRY. In addition, a substantial portion of UCK activities was based in Northern Albania. The proximity of Albania to Kosovo and close ethnic ties to the Kosovar Albanians made Albania highly vulnerable to any spillover of the violence. In April 1999, there were reports of Serb forces shelling Albanian border villages, amidst heavy fighting between the UCK and the Serbs. At this time, the government of Albania accused the FRY of trying to spread the conflict beyond its borders. The FRY government also accused Albania of aiding NATO, even though the latter was not a member of NATO and did not take an active role in the attacks.

During the crisis, numerous instances of mediation occurred. US envoy Richard Holbrooke was mostly at the lead of the mediation efforts, both before and during the crisis. The UN and Russia were also periodically involved in attempting to broker a peace settlement. The final agreement was mediated by Finish President Martti Ahtisaari and Russian envoy Viktor Chernomyrdin, but the mediation efforts only contributed marginally to crisis abatement relative to the impact of the destructive NATO bombing campaign. In addition to mediation, the UN was also involved in maintaining the arms embargo on the FRY and in indicting President Milosevic for war crimes. (Milosevic was not apprehended and prosecuted until after the crisis was terminated.)

References:

Keesings Online; Flight International; Agence France Presse.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


