CRISNO 42

LETICIA

Background:

A crisis for Colombia and Peru over Leticia began on 8 September 1932 and terminated on 25 May 1933.

Background and Pre-crisis The frontier between Colombia and Peru was in dispute until 1922 when the Salomon-Lozano Treaty was signed by the two states. The agreement provided that Peru recognize Colombian sovereignty over the Leticia Trapeze--a narrow strip of territory running from the Putumayo River to the Amazon.

During the night of 31 August-l September 1932 a group of armed Peruvians attacked and occupied the river port of Leticia, the capital of the Colombian district of the Amazon. Colombian troops were dispatched to repel the "aggressors." Peru denied responsibility for the attack, citing communists and enemies of the Peruvian government as having carried out the incursion. However, rumors of Peruvian President Sanchez Cerro's support for the seizure, as well as for a revision of the Salomon-Lozano Treaty, began to spread.

Summary:

On 8 September 1932 the U.S. ambassador to Colombia reported to the State Department that Colombian President Olaya perceived the possibility of war with Peru over the latter's support for the occupiers of Leticia. With a view to restoring its control over Leticia, Colombia responded in early September 1932 by sending a small naval expedition to retake the territory. The expedition had to pass through the Panama Canal and then 2,000 miles up the Amazon River. On 22 September the government of Colombia issued a special loan for national defense. During November Ecuador sent a Note to the League of Nations about the conflict between Colombia and Peru.

On 27 December 1932 the Colombian expedition arrived at the mouth of the Amazon River, triggering a crisis for Peru. At that time Peruvian reinforcements were reported to be assembling near Leticia. Colombia formally asked for League of Nations intervention on 2 January 1933 and again requested a special session on the 21st.

On 6 February General Victor Ramos, commander of the Peruvian forces, cabled a warning to the Colombian consul in Lima stating that the entry of the Colombian flotilla into the Amazon was a hostile act and he had therefore ordered military measures to prevent its arrival at Leticia. Following a request by the commander of the Colombian expedition to allow him to occupy Tarpaca peacefully, Peru bombed the Colombian gunboats on 14 February 1933. Tarpaca was captured the following day by Colombian forces.

During March and April Colombian troops captured several Peruvian posts. The assassination of President Cerro in Peru on 30 April decreased the possibility of further military clashes. On 2 May direct negotiations began between the new Peruvian President, Benavides, and his close personal friend, Alfonso Lopez, a leader of the Liberal Party in Colombia, who was to become its President the following year. On the 10th the League Council's advisory committee submitted a new proposal, and on 25 May 1933 an agreement was signed by representatives of Colombia and Peru, transferring control of Leticia from the Peruvian forces to a League of Nations commission of three (Brazil, Spain, and the U.S.) for one year, terminating the crisis for both actors.

The League of Nations played a crucial role in crisis abatement. The Council discussed the Leticia issue on 24 and 26 January 1933 and sent Notes to both parties. On 13 March it unanimously adopted a report calling on Peru to withdraw all its forces from Leticia and all support from Peruvian occupiers of Colombia's territory--as a prelude to negotiations on Peru's grievances. (Both parties rejected arbitration.) Through direct submission of proposals and the use of sanctions against Peru, the League effectively mediated in the crisis and contributed to the abatement of hostilities. The Council also appointed an advisory committee to monitor the crisis. Its new proposals, submitted on 10 May, proved to be the basis of negotiations between the adversaries, leading to the agreement of 25 May. (Moreover, the League Commission administered the disputed territory for a year. Leticia was transferred to Colombia in June 1934, following a treaty between the two parties on 24 May 1934.)

The U.S. responded to a Colombian appeal by sending a Note to Peru requesting that it allow the restoration of Colombian control over Leticia. Later, in March 1933, the U.S. participated in the deliberations of the League of Nations Advisory Committee. The U.K. also applied pressure, mostly on Peru, to cooperate with the League. Brazil tried to mediate, unsuccessfully.

References:

Eagleton 1957; Fluharty 1957; Hull 1948, vol. I; Walters 1952; Wood 1966.

Last Updated: 1/21/2004


