CRISNO 62

CZECHOSLOVAKIA MAY CRISIS

Background:

The threat of German military hostilities against Czechoslovakia created a crisis for Czechoslovakia, France, the U.K., and Germany from 19 to 23 May 1938.

Pre-crisis The widespread perception of Hitler's objectives vis-à-vis Czechoslovakia, namely, to annex the German-speaking Sudetenland to the Reich, was reinforced by his speeches. The Sudeten Nazi Party, led by Konrad Henlein, received open support from Germany. Elections in the Sudetenland had been scheduled for 22 May 1938, and there was a heightening of turbulence in the area.

Summary:

A crisis for Czechoslovakia, France, and the U.K. was triggered on 19 May 1938 when intelligence sources reported that Germany was concentrating troops in Saxony, near the Czechoslovak border. These troops were, in fact, carrying out a combined army and air military game near and on the Koenigsbruck military training ground.

Czechoslovakia responded on the 20th by declaring a state of emergency and partial mobilization. Britain's and France's response, on 21 May, took the form of strong warnings to Germany, with a threat of intervention should Germany attack Czechoslovakia. Hitler, who apparently had no intention of invading Czechoslovakia in the immediate future, was surprised by the Czechoslovak response, as well as by that of the other actors, and perceived it as a threat to Germany. The German response was a decision by its War Council to retreat, as the Wehrmacht was not yet ready to meet the British-French-Czechoslovak challenge. On 23 May the Czechoslovak ambassador to Berlin was assured that Nazi Germany had no aggressive intentions toward his country, and the crisis ended for all the participants. The underlying conflict, however, continued unabated and reached a further stage of crisis four months later--the Munich crisis (see Case #64).

There was no USSR intervention in the May weekend crisis. Nor was its aid solicited by the U.K. and France, despite the fact that the Soviet Union had an alliance with France and Czechoslovakia concerning the latter's independence and territorial integrity. This crisis did not come before the League of Nations.

References:

See sources for Case #64.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


