CRISNO 319

JORDAN-SYRIA CONFRONTATION

Background:

Jordan experienced a crisis with Syria from 25 November to 14 December 1980.

Background Instability has been the norm in the relations between these two Middle East Arab neighbors. They ranged from confrontation, as in 1970 over the PLO-Hashemite regime civil war in Jordan (see Case #238--Black September), to reconciliation, extending to an (abortive) agreement to establish a federation between them, as in 1975-76. Relations deteriorated once more in 1978-80.

Syria's minority Alawi-led regime, perceiving itself as increasingly isolated within the community of Arab states, accused Jordan of several hostile plans and actions: intention to make peace with Israel and to regain control over the West Bank and Gaza, at the expense of the PLO; harassing Syrians trying to cross the border into Jordan; and most important, supporting the Muslim Brotherhood within Syria in its attempts to overthrow the Asad regime.

However, none of these catalyzed a military-security crisis. This was a product of a Syrian initiative.

Summary:

On 25 November 1980 Damascus began moving armored units forward to positions on the Jordanian border. By the first week of December the military confrontation became ominous, with 30,000 Syrians and 24,000 Jordanians, supported by 1,000 tanks, facing each other. The confrontation lasted two weeks but without violence. Sa’udi Arabia’s Second Deputy Premier Prince Abdullah served as an important mediator in the crisis and facilitated de-escalation. Syrian forces began to pull back on 5 December, Jordan's on the 10th. By the 11th most had redeployed to their pre-crisis positions. The military confrontation and, with it, the crisis ended on 14 December. But the fundamental distrust between the two regimes remained.

Both sides could claim political gains from the 1980 crisis. Jordan had demonstrated resolve and capability in the face of dramatic pressure from its much stronger neighbor. Syria had indicated the likely cost to Jordan of breaking ranks with its Arab allies in the conflict with Israel, of abandoning the PLO, and of continuing to meddle in Syria's internal affairs.

The U.S., the USSR, and the UN were not involved in this crisis.

References:

MECS 1980-81; MEJ Chronology 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


