CRISNO 147

COSTA RICA-NICARAGUA II

Background:

Another crisis for these two Central American neighbors lasted from 8 to 20 January 1955.

Summary:

While Nicaragua had a well-trained army of about 7,500 men, Costa Rican defense was entrusted to the National Police Force. On 8 January 1955 Costa Rican President José Figueres received information that Venezuela had sent a fleet of 10 military transports, fully manned, to Nicaragua. Costa Rica appealed to the OAS, mobilized volunteer reserve troops, and placed its police on standby alert. Three days later about 500 Costa Rican rebels crossed the frontier from Nicaragua and captured a town 30 miles north of the capital city, San José. Costa Rica proclaimed a state of emergency and broke diplomatic relations with Nicaragua.

The OAS Council met in emergency session on 11 January and voted to send a fact-finding mission to Costa Rica. On the 14th the mission reported that there were serious indications that the rebels were being supplied with arms from Nicaragua and that foreign aircraft had flown over Costa Rica, strafing and bombing cities. The Council then called upon Nicaragua to stop the flow of arms to the rebels and voted to send observers to the area. The Council decided further, on 16 January, to grant Costa Rica's request for aircraft. Four F-51 Mustang fighter-planes were delivered from the United States. This triggered a crisis for Nicaragua.

President Somoza responded on the 19th by reinforcing Nicaragua's borders and stepping up military flights. Costa Rican forces drove the rebels from the captured territory and forced them back across the Nicaraguan border.

The OAS approved an on-the-spot investigating committee – providing fact finding and observation flights – with which both crisis actors agreed to cooperate. The crisis ended on 20 January 1955 when the Costa Rican rebels withdrew and both states agreed to an OAS plan for demilitarized zones along the border. After the termination of the crisis, the OAS committee helped draft two bilateral treaties that Nicaragua and Costa Rica signed. Whereas Figueres considered the outcome a victory for Costa Rica and credited the OAS and the United States, Nicaragua's Somoza was disappointed that the attempt to overthrow Figueres had failed.

The UN and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #126.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


