CRISNO 175

FAILED ASSASSINATION-VENEZUELA

Background:

A crisis between Venezuela and the Dominican Republic occurred from 24 June to mid-September 1960.

Background Diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic were broken by Venezuela in June 1959. In February 1960 a charge of flagrant violations of human rights was made to the OAS against the Dominican Republic by the Venezuelan government.

Summary:

An assassination attempt on Venezuelan President Betancourt triggered the crisis on 24 June 1960. Dominican Republic complicity was suspected when it was learned that the plot was organized by Venezuelan exiles living there. In addition, the Dominican Republic radio reported the assassination attempt 15 minutes after it occurred. On the 25th Venezuela accused Trujillo of initiating it. This triggered a crisis for the Dominican Republic, which feared a Venezuelan attack on its territory. The Dominican Republic promptly denied all charges. Its major response, on 27 June, was to place the Dominican armed forces on alert and to call for general mobilization. The Congress met in emergency session the following day.

Venezuelan countermeasures consisted of placing its army on alert and issuing another formal accusation against the Dominican Republic. On 30 June a state of emergency was declared in Venezuela after Trujillo accused Venezuela of preparing for war in order to overthrow his regime. Venezuela's major response, on 1 July, was to call for an emergency session of the OAS and to press for a resolution of sanctions against the Dominican Republic. President Betancourt stated that, if no measures were taken against Trujillo by the OAS, Venezuela would act unilaterally. An investigation committee was appointed by the OAS on 8 July. On 20 August a resolution was passed condemning the Dominican Republic's "acts of aggression and intervention." It called upon the members of the OAS to break off diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic and to impose an arms embargo, along with partial economic sanctions. This terminated the crisis for Venezuela.

During the OAS debate the United States attempted unsuccessfully to have a more conciliatory resolution passed, fearing a replacement of the Trujillo government by a communist regime. The U.S. then complied with the resolution by withholding the Dominican Republic's sugar quota and breaking off diplomatic relations.

On 5 September, at an urgent meeting of the Security Council, the USSR called for a resolution to act upon OAS sanctions, but it was not passed. The crisis for the Dominican Republic faded in mid-September.

References:

Atkins and Wilson 1972; Crassweller 1966; Wainhouse 1966.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


