CRISNO 287

BEAGLE CHANNEL I

Background:

The century-old dispute over the Beagle Channel erupted into a crisis for Chile and Argentina on 5 December 1977 and ended on 20 February 1978.

Background and Pre-crisis Since the mid-nineteenth century Argentina and Chile contested the ownership of three tiny islands, Lennox, Nueva, and Picton, located at the eastern entrance to the Beagle Channel, a waterway 150 miles long and 3-8 miles wide in the southern tip of South America. The islands are inhabited by Chilean shepherds and patrolled by Argentinian torpedo boats. The two countries signed an agreement in 1972 referring the dispute to the International Court of Justice (ICJ), which awarded the islands to Chile on 2 May 1977. Argentina's access to the Atlantic, to its Antarctic bases, and to the potential resources of oil, minerals, and fish in the South Atlantic and Antarctic regions was in jeopardy.

Summary:

On 5 December 1977 the Argentine government delivered a formal Note to Chile objecting to the terms of the court ruling. More important, it called up army reservists in the Mendoza border region the same day, triggering a crisis for Chile. Negotiations between Chile and Argentina ended on 28 December, and all further meetings were canceled. Chile's response, on 5 January, was a speech by President Pinochet stating that his government would henceforth pursue a more aggressive and pragmatic foreign policy. That day it was also reported that Chilean soldiers were being massed between Puerto Natales and Punta Arenas and that tank and infantry maneuvers were in progress with Chilean warships patrolling the Magellan Straits. This activity triggered a crisis for Argentina. Argentinian vessels sailed for the Beagle Channel area and remained offshore on 8 January. Two days later Argentina's naval commander, while observing maneuvers, stated that the navy was ready for action; the air force commander inspected airfields on the Chilean border. The same day President Videla interrupted a vacation to return to Buenos Aires for consultations with the military junta.

Throughout January 1978 Argentina and Chile continued their preparations for a military confrontation. On 19 January Videla and Pinochet met in Mendoza to discuss matters of joint concern, especially the area in dispute. When Argentina once more rejected the ruling by the ICJ, a second meeting between the two presidents was postponed. However, on 20 February they did meet once more and signed the "Act of Puerto Montt" under which a joint negotiating committee was set up and given 180 days to resolve the dispute. The crisis ended for both actors that day with no change in the status quo.

The United States tried to persuade both parties to reduce tension and seek a solution through diplomatic means. The UN and the USSR were not involved.

(Almost two months after the 180-day negotiating period a second crisis over the Beagle Channel occurred [see Case #295].)

References:

Child 1985; Garrett 1985; Gwyne 1979; Kelley 1988; Princen 1987, 1992a, 1992b.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


