CRISNO 394

RWANDA-UGANDA

Background:

Rwanda experienced an ethnic crisis with Uganda from 30 September 1990 to 29 March 1991.

Background Ethnic conflict between the Hutu and Tutsi communities has been endemic in Rwanda (and neighboring Burundi) since long before independence in July 1962. Until a successful Hutu revolt in 1959 the Tutsi dominated politics and the military. Thousands of Rwanda Tutsi fled to nearby states, Burundi, the Congo (later, Zaire), Tanganyika (later, Tanzania), and, most important, Uganda. It was in Uganda that thousands of Tutsi refugees organized themselves into a disciplined armed force, the Rwanda Patriotic Front (RPF), with the goal of regaining power in Rwanda. (They ultimately did so, at the end of a lengthy civil war and in the aftermath of the 1994 Hutu-organized genocide against the members of the Tutsi community who had not fled Rwanda.)

Summary:

A crisis for Rwanda was triggered on 30 September 1990 by an RPF incursion from its bases in Uganda that threatened the Hutu-dominated regime of President Juvenal Habyarimana. Inconclusive clashes in the capital, Kigali, occurred on 4-5 October.

Rwanda's initial response was to arrest 3,000 members of the Tutsi community, eliciting expressions of concern from Belgium and the U.S. A cease-fire, brokered under the auspices of Belgium, took effect on the 24th but collapsed quickly. Fighting resumed near the Rwanda/Uganda border in late October and, after a lull, again on 12 December and on 4 and 23 January 1991--there were further incursions by the RPF from across the Uganda border.

On several occasions Rwanda accused the Uganda army of assisting the RPF, a charge that was always denied.

During the episodic fighting between Rwanda's army and the RPF over a period of six months, many efforts were made to resolve the crisis by diplomacy. A Belgian diplomatic initiative began as early as 15 October 1990 (see below). On 26 October a regional summit conference in Zaire agreed on the creation of a joint monitoring group to supervise a cease-fire. Another regional meeting was held in Kenya in February. Talks between the presidents of Rwanda and Uganda in Tanzania on 17 February 1991 led to an agreement for an immediate cease-fire. A regional conference two days later in Tanzania called on the OAU and the UN to assist the return of refugees to Rwanda.

There was renewed fighting on 9 March and several days thereafter. Finally, at the initiative of Zaire, a cease-fire was signed by Uganda's government and the RPF on 18 March and was formalized on 29 March. This marked the end of the crisis--but not of the deep-rooted Hutu-Tutsi ethnic conflict in Rwanda, which was to generate one of the cataclysmic acts of genocide in the twentieth century, the slaughter of up to a million Tutsi by Hutu armed forces and police in 1994.

Among external powers, Belgium, the former colonial power in Rwanda as administrator of the UN Trust Territory, and Zaire were the most highly involved states in this crisis. As noted, Belgium sought an end to the fighting as early as 15 October 1991, through a diplomatic initiative in cooperation with the OAU: Rwanda's president refused to negotiate with the RPF. Belgium also sought the creation of an African peacekeeping force and offered logistical and financial support. And it sent an elite battalion of 600 soldiers, along with arms and ammunition, to assist the Rwanda army. Zaire served as the principal mediator in the crisis, as it began holding talks, in conjunction with the OAU, between Rwanda and Uganda on 22 November 1990 in Goma, Zaire. The president of Zaire mediated multiple peace talks throughout the crisis period, in both Zaire and Tanzania, and, as a result, Zaire played a key role in arranging the March 1992 cease-fire. Zaire also dispatched 1,000 troops to assist the Rwanda army, in accordance with their mutual defense agreement. France sent 150 paratroopers to protect Europeans resident in Rwanda.

The UN, the U.S., and Russia were not involved.

References:

ACR 1990, 1991; AR 1990, 1991; ARB 1990, 1991; Keesing's 1990, 1991.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


