CRISNO 214

RANN OF KUTCH

Background:

A crisis over territory between India and Pakistan, one of many since 1947, lasted from 8 April until 30 June 1965.

Background The princely state of Kutch acceded to the Indian Union in 1947; but Pakistan claimed the northern part of the Rann of Kutch as its territory. Incidents occurred in 1956, but Indian control over the disputed territory was quickly restored. In January 1965 Pakistani forces began patrolling in areas claimed by India.

Summary:

Crises were triggered for India and Pakistan on 8 April 1965 when each attacked the other's police post in the disputed territory (the question, who attacked first, remains shrouded in competing reports by the two crisis actors). On the 14th both parties agreed to stop fighting; but intense military hostilities resumed during the last week of April.

The U.K. called for a cease-fire based upon the restoration of positions held by each side as of 1 January 1965. This was followed by intense trilateral negotiations, involving New Delhi, Islamabad, and London, ending in a cease-fire agreement on 11 May. However, the crisis for India and Pakistan did not end until 30 June, when both parties agreed to all the terms of the cease-fire: mutual withdrawal of forces, direct negotiations, and arbitration if all else failed to settle the dispute. Harold Wilson, the Prime Minster of Great Britain, acted as the primary mediator in the crisis and was instrumental in brokering the cease-fire agreement.

Moscow expressed the hope that India and Pakistan would exercise restraint and settle the dispute in a manner safeguarding the interests of both states. A U.S. statement deplored the fighting and offered American help in restoring peace to the subcontinent. India charged that Pakistani forces were using American equipment, leading to deteriorating U.S.-Indian relations. Beijing supported Pakistan throughout the crisis.

(A few months later, India and Pakistan were at war once more [see Case #216].)

(On 19 February 1968 the ad hoc Indo-Pakistani Western Boundary Tribunal, established by the U.K.-mediated agreement of 30 June 1965, awarded India 90 percent of the Rann of Kutch and 10 percent [300 square miles] to Pakistan.)

References:

See sources for Case #216.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


