CRISNO 113

COMMUNISM IN HUNGARY

Background:

A crisis between the Soviet Union and Hungary began on 10 February and terminated on 1 June 1947.

Background and Pre-crisis The Soviet army liberated Hungary from German occupation at the end of World War II and was the dominant factor in the Allied Control Commission (ACC) which administered the country after 1945. With Soviet support, the Hungarian Communist Party began to organize itself as a political force. In 1947 the government of Hungary was a coalition of the Smallholder, Social-Democratic, National Peasant, and Communist parties. Although the Smallholders had obtained a majority, the party was obliged by the Soviet-led ACC to form a coalition and grant the Communists the key post of Ministry of the Interior, thus enabling them to control the police. In December 1946 a conspiracy to overthrow the regime was uncovered, with the Secretary-General of the Smallholders Party, Bela Kovács, being implicated. An investigation by Hungarian police began.

Summary:

The trigger to the Soviet crisis was the change created by the signing of the Peace Treaty on 10 February 1947: it called for the withdrawal of occupation forces from Hungary within six months. The Soviets perceived this to be a threat to their control of Hungary and responded on 26 February with the arrest of Kovács on charges of undermining the security of the Soviet occupation forces. This act triggered a crisis for Hungary, which viewed Kovács's arrest as a challenge to the elite and the regime. In March there was another purge of the Smallholders Party extending to members of parliament and ministers in the government. When Prime Minister Nagy was away from Hungary, on vacation in Switzerland, the Soviet authorities presented the Hungarian government with a record of the Kovács interrogation wherein Nagy was named as a fellow conspirator. When Nagy refused to return to the country for fear of arrest, he was asked to resign. This was accompanied by threats to the safety of his son, still in Hungary. Nagy decided to do so on 30 May. The termination for both crisis actors was his formal resignation on 1 June 1947. Hungarian political resistance had been broken (see Case #155--Hungarian Uprising, in 1956, in Europe: Non-PCs).

The U.S. and the U.K. asked for a three-power inquiry into Kovács's arrest. Notes with the USSR were exchanged. There was no UN involvement.

References:

Kertesz 1950; Kovrig 1970; Lahav 1976; Nagy 1948; Schoenfeld 1948; Seton-Watson 1956; Vali 1961.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


