CRISNO 219

YEMEN WAR IV

Background:

The last phase of the long war in Yemen took place between 14 October 1966 and 26 September 1967. There were three crisis actors: Sa'udia Arabia, Egypt, and Yemen.

Pre-crisis On 23 November 1965 Yemeni Republican and Royalist delegations, together with observers from Egypt and Sa'udi Arabia, met to discuss the nature of the plebiscite agreed upon at Jiddah. The parties failed to reach agreement on any of the items on the agenda. Intermittent fighting continued. A new agreement for a peace settlement in Yemen was reached in Kuwait on 19 August 1966 but was never put into effect. The long war was renewed.

Summary:

On 14 October 1966 air raids began on Royalist-controlled villages in the northern mountains, a main target being the headquarters of the Royalists. Two Sa'udi villages were also bombed, the crisis trigger for Sa'udi Arabia. On 24 October intelligence reports that a strong concentration of Royalist tribesmen was gathering for an attack on the town of Sa'dah triggered another intra-war crisis for Egypt and Yemen. The YAR response, on 30 October, was a combined attack on Sa'udi troops and the Royalist Homdon tribe. Egypt's response was the use of poison gas in bombings of Halhal, a Royalist-held town, on 27 December 1966. Other gas bombings by Egypt were reported in January. Egypt's expeditionary force had reached 50,000-60,000.

The Sa'udi response to the crisis occurred the next day--a combined Royalist-Sa'udi attack on Yemen President Sallal's residence and a military post in the YAR capital, San'a. The Sa'udi Arabian delegate to the UN complained to the Secretary-General and warned that Sa'udi patience was at an end. On 28 February 1967 U Thant, whose offer of good offices was the main UN involvement, stated that he was powerless to deal with the matter. Jordan and Tunisia withdrew their recognition of the YAR. A UN General Assembly resolution of 5 December 1966 condemned the use of poison gas as contrary to international law, as well as to the policies of governments throughout the world.

The Republicans remained seriously divided during the early months of 1967. Military action was confined to sporadic Egyptian air raids on Royalist villages, in which poison gas bombs were reported to have been dropped. In March there were reports of a serious split among the Royalists. A reconciliation was reached on 10 April when a Royalist government-in-exile was formed. The crisis in May and the outbreak of war between Israel and Egypt beginning 5 June (see Case #222--Six Day War, in Arab/Israel PC) produced a transformation of the situation in Yemen: Egypt began withdrawing large numbers of troops. Yet a counteroffensive by Egyptian and Republican forces was launched in July. A Republican delegation visited Moscow to discuss Soviet military and economic aid to the YAR.

Muhammad Ahmad Maliyih, Prime Minister of Sudan, began a successful mediation effort on 20 August, when he visited King Faisal in Sa’udi Arabia and created a new peace plan. On 24 August, Maliyih visited President Nasir in Cairo and discussed the new plan. This paved the way for an agreement between Nasir and Faisal that was concluded at Maliyih’s residence in Khartoum on 31 August 1967. Under this agreement Egypt was to withdraw its forces. Egypt began its final evacuation of Yemen on 26 September, marking the termination date of the crisis.

The U.S. was marginally involved in this crisis; and the USSR continued to provide military aid to Egypt and the YAR.

(Sa'udi Arabia subsequently withdrew as well; but the civil war between Royalist and Republican Yemen simmered for another two years. An unwritten agreement was finally concluded whereby a number of Royalist leaders would be appointed to the presidential council and the government of Yemen. The YAR was officially recognized by Sa'udi Arabia, the U.K., and France in July 1970.)

References:

See sources for Case #195; and MER 1967.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


