CRISNO 389

CONTRAS IV

Background:

The decade-old conflict between Nicaragua and the anti-Sandinista contras generated another crisis for Honduras from 9 September to 7 November 1989.

Pre-crisis Nicaragua had filed a complaint against both Honduras and Costa Rica with the International Court of Justice (World Court) in 1986, for allowing the contras to launch raids into Nicaragua from their territories. In a turning-point regional development, the heads of all five Central American states--Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua--met in Tela, Honduras, on 5-7 August 1989 and signed a declaration calling for the "voluntary demobilization, repatriation or relocation" of the contras in Nicaragua or in other countries within three months, beginning in September 1989, under the supervision of an international commission. On 7 August, too, in a bilateral agreement, Honduras agreed to the demobilization of the contras on its territory, in return for Nicaragua's withdrawal of its complaint against Honduras at the World Court.

Summary:

A crisis for Honduras was triggered by a Nicaraguan attack on several Honduran army posts on 9 September 1989. The Honduras Foreign Ministry protested the same day. On the 13th the head of Nicaragua's Military Intelligence responded that contra raids from Honduran bases had increased markedly in the preceding two weeks. (This turned out to be the only violent exchange during the crisis.)

In October, at the 43rd session of the UN General Assembly, the Honduras foreign minister called on the UN Secretary-General to create a multinational UN peacekeeping force to patrol the border with Nicaragua. The latter approved the idea. However, on 1 November President Ortega of Nicaragua declared a formal end to the cease-fire with the contras. This came in the aftermath of a contra attack on 22 October, in which 19 persons were killed. Ortega proposed meetings with contra leaders, the Honduras government, and the UN Demobilization Commission. Honduras responded sharply on 2 November, criticizing Ortega for his cancellation of the cease-fire and rejecting Nicaragua's call for new talks on demobilizing the rebel army, claiming that the peace agreement was sufficient.

The UN Security Council, responding to the Honduras foreign minister's request, adopted a resolution on 7 November that created an Observer Group in Central America to monitor compliance with the Tela Agreement and to patrol the borders between Honduras and Nicaragua. The 625-strong force included soldiers, observers and technicians from Canada, West Germany, Spain and other Latin American countries. Both the conflicting parties approved the resolution. This ended the crisis for Honduras and the Contras IV international crisis, for the UN Observer Group reduced tension and reduced the likelihood of further violence.

Nicaragua was a pivotally involved actor in this crisis. However, its source of threat was a nonstate actor, the contras, operating from a neighboring state, not Honduras per se: Nicaragua's leaders did not perceive value threat, time pressure, or higher probability of involvement in military hostilities with Honduras in this case.

The U.S. and the USSR were involved in the Nicaragua/contra domestic conflict but not in the interstate conflict between Honduras and Nicaragua.

(Talks between Nicaragua and the contras took place at UN headquarters on 9-10 November under the auspices of the UN-OAS International Commission for Support and Verification, with Honduras present as an observer.)

References:

Keesing's 1989, 1990; New York Times 1989, 1990.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


