CRISNO 184

BIZERTA

Background:

There were two actors in this crisis, France and Tunisia. It began on 17 July and ended on 29 September 1961.

Background France continued to maintain a number of military bases in its former colony of Tunisia after Tunisia's independence in 1956. This caused tense relations which reached crisis proportions in 1957-58 (see Case #158). As a result France reduced its military presence to one large base at Bizerta.

Summary:

In spite of a vague promise by President de Gaulle to President Bourguiba that France would evacuate the base, the French began construction in July 1961 of an additional runway designed to increase its military capability. On 17 July Bourguiba triggered a crisis for France when he issued an ultimatum giving the French approximately 48 hours to open negotiations on a timetable for withdrawal from Bizerta, or face a Tunisian-imposed blockade. France's response was a decision on the 18th to take military action; and on the 19th, when the Tunisians tried to block a French attempt to resupply the base, French paratroops and other forces launched a military assault against Tunisian positions, triggering a crisis for Tunisia.

Tunisia's response was multiple: on 20 July it appealed to the UN Security Council and also attempted to meet French violence with violence of its own. France was condemned in resolutions by the Security Council and the General Assembly. An Arab League resolution was also passed authorizing action by member-states in the form of volunteer military forces for Tunisia. However, none of these contributed to the abatement of the Bizerta crisis. The crisis ended on 29 September with an agreement between France and Tunisia that restored the status quo prior to Bourguiba's ultimatum. (After lengthy negotiations, France evacuated its base at Bizerta on 15 October 1963.)

Neither the U.S. nor the USSR was involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #158; and Hassouna 1975; Ruf 1971.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


