CRISNO 385

IRAQ RECAPTURE OF AL-FAW

Background:

Iran experienced its last intra-war crisis (IWC) of the eight-year Iran/Iraq War from 18 April to 8 August 1988.

Background The long war in the Gulf region began in September 1980 when Iraq invaded its neighbor (see Case #317). There were several IWCs in the following years (see Cases #335, #348, #361 in 1982, 1984, 1986). Both sides suffered heavy casualties. There was little change in the strategic balance. And for most of the time the protagonists were locked in a stalemate.

The key Iraqi port of al-Faw at the entrance to the long-disputed Shatt-al-Arab estuary (see Cases #172, #234), with a history of conflict over this waterway going back to the Ottoman period before World War I, had fallen to Iran on 9 February 1986. On 14 May 1986 Iraqi forces made their first land incursion into Iran since the battle for Khorramshahr in 1982.

Pre-crisis For the last two years of the war there was a renewed stalemate. Iraq's primary goal in this phase was to damage the Iranian economy, notably its oil exports. Iran's objectives were to punish Iraq as the initiator of the costly war, to oust Saddam Hussein from power in Baghdad, and to receive massive war reparations from Iraq. In light of these goals Iran rejected several Iraqi offers of a cease-fire, including one by Saddam Hussein in January 1987: on 12 February Ayatullah Khomeini declared that the war against Iraq was a "Holy Crusade" that could end only in victory. On 20 March 1988 Khomeini reaffirmed his determination to persist until final victory.

Iran used its Kurdish allies in a war of attrition against Iraq in the mountainous north. Iraqi planes continued to attack tankers in the Gulf and the Strait of Hormuz, in an attempt to undermine Iran's capability to sustain the long war. The naval war in the Gulf was internationalized in the spring of 1987, including an Iraqi attack on a U.S. frigate in the Gulf on 17 May, changing U.S. attitudes toward Gulf War I, but not to the extent of making Washington a direct participant. Iran and Iraq exchanged air raids on civilian targets in many cities of the two warring states, including Baghdad and Teheran. Iran also renewed pressure on Kuwait to desist from further material aid to Iraq, by naval attacks on Bubiyan Island on 30 March and 20 April 1988.

Summary:

On 18 April 1988, after a fierce battle, Iraqi forces recaptured the port of al-Faw, the first of a series of victories that would lead to the end of the war. Iraq launched another successful offensive on 25 May on the town of Shalamchech, which Iran had occupied in January 1987. An Iranian counteroffensive was unsuccessful. Nonetheless Iran refused all UN entreaties to negotiate with Iraq, directly or even indirectly.

In late May the UN Secretary-General began a new cease-fire initiative, but neither of the protagonists was receptive. On 2 June Iran, through its new commander-in-chief of the armed forces (and later, president), Rafsanjani, declared that there would be no compromise. On 18 June Iraq began a new offensive, attacking Mehran. A week later it reconquered Majnoon Island and the northern outskirts of Basra.

By the summer of 1988 Iran had yielded all of its military gains of the preceding six years. It was a turning point in the war, indicating that defeat was possible, and for Iraq, a signal that victory was attainable. Saddam Hussein declared on 28 June that "final victory is very near"; and on 12 July Iraq began to advance into Iran. From a position of strength Iraq proposed peace talks on the 18th. The two superpowers and the UN also pressed for negotiations, through Security Council Resolution 598. Iran, suffering from a shortage of arms and several defeats on the battlefield, and under growing external pressure from the major powers, agreed to negotiate: on 20 July Khomeini announced Iran's acceptance of a cease-fire, a decision he described as "more deadly than taking poison." Iraq, however, insisted on direct negotiations on all aspects of the conflict. The fighting, the last IWC, and the Iran/Iraq War ended on 8 August 1988.

(None of the basic issues in dispute, including borders, was resolved by the war. The two Gulf powers had suffered massive losses and were weakened, internally and externally.)

References:

See sources for Case #317; and Chubin 1989; MECS 1988; MEJ Chronology 1988.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


