CRISNO 429

UNSCOM II OPERATION DESERT FOX

Background:

A crisis erupted involving Iraq, the United Kingdom, and the United States on 31 October 1998. The crisis-the fifth in the Iraq/US protracted conflict-ended on 20 December 1998.

Background

Following Iraq's acceptance of a deal brokered by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan in February 1998, weapons inspectors from the UN Special Commission (UNSCOM) were to be granted access to all potential sites within Iraq. (See Crisis #422, UNSCOM I, for more on this agreement.) By May 1998, the Security Council issued a statement that Iraqi officials were in compliance with the February agreement and that UNSCOM inspectors now faced fewer impediments to complete its inspection and verification work.

This cooperation between UNSCOM and Iraqi officials proved to be short-lived, however. During August 1998 talks, UNSCOM Executive Chairman Richard Butler requested that Iraq agree to the implementation of a more aggressive weapons inspection program. Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz dismissed Butler's requested, demanding that Iraqi disarmament processes had been completed. Aziz also demanded that UNSCOM be restructured to reduce the disproportionate influence of the US. Aziz's comments were followed by a vote in the Iraqi National Assembly on 5 August for the suspension of Iraqi cooperation with UNSCOM. One month later, Resolution 1194-condemning Iraq's decision to discontinue efforts to work with UNSCOM-received the unanimous support of the Security Council. This resolution also suspended indefinitely the periodic reviews of UN economic sanctions in place against Iraq. While Aziz resumed discussions with UN officials, the Iraqi National Assembly condemned Resolution 1194. The assembly also called for an end to the limited UNSCOM monitoring it had allowed following the 5 August declaration.

On 26 October 1998, Butler reported to the Security Council the results of a two-day meeting of international experts, convened to review evidence collected by UNSCOM. The experts agreed that the evidence raised serious questions about Iraq's claims that its chemical and biological weapons programs had been dismantled.

Summary:

Following increased questions about the veracity of Iraq's claims that it has no chemical or biological weapons systems, Iraq announced that all UNSCOM activities in Iraq would come to an immediate halt. Cooperation would only resume, according to an Iraqi statement, after the Security Council reviewed the possibility of lifting sanctions on Iraq and after Richard Butler was removed as the UNSCOM chair. This announcement triggered a crisis for the UK and for the US. On 5 November 1998, the UN Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1205, demanding that Iraq "rescind immediately and unconditionally" its anti-UNSCOM pronouncements of 5 August and 31 October. This resolution, drafted by the UK, reflected the shared sentiment of the permanent members of the Security Council, but disagreements persisted about how to affect Iraq's behavior. As during the UNSCOM I crisis, China, France, and Russia believed that this crisis could be resolved through diplomatic means, while the UK and US maintained that the UN should consider using military force.

On 9 November 1998, the UK and the US announced increased military mobilization in the Gulf region, continued talks with potential allies in a military attack, and urged the evacuation of all UNSCOM personnel and aid workers from Iraq. These actions, indicating an increased likelihood of military hostilities, triggered a crisis for Iraq. Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein responded to this trigger by re-opening talks between his officials and others in the international community. The major Iraqi response to the crisis occurred on 14 November, when Saddam indicated to a Russian diplomat that Iraq would cooperate fully with UNSCOM in the future. It is later discovered that US military jets were in the air, on their way to Iraq, when this announcement was made. The US maintained that it would launch an unannounced military strike if Saddam violated his latest commitment to working with UNSCOM.

In late November and early December, Iraqi officials resumed practices of denying UNSCOM inspectors access to information and sites, and on 15 December, Richard Butler reported to the Security Council that Iraq had not lived up to the promise of cooperation made on 14 November. On the evening of 16 December, the UK and US launched a series of air strikes on Iraq. The attacks, which continued until 20 December, were not authorized by the UN, but British and American officials argued that they were consistent with UN Security Resolution 1154, which guaranteed that Iraq would face the "severest consequences" if it did not live up to the memorandum of understanding signed by Aziz and Kofi Annan in February 1998. During 72 hours of bombing, UK and US forces struck more than 90 Iraqi targets.

The crisis ended for Iraq, the UK, and the US on 20 December when the military attack, named Operation Desert Fox, ended. At the end of the crisis, there was still no agreement within the UN Security Council about its policy toward Iraq, nor was Iraq willing to accept UNSCOM inspectors back into the country. In December 1999, the UN Security Council replaced UNSCOM with the United Nations Monitoring Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC).

References:

Kessing's Record of World Events Online Lexis Nexis Online (Washington Post, Agence France Presse) United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) website. http://www.un.org/Depts/unscom/ Bureau of Political Military Affairs, U.S. Department of State, "Chronology of Events Leading To the U.S.-led Attack on Iraq," January 8, 1999. http://www.state.gov/www/regions/nea/iraqchronyr.html.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


