CRISNO 210

GULF OF TONKIN

Background:

The first international crisis of the Vietnam War (1964-75) began on 30 July 1964. It ended for the United States on 7 August. North Vietnam's crisis faded in mid-August.

Background Until the Gulf of Tonkin crisis in 1964 the U.S. presence in Southeast Asia was limited to military and economic aid to Thailand, Cambodia, and South Vietnam. United States policy in Vietnam was based upon the maintenance of a separate state in South Vietnam. Any support to the insurgency in the south by North Vietnam was viewed as external aggression. The U.S. supported the repressive Ngo Dinh Diem regime in Saigon against rebellion, but the growth of insurgency in the south was rapid. Southerners, regrouped in North Vietnam, began to return to join the expanding military strength of the Vietcong. During 1962 the United States undertook a major military buildup in Vietnam: U.S. helicopter crews took an active part in the war. A Buddhist uprising against the Diem government, accompanied by acts of suicide by Buddhist monks, dramatized the situation and brought about U.S. political pressure against Diem.

Pre-crisis On 1 November 1963 Diem was murdered, and a Military Revolutionary Council took power under General Duong van Minh. At that time less than half the territory of South Vietnam was under effective Saigon control. President Kennedy's assassination followed shortly thereafter. In the 1964 presidential campaign, Johnson reassured the public that Americans would not be sent to fight in Vietnam. Nevertheless, he would never permit communist expansion there. Across the Pacific, on 25 July 1964, Hanoi Radio charged that Americans had fired on a North Vietnamese fishing craft.

Summary:

On 30 July 1964 South Vietnamese patrol boats, on a U.S.-backed covert 34A mission, attacked two North Vietnamese islands in the Gulf of Tonkin. This triggered a crisis for North Vietnam. It responded by a tit-for-tat attack on 2 August--the U.S. destroyer Maddox was attacked by North Vietnamese torpedo boats in the Gulf of Tonkin off North Vietnam, with a second attack on 4 August against two U.S. destroyers. Neither resulted in casualties or damage.

The U.S. response was prompt. Shortly after the second attack President Johnson ordered an air attack against North Vietnamese gunboats and their supporting facilities. And on the 5th he asked the U.S. Congress to pass a resolution to authorize all necessary action to protect U.S. armed forces and to assist nations covered by the SEATO treaty. The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, giving the president broad war powers in defense of U.S. and allied interests in Southeast Asia, was passed on 7 August. This ended the U.S.'s crisis. The bombing of North Vietnam ceased in mid-August; and North Vietnam's crisis faded shortly thereafter.

The United States requested a UN Security Council meeting and called for a session of SEATO, as well as informing its NATO allies of events through high-level consultations. Nothing concrete emerged from these meetings. No clear agreement between Hanoi and Washington was reached. The outcome of the crisis led to an escalation of tension in the area. The USSR provided political support to Hanoi.

References:

See sources for Case #225; and Austin 1971; Gardner 1995; Gelb with Betts 1979; Gibbons 1986, vol. II; Goulden 1969; Gravel 1971, vols. II, III; Halberstam 1972; Herring 1986; Johnson 1971; Kahin 1986; Kahin and Lewis 1967; McNamara 1995; Windchy 1971.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


