CRISNO 48

BULGARIA-TURKEY

Background:

A two-stage non-violent crisis between Bulgaria and Turkey occurred between 6 March and 31 August 1935.

Background and Pre-crisis On 8 February 1934 the Balkan Pact was signed by Greece, Romania, Turkey, and Yugoslavia: it provided mutual guarantees for the security of their borders; and each promised not to take action regarding any Balkan nonsignatory without previous discussions. Bulgaria had long refused to recognize the status quo established by the post-World War I peace treaties. On 1 March 1935 the followers of Venizelos in Greece staged an uprising in Athens, Macedonia, and Crete as a protest against royalism. Turkey began concentrating troops on its borders with Bulgaria and Greece.

Summary:

On 6 March Bulgaria's foreign minister expressed his country's alarm at the troop concentrations and complained of anti-Bulgarian propaganda in the Turkish press. Two days later Bulgaria responded with an aide-mémoire to the League of Nations charging Turkey with "aggression" and requesting League action, thereby triggering a crisis for Ankara. At a press conference Turkey denied unfriendly intentions, declared that its troop concentrations were directed at Greece, countercharged that there was a Bulgarian military buildup along the border, and affirmed its intent to maintain the status quo in the Balkans. This had the desired effect. On 10 March Bulgaria withdrew its memo from the League and asserted its peaceful intentions ending the first stage of this crisis for both actors.

Relations between Bulgaria and Turkey remained tense during the next five months. In March Kemal Atatürk was reelected President of Turkey for the next four years. Turkey continued its active policy of rearmament because of distrust of Italy's intentions in the eastern Mediterranean. In July the Turkish War Ministry ordered the fortification of Kirklareli near Bulgaria's southern border on the Black Sea. Bulgaria's nationalists desired an outlet to the Aegean Sea through the Turkish Gulf of Saros.

On 3 August 1935, as the Turkish fortifications at Kirklareli neared completion, Bulgaria's War Council met in emergency session and decided on immediate construction of strong permanent fortifications around the southern Bulgarian town of Haskovo. The Bulgarian perception of threat rose further when the Turkish army began carrying out maneuvers in Eastern Thrace near the border. On 23 August the Turkish minister to Bulgaria informed his government of the growing anxiety in Bulgaria regarding Turkish military maneuvers, especially in view of the fact that they were attended by all high-ranking Turkish officers. He also reported on the growing resentment at the anti-Bulgarian articles in the Turkish press. By 25 August the concentration of Turkish troops on the Bulgarian border was reported to have reached the strength of three army corps.

On 31 August, although half of the Turkish army was on maneuvers, the crisis ended with a visit to Sofia by Turkish Foreign Minister Aras resulting in a joint statement disapproving anti-Bulgarian attacks in the Turkish press.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Albrecht-Carrié 1965; Schuman 1939.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


