CRISNO 446

ETHIOPIA-ERITREA II

Background:

A crisis occurred between Ethiopia and Eritrea from 4 October 2005 to 11 January 2006 as a result of Eritrea’s restriction of UN peacekeepers along the disputed border between the two countries. The crisis faded after both sides reduced their high concentrations of troops along the border in mid-January.

Background and Pre-crisis: Since the 1998-2000 border war (see Case #424), the relations between Ethiopia and Eritrea have remained tense. The Algiers Agreement signed at the end of the war created a demilitarized 25km Temporary Security Zone (TSZ) within Eritrean territory to be monitored by UN peacekeepers. In 2002, the independent boundary commission awarded the disputed town of Badme to Eritrea. However, Ethiopia has been obstructing the implementation of the decision since 2002. Eritrea considers the continued presence of Ethiopian troops in the disputed territory to be a violation of its sovereignty and resents the UN for not pressuring Ethiopia to accept the final decision. Each country has accused the other of hostile intentions and maintained volatile relations with the UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE). Since December 2004, Ethiopia has constantly increased its troop levels along the border with Eritrea, resulting in a further deterioration of relations between the two countries.

Summary:

Frustrated by the reluctance of the UN to pressure Ethiopia to accept the border ruling, Eritrea banned all helicopter flights by the UN peacekeepers in Eritrean airspace on 4 October 2005. This decision restricted the operational ability of the UN mission to check Eritrea’s military movements along the border and triggered a crisis for Ethiopia. Following the ban on helicopter flights, Eritrea also restricted UN ground patrols which decreased the operational ability of the UN even further. On 19 October 2005, Ethiopia accused Eritrea of boosting military activity along the border by increasing the number of soldiers on the Eritrean side. Ethiopia’s accusation triggered a crisis for Eritrea and increased the likelihood of a violent conflict between the two countries.

Immediately after Ethiopia’s accusations, Eritrea started to re-position troops and armaments along the border. Ethiopia responded in kind and moved more soldiers and military hardware to the border. The growing tension around the TSZ and the exchange of accusations at a high official level between the two countries raised the risk of a new war according to UN officials. At the beginning of November, the UN Secretary General and the head of the AU Commission Konare urged restraint and called on both sides to halt military actions that may be misinterpreted by the other side. These appeals were ignored by both countries. While Ethiopia defended its troop deployments along the border, Eritrea denied massing troops along the TSZ. The UN Security Council decided to send Japanese envoy Oshima on a fact-finding tour of the region. Oshima arrived in the Ethiopian capital on November 7 for talks with both Ethiopia and Eritrea to defuse the escalating tension. Oshima was unable to meet with Eritrean officials, but he received assurances that Ethiopia would not be the first to fire in the event of a border conflict. However, Ethiopia continued to object the boundary commission’s ruling on Badme. Eritrea, on the other hand, insisted that it is the UN’s responsibility to pressure Ethiopia into abiding by the boundary commission’s decision.

On November 23, the UN Security Council passed a resolution which threatened sanctions against both countries if either used force to settle their border dispute or if Eritrea failed to lift restrictions on the movements of UN peacekeepers. The resolution demanded that both parties return to the 16 December 2004 levels of deployment. Two days later, at a UN-hosted meeting in Nairobi chaired by the commander of the UNMEE, senior military officers from Ethiopia and Eritrea exchanged accusations and gave no hint that they would comply with the UN Security Council demands. However, a week later Ethiopia indicated that it might be willing to comply with the UN resolution. Eritrea, on the other hand, did not indicate any willingness to cooperate.

On December 7, Eritrea demanded the immediate withdrawal from its territory of nationals of the US, Canada, Russia and the EU countries serving with the UNMEE. The UN refused to comply with Eritrea’s decision to expel part of the UN mission. Following this incident, UN Secretary-General Annan sent two senior UN officials to Eritrea and Ethiopia in order to reduce the tension between the two sides and to assess the impact of Eritrea’s decision to expel part of UN monitoring forces. The UN undersecretary-general for peacekeeping, Guehenno, and his adviser Kumar arrived in Ethiopia on December 11. They met with Ethiopian Prime Minister Zenawi and warned that a minor misunderstanding could escalate into an open conflict. As a result of this trip, on December 13, Ethiopia agreed to redeploy its forces on the border with Eritrea to positions they held before December 2004. The Eritrean side did not agree to meet with the UN Secretary General envoy. After Eritrea’s refusal to meet Guehenno, the UN agreed to the temporary evacuation of 180 UNMEE staff.

Minor clashes between Ethiopian and Eritrean forces took place sporadically along the disputed border throughout the entirety of the crisis. The clashes declined after Ethiopia started to move some troops back from the border on December 23. At the beginning of January, both sides reduced their troops along the border. On January 11, UNMEE described these developments as positive and reported that the tension along the border had drastically decreased. However, Eritrea’s restrictions on UN helicopter flights and movement of UN peacekeepers remained in place. Although the crisis faded by mid-January, the dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea was not resolved. There was no definitive outcome to the crisis and the two countries continued to have volatile relations throughout 2006.

The role of the US was limited during the crisis. In early November 2005, US Undersecretary of State for political affairs, Nicholas Burns, contacted Ethiopian Prime Minister Zenawi to discuss the border dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea. Later that month, Donald Yamamoto, the US deputy assistant secretary of state for African affairs, traveled to Addis Ababa to meet with Ethiopian officials and attempt to cool the rising border tensions. These US efforts were ignored by Eritrea and widely considered to be ineffective in helping to terminate the crisis.

Both the involvement of the UN Secretary General and the Security Council contributed to the termination of the crisis between Ethiopia and Eritrea. While the threat of sanctions by the Security Council affected the behavior of crisis actors to some extent, it was mainly the activities of the UN undersecretary-general for peacekeeping, Guehenno, which led to a rapid termination of the crisis. Although the mediation offer of the undersecretary-general was not accepted by Eritrea, Guehenno’s talks with the Ethiopian side convinced Ethiopian officials to accept the Security Council’s demands. As a result of these negotiations, Ethiopia pulled back its troops and Eritrea responded in kind terminating the crisis.

References:

Lexis-Nexis Online, Keesing’s Record of World Events Online, CIA World Fact Book Online, International Crisis Group.

Last Updated: 3/17/2008


