CRISNO 111

TURKISH STRAITS

Background:

A second post-World War II crisis over the Straits, arising from renewed Soviet demands for a revision of the Montreux Convention, occurred for Turkey and the United States between 7 August and 26 October 1946.

Summary:

The crisis trigger for Turkey and the United States was a Note from the USSR on 7 August 1946, requesting a revised international regime for the Straits. Simultaneously, the Soviets began naval maneuvers in the Black Sea and a concentration of forces in the Caucasus. Turkey viewed this as additional pressure from the Soviets for bases on its territory. On 11 August Moscow broadcast the content of a series of documents allegedly found in the archives of the German foreign office that recorded violent anti-Soviet statements by Turkey's former Premier and President Inönü. Ankara denied the authenticity of these documents two days later. The U.S. major response occurred on 20 August 1946: after meetings between President Truman and his top advisors, Washington opted for a show of force by sending army and naval forces into the area. With U.S. backing, Turkey was able to give a firm response on 22 August resisting the Soviet demands, while expressing a willingness to participate with all the original signatories in a conference to revise the Montreux Convention. Another Soviet Note followed on 24 September, milder in tone. On 9 October the United States sent a Note to the Soviet Union reaffirming its support for Turkey. The U.K. did the same.

Increased U.S. and British naval activity in the region preceded Turkey's total rejection of Soviet demands, which was contained in a Note to Moscow on 18 October. On the 26th the USSR relented: word was passed to London that, in the Soviets' opinion, a conference on the Straits at that time was premature, thereby terminating the crisis for both Turkey and the U.S. Moreover, once Soviet troops had begun to withdraw from Iran (see Case #108--Azerbaijan, in Multiregional PCs: Iran/USSR), there was a growing feeling in Turkey that the USSR would not use force to achieve its goal relating to the Straits.

The UN played no role. And violence was not used by any crisis actor.

References:

See sources for Case #114; and Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) 1946; de Luca 1977.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


