CRISNO 29

HIJAZ-NAJD WAR

Background:

Najd and Hijaz, two desert kingdoms in the Arabian Peninsula, precursors to Sa'udi Arabia, experienced a crisis-war from 7 March 1924 until 19 December 1925.

Background and Pre-crisis Najd is the vast, sparsely populated, northern region of the Arabian Peninsula. Although formally a province of the Ottoman Empire from 1517 until the end of World War I, it was largely ignored by the Sublime Porte in Constantinople. It was unified by the orthodox Wahabi Muslims in the eighteenth century and was ruled continuously by the al-Sa'ud dynasty except for a decade beginning in the early 1890s. Its capital, Riyadh, was reconquered in 1902 by Sa'ud Ibn 'Abd-ul-'Aziz, who then steadily extended the Saudi domain to the entire Arabian Peninsula except the south--Yemen, Hadhramaut, and Oman.

Hijaz comprised the western region of Arabia. It extends from the Gulf of Aqaba and the border of the Kingdom of Jordan to 'Asir with an area of 120,000-150,000 square miles. The home of Islam's two holiest cities, Mecca and Medina, Hijaz was the heartland of the Muslim faith. It also possessed political and economic importance, the latter due to substantial revenue deriving from the continuous flow of Muslim pilgrims and from Jidda, the main port of Arabia on the Red Sea.

Like Najd, Hijaz was an autonomous part of the Ottoman Empire for four centuries. A rebellion in 1916, part of the "Arab Revolt" against Turkish rule, led to a short-lived Kingdom of Hijaz (1916-25) under Hussein Ibn 'Ali, the Sharif of Mecca, a Hashemite and traditional rival of the Sa'udis, the great-grandfather of King Hussein of Jordan.

Tension between the two rivals for primacy in Arabia and Islam, the Saudis and the Hashemites, became acute in 1923 with clashes between Najd and Hijaz pilgrims; but the conflict was controlled by their common patron, the U.K., which had played that role since the Arab Revolt during World War I.

Summary:

Although 'Abd-ul-'Aziz sought and exploited any opportunity to extend the Sa'udi kingdom to all of Arabia, his decision to attack Hijaz was triggered by King Hussein's assumption on 7 March 1924 of the title of Caliph, which had been vacant since the end of the Ottoman Empire and had been abolished by the new secular Republic of Turkey. Hussein's move, although not recognized by the Muslim world, offended the orthodox Wahabis and especially their military core, the Ikhwan. It was perceived as a visible threat to the Sa'udi aspiration for hegemony in Arabia and primacy in Islam. The delayed Wahabi response was a military campaign against Hijaz beginning on 29 August 1924.

By 1 September Wahabi forces were at the gates of Ta'if, a summer resort for Hijaz and, later, Sa'udi Arabian notables, barely 40 kilometers from Mecca. This triggered a grave crisis for the king of Hijaz. Military resistance was in vain; and Ta'if fell on 5 September. The Wahabis advanced toward Mecca. Hussein abdicated on 3 October in favor of his son, Ali, and fled to Aqaba. Mecca was overrun on the 13th.

The Wahabis laid siege to the three remaining cities in Hijaz--Medina, Yanbu, and Jidda. The port city held out until 19 December 1925 marking the end of the crisis and the collapse of Hijaz as a state.

No great power, nor the League of Nations, was involved in this crisis.

(The Sa'udi ruler, 'Abd-ul-'Aziz, better known as Ibn Sa'ud, assumed the title, King of Hijaz and Sultan of Najd, in 1926, changing it the following year to King of Hijaz and Najd, and held the title until 1932, when the united state was renamed "The Sa'udi Arabian Kingdom.")

(A geographically related crisis focusing on 'Asir occurred a decade later [see Case #44--Saudi/Yemen War, in 1933-1934].)

References:

Benoist-Mechin 1955; Holden and Johns 1981; Iqbal 1977; Lacey 1981; Shimoni 1987; Toynbee 1927.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


