CRISNO 139

INVASION OF LAOS I

Background:

The crisis began on 24 March 1953 and faded, with no specific termination date. The two actors were France and Laos.

Pre-crisis The invasion of Laos occurred during the first Indochina long war, which had begun after the restoration of French control following World War II. Within Laos there were communist-oriented guerrilla groups, the Pathet Lao, which cooperated with the Vietminh guerrillas of Vietnam. The northern frontier of Laos was occupied by Vietminh forces in December 1952; and, for the next three months, they massed along the border. By mid-March 1953 their strength had grown to four divisions.

Summary:

The crisis trigger for France can be dated 24 March when the massing of Vietminh troops in Laos reached its peak. The trigger for Laos was the launching of a Vietminh offensive on 5 April. The French responded on 13 April by evacuating the first major town along the Laos border. The same day Laos ordered a general mobilization and appealed to the UN to halt the invasion. On the 27th Prince Souphanouvong declared the formation of a "Free Laotian Government." Vietminh forces surrounded the airfield and the fortified camp on the Plaine des Jarres and advanced toward the two Laotian capitals of Vientiane (administrative) and Luang Prabang (royal). French-Laotian troops, supplied by an extensive airlift from Saigon, clashed with the Vietminh at Sam-heva. The widely dispersed Vietminh garrisons began withdrawing to North Vietnam by mid-May, leaving behind Laotian guerrilla forces. The French proceeded to recapture the abandoned position. On 2 June two columns of French-Laotian forces advancing north and south reestablished contact between the provinces of Vientiane and Xiengkhouang. Fighting erupted and subsided and finally led to the Navarre military plan and the Battle of Dien Bien Phu the following year (see Case #145), with no precise termination date for this crisis.

There was no UN or USSR involvement. The only regional organization activity was a communiqué on 25 April by NATO citing the invasion of Laos as an example of continuing communist aggression.

References:

Buttinger 1967; Goldstein 1973; Gravel 1971, vol. I; Gurtov 1967; Hammer 1966; Lebar 1960; Stevenson 1972.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


