CRISNO 404

PAPUA NEW GUINEA-SOLOMON

Background:

These two island-states in the South Pacific experienced a crisis from 12 March until mid-September 1992.

Background The root of this crisis was an ongoing secessionist conflict between Bougainville Island and Papua New Guinea (PNG) since the late 1980s. The rebel Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) had compelled PNG forces to withdraw from their island in March 1990; but Bougainville's declaration of independence did not achieve international recognition. Negotiations between PNG and the BRA led to an accord in January 1991 to lift the crippling blockade of the island. In April 1991 PNG troops again landed on Bougainville leading to further clashes. Renewed fighting occurred in November 1991. A PNG offer of greater autonomy was rejected by the BRA, which relied on support from the Solomon Islands, an independent member of the Commonwealth since 1978.

Summary:

Internal strife in PNG acquired an interstate dimension with a PNG commando raid on the Solomon Islands on 12 March 1992, repeated on the 17th: it was designed to destroy a fuel storage depot that PNG believed was used to supply the Bougainville Revolutionary Army's campaign for independence. (This PNG perception was based upon racial and cultural affinity of the people of Bougainville and the Solomons and the geographic proximity of the two islands.)

Prime Minister Solomon Mamaloni responded with a strong diplomatic protest. The PNG Prime Minister, Rabbie Namaliu, initially denied responsibility for the raid but later apologized for the "regrettable incident" to the Solomon Islands leader. At the same time, he renewed charges of military assistance to the BRA by the Solomons regime.

Another PNG commando raid on the Solomons occurred on 12 September. Once more the Solomons lodged a strong diplomatic protest and demanded an apology and compensation. They also deployed additional troops to the Shortland Islands. Several days later the PNG prime minister deplored the raid as "an atrocious act" and promised to punish those responsible, as well as to pay compensation to the Solomons. This terminated the crisis for both parties.

(There was a modest third-party intervention: Australia, Canada, and New Zealand, along with the Solomon Islands, formed a multinational supervisory team to interrupt the Papua New Guinea blockade of Bougainville.)

One consequence of the crisis was a report on 24 September that the Solomons had requested assistance from Japan and Taiwan to construct a military base in the area. Both remained aloof. So too did the UN, the U.S., and the USSR.

References:

Keesing's 1992.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


