CRISNO 38

CHINESE EASTERN RAILWAY

Background:

A crisis between the USSR and China over the Chinese Eastern Railway (CER) began on 10 July and ended on 22 December 1929.

Background and Pre-crisis Under the terms of a Sino-Russian secret treaty in 1896, China consented to the construction and operation of the Chinese Eastern Railway across Manchuria by the Russian-controlled Russo-Chinese bank. In 1924 an agreement was signed between the USSR and China for the joint management of the CER. During the next three years the Soviets assumed near-total management of the vital railway, and proposals by the Chinese to alter the situation were rejected. Relations between the two states were strained, and an incident in 1927 in which the Soviet embassy in Peking (Beijing) was searched did not improve matters. In addition, Chinese Communist activities in the railway zone were facilitated by Soviet diplomatic channels.

On 27 May 1929 the Chinese raided the Soviet consulate in Harbin, arresting several of its officers and railway employees. Documents seized at the time were published in the Chinese press and pointed to Soviet interference in China. The provincial government, acting in the railway area on the authority of China's national government, ordered the takeover of the CER and assumed its management, occupied USSR institutions, and arrested Soviet railway officials and citizens. A formal protest by Moscow on 31 May included demands for the immediate release of prisoners and the return of documents and property that, if not met, would incur the withdrawal of diplomatic privileges to Chinese personnel in the Soviet Union.

Summary:

On 10 July 1929 a crisis was triggered for the USSR: Chinese Nationalists, in cooperation with Marshal Chang Hseuh-liang, the ruler of Manchuria, seized the Chinese Eastern Railway, arresting a number of Russian administrators of the railway and closing their offices. The Soviet ambassador responded with an ultimatum on the 13th demanding the full restoration of the status quo ante vis-à-vis the CER. The Chinese were given three days to respond and to agree to a conference to settle problems involving the railway. Perceiving a threat to its political regime, China responded to the crisis with counterdemands on 16 July. Moscow broke off diplomatic relations on the 19th and sent troops to the border. Military preparations were also made by the Chinese, who published a manifesto alleging Soviet transgressions of the 1924 agreement. Meetings between the Soviet consul in Harbin and Chinese officials took place on 24 and 28 July and 2 August. Soviet raids into Chinese territory occurred throughout the discussions. When proposals advanced by each side were rejected by the other, the crisis escalated to violence.

On 12 August Soviet troops occupied three strategic towns in China near the border. Six thousand Chinese troops were mobilized on the 15th. Serious clashes occurred. By late December the Soviet advance threatened Harbin. Under duress, China signed a protocol on 22 December 1929 capitulating to Moscow's demands. This terminated both parties' foreign policy crises and the international crisis over the Chinese Eastern Railway.

Germany approached the Soviet Union on China's behalf in August and offered its good offices to settle the dispute. In October German attempts to conciliate were once more unsuccessful. During the crisis the United States, Britain, and France sent Notes to both belligerents requesting a halt to military activities. China responded favorably, but the USSR refused any third party intervention. A Japanese recommendation for talks at the local level, too, failed to produce any results.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Cameron et al. 1952; Clyde 1958; MacNair and Lach 1955; Thorne 1972; Vinacke 1959; Wu 1950.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


