CRISNO 234

SHATT-AL-ARAB II

Background:

The second crisis for Iran and Iraq over the Shatt-al-Arab lasted from 15 April to 30 October 1969.

Summary:

Iran's crisis was triggered on 15 April 1969 when its ambassador to Baghdad was informed by Iraq's deputy foreign minister that Iraq regarded the Shatt-al-Arab as part of its territory and requested ships flying Iran's flag to lower their flag when entering the estuary. Furthermore, no Iranian nationals were to be aboard. If the demands were not met, Iraq would use force and would not allow vessels destined for Iranian ports to use the river. Iran responded on 19 April by declaring the 1937 treaty null and void and demanded its renegotiation. Iran's deputy foreign minister warned that any violation of Iran's sovereign rights would be met with full retaliation. The nullification of the 1937 treaty was the crisis trigger for Iraq. On 20 April Iraq responded by reiterating the validity of the treaty and reserved the right to take legal and legitimate action. Iran then concentrated its forces around Khorramshahr and Abadan and put its navy on full alert, while Iraqi forces were placed on alert at the port of Basra.

On 22 April, as a show of force, Iran sent a freighter through the Shatt, escorted by naval craft and protected by an umbrella of jet fighters. It was the first Iranian vessel to pass through the Shatt flying Iran's flag since the outbreak of the crisis. An Iraqi naval launch allowed the vessel to go through. This act constituted the Iraqi response to the crisis. Another escorted Iranian vessel passed through the Shatt unmolested on the 25th.

On 28 April Iraq circulated a document to UN delegates complaining of Iran's actions in the Shatt-al-Arab. This charge was answered on 5 May by Iran, which appealed to the UN Secretary-General to send a representative to Iran in order to witness the influx of Iranians expelled from Iraq who had been subjected to inhumane treatment by Iraqi authorities. Notes were also sent to the Security Council. During October the addresses to the General Assembly by the foreign ministers of both states contained accusations against one another in the Shatt-al-Arab crisis. The CENTO Ministerial Council conferred in Teheran on 26 and 27 May and issued a signed communiqué by Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, the U.K., and the U.S., disclosing discussion of the dispute.

The crisis ended on 30 October 1969 when the information ministers of Iran and Iraq decided to terminate the propaganda campaign against each other, with the hope that this would prepare the atmosphere for a peaceful settlement between the two countries. Several Middle East states attempted to mediate: Jordan, Kuwait, Sa'udi Arabia, and Turkey. Whereas Iraq was ready to accept mediation, Iran was not. A full-scale war between Iran and Iraq, catalyzed by the Shatt-al-Arab dispute, was to break out in September 1980 (See Case #317).

Neither the U.S. nor the USSR was involved in this crisis.

References:

Chubin and Zabih 1974; MEJ Chronology 1969; MER 1969-70; Ramazani 1972; Shimoni 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


