CRISNO 55

AMUR RIVER INCIDENT

Background:

A crisis between Japan and the USSR took place from 22 June to 4 July 1937.

Background and Pre-crisis The issue of sovereignty over several small islands in the Amur River between the Soviet Union and Japanese-controlled Manchuria (Manchukuo) had long been in dispute: the crisis in 1937 was the 185th incident of its kind along this border. Between August 1936 and June 1937 a series of political trials and severe purges took place in the Soviet Union. Some persons who stood trial were executed because of alleged espionage on behalf of the Japanese. Many of the top-ranking Soviet officers stationed in the Far Eastern territories were removed. Inter alia, the Japanese wished to test Soviet strength and determination, as well as its readiness for war. On 19 June 1937 a small number of Soviet troops entered the two islets of Sennufu and Bolshoi on the Amur and abducted some gold miners. The same day Soviet gunboats, which routinely patrolled the area, engaged Manchukuon forces.

Summary:

On 22 June Japan's General Staff received reports of Soviet military occupation of the disputed islands: these reports triggered a crisis for Japan. It responded on the 24th with an order to concentrate troops in the area and a protest to the Soviet consul-general at Harbin. The trigger to the crisis for the Soviet Union, on 28 June, was a demand, delivered by the Japanese ambassador in Moscow, that all Soviet forces be evacuated from the islands. On 29 June forces of Japan's Kwantung Army bombed and sank a Soviet gunboat, apparently at the initiative of the local field commander. That day Soviet negotiators indicated a willingness to remove their troops, and, on 2 July, the USSR announced that it would comply with Japanese demands. The crisis ended for both actors on 4 July, with the Soviet evacuation of the islands. Four days later the Sino/Japanese War broke out. This crisis was not brought before the League of Nations.

References:

See sources for Case #72; and Hane 1972; MacNair and Lach 1955; Vinacke 1959.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


