CRISNO 265

LEBANON CIVIL WAR

Background:

The civil war in Lebanon created a crisis for Syria from 18 January to 15 November 1976.

Background and Pre-crisis The civil war in Lebanon began in April 1975: it was the culmination of years of gradual dislocation of Lebanese society, which developed into a polarization of the Christian and Muslim communities and signaled the possibility of the disintegration of Lebanon. Syria has always maintained that Lebanon and Syria are integral parts of Greater Syria and that the division of the two countries was artificially created by France to serve its colonial interests. Thus a possible partition of Lebanon was perceived by Syria as a threat to its vital security interests: first, as undermining Syria's image as the guardian of Arab nationalism and unity; and second, as giving Israel a pretext to move into southern Lebanon and occupy the area up to the Litani River. Syria's primary interest in 1975 was to mediate among the conflicting parties in Lebanon. Toward the end of that year victories by the Christian militias seemed to heighten the possibility of a partition of Lebanon. On 7 January 1976 Syria threatened to intervene militarily after the Christian Maronite militia, on 4 January, besieged the Palestinian camps, Tel al-Za'atar and Jisr al-Basha, in a concerted drive to clear the region of "alien" elements.

Summary:

On 18 January 1976 Lebanese Christian forces triggered a crisis for Syria when they overran Karantina, al-Maslakh, and al-Naba's, predominantly Muslim towns in the self-declared "Christian Heartland," north of Beirut, and proceeded to expel their residents. The following day Syria responded by dispatching to Lebanon the Yarmouk Brigade of the Syrian controlled Palestine Liberation Army, in response to appeals by Lebanese leftist Muslim leaders. On the 19th as well, Syria sent a delegation to Lebanon to try to impose an effective cease-fire.

Shortly after Syria came to the rescue of the Muslim Lebanese and Palestinians, Syrian threat perceptions began to change. President Asad had made a proposal to resolve the internal Lebanon conflict: retain the confessional system but replace the numerical proportionate basis of allocating political power with equality between the Christian and Muslim communities. This would entail a 50-50 representation in the legislature and a reduction of the Maronite president's authority in favor of the Sunni Muslim prime minister. The plan was accepted by the Christians but was rejected by the Muslims and the Palestinians. Thus Syria no longer saw the Christians as the catalyst to a Lebanese partition; rather, it was now the Muslim leftists and their PLO allies who, on the momentum of successive victories, threatened the fragile Lebanese equilibrium.

On 28 March Syria decided to place an embargo on all arms supplies to the leftist-PLO coalition. By 9 April Syria was sending clear signals to the leftists that Syrian troops concentrating on the Lebanese border would be brought into use if their intransigence persisted. On 1 June Syrian troops poured into Lebanon in order to force a resolution of the conflict. The immediate--and successful--goal was the relief of some Christian villages under siege. The Syrian advance against the Muslim leftist-PLO forces continued throughout the summer. On 28 September Syria decided to inflict a military defeat on them to be followed immediately by peace talks in which the Syrian point of view would be imposed. A concerted offensive, in alliance with Christian forces but restrained so as not to destroy the Muslim-PLO camp entirely, smashed all Palestinian forces in the Lebanese mountains. By 30 September all opposition in Lebanon to Syria's hegemony had been overcome and partition had been averted. However, the crisis lingered until an Arab Deterrent Force was authorized by the Arab League in October, composed of 20,000 to 30,000 Syrian troops, which occupied the center of Beirut on 15 November. Shortly thereafter, Syria reverted to its traditional pro-Palestinian stance after tension and clashes between Syrian and Christian forces, supporting the PLO against the Israeli-backed Christian militias.

Secretary-General Waldheim offered his good offices for UN mediation, but it was refused. U.S. activity consisted of verbal approbation of Syrian actions and serving as a conduit between Syria and Israel, relaying intentions and information. The USSR supported Syria until the 1 June invasion--to which it was strongly opposed. Arms deliveries to Damascus were halted. Syria's careful efforts not to provoke Israel by crossing the "Red Line" of the Litani River kept the latter out of the Lebanon fighting. During the crisis an Iraqi troop movement to the Syrian border precipitated another crisis for Syria from 9 to 17 June (see Case #269--Iraqi Threat).

References:

A. I. Dawisha 1978, 1980; Heller 1980; MECS 1975-76, 1976-77; MEJ Chronology 1976; Meo 1977; Rabin 1979; Vocke 1978.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


