CRISNO 422

UNSCOM I

Background:

Iraq and the United States were engaged in the fourth crisis of the protracted conflict between the two states from 13 November 1997 through 23 February 1998.

Background

As one of the conditions of the ceasefire agreement that ended the Gulf War, UN Security Council Resolution 687 called for Iraq to give up all weapons-of-mass-destruction capability. This resolution called for the creation of the UN Special Commission (UNSCOM) to oversee and assist with the elimination of Iraq's chemical and biological weapons programs, while the International Atomic Energy Agency was tasked with working with Iraq on dismantling its nuclear program.

While Iraq accepted the provisions of Res. 687 and the authority of UNSCOM in April 1991, it soon became clear that UNSCOM inspectors would experience many obstacles, including repeated efforts by the Iraqi government to deny inspectors access to suspected weapons sites. Between the summer of 1991 and the summer of 1997, the UN Security Council passed seven resolutions demanding that Iraq cooperate fully with UNCSOM inspectors and make clear and transparent efforts to destroy its chemical and biological weapons programs. (See UN Security Council Resolutions 699 (1991), 707 (1991), 715 (1991), 949 (1994), 1051 (1996), 1060 (1996), and 1115 (1997).) While UNSCOM's inspection efforts are repeatedly thwarted by the Iraqi government, inspectors did find sufficient evidence during this period to confirm global suspicions that Iraq had developed an offensive biological weapons program and that they had actively pursued chemical agents as well.

In early October 1997, Richard Butler, the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM, submitted to the Security Council the semi-annual review of the commission's work in Iraq. The report indicated that Iraqi officials continued to prevent inspections throughout the country and that Iraq had yet to offer a "remotely credible" account of its weapons programs. While Iraq denied the assessment contained in Butler's report, the Security Council began negotiations to determine what further sanctions can and should be levied against Iraq. On 23 October 1997, the Security Council passed Resolution 1134, threatening a travel ban on Iraqi officials and suspension of discussions about lifting economic sanctions against Iraq if the regime continued to fail to cooperate with UNSCOM. Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, replied to the resolution by calling for the exit from Iraq of all US personnel working with UNSCOM, as these personnel were considered to be a direct threat to Iraq's national security. Iraq soon rescinded this demand, but the US government continued to work with the Security Council to ensure that "firm action" be taken against Iraq.

On 12 November 1997, the Security Council unanimously passed Resolution 1137 which, among other things, again demanded from Iraq "immediate unconditional access" for UNSCOM inspectors to all potential weapons sites and imposed the previously threatened travel ban on Iraqi officials who had disrupted the work of UNSCOM.

Summary:

On 13 November 1997, the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) expelled all US inspectors working with UNSCOM. This response by the RCC to passage of Security Council Resolution 1137 triggered a crisis for the United States. The US's major response the following day was to mobilize its military forces in the Persian Gulf. On 14 November 1997, US President Bill Clinton sent the US aircraft carrier George Washington to the region and accepted UK's offer to send an additional carrier to the Mediterranean Sea as a "precautionary measure." On 20 November, Clinton ordered additional military aircraft, including B-1 bombers to the Gulf. The rapid mobilization of US forces triggered a crisis for Iraq.

Several international actors tried to work with Iraqi officials, especially Deputy Prime Minister Aziz, in an effort to defuse the crisis. Most notably, Russian Foreign Minister Yevgeny Primakov worked with the RCC which, on 19 November, approved a Russian proposal that allowed all UNSCOM inspectors into Iraq but ensured that UNSCOM's efforts demonstrate respect for Iraq's sovereignty and security. This agreement proved to be fleeting, however; in late November, Iraqi officials violated the Russian-brokered agreement, again placing conditions on which sites UNSCOM could inspect.

Iraq's major response to this crisis occurred on 13 January 1998, when officials demanding the stoppage of the inspection work of an UNSCOM team, led by American Scott Ritter, that was investigating reports that Iraq has tested its chemical and biological weapons on prisoners. Iraq claimed that Ritter had committed acts of espionage during his time in Iraq. The expulsion of Ritter triggered another round of negotiations in the UN Security Council, which was greatly divided about how to secure Iraqi cooperation with UNSCOM. Throughout January and February 1998, the US worked to gain support for a military strike against Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq. While the UK agreed with the US plan to force Iraqi compliance with Security Council resolutions, the remaining permanent members of the Security Council-France, China, and Russia-favored a diplomatic resolution and argued against the use of force.

This crisis came to an end on 23 February 1998. While negotiations between Richard Butler and Tariq Aziz in late January, and additional mediation efforts by Russian officials in early February, had failed to resolve the crisis, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan traveled to Baghdad on 20 February to attempt to carve out an agreement between Iraq and the UN that would resolve the crisis. On 23 February, Annan and Aziz signed a "memorandum of understanding" (MOU) that re-affirmed the authority and mandate of UNSCOM and provided for inspectors' access to what Iraq had deemed "presidential" or "sovereign" sites. The MOU specified the procedures which UNSCOM inspectors would follow in order to gain access to these sovereign sites. President Clinton gave provisional endorsement of the agreement, noting that US would continue to exert military pressure on Iraq until it complied fully with the terms of the new agreement. On 2 March 1998, the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1154, endorsing the provisions of the MOU between Iraq and the United Nations.

References:

Kessing's Record of World Events Online Lexis Nexis Online (Washington Post, Agence France Presse) United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) website: http://www.un.org/Depts/unscom/

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


