CRISNO 303

AFGHANISTAN INVASION

Background:

The Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the United States were enmeshed in a lengthy international crisis marking the onset of the prolonged war over Afghanistan (1979-91). The crisis lasted from mid-March 1979 until 28 February 1980.

Background and Pre-crisis Two crucial events preceded the Afghanistan Invasion crisis and war. The last King of Afghanistan, Mohammad Zahir, was overthrown in a coup on 17 July 1973; and a republic was proclaimed by his first cousin and brother-in-law, Mohammad Daoud Khan, who had served as Prime Minister from 1953 to 1963. Daoud, in turn, along with 30 family members, was killed in a left-wing coup on 27 April 1978. This marked the end of the Mohammadzai lineage of the Durrani Pushtun, which had ruled Afghanistan for 150 years.

A revolutionary council took power in the new Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (the DRA), with three leaders representing competing factions on the left of the Afghan political system: Mohammad Taraki, leader of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), as President; Babrak Karmal as Vice-President; and Hafizullah Amin as Deputy Prime Minister.

From the outset the new left-wing rulers of Afghanistan relied upon the Soviet Union for funds to cover the payroll of civil servants, and for a commitment to support the new regime during a critical period in the modern history of Afghanistan. Because its coup lacked legitimacy within Afghanistan, the new ruling party, the PDPA, faced open rebellion during the subsequent months from a welter of antigovernment forces dominated by Muslim fundamentalists, later known as the Mujahuddin. The most serious challenge was the Herat Uprising in mid-March 1979. It was so serious that the PDPA Politburo turned to Moscow for assistance to ensure its survival.

Summary:

A crisis for the USSR was triggered by the Heart Uprising and by the PDPA appeal for urgent aid in mid-March 1979. Moscow decided at once to take whatever steps were deemed necessary to keep the Communists in power in Kabul. Operationally, the Soviets began a large-scale airlift to the PDPA regime on 26-27 March: cargo planes, light tanks, armored personnel carriers, and helicopter gun ships. General Yepishev was sent to Kabul on 5 April; and Pravda articles began to blame the U.S., Pakistan, China, and Egypt for provoking and backing the Afghan rebels.

Within the PDPA, Taraki was replaced by Amin as the dominant figure after the Heart Uprising. However, an article in Pravda in mid-July clearly indicated that the Soviets were seeking a replacement for Amin. This triggered a crisis for Afghanistan. Amin then embarked on a hundred bloody days of repression to save his own position. Moscow, increasingly concerned about the ability of its client regime to survive, made the critical decision to invade Afghanistan, on 27 November 1979. Implementation began on 24 December, when troops of the 105th airborne division began to land at Kabul airport.

By 27 December Amin was dead. He was succeeded by the most loyal pro-Soviet Afghan leader, Babrak Karmal, long-time head of one of the two dominant PDPA factions, the Parcham (Flag) Group, formed by him in 1967 against the then-dominant Khalq Group. The two groups had renewed their cooperation in July 1977 to oppose the Daoud regime. But factional rivalry broke out again soon after the overthrow of Daoud and remained a constant until the collapse of the PDPA regime amid the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan in 1991. The installation of Karmal as leader of Afghanistan marked the end of the USSR's and Afghanistan's initial crisis--but not the international crisis as a whole or the Afghan War; from that time on, until 1991, Afghanistan under Babrak Karmal was an appendage of the USSR in the Afghan War.

For both Pakistan and the U.S. a crisis was triggered by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan on 24 December. An emergency meeting of the U.S.'s National Security Council was convened to cope with what President Carter termed the most serious superpower crisis of his presidency. The U.S. response took the form of a series of measures announced on 2 January 1980. The U.S. blocked the export of 17 million tons of grain to the Soviet Union, then facing a severe food shortage; stopped the sale of computers and other high tech equipment to the USSR; reduced the permissible catch by the Soviet fishing fleet in U.S. waters from 350,000 tons to 75,000 tons; delayed the opening of a Soviet consulate in New York; postponed the renegotiation of a cultural agreement with the Soviet Union, then under consideration; boycotted the Moscow Olympics in 1980; reassured the Pakistanis of U.S. security support; and visibly increased U.S./ China cooperation, including the sale of military equipment to Beijing.

That U.S. response also marks the beginning of the winding down of its Afghanistan Invasion crisis. The main reason was that, at the end of 1979, the U.S. administration and public opinion became preoccupied with the hostage crisis in Iran (see Case #309--U.S. Hostages in Iran, in Middle East: Non-PCs). Termination of the U.S.'s Afghanistan crisis is identified with a decision on 28 February 1980 to pursue a two-track policy: return to normal relations with the USSR; and continue a steady flow of arms aid, via Pakistan, to the many groups of anti-Soviet Afghan guerrillas until the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan.

Pakistan's generals perceived the Soviet invasion as a graver threat than did the U.S., namely, the distinct possibility that the Soviets would invade Pakistan as well. For that reason and because of its geographic proximity to the USSR they responded much more cautiously than the U.S.: on 29 December 1979 Pakistan delivered a strongly worded message to Moscow condemning the invasion and calling for the immediate withdrawal of Soviet forces. At that early stage, however, Pakistan took no concrete action, unlike its later crucial role as a conduit for sustained U.S. covert operations in support of the Mujahuddin.

Washington, aware of Pakistan's sense of insecurity, especially because of the long-standing (1971) Indo-Soviet military alliance, sought to provide reassurance to General Zia, Pakistan's leader: this took the form of an offer of limited military aid, at a high level meeting with Carter's National Security Advisor, Brzezinski, in Rawalpindi on 2 February 1980. This marked the end of Pakistan's crisis.

The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan also generated concern in many states, notably Iran and the PRC. The UN Security Council and General Assembly addressed this conflict frequently, in 1979-80 and throughout the long war, which dragged on for more than a decade. So too did many regional and interregional organizations, including ASEAN, the European Community, NATO, the Non-Aligned Group, and the Islamic Conference. Frequent resolutions were passed by these organizations calling for the withdrawal of Soviet forces--but to no avail until 1991 when the Soviet Union, less than a year before its own disintegration into 15 independent states, concluded that the costs of continued occupation of Afghanistan vastly outweighed the benefits.

References:

Amer 1992; Amstutz 1986; Arnold 1985; Bradsher 1983; Brzezinski 1983; Carter 1982; Collins 1986; Cordesman and Wagner 1990, vol. 3; Dobrynin 1995; Hammond 1984; Hosmer and Wolfe 1983; Newell 1981; Nyrop and Seekins 1986; Vance 1983; Vertzberger 1982.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


