CRISNO 450

NORTH KOREA NUCLEAR III

Background:

The North Korean Nuclear Crisis III began on 5 May 2006 and lasted till 3 October 2007. North Korea and the United States were the two main crisis actors. China, Japan, South Korea and Russia were also involved in the crisis. See also crises #408 and 441.

Background and Pre-Crisis:

The first three rounds of the Six Party Talks indicated that both North Korea and United States were willing to peacefully resolve the nuclear dispute. These talks, however, yielded more procedural gains than substantive benefits. The fourth round of talks that began on 25 July 2005 showed more flexibility on the part of the United States. Assistant Secretary Christopher Hill was given the green light to conduct direct bilateral negotiations with North Korea. Despite this, both sides could not agree on core substantial issues. Frustrated with the lack of progress, the United States decided to terminate the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organisation (KEDO), the consortium that was set up after the North Korean Nuclear Crisis I (see case #408) and was intended to provide North Korea with heavy oil and construct light water reactors (KEDO had suspended its operations in North Korea during the North Korean Nuclear Crisis II (case # 441).

Washington also decided to put financial pressure on North Korea. In September 2005, the Macao-based Banco Delta Asia (BDA) was instructed to freeze North Korean assets and stop its dealings with Pyongyang or risk losing access to U.S. financial markets. The United States announced that its action was just the result of a routine laundering and counterfeiting investigation. In response, North Korea refused to return to the negotiation table till such time this issue was cleared up. It claimed that about $25 million of its assets were frozen at BDA. The fifth round of the Six Party Talks in November 2005 made no progress as this financial freeze overshadowed the nuclear issue. At this point, the negotiations seemed to largely fizzle out and end in a stalemate.

Summary:

On 5 May 2006, however, the United States obtained intelligence that North Korea was transporting a missile to a launch site. This information triggered a crisis for the United States. A few days after, North Korea announced that it intended to carry out a missile test. United States denounced DPRK's decision and began to explore ways to restart the stalled Six Party Talks. It did not, however, budge on removing its sanctions against financial institutions that do business with Pyongyang. In an effort to pressure North Korea against conducting a missile test, KEDO officially terminated its light water reactor project in North Korea in early June. When Pyongyang, however, invited the United States for talks to resolve the nuclear issue, these overtures were rebuffed and the U.S. Ambassador to South Korea warned the DPRK that it would face repercussions if it went ahead with the missile test.

Meanwhile, many other countries also spotted a North Korean rocket on a launch pad and intelligence information about possible fuelling work surfaced around mid-June. While Japan sided with the United States on sanctioning DPRK further, South Korea and China called for the resumption of the Six Party Talks. At the same time, United States attempted to get China to dissuade North Korea; China urged North Korea not to a launch a long-range missile but Pyongyang ignored the Chinese request and upped the ante declaring that it would respond to a U.S. military strike with nuclear war. Towards the end of June, there was a flurry of diplomatic activity to reduce tension in the peninsula but on 5 July 2006 DPRK test-fired its Taepodong II long-range missile as well as six other medium and short-range missiles. Although the test failed, it was a clear indication that the North Korea still possessed offensive capabilities.

In response to the missile test, Japan requested an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council and called for sanctions against North Korea. In a unanimous vote on 15 July 2006, the Security Council adopted Resolution 1695 which demanded that the DPRK halt all nuclear activity and unconditionally return to the negotiation table. It also called on other member countries to take efforts to stop the transfer of nuclear material and related technology to North Korea. At the same time, it noted that negotiations were the most appropriate way to resolve the crisis. This undivided Security Council vote triggered the crisis for North Korea; it immediately rejected the U.N. resolution and claimed that its missile test was a sovereign act intended to protect itself from an external threat.

After its missile test, North Korea faced increasing isolation from the international community. Humanitarian assistance from South Korea was suspended and some countries (Australia, Vietnam, Mongolia, Singapore and China) also froze North Korean assets following U.N. resolution 1695. On 3 October 2006, North Korea escalated the crisis through an announcement that it intended to conduct a nuclear weapons test. Despite international pressure, DPRK North Korea conducted its first nuclear test on 9 October 2006. Both the United States and South Korea confirmed DPRK's test after radioactive debris was detected in air samples around the site.

In response to the nuclear test, the United States and Japan championed U.N. resolution 1718 that called on DPRK not to escalate the situation by conducting more nuclear tests, and dismantle its missile program in a "complete, verifiable and irreversible manner". In addition, it wanted member states to prevent any sale of nuclear related material to Pyongyang and also step up inspection of North Korean shipping vessels at their ports. The Security Council unanimously adopted this resolution, and is seen as one of the strongest sanctions against Pyongyang. However, both China and Russia pushed for the inclusion of a clause that would prevent the implementation of the resolution with military force. The Security Council also formed a committee to monitor the actions of member states in implementing the tenets of the resolution. Notably, the resolution was passed after only six days of discussion (compared to the usual eleven), an indication that the defiance of North Korea in the face of international pressure made it easier for the Security Council members to agree on the text of the resolution.

About three weeks after North Korea conducted its nuclear test, it agreed to return to the Six Party Talks. Meanwhile, the United States, Japan and South Korean negotiators also met to form a consensus on how to negotiate with Pyongyang. Over the next few months, North Korea maintained that the release of its assets at BDA was a precondition to further negotiations. Bogged down in both Iraq and Afghanistan, the United States changed course and agreed to release on Pyongyang's assets at BDA; it also allowed North Korea to sell arms to Ethiopia in January 2007.

A breakthrough in negotiations was achieved on 13 February 2007. North Korea consented to the shutdown of the Yongbyon nuclear reactor and agreed to permit IAEA inspectors to monitor the site within 60 days. In turn, the United States agreed to provide DPRK with 50,000 tons of heavy fuel oil, and also release North Korean assets at BDA within 30 days. There was also an agreement to discuss issues of denuclearization of the peninsula, normalization of relations between North Korea and the United States, and North Korea and Japan. This agreement reflected a change in Washington's policy towards DPRK. Through December 2006 and January 2007, United States and North Korean officials met directly and held bilateral negotiations. These efforts laid the foundation to the February agreement at the Six Party Talks.

The implementation of the February agreement proceeded smoothly with two key exceptions. The United States faced hurdles in releasing the $25 million held in Macau, and the North Korea-Japanese talks failed to make any progress. In the former case, an intermediary was required as Daedong Credit Bank, the largest BDA account holder, refused to directly release the funds to Pyongyang. This proved difficult since no bank wanted to receive the North Korean assets. It was only in June 2007 that Pyongyang received the funds that were frozen at BDA via a Russian bank. Soon after, North Korea then announced that it would implement its part of the February agreement.

On 12 July 2007, North Korea shutdown the Yongbyon reactor and the IAEA issued a statement acknowledging Pyongyang's cooperation. In response, North Korea received 50,000 tons of fuel oil from South Korea. Meanwhile negotiators worked to achieve further progress in the nuclear talks. The Six Party Talks resumed in early August focusing on the dismantling of DPRK's nuclear weapons program. A team of U.S. experts also visited North Korea to survey their nuclear facilities and discuss the disabling of the Yongbyon reactor.

On 3 October 2007, the Six Party Talks sealed the second phase of the agreement on the nuclear issue with North Korea. Pyongyang agreed to dismantle its nuclear facilities and also declare its nuclear programs by the end of the year. In return, the United States also pledged to remove DPRK from the list of countries that support terrorism. This agreement marked the end of the third nuclear crisis between the United States and North Korea.

References:

Keesing's Online; New York Times; Economist; Lexis-Nexis Academic; BBC News; CNN International Crisis Group 2006, 2007

Last Updated: 2/6/2009


