CRISNO 145

DIEN BIEN PHU

Background:

The crisis over Dien Bien Phu for France, the U.S., and the U.K. lasted from 13 March to 21 July 1954.

Background and Pre-crisis France's strategy in the first Indochina War (1946-54) changed in early 1953 when a new commander, Henri Navarre, arrived in its Southeast Asia colony. Laos had been invaded by the communist-led Vietminh (see Case #139--Invasion of Laos I); and the French sought proof of their ability to remain in Indochina before the scheduled May 1954 Geneva Conference on Indochina. The new strategy consisted of regrouping and reinforcing local forces and areas held by the French and opening areas held by the Vietminh. This plan was not successful.

Dien Bien Phu lay in a flat valley surrounded by Vietminh-occupied hills on the entrance road to Laos and at the crossroads of three other roads. Throughout the winter of 1953-54 the French fortified the area. The plan was to draw the Vietminh forces to Dien Bien Phu for a showdown battle. Both forces underestimated the strength of their adversary.

Summary:

On 13 March 1954 the Vietminh launched their first major offensive against Dien Bien Phu, triggering a crisis for France. By 17-18 March the surrounding French defensive positions had been taken. France's major response, on the 20th, was an appeal to its allies for increased aid and the threat of strong military action, to be used as a bargaining chip in an anticipated negotiated settlement. This appeal--the call for direct and immediate U.S. involvement in the war--triggered a crisis for the United States.

French General Ely met with the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff on 21 and 24 March and with President Eisenhower on the 22nd. Matters involving the supply of U.S. bombers and ground strategy were discussed. The U.S.'s initial response on 29 March took the form of a speech by Secretary of State Dulles, stressing the vital importance of Indochina to U.S. security; and he proposed that the U.S. and its allies meet the communist threat with undefined "united action." The next day the second Vietminh offensive began.

Strategy discussions were held by the U.S. Joint Chiefs from 29 March to 3 April. A plan, "Operation Vulture," was proposed by Admiral Radford, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for limited tactical nuclear air strikes against Vietminh positions around Dien Bien Phu by the Seventh Fleet then positioned in the Philippines. The U.S. president rejected this proposal. The need to strengthen France's will to fight was emphasized. There was also a plan to dispatch seven armored divisions--contingent upon the U.S. being allowed to train the South Vietnamese forces. This did not appeal to either France or the U.K.

The U.K.'s crisis was triggered on 11 April by Dulles's arrival in London, posing a threat of pressure for direct British participation in the Indochina War. The same day another Vietminh attack brought its forces within a quarter of a mile of the French stronghold, cutting off the use of its airstrip and preventing the evacuation of the wounded, as well as the arrival of supplies. In London Dulles reiterated that his plan for united action was not designed to prejudice the upcoming Geneva talks on Indochina, scheduled to begin on 8 May. On 13 April Dulles and Prime Minister Eden issued a statement referring to a regional collective defense arrangement, under the UN Charter, which would be considered at the Geneva Conference. A similar U.S.-France statement was issued the next day.

On 21 April General Navarre informed Paris that Dien Bien Phu could not hold out unless there were allied air attacks on Vietminh supply routes. Dulles, in Paris for a NATO meeting, met with Eden and heard Prime Minister-Foreign Minister Bidault's request for air strikes. The U.S. refused to act without U.K. cooperation, which Eden would not grant. U.S. aid was formally requested by France on 25 April. A plan was formulated by Dulles and the French ambassador to London to push for a U.K. decision.

An emergency British cabinet meeting ended with a decision that the U.K. would not join in any "precipitate military intervention" in Indochina before the Geneva Conference, along with a promise to consider a collective defense scheme in the area after the conference. On 26 April Eisenhower stated that, in view of the absence of a joint Allied response, the U.S. would not send ground forces, and no unilateral action would be taken. The U.K.'s crisis ended on 27 April with a speech by Prime Minister Churchill to the House of Commons announcing the nonintervention decision. Eisenhower made a similar statement on the 29th.

On 7 May Dien Bien Phu fell. The following day a formal cease-fire took effect; and the U.S. crisis ended. The crisis for France persisted until the signing of a bilateral armistice agreement with the Vietminh: a final declaration, on 21 July 1954, provided for the partition of Vietnam into north and south, along with a call for elections and unification two years later. This resolution came after much negotiation at the Geneva Conference -- the Indochina section of the conference began on 8 May. Molotov, Russia’s representative to the conference, put forth a five-point peace plan, suggested that Vietnam be split at the 17th parallel, and recommended that national elections be held in two years. In addition to the Russian proposals, the Chinese delegation proposed to include Canada, Poland and India as part of an international supervisory committee over Indochina. All of these proposals were accepted.

A regional collective defense arrangement, first considered at the beginning of April 1954, became the basis for the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). The UN was not involved in this intrawar crisis.

References:

Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) 1952-54, vol. XII; Anderson 1991; Artaud 1990; Billings-Yun 1988; Burke and Greenstein 1989; Davidson 1991; Eisenhower 1963; Ely 1964; Fall 1966; Giap 1962; Gibbons 1986, vol. I; Gravel 1971, vol. I; Hammer 1966; Herring and Immerman 1984; Hoopes 1973; Immerman 1987; Khong 1992; Lacouture and Devillers 1969; Laniel 1957; Navarre 1956; O'Ballance 1964; Radford and Jurika 1980; Randle 1969; Roberts 1954; Steinberg 1996.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


