CRISNO 197

MALAYSIA FEDERATION

Background:

Malaysia (then Malaya) and Indonesia were crisis actors over the issue of the Malaysia Federation from 11 February 1963 until 9 August 1965.

Background Malaya became an independent member of the (British) Commonwealth on 31 August 1957. Throughout the 1950s Great Britain attempted to create a viable political structure for its Southeast Asia colonies, to include Brunei, Malaya, Sabah (British Borneo), Sarawak, and Singapore. Plans for a Federation of Malaysia among these five political entities--an agreement was signed on 31 July 1962--conflicted with territorial claims of Indonesia and the Philippines. Hostility was first expressed in December 1962, when Indonesia covertly backed a revolt in Brunei for independence from the U.K. The rebellion was quelled within 10 days. Following this revolt, Indonesia's support became more open.

Summary:

The trigger to Malaya's crisis was President Sukarno's declaration on 11 February 1963 that Indonesia strongly opposed a Malaysia federation. Malaya responded two days later by announcing an immediate expansion of its armed forces. Talks between the U.K. and the five participating entities resulted in an agreement in London on 9 July 1963 for the formation of the Federation of Malaysia, which was signed by all except Brunei. This triggered a crisis for Indonesia. Its response, on 11 July, was a sharp statement of opposition claiming a violation of a 14 June 1963 agreement that a federation would be established only after the UN ascertained the wishes of the people involved. Tension declined on 5 August when a summit conference of Indonesian, Malayan, and Philippine heads of state agreed that the UN would ascertain the views of the people.

Tension was exacerbated on 14 September 1963 with the publication of the results indicating the people's preference for a Malaysia federation. The next day Indonesia declared that it would not recognize the Federation and recalled its ambassador to Kuala Lumpur. Malaya responded on 17 September by severing diplomatic ties with Indonesia and the Philippines. The U.S. suspended economic aid to Indonesia and sent Attorney-General Robert Kennedy to mediate, with little success – Kennedy brokered an ambiguous cease-fire that was not implemented and persuaded both sides to attend future negotiations in Bankok and Tokyo. The International Monetary Fund then withdrew its offer of promised credit. The Soviet Union gave Indonesia only lukewarm political support. China supported Indonesia throughout the crisis.

As the confrontation faded, the crisis eased. Singapore seceded from Malaysia on 9 August 1965, an event that Indonesia viewed as the beginning of the breakup of the Federation, a "face-saver." Malaya, too, perceived a victory because Indonesia's confrontation policy ended without destroying the Federation.

UN involvement was limited to discussion.

References:

See sources for Case #187; and Allen 1968; Greene 1975; James and Small 1971; Mackie 1974.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


