CRISNO 127

INDONESIA INDEPENDENCE III

Background:

The last of three interrelated crises between Indonesia and the Netherlands over the former's independence occurred between 19 December 1948 and 27 December 1949.

Pre-crisis The Linggadjati and Renville Agreements of 25 March 1947 and 17 January 1948 had recognized the de facto authority of the Republic of Indonesia over Java, Sumatra, and Madura. The Dutch, nevertheless, created autonomous regions and states on those islands, thus violating the agreements. Tension began to mount again in 1948, and negotiations reached a deadlock when the Dutch tried to force a one-sided agreement. It became clear to the Indonesians that the Netherlands would once more attempt to solve the problem unilaterally by force.

Summary:

A crisis for Indonesia was triggered on 19 December 1948 when Dutch forces occupied Djakarta and other cities in Java and Sumatra, while capturing eminent Republican political leaders. The trigger for the Netherlands was a critical report to the Security Council by the Good Offices Committee on 23 December 1948, threatening the Dutch empire in Southeast Asia. Indonesia responded on 25 December by setting up an emergency government in Sumatra and appealing to Prime Minister Nehru of India, who transmitted to the Security Council the resolution adopted by the second New Delhi Conference on Indonesia, with strong recommendations for action. The Netherlands responded on the 27th by rejecting the Security Council's call for an immediate cease-fire and the transfer of sovereignty to Indonesia after free elections. On the 30th it refused to accept the cease-fire and release political prisoners.

The UN formed the United Nations Commission for Indonesia (UNCI), which included representatives from Australia, Belgium and the United States, to assist in the resolution process. At a meeting on 14 April 1949, the U.S. representative, H. Merle Cochran, proposed 17 points to be considered at a round table discussion between the UNCI and the belligerent actors, held from 23 August to 2 November 1949. Additional international pressure--from the second New Delhi Conference, an Arab League resolution calling for a Dutch cease-fire, and intense U.S. pressure--finally convinced the Netherlands to comply. The crisis ended for both actors on 27 December 1949, when Queen Juliana signed a formal act transferring sovereignty over the Dutch East Indies to the Republic of Indonesia.

The Soviet Union supported Indonesia politically throughout its conflict with the Netherlands, 1945-49. The U.S., on the other hand, changed from supporting the Netherlands to pressing them to sign the Renville Agreement, to securing Dutch compliance with UN resolutions by threatening to suspend U.S. aid.

References:

See sources for Cases #109 and #116.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


