CRISNO 440

IRAQ REGIME CHANGE

Background:

From 12 September 2002 to 1 May 2003, the U.S., U.K. and Iraq were engaged in an international crisis that escalated to total war and the fall of Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq.

Background

Terrorist attacks against the United States on 11 September 2001 created a strong sense of vulnerability in the U.S. against the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, especially to terrorist groups in the Islamic world. The fact that Iraqi President Saddam Hussein had not allowed UN inspectors (UNMOVIC) into Iraq since the 1998 conflict (see Cases #422 and #429 -- UNSCOM I and UNSCOM II), had a history of using chemical weapons against Iran and the Kurds, and had begun developing a nuclear weapons program that was revealed following the Gulf War (case #393 - Gulf War) made Iraq a state of paramount concern to the U.S. Although there was never any strong evidence that explicitly linked Iraq to support for Al Qaeda or the 11 September attacks, Iraq was seriously discussed as a potential threat to the U.S. as early as 15 September 2001, when a U.S. war council met at Camp David.

The U.S. first responded to its security concerns by invading Afghanistan, overthrowing the Taliban regime and destroying as much of the Al Qaeda infrastructure as possible (see Case #434). The conflict in Afghanistan had started winding down by December 2001, and the U.S. turned its attention to other potential threats across the globe. Even before the war in Afghanistan had run its course, President Bush reportedly directed Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld to draw up plans for military action against Iraq on 21 November 2001. On 28 December, General Tommy Franks reportedly gave President Bush his first briefing on the plans for a potential war against Iraq.

In President Bush's State of the Union speech on 29 January 2002, three potential threats against the U.S. were identified as constituting an "Axis of Evil." The three potential threats were Iraq, Iran and North Korea. Among these three states, Iraq was emphasized as being the most egregious threat to U.S. security. This was further indicated on 6 February, when U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell called for a "regime change" in Iraq that should be pursued unilaterally if necessary. Bush's State of the Union speech triggered threat perception for Iraq. The other two components of crisis, war likelihood and time pressure, were not yet perceived by Iraq after Bush’s speech.

Iraq responded with verbal protests against the U.S. hostility, and on 4 February expressed a willingness to meet with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan. Despite the diplomatic pleas for exoneration, the U.S. continued to ratchet up the pressure on Iraq. By 14 February, reports indicate that the U.S. had begun preparations for a military conflict in Iraq involving 200,000 troops.

Over the subsequent months, there were many developments with regard to the U.S. ability to muster international support for action against Iraq. Once again, the most important source of support for American activity vis-à-vis Iraq was the U.K. Prime Minister Tony Blair pledged to support the U.S. in a conflict with Iraq on 3 March, and reaffirmed that promise on 7 September. The Anglo-American alliance served as the principal driving force for the momentum against Iraq in providing both the justification for intervention and the bulk of the forces built up in the region.

However, the U.S. and the U.K. found it difficult to secure other sources of international pressure -- through the UN or otherwise -- as they continued to advocate action against Iraq. On 30 June 2002, France and Germany declared that they would not support military action against Iraq without a UN mandate. This was significant because France and Germany were important players with regard to the UN Security Council and would have been influential in forming greater European support for military action against Iraq. President Bush's administration perhaps began to recognize the benefit of establishing a UN mandate for action, as evident when Bush spoke in front of the UN General Assembly on 12 September 2002.

Summary:

In his speech to the General Assembly on 12 September 2002, Bush announced the conditions the Iraqi regime had to meet immediately. The President called for strong multilateral action against Iraq if it did not destroy the weapons and weapons programs that had been assumed to have been present in Iraq. Thus, Bush's speech triggered a crisis for Iraq by increasing the threat perception, war likelihood and time pressure for Saddam.

Following President Bush's speech to the UN, on 16 September, Iraq announced that it would accept the unconditional return of the UNMOVIC inspectors. After generally settling on the conditions by which the inspectors would return, the UN Security Council achieved a consensus and unanimously passed Resolution 1441 on 8 November. This resolution outlined the conditions under which weapons inspectors would return to Iraq and promised "the severest consequences" for noncompliance.

The weapons inspectors arrived in Iraq on 18 November. As part of the inspections agreement, Iraq was to provide a complete declaration of their weapons capabilities. Iraq produced the 12,000 page declaration on 7 December 2002. However, after the UN chief weapons inspector Hans Blix announced that the arms declaration contained little new information since 1998, the U.S. declared Iraq to be in material breach of Resolution 1441 on 19 December. With the arms declaration's lack of satisfying information, President Bush perceived that there was a sufficient mandate to intervene. Over the next month, the Bush administration relied on Secretary of State Powell's diplomatic efforts to garner as much support as possible and perhaps find a peaceful solution. Not being satisfied with the progress on the diplomatic front, on 13 January Bush communicated his firm intention to go to war against Iraq to Powell, stating, “The inspections are not getting us there” (Woodward 2004: 270). The perception, by the Bush and Blair administrations, that diplomatic solutions to bring Iraq into compliance with Resolution 1441 had been exhausted triggered a crisis for the U.S. and the U.K.

Throughout January, the U.S. and U.K. continued deploying large-scale military forces in the Gulf in anticipation of a possible attack on Iraq, which created tensions within the UN Security Council. France and Germany were strongly against military action without a UN resolution. Blair, mainly due to domestic pressures, wanted to secure a second Security Council resolution authorizing a US-led attack on Iraq and persuaded the U.S. to seek a UN mandate. During much of February, the U.S., along with the U.K., engaged in diplomatic efforts to secure a second resolution but it became increasingly clear that these efforts were futile. France, Germany and Russia were firmly opposed to the use of force and proposed to give Iraq more time to disarm.

The UN weapons inspectors continued to work with Iraqi authorities during February. The progress reports of Hans Blix, head of UNMOVIC, were less critical of Iraqi cooperation than before. Although the inspectors found no weapons of mass destruction, Blix cautioned against jumping to a conclusion. France and Russia expressed satisfaction with the inspections regime and insisted on giving more time to Iraq to fully comply, based on Blix' progress reports about the increasing cooperation of Iraq with the inspectors as well as the progress in the destruction of al-Samoud missiles.

On 4 March, Powell declared that the U.S. was prepared to launch a war with or without a second resolution. By mid March, it was evident that a second resolution would fail to pass. The U.S., U.K. and Spain (which had been in favor of U.S.-led action) held an emergency meeting on 16 March, and at the end of the meeting they issued an ultimatum giving Saddam Hussein and his sons 48 hours to leave Iraq or face attack.

The war on Iraq, named Operation Iraqi Freedom, was launched on 20 March. The first attack was apparently aimed at killing Saddam Hussein and decapitating his regime. The goals of the war were identified as disarming the country of its weapons of mass destruction, freeing the Iraqi people and deposing Saddam Hussein and his regime. The war took longer than the U.S. and U.K. had expected. Although they were technologically inferior, Iraqi irregular units employed guerilla tactics against the U.S. and U.K. forces. Despite the unanticipated resistance of Iraqi forces, especially the irregulars, by early April the regime of Saddam Hussein collapsed. The U.S.-led coalition forces seized Baghdad on 9 April, which symbolized the fall of the regime. The whereabouts of Saddam Hussein remained unclear but several of his close associates were taken into custody. Tikrit, which was the last city not under U.S. or U.K. control, fell on 14 April. On 1 May 2003, President Bush publicly announced from the flight deck of the USS Abraham Lincoln that major combat operations were over in Iraq. Since Iraq exited the system temporarily as a sovereign state, 1 May 2003 is considered as the end of the crisis for all crisis actors even though clashes with Hussein loyalists and other insurgents continued well afterward.

(Although the whole country was under effective U.S. control by the mid-April, lawlessness and sporadic fighting with pro-Saddam irregulars interfered with the U.S. efforts to begin reconstructing post-war Iraq. The biggest challenge for the U.S. was to maintain law and order while preparing the transition to self-rule in Iraq. As the months progressed, there was growing Iraqi dissatisfaction as well as resistance to the U.S. occupation. The U.S.-led coalition forces remained in Iraq to restore degraded infrastructure and facilitate the establishment of a freely elected government. Saddam Hussein's heir-apparent sons, Udai and Qusai Hussein, were killed in a gun battle on 22 July 2003, and Saddam himself was captured by U.S. forces on December 13, 2003. The U.S. transferred sovereignty to the Iraqi people in June 2004.

The invasion forces never found any stockpiles of nuclear, biological or chemical weapons, or evidence that there had been recently a functional weapons program. After the war, rigorous reviews of the Iraq weapons programs prior to the war -- most notably the report compiled by Charles Duelfer, the Special Advisor to the Director of Central Intelligence on Iraq's Weapons of Mass Destruction -- revealed that the Hussein regime lacked any stockpiles of weapons of mass destruction and the capabilities to produce such weapons had progressively dwindled since the Gulf War.)

References:

References: Keesings Online; New York Times; Economist; Lexis-Nexis Academic; Woodward, Bob. 2004. Plan of Attack. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Last Updated: 6/22/2020


