CRISNO 121

COMMUNISM IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA

Background:

The Czech. regime crisis for the USSR and Czechoslovakia occurred from 13 to 25 February 1948.

Background and Pre-crisis The 1946 elections in Czechoslovakia resulted in a coalition government in which the Communists were the largest single party. Klement Gottwald, the Communist leader, became Prime Minister, and Jan Masaryk, son of the first President, Thomas Masaryk, and a liberal belonging to no party, was appointed Foreign Minister. A campaign of intimidation against non-Communist ministers of the Czechoslovak cabinet began in the autumn of 1947. Elections were scheduled for May 1948. A preelection poll commissioned by the Ministry of the Interior pointed to a Communist Party defeat, although there were indications of genuine Czech. sentiment toward the USSR as liberator and protector against Germany. There was, as well, some popular sympathy with Soviet economic goals.

The desperate state of the national economy, increasing police malpractice, threats from the trade unions, and other political disturbances were present in Czechoslovakia in January and February 1948. In January the Czech. coalition government accused the Czech. secret police of direct cooperation with the Soviet NKVD. On 13 February all non-communist regional commanders of the police in Prague were suddenly retired or transferred. The cabinet ordered the Communist minister of the interior to reinstate the non-communist police. As a result of the nonimplementation of this order, 12 members of the cabinet resigned in protest.

Summary:

The Czech. cabinet resignations triggered a crisis for the USSR on 13 February 1948. The Soviets, fearing that early elections would adversely affect communist supremacy in Czechoslovakia, responded on the 19th by dispatching Deputy Foreign Minister Zorin to Prague, ostensibly to supervise an incoming shipment of Soviet wheat. He immediately called upon Czech. President Benes suggesting that the USSR was interested in seeing Prime Minister Gottwald succeed in solving the cabinet crisis. This constituted the trigger for the Czech. crisis. The Czech. response, and the termination of the crisis for both actors, occurred on 25 February when Benes, fearing Soviet military intervention, yielded to Zorin's and Gottwald's pressure and accepted the resignations of non-communist cabinet ministers, despite his own reluctance and demonstrations outside the president's palace.

The UN was not involved in this crisis.

(The bloodless coup enabled the Communists to retain control of Czechoslovakia. It was alleged that Soviet troops participated in the coup, directly or indirectly. On 10 March 1948 Foreign Minister Jan Masaryk was found dead--a suicide or a victim of assassination--on the ground below his apartment in the foreign ministry. Czechoslovakia maintained that the coup was an internal matter and declined a Security Council invitation on 6 April to participate in UN deliberations. A draft resolution by Argentina and Chile on 29 April calling for an inquiry into the regime changes was vetoed by the Soviet Union in the Security Council. The U.S. criticized Soviet behavior.)

References:

See sources for Case #115.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


