CRISNO 138

BURMA INFILTRATION

Background:

A crisis for Burma over Chinese Nationalist troops on its territory occurred between 8 February 1953 and 15 October 1954.

Background In 1949 Kuomintang (KMT, Chinese Nationalist) forces, who had retreated to southern China during the China Civil War (see Case #125, in Taiwan Strait PC), crossed into Burma as the Chinese Communists consolidated their position in the south. KMT forces, commanded by General Li Mi, occupied part of the Burmese state of Kengtung, which adjoined China and Thailand, and became an intolerable nuisance to Burma because of their alliance with, and supply of arms to, the local insurgents. They also served as a possible provocation for a Chinese Communist incursion into Burmese territory and drew 12,000 Chinese forces into an uncomfortable proximity to the border. By 1952 air drops and supplies from foreign air bases became frequent and blatant.

Summary:

On 8 February 1953 a crisis was triggered for Burma when local insurgents combined with 300 KMT troops to attack Loikaw, the capital of the state of Kayah. Additional attacks occurred on the 11th and 27th at other Burmese locations. Documents showed that the intention of the KMT was to overthrow the Union of Burma government. Burma contended that the KMT forces were being supplied by Nationalist-held Taiwan, with tacit U.S. agreement. Prime Minister U Nu responded to the threat to his regime with a statement on 2 March that his government intended to take the KMT question to the United Nations. On 17 March Burma notified the United States that their assistance agreements would be terminated by June. This step was taken so that the government would not be accused of complacency on the KMT issue due to its obligations to Washington.

Burma submitted a complaint to the Secretary-General of the UN on the 25th, and on the 31st requested that it be placed on the General Assembly agenda for debate. A resolution was introduced on 17 April condemning the Nationalist Chinese government and indicating necessary steps to disarm and withdraw the KMT troops from Burma. On the 21st the General Assembly adopted a resolution condemning the presence of foreign troops in Burma and insisting upon their withdrawal. The U.S. proposed a conference with Burma, Nationalist China, and Thailand to discuss the withdrawal of the KMT forces.

A four-nation Joint Military Commission under UN auspices was formed and met on 22 May 1953. Negotiations, as well as serious clashes between Burma and KMT troops, continued throughout the summer. Burma withdrew from the talks on 17 September. Despite the attempts at mediation throughout the crisis – conducted under the auspices of the UN and including formulation on the part of the US – Burma found the results unsatisfactory and ultimately resolved the issue on its own. Eventually 7,000 KMT troops were airlifted to Nationalist China between November 1953 and May 1954. On 30 May General Li Mi announced the formal dissolution of his Yunnan anti-communist army and, on 30 July, the Joint Military Commission announced in Burma that its program had been completed. About 6,000 guerrillas remained in Burma.

Burma submitted a new request to the UN Secretary-General on 20 August, and on the 29th of September a report on the situation was submitted to the UN stating that Burma viewed the continued presence of Chinese Nationalist troops in its territory as a threat. On 15 October 1954 Burma's representative acknowledged that the partial removal of KMT troops "represented the limit of what could be accomplished by international action." The crisis terminated that day with a Burmese statement that the removal of foreign troops from its territory would be its responsibility alone.

The USSR was not involved.

(KMT troops, with U.S. and Taiwan aid, continued their operations in Burma until 1961 when they were finally driven into Thailand and Laos by the Burmese army.)

References:

Johnstone 1963; Maung 1969.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


