CRISNO 96

IRAN-OIL CONCESSIONS

Background:

A crisis for Iran over Soviet demands for oil concessions took place from 26 September to 9 December 1944.

Background and Pre-crisis Contrary to the tripartite treaty of 1942, the USSR showed signs of continuing its occupation in order to keep northern Iran and its oil resources within the sphere of Soviet influence. At that time there were only two authorized oil concessionaires in Iran: the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company in the southwest; and the Kavir-i-Khurian Company near Seronan, owned jointly by the Soviet Union and an Iranian group. The publication in August 1944 of a general Anglo-American agreement for oil concessions in the southeast aroused criticism by the communist-dominated Tudeh Party in a Majlis debate and disturbed the Soviets to the extent that they decided to revive their claims to oil concessions in northern Iran.

Summary:

A crisis for Iran was triggered on 26 September 1944 when the Soviet Assistant People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs, Kavtaradre, during a visit to Teheran, demanded oil concessions in five northern Iranian provinces. The Soviet demand was viewed by nationalist elements in Iran's government as being detrimental to Iran's national interests, as well as an infringement upon Iran's sovereignty. Iran's response was a decision to reject all (British, U.S., and Soviet) demands for oil concessions. Whereas Britain and the United States accepted the Iranian decision, the USSR rejected it and questioned the integrity of Iran's Prime Minister Sa'id. This was followed by a violent press campaign by the Tudeh Party attacking Sa'id's policies and demanding his resignation. The campaign led to mass demonstrations in Teheran and other cities against Sa'id. In Teheran, Soviet army trucks carried considerable numbers of Tudeh Party members to a demonstration in front of the Majlis, while Soviet army detachments with tanks protected the demonstrators against any counteraction by Iranian troops. The presence of Soviet troops paralyzed any activity on the part of the Iranians. Sa'id resigned on 8 November and a new government was formed by Mortera Quli Bayat. This new government was also attacked by the Tudeh Party in demonstrations and through the press. On 2 December the Majlis passed a law forbidding any minister to grant or negotiate oil concessions with foreign governments without parliamentary approval. The crisis ended when Kavtaradre and his delegation left Iran for Moscow on 9 December 1944.

Iran, which had looked toward the U.S. as a friendly third power, was disappointed that Washington did not openly oppose Soviet claims.

The League of Nations did not function in 1944.

References:

See sources for Case #108.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


