CRISNO 105

FRENCH FORCES-SYRIA

Background:

Syria and France were the actors in a crisis involving French control over Syria, from 17 May to 3 June 1945.

Background and Pre-crisis Syria's independence was formally recognized by France and the U.K. in 1941. France, however, remained the Mandatory Power until the end of World War II and allowed Syria to maintain a militia, but not an army. The Comité Français de Liberation Nationale (CFLN), under the leadership of General Charles de Gaulle, had been recognized by the U.K. and the U.S. as the French government-in-exile. On 25 August 1944 de Gaulle entered Paris and the CFLN was then recognized as the Provisional Government of the French Republic, with Charles de Gaulle as President.

With the defeat of Nazi Germany in May 1945, the president and National Assembly of Syria appealed to France for a new treaty that would curtail French privileges in Syria and transfer control over security and foreign affairs from the French Mandatory Power to the government of Syria. France wished to delay this step until the formal establishment of the United Nations. Sporadic riots and strikes against the French in Syria began on 8 May. In order to retain control, and as a security measure, de Gaulle ordered French troops into Syria.

Summary:

A crisis for Syria was triggered on 17 May 1945 when three French battalions landed in Beirut and proceeded to Syria in order to secure positions in Damascus and other major cities. On 28 May the Syrian militia, accompanied by rioting citizens, attacked all French posts in the country. De Gaulle accused the British of supplying arms to the Syrians. The riots triggered a crisis for France, which responded the same day by firing on the militia and bombing major Syrian cities. In two days of fighting an estimated 400 soldiers and civilians lay dead in Damascus, along with countless injured.

After the outbreak of violence the U.K. intervened and demanded that France agree to a cease-fire, evacuate its positions in the Syrian cities, and return all French forces to their barracks. Churchill intimated to de Gaulle that, if the French did not comply, the consequences might be collisions between British and French forces. A disagreement between France and the U.K. over the authority of British General Paget, the Commander in Chief of all Allied forces in the Middle East, had precipitated the U.K. ultimatum. Churchill regarded the French forces as still officially under the supreme command of General Paget until the end of the Pacific war, while de Gaulle assumed that Paget had completed his function once the war in Europe was over.

De Gaulle considered rejecting the British ultimatum, even in light of the possibility of hostilities between French and British forces; but the French parliament and press vehemently opposed French resistance. On 3 June France complied with the ultimatum and evacuated its positions ending the crisis for both itself and Syria.

On 1 June the USSR sent a memorandum to de Gaulle expressing concern about developments in the Middle East. The U.S. was approached by de Gaulle on the 2nd to participate in a conference to settle the crisis in Syria, as well as all other Mandate questions in the Middle East, including Palestine and Iraq. Washington, however, refused to involve itself in an issue that it considered to be exclusively of British and French concern. Moreover, the idea of inviting the USSR to the conference prompted President Truman to reject the idea. British troops replaced the French until 1946 when the United Nations terminated the French Mandate and acknowledged the Syrian Republic's full sovereignty.

References:

Churchill 1953; de Gaulle 1971; Longrigg 1958; Palmer 1973; Willis 1968.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


