CRISNO 115

MARSHALL PLAN

Background:

A crisis for the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia over the Marshall Plan occurred between 3 and 11 July 1947.

Background Severe winters in 1945 and 1946 and a drought in 1947 had caused great economic hardship in Czechoslovakia. The food supply was severely reduced, and all goods originally destined for domestic consumption had to be exported. Both unemployment and citizen discontent were rising rapidly. Consequently, when an invitation was issued by France and Great Britain to Czechoslovakia to attend a conference in Paris dealing with the Marshall Plan and U.S. conditions for aid, it was readily accepted and a delegation was sent.

Pre-crisis The proposal of large-scale economic aid to Europe, in an address by U.S. Secretary of State Marshall at Harvard University on 5 June 1947, elicited a favorable response from Central and Eastern European states, notably Czechoslovakia and Poland. Soviet leaders were uncertain about U.S. motives but, initially, were not hostile to the "Marshall Plan." In fact, they participated actively in the first Paris meeting on the plan from 26 June to 3 July.

It was during that meeting that Soviet perceptions changed. One reason was concern that Marshall Plan aid to Germany would lead to an increase in German industrial capacity, evoking memories of the havoc wreaked by an economically powerful Germany during the war. Another was a dispute over the procedure for submitting aid requests to the U.S. and its implications: the U.K. and France preferred a coordinated list for all of Europe produced by a multinational committee; the Soviets wanted to aggregate all individual requests and to submit them to Washington. Important as these issues were, their primary impact was to rekindle Soviet fears that the U.S., along with the U.K. and France, intended to use economic aid as an instrument to undermine Soviet hegemony in Central and Eastern Europe, areas where its control was tenuous barely two years after the end of World War II.

Summary:

It was this perception that triggered the USSR's Marshall Plan crisis, as evident in Molotov's volte-face. The Soviet foreign minister's opening statement at the conference on 26 June was moderate. His closing speech on 3 July before his dramatic exit from the conference articulated this dramatic change: he accused the Western powers of planning to divide Europe into hostile camps; and he declared that Moscow would no longer cooperate with the Marshall Plan.

For several days, however, the Soviet attitude remained ambivalent. Thus the Czechoslovak cabinet's decision on 4 July to accept the Anglo-French invitation to participate in the next Paris meeting, scheduled for the 12th, was approved by Molotov on the 5th in a back-channel message to Prague. Czechoslovakia formally announced its acceptance of the invitation on the 7th. The next day Molotov demanded that Prague retract its acceptance.

By then Soviet skepticism, reinforced by negative assessments of U.S. motives (from the USSR's Ambassador to the United States, Novikov) and of the economic consequences (from its most influential economic planner, Varga) had turned to outright hostility. This was expressed by Stalin to a Czechoslovak government delegation, headed by Communist Party leader and Prime Minister Gottwald, along with the non-communist Ministers of Foreign Affairs and Justice, Masaryk and Dritna. On 9 July Stalin delivered an ultimatum calling upon Prague to rescind its acceptance of the invitation to participate in the Marshall Plan talks in Paris: he told the delegation that Czech. participation would be "an unfriendly act." This triggered a crisis for Czechoslovakia, which was virtually surrounded by Soviet troops. It responded the following day by compliance to Soviet wishes. The Czech. ministers in Moscow telephoned their cabinet colleagues in Prague and requested them to rescind the earlier decision to participate in the Paris meetings. The Czech. cabinet met at 4:00 a.m. and did so. The 11th of July was the termination date for both actors in the 1947 Marshall Plan crisis. There was no violence.

The UN was not involved in this crisis.

(A more far-reaching Soviet response to the threat posed by the Marshall Plan occurred after the crisis ended: at a conference of nine communist parties in Poland on 22-27 September 1947 the Communist Information Bureau (COMINFORM) was founded--to propagate the Soviet line internationally, through European communist parties. It was regarded in the West as a successor to the Communist (or Third) International (COMINTERN), founded by Lenin in 1919 and disbanded in 1943 by Stalin as a gesture to his Western allies. At that conference its founder, Stalin aide Andrei Zhdanov, in a speech on "the International Situation," first propounded the Soviet doctrine that became paramount throughout the Cold War, namely, the division of Europe by the West into "two camps," which he traced primarily to the Marshall Plan.)

References:

FRUS 1947, vol. 3; Acheson 1969; Bullock 1983; Donovan 1977a; Hogan 1987; Kennan 1967; Kolko 1972; Korbel 1959, 1977; Leffler 1992; McCullough 1992; Parrish and Narinsky 1994; Pelling 1988; Pogue 1987; Shulman 1963; Szulc 1971a; Taubman 1982; Ulam 1973.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


