CRISNO 192

TAIWAN STRAIT III

Background:

The PRC was the sole crisis actor. This crisis lasted from 22 April to 27 June 1962.

Pre-crisis During the three years before this crisis there had been agricultural disasters and a significant shortage in consumer goods on the Chinese mainland. There was a mass exodus of Chinese across the borders; from Sinkiang into Soviet Central Asia and from Kwangtung into Hong Kong. In addition, during the period preceding the crisis there was tension along China's border with India (see Case #194--China/India Border II, in 1962-63, in Asia: Non-PCs).

Beginning in January 1962, a series of bellicose statements by senior Nationalist officials alerted decision makers in the PRC that Chiang Kai-shek might be preparing an invasion of the mainland.

Summary:

The trigger for the PRC's crisis was an Easter message by Chiang Kai-shek to his people on 22 April 1962, which contained threats to invade the mainland. This was followed by a conscription of additional manpower to Taiwan's army. On 1 May a special new tax was imposed in order to support the "return to the mainland." Further, from 22 May more Nationalist statements were issued indicating plans for an invasion. On 29 May the PRC's Foreign Minister, Ch'en Yi, divulged the existence of specially trained agents who, together with anti-communist elements on the mainland, would join forces if a decision were made by Chiang Kai-shek to drop paratroops into Communist China. Ch'en Yi intimated that there would be U.S. support for this venture.

Alarmed by the possibility of U.S. intervention, the response of the PRC was a considerable troop buildup in Fukien Province beginning on 10 June. On 23 June a meeting was held between U.S. and PRC ambassadors in Warsaw, where U.S. Ambassador John Cabot denied that the U.S. would actively support a Taiwan invasion. On 27 June President Kennedy, at a news conference, reiterated U.S. policy: the U.S. would defend Taiwan against a PRC threat, but its policy was peaceful and defensive only. This was an indirect assurance that the U.S. would not support a Taiwanese attempt to invade the mainland. That statement marked a unilateral conclusion to the third Taiwan crisis.

Neither the UN nor the USSR was involved in this crisis.

(There was no full-scale international crisis between the PRC and Taiwan for more than three decades. However, the protracted conflict between the two China regimes erupted periodically--usually in the form of a Beijing-perceived threat from Taipei, supported by the U.S., to thwart the PRC's persistent claim to sovereignty over Taiwan, by reactivating the "Two Chinas" policy, renounced by the U.S. in 1971. The most recent crisis [Taiwan Strait IV in this PC] was triggered by a U.S.-permitted private visit of Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui to the United States in May 1995. China responded to this hostile act by doing the following: withdrawing its ambassador from Washington for five months, suspending high-level official visits, and holding show-of-force naval maneuvers near Taiwan in the summer and autumn of 1995. The PRC renewed its military pressure on Taiwan in February-March 1996, more intensely, and with even higher visibility; but, as in the summer of 1995, there was no violence between the adversaries. All these acts signaled--to Taiwan and the U.S.--the PRC's determination to reintegrate Taiwan into China, preferably by negotiation, but by force if necessary.)

References:

Brugger 1977; Cheng 1972; Hilsman 1967; Hinton 1966; Howe 1971; Kennedy 1964; Leng and Chiu 1972; Mendel 1970; Segal 1985; Simmonds 1970; Yahuda 1978.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


