CRISNO 362

CHAD-LIBYA VII

Background:

Chad, France, and Libya were enmeshed in another crisis from 10 February to the end of March 1986.

Background Libyan forces continued to occupy the Aozou Strip after the termination of Chad/Libya VI. And the Libyan-backed GUNT remained in control of more than a third of Chad's territory--north of the 16th Parallel. There were frequent reports of Libyan reinforcements in Chad during 1985. In December President Habré of Chad indicated that he expected a fresh Libyan offensive. As often in the past, Mitterand warned Qaddhafi against an invasion.

Summary:

On 10 February 1986 the Libya-backed rebels, the GUNT, renewed their attacks on government forces at Oum Chalouba and captured Koro Toro near the 16th Parallel, triggering a crisis for Chad. France, too, perceived a crisis because the 16th Parallel was its "red line" against Libya's proxy, the GUNT, and Libyan forces in Chad. The same day Libyan forces reportedly attacked Chadian troops 480 kilometers northeast of the Chadian capital.

On 13 February France's defense minister arrived in N'Djamena for talks with President Habré, who had appealed for direct French military intervention. The next day French forces in the neighboring Central African Republic were put on alert, and French commandos and fighter planes were dispatched to N'Djamena.

Once more Mitterand warned Qaddhafi not to intervene in Chadian internal affairs. And on the 16th French aircraft bombed a rebel airstrip at Qadi-Doum.

Libya denied that its troops took part in the fighting. But on the 17th it responded to the French attack by sending two aircraft to bomb the airport of N'Djamena. However, it also indicated its approval of negotiations with Chad.

Fighting continued until the end of March, when the crisis faded; but the Chad/Libya conflict remained unresolved.

There were many attempts at mediation between President Habré of Chad and GUNT leader Goukouni Oueddei: by the OAU's chairman, President Abdou Diouf of Senegal; and by the presidents of Congo, Nigeria, Togo, and Zaire. However, Goukouni demanded an OAU condemnation of "French aggression" prior to any direct negotiations with the government. On 29 March Diouf declared that "Habré is the one who wants peace, unity and territorial integrity."

The U.S. State Department announced on 13 March that it would provide Chad with emergency military aid of $10 million. The UN and the USSR were marginally involved.

References:

ACR 1986; AR 1986; ARec 1986; ARB 1986; Keesing's 1986.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


