CRISNO 369

CONTRAS II

Background:

Honduras and Nicaragua were embroiled in the second of several interstate crises linked to the contras and their anti-Sandinista rebellion from 4 to 12 December 1986.

Pre-crisis In August 1986 the military regime in Honduras reaffirmed its formal strictures on the training of contras by foreign (U.S.) forces on its territory. However, American pressure during talks in October led to the creation of a U.S.-Honduras joint military commission to coordinate training of the contras and to the first large shipment of U.S. arms in early November.

During October and November fighting between the contras and Sandinista forces escalated near the Honduran border village of Arenales. On 1 November Nicaraguan troops pursued contra rebels, penetrating five kilometers into Honduras. Further incursions into the El Paraiso Department of Honduras were reported in late November. The civil war was about to spill over into an interstate crisis.

Summary:

A crisis for Honduras was triggered by a major Sandinista cross-border military operation against contra bases on 4 December: a Honduran border post at Las Mieles was overrun, three Honduran soldiers were wounded, and two were captured. A Honduran protest was rejected by Nicaragua, which denied its incursion, even though its troops were operating at least five kilometers across the border near the town of Teotecacinte.

Honduras launched a combined political-military response. On 6 December President Azcona del Hoyo requested U.S. military assistance, which was granted by President Reagan immediately. The same day Honduran planes bombed Sandinista troops in the border area, triggering a crisis for Nicaragua, which reported seven soldiers and two civilians killed.

U.S. military involvement in this crisis became more visible on 7-8 December, when American helicopters transported more than 1,000 Honduran soldiers to the border area, 40 kilometers from the fighting. Nicaragua responded on the 9th by appealing to the UN Security Council. At the Council's meeting on the 10th Nicaragua's representative blamed Honduras for rejecting its proposal to dispatch a UN commission of inquiry; and it claimed that Honduras's army launched attacks against Nicaragua "on orders from Washington." The U.S. delegate denied the charge. Honduras made the countercharge of repeated Nicaraguan incursions into its territory.

The fighting ended within several days. There was no formal agreement or tacit understanding between the adversaries. Rather, crisis termination was evident in a confirmation by Honduras on 12 December that it had requested the U.S. to remove contra rebels from its territory.

Although the USSR was a patron of the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua from its inception, Moscow remained aloof from this crisis.

References:

Keesing's 1987; New York Times December 1986.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


