CRISNO 331

OPERATION PROTEA

Background:

Angola experienced one of its many crises with the Union of South Africa during the 1970s and 1980s from 23 August to 30 September 1981.

Pre-crisis There were several SADF "hot pursuit" operations into Angola, in May and at the end of July 1981. The most dramatic of these, which escalated to a full-fledged interstate crisis, was Operation Protea.

Summary:

Heavy bombing raids on the Angolan towns of Cahama and Chibemba, deep inside Angola, on 23 August triggered a crisis for Angola. These were followed the next day by a South African invasion consisting of two motorized columns, with 80 vehicles and 32 tanks. The town of Xangongo was reduced to rubble and was occupied on the 25th. Units of the South African Defence Forces extended their operations in several directions, with the aims of cutting off SWAPO guerrillas from possible escape to the east and of preventing interference by Angola's armed forces.

Angola's Defense Ministry responded with general mobilization and a threat to deploy 20,000 troops to repel the invaders. Supplementing this with diplomatic pressure, President dos Santos sought the UN Secretary-General's help in repelling the invasion, with a threat to invoke Article 51 of the UN Charter--the right of self-defense, including the use of Cuban troops then in Angola. On the 27th Angola requested that the UN Security Council demand an immediate withdrawal of South Africa's forces. The next day the commander-in-chief of the SADF announced that his troops were already withdrawing from Angola; but this seemed a diversionary tactic.

The objectives of Operation Protea were to thwart Angola's plans to extend its radar missile air defense system southward, to cover the strategic town of Cunene, and to create a no-man's land along the northern side of the Namibian border in order to act as a buffer against SWAPO infiltration into northern Namibia. While SWAPO bases were the primary goal, Angolan army headquarters in Xangongo had also been heavily bombed.

On 31 August, in accordance with the Reagan administration's policy of "constructive engagement" with the Union of South Africa's apartheid regime, the U.S. vetoed a Security Council draft resolution that strongly condemned the "racist regime" of South Africa and demanded the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of South African forces from Angola.

On 1 September Angola's ambassador to Portugal renewed the threat to employ Cuban forces against South Africa's invaders.

UN pressure mounted with a resolution by a special session of the General Assembly on 14 September calling upon the Security Council to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa. At the same time South Africa's army commander pronounced Operation Protea a partial success.

Angola's crisis ended on 30 September with its reoccupation of Xangongo and several other towns vacated by the SADF.

The superpowers were active politically in this crisis. The U.S., as noted, adhered to "constructive engagement." The USSR called for unqualified condemnation of South Africa's invasion and the imposition of sanctions. So too did the OAU, which also urged the expulsion of South Africa from the UN.

(South African forces withdrew; but other incursions into Angola, in the long-term war against SWAPO, continued until Namibia finally achieved its independence in 1990.)

References:

ACR 1981-82; AR 1981; ARec 1981; ARB 1981; Keesing's 1981.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


