CRISNO 447

CHAD-SUDAN I

Background:

From 18 December 2005 until 8 February 2006, Chad and Sudan experienced a crisis as a result of the presence and activities of rebel groups from both sides hosted in each other’s territories. Background and Pre-crisis: Relations between Chad and Sudan have been strained since late 2004. Chad’s government has been accusing Sudan of hosting and backing Chadian rebels who want to overthrow Chadian President Deby. While denying Chad’s accusations, Sudan has also been charging Chad for supporting Darfur rebels. As a result of these tensions, in mid-2005, Chad has suspended the mediation of the Darfur conflict and the relations between the two countries have continued to deteriorate.

Summary:

On 18 December 2005, Chadian rebels attacked Chadian troops in the town of Adre, close to the border with Sudan. This incident triggered a crisis for Chad, who blamed Sudan for the rebel raid. The rebel raid continued the following day. Chadian troops killed approximately 300 rebels and forced the rest into their camps in Sudan. After Chad’s accusations, the Sudanese government immediately denied supporting Chadian rebel groups and intervening in the domestic affairs of Chad. Despite Sudan’s declaration of its commitment to the policy of “good neighborhood” with Chad, on December 23 the government of Chad announced that a “state of war” existed between the two countries. Chad’s declaration of a “state of belligerence” against Sudan triggered a crisis for Sudanese government. In late December, the Chadian government demanded that Sudan drive away and disarm Chadian rebels from the joint border. Despite Sudanese protests to the contrary, Chad continued to accuse Sudan of supporting the rebels with money, bases, and arms. Sudan’s Minister of State for Foreign Affairs described the accusations as nonsense and accused President Deby of trying to draw attention away from domestic problems.

On December 28, Chadian President Deby made a formal protest about Sudanese “aggression” to Nigerian president and African Union chairman Obasanjo. Simultaneously, the Sudanese government also complained to President Obasanjo that the government of Chad was sponsoring rebel groups in Sudan to wage war against Khartoum. As a result of these complaints, President Obasanjo set up an AU Commission of inquiry to study the claims of both countries and to report its findings at a mini-summit.

The first direct accusation by a Sudanese government official against President Deby following Chadian escalation of rhetoric came on 5 January 2006. The Sudanese Presidential Advisor and Communications Secretary announced that some Chadian government officials and army leaders supported rebels in Darfur and provided arms to the rebel movements.

Relations between the two countries deteriorated further the next day, January 6, when Chad accused Sudanese militias of carrying out several attacks in eastern Chad, which resulted in the deaths of several civilians. The Chadian government issued a new plea to the African Union to support Chad in the face of Sudanese aggression.

An attempt to mediate the conflict was launched by the Organization of the Islamic Conference in late January. The OIC claimed to have dispatched an envoy to defuse the crisis between Chad and Sudan, though the attempt to diffuse the crisis was largely unsuccessful.

Neither the United States nor the United Nations had any role in mediating the crisis, focusing instead on the human rights violations occurring in Darfur, though the UN reportedly scaled back its presence in parts of Sudan’s Darfur region bordering Chad because of the tension between the two nations. Chad and Sudan viewed this lack of intervention neutrally, and continued to accuse one another of various attacks and rebel support for several weeks.

In February it was announced that African leaders would attempt to calm the mounting border tensions between Chad and Sudan at a mini-summit in Libya. Both Chad and Sudan expressed a willingness to find a mechanism to end the conflict. The summit, hosted by the African Union, took place in Tripoli on 8 February 2006. There, Chad and Sudan signed a peace deal which banned the use of each other’s territory for hostile activity directed against the other, and prohibited each country from accepting rebels from the other. The treaty was welcomed by both presidents and effectively ended the crisis.

References:

Keesing’s Record of World Events, Lexis-Nexis Online, International Crisis Group.

Last Updated: 3/17/2008


