CRISNO 151

GOA I

Background:

The first Goa crisis for Portugal began on 10 August and lasted until 6 September 1955.

Background and Pre-crisis After the British withdrawal from India in 1947 Portugal continued to reject all Indian requests for the reunification of its enclaves on the west coast of India into the Republic of India. This led to the closing of the Indian legation in Lisbon in June 1953.

Intensification of nationalist agitation within India, as well as within Portugal's enclaves, began in mid-1954 and resulted in mass arrests, curfews, and expulsions. In July of that year Dadra, Nagar Haveli, and Damao were seized by "Free Goan volunteers." The Indian government refused passage to Portuguese forces to reinstate control over these areas. The mass entry of "volunteers" into Goa in May and June became the symbol of a campaign for the peaceful liberation of Goa.

Summary:

On 10 August 1955 it was announced that, despite Nehru's disapproval, Indian "volunteers" would march into Goa in a peaceful mass invasion on 15 August, India's Independence Day. This announcement triggered a crisis for Portugal, which responded by moving army units to the Indian/Goan border and sending its chief of staff to Goa. Prime Minister Cunha called upon the Indian government to ban the march.

On 15 August about 3,000 Indian demonstrators marched across the Goan border. Portuguese police and soldiers opened fire killing 20 and wounding many more. Lisbon protested to New Delhi on the 17th, accusing it of violating Portugal's sovereignty. India broke diplomatic relations with Portugal on the 19th.

On 4 September the All-India Congress Committee, the legislative body of India's governing Congress Party, declared that in the present situation it would be inappropriate for Indian nationals to enter Goa. This crisis ended on 6 September when Indian Prime Minister Nehru stated in parliament that India had no intention of taking any warlike measures over Goa. A second crisis over Goa erupted in 1961 (see Case #190).

The UN, the U.S., and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #190.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


