CRISNO 140

KOREAN WAR III

Background:

The third crisis during the Korean War began on 16 April and ended on 27 July 1953. The crisis actors were the U.S., China, North Korea, and South Korea.

Pre-crisis In January 1953 Eisenhower succeeded Truman in the White House. Primary U.S. concerns in Korea were the release of the prisoners of war and an end to the stalemate. On 2 February President Eisenhower mentioned the possibility of removing the Seventh Fleet from the Taiwan Strait: it had been serving as an effective barrier to Chinese Nationalist (Taiwan) plans to invade the mainland. In addition, Stalin's death on 5 March left a power vacuum in the USSR, the PRC's closest ally during this period. Armistice and prisoner of war (POW) negotiations at Panmunjom continued with little progress, as a reported 46,000 PRC and North Korean prisoners in South Korea stated that they did not wish to return to their homelands. While the communist powers demanded their return, the UN sought ways not to force them to do so.

Summary:

On 16 April 1953 the PRC-North Korean forces began a new offensive against UN troops at Pork Chop Hill and Old Baldy. In the setting of the political discussions at Panmunjom and the general lull in the fighting, this new attack catalyzed an intrawar crisis for the United States. Washington responded on 22 May when Secretary of State Dulles threatened the PRC, via India's Prime Minister Nehru, with the possible use of tactical nuclear weapons to break the deadlock in Korea. This triggered a fresh crisis for the PRC and North Korea. Their combined response, on 8 June, was an agreement at Panmunjom for the voluntary repatriation of POWs, which broke the political deadlock. The softening of the communist position, on 8 June, triggered a crisis for South Korea which, fearing a U.S. withdrawal, viewed any agreement on the POW issue as a compromise of its reunification plans for the Korean peninsula. The South Korean response, on 18 June, was the unauthorized release of about 25,000 prisoners of war who had declared their preference not to return to the PRC or North Korea. This act, while angering the U.S., did not succeed in halting the negotiating process. An Armistice Agreement was signed on 27 July 1953 terminating the crisis for all four actors.

The agreement established a demarcation line in Korea, a Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), a Military Armistice Committee (MAC) to resolve violations of the agreement, and a commission to supervise troop withdrawals.

The USSR was not involved in this crisis.

(There were many violations of the Armistice Agreement over the years, including an estimated 700 minor armed incidents in the DMZ. The most recent occurred in early April 1996, when 300 heavily armed DPRK troops entered the DMZ at Panmunjom--the agreement permitted the entry of only 35 lightly armed soldiers from each side. North Korea's motive was unclear but seemed to be aimed at pressure on Washington to negotiate a formal bilateral peace agreement between the U.S. and the DPRK, excluding the ROK [South Korea], to replace the 43-year-old Armistice Agreement. The abortive crisis, which occurred days before elections to South Korea's National Assembly, faded after three days.)

References:

See sources for Cases #132 and #133; and Dingman 1988-89; Eisenhower 1963; Foot 1985, 1988-89, 1991; Gordenker 1959; Henderson 1968; Higgins 1970; Murphy 1964.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


