CRISNO 71

INVASION OF ALBANIA

Background:

A crisis for Albania, France, Greece, and the U.K. occurred between 25 March and 13 April 1939.

Background In 1928 a new constitution transformed Albania into a hereditary constitutional monarchy with Ahmed Zog crowned as King. Zog was given broad authority and ruled as a dictator until 1939. During the 1930s, on several occasions, King Zog attempted to break away from Italy but was forced to back down when Italian diplomatic, economic, and military pressure was applied. By 1938 the Italians had become impatient with Zog and looked for a way to assume direct control over Albania.

Summary:

A crisis for Albania was triggered on 25 March 1939 when Italy presented a treaty draft, in the form of an ultimatum: it proposed the stationing of Italian troops in the main centers and on the frontiers of Albania, along with the full participation of the Italian minister in Tirana in the Albanian Council of Ministers. The pact was rejected by King Zog and, at the beginning of April, he presented counterproposals with new concessions. Mussolini was not placated. As Italian/Albanian negotiations were taking place, rumors spread about the completion of Italian military preparations for invasion, with a concentration of army and naval forces in southern Italy. Despite violent anti-Italian demonstrations throughout Albania, Zog issued a public declaration on 3 April denying the worsening of relations with Italy. Following a cabinet meeting the next day the king indicated to the Greek minister, then doyen of the diplomatic corps, that Italian demands would mean control over all the essentials of Albanian life and the establishment of an Italian protectorate on Greece's borders. Representatives of France, the U.K., and the Balkan Entente were informed that Italian demands would be rejected by force. Also on the 4th Mussolini set a deadline of 6 April for the acceptance of Italy's demands. Albania's major response was a decision by the council of ministers, on the 6th, to reject the Italian ultimatum; a negative reply was sent the same day. Preparations for resistance were made, including the distribution of arms.

Italian forces invaded Albania on 7 April, triggering a crisis for France, Greece, and the U.K. France perceived the fall of Albania as a prelude to an Italian-German offensive from the North Sea to Egypt. The Greek government was convinced that, once Albania had been annexed, the Italians would invade Corfu. And the U.K., fearing that the situation might undermine its influence and the status quo in the Mediterranean, became concerned about a possible Italian invasion of Greece.

The crisis for Albania ended on 8 April when the king and other Albanian officials fled to Greece. The Italians entered the capital that day. On the 9th Greek Prime Minister Metaxas informed the British minister that the Italians intended to attack Corfu between 10 and 12 April. On the same day two Greek destroyers were manned and made ready for action.

At an urgent meeting on 9 April the French National Defense Committee decided to move the French Atlantic fleet to the Mediterranean, to send reinforcements to Tunis and French Somaliland, and to call up reservists. The British major response occurred on 11 April, after precautions had been taken in Malta, air services to Italy had been suspended, and military leaves canceled. That day, at a meeting of the cabinet's foreign policy committee, a statement was approved warning Italy that any aggression against Greek territory would be regarded as a threat to the vital interests of Great Britain.

The crisis for France, Greece, and the U.K. ended on 13 April 1939. The British prime minister declared a guarantee of the independence of Greece and Romania. A similar guarantee was made by France's Premier Daladier the same day. These assurances terminated the crisis for Greece as well. There was no League of Nations activity, despite Albania's protest on 8 April. On 13 April the new Albanian puppet regime followed Italy's lead and withdrew from the League.

References:

Carr 1945; Ciano 1947; Clogg 1980; Knox 1982; Koliopoulos 1977; Pano 1968; Polo and Pato 1981; Schuman 1941; Shirer 1964; Smith 1982; Taylor 1968; Woodhouse 1968.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


