CRISNO 294

NICARAGUA CIVIL WAR II

Background:

An international crisis over the civil war in Nicaragua involved Costa Rica and Nicaragua from 10 September 1978 to 17 July 1979.

Pre-crisis During 1978 there was severe unrest in Nicaragua, with widespread demonstrations and strikes in opposition to President Somoza's dictatorial regime. On 22 August the National Palace was temporarily seized by left-wing guerrillas of the Sandinista National Liberation Front (SNLF), who were supported by Costa Rica. The internal situation worsened in early September when regime repression increased, and the Sandinistas called for a national insurrection against Somoza. On the 9th heavy fighting broke out between the Nicaraguan National Guard and Sandinista supporters.

Summary:

A foreign policy crisis for Nicaragua was triggered on 10 September 1978 by a guerrilla attack from Costa Rica at the border town of Penas Blancas. According to Somoza, the 300-man invasion force was part of a plan to overthrow his regime, with the complicity of the Costa Rican government, President Cararo, and other high officials. Nicaragua responded the same day with a counterattack and the reorganization of the National Guard to meet attacks throughout the country. The following day Somoza declared a partial state of siege.

A crisis for Costa Rica was triggered on 12 September by Nicaraguan bombing of its territory and "hot pursuit" by Nicaraguan forces across the border. The following day the state of siege was extended throughout Nicaragua. The Costa Rican response to the crisis was the signing of a mutual aid and cooperation agreement with Venezuela on 15 September, a day after the latter had sent four jet bombers to Costa Rica on a goodwill visit. Costa Rica had no official army; its defense was handled by a Civil Guard. Panama, too, sent arms to Costa Rica. On 16 September Nicaragua recalled its ambassadors from Costa Rica, Panama, and Venezuela, and, later, from Colombia.

On 18 September the Permanent Council of the OAS accepted a proposal to convene a meeting of foreign ministers to consider the situation in Nicaragua. At meetings that took place in Washington between 21 and 23 September, a resolution was passed affirming the principle of nonintervention and reaffirming Nicaraguan sovereignty over its internal affairs; and a decision was reached to send an investigation team to Nicaragua. A statement by the United States Department of State expressed concern at reported atrocities committed by the Nicaraguan National Guard. On 25 September the insurgents were defeated and factories and businesses reopened in Nicaragua, terminating its first crisis. On that day, too, Somoza announced that Nicaragua would accept U.S. mediation.

On 29 September Nicaragua's president agreed to a mediation team sponsored by the OAS, the mediating countries being the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and the United States. Its first meeting was held on 16 October. However, by mid-January 1979 mediation efforts collapsed. And on 8 February the U.S. ended all military aid to Nicaragua.

Following clashes between Costa Rican Civil Guards and Nicaraguan National Guards on 21 November 1978, Costa Rica severed diplomatic relations with Nicaragua and began a call-up of 2,500 troops. A resolution was passed by the UN General Assembly on 15 December condemning Nicaragua for repressing its population and demanding that Nicaragua cease all acts endangering the security of its neighbors. UN activity made it difficult for Somoza to contend that his government was a victim of foreign communist aggression; and his regime became isolated. On the 27th Somoza threatened to invade Costa Rica if that country continued to assist the guerrillas. On 30 December Somoza met with the presidents of El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras, all of whom had been supporting him in the fight against the Sandinistas.

Sporadic fighting continued until 27 May 1979, when a second crisis was triggered for Nicaragua by an invasion of guerrillas from Costa Rica. Nicaragua responded the same day by repelling the invaders. The U.S. continued to refuse to sell arms to Nicaragua and, according to Somoza, convinced Israel to impose an arms embargo as well.

At the end of May Nicaragua called upon the Permanent Council of the OAS to invoke the Rio Treaty in response to the Costa Rican invasion. Costa Rica requested the same OAS action against Nicaragua on 3 June. The following day the OAS Council met and passed a resolution calling for the replacement of President Somoza's dictatorship by a democratic regime. A U.S. proposal to dispatch a peacekeeping force to Nicaragua was rejected by the OAS. Despite the embargo, U.S. military equipment found its way into the conflict zone. Heavy fighting continued throughout June. Toward mid-July the OAS agreed to a proposal whereby General Somoza would resign, a cease-fire would take place, and the left-wing revolutionary junta would assume power in Nicaragua. No agreement was reached between Somoza's government and the Sandinistas. The president fled Nicaragua on 17 July 1979, ending the crisis for Costa Rica and Nicaragua.

(The Sandinistas, in coalition with liberal democrats, assumed power in Nicaragua. During the Carter administration a $75 million loan was granted to Nicaragua, but the final payment was withheld by President Reagan in January 1981, when relations between the two countries deteriorated: the State Department charged that the Sandinista government was aiding guerrillas in El Salvador; Managua denied the charges.)

References:

Cottam 1994; Gordon and Munro 1982; Leogrande 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


