CRISNO 73

TIENTSIN

Background:

An international crisis for the U.K. over Tientsin began on 14 June 1939 and terminated effectively on 29 August of that year.

Background and Pre-crisis After Japan's proclamation of "The Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere," on 3 November 1938, Tokyo concentrated on tightening its hold over the occupied areas of China and on undermining China's currency. Japan put pressure on the International Settlements in Shanghai and Amoy, and the British Concession at Tientsin, maintaining that these foreign enclaves were blocking the absorption of occupied China into "A New Order of East Asia." The Japanese had four main grievances against Britain at Tientsin: the Chinese guerrillas allegedly used the British Concession as a base to launch anti-Japanese attacks and propaganda; circulation of the Chinese currency was allowed; the British banks refused to accept the Japanese-sponsored Peking (Beijing) regime's Federal Reserve Bank notes; and, finally, that silver reserves deposited by Chinese government banks in Tientsin were not reported to the Japanese authorities.

On 9 April 1939 an official of the Peking puppet regime was assassinated within the British Concession in Tientsin. Two of the arrested suspects confessed under Japanese interrogation but retracted when they were handed over to the British. When the British authorities in Tientsin refused to place the suspects under the jurisdiction of the pro-Japanese Peking regime for a trial, Japan sent the U.K. an ultimatum. Britain proposed an advisory committee to deal with the problem, but Japan refused.

Summary:

On 14 June 1939 a crisis was triggered for the U.K. when Japan imposed a blockade on the British and French Concessions in Tientsin, cutting off supplies and harassing persons entering and leaving the Concessions. Japan then demanded Britain's abandonment of the Chinese national government and its cooperation with the "New Order." London received information that the Japanese General Staff had plans for war with Britain that were supported by a faction of the Japanese army.

The Tientsin issue was discussed by the British cabinet on 14 June, when Foreign Secretary Halifax suggested serious consideration of economic sanctions, but this was postponed. While Halifax advocated retaliatory measures, a report from the Colonial Board of Trade and foreign office was issued advising against them. On the 18th a report from Britain's chief of staff concluded that it would not be justifiable to take any action that might lead to hostilities with Japan. On 19 June the foreign secretary authorized Ambassador Craigie to propose conducting negotiations over Tientsin in Tokyo. This was accepted by Japan on the 23rd. On 15 July Japan's prime minister proposed a formula in which British assistance to China would be withheld during the large-scale Japanese military operations. On the 24th the Craigie-Arita Agreement was reached between the two governments providing for British recognition of the "actual situation in China" and stating that British officials and subjects would be instructed to refrain from obstructing the Japanese army.

The Tokyo conference on the Tientsin issue opened on 27 July, with quick agreement on the proposals dealing with the restoration and maintenance of order in Tientsin. Negotiations reached an impasse on economic issues. The conference was adjourned on 20 August. The following day the British foreign office circulated a paper in which Britain declared that, in the event of hostilities with Japan, it would denounce the Anglo-Japanese Commercial Treaty, nationals would be evacuated from North China, and economic steps would be instituted against Japan. On that day, as well, Japan was stunned by the announcement of the German/Soviet Non-Aggression Pact (see Case #74--Entry into World War II, in World War II PC). Japan was at that time engaged in large-scale fighting against Soviet troops at Nomonhan (see Case #72). The Pact enabled the USSR to concentrate on the East Asian situation without fear for its European flank. After the fall of the Hiranuma government, the silver and currency questions lapsed and the danger of an Anglo/Japanese war became less probable. On 26 August a formula was suggested by the Japanese embassy in London, to which Halifax agreed on the 29th. The outbreak of war in Europe in September, however, prevented a formal agreement. A British attempt to get U.S. backing resulted in a Roosevelt statement on 26 July giving notice to Japan of the U.S.'s intention to terminate the U.S.-Japan Commercial Treaty of 1911.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #59.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


