CRISNO 52

SPANISH CIVIL WAR I

Background:

Spain experienced the first of four international crises during the long civil war, from 17 July 1936 to 18 March 1937.

Pre-crisis On 16 January 1936 a Popular Front was forged by the small Communist Party, the Socialists, the Left Republicans, the Republican Union, the Catalán Left, and the marxist POUM parties of Spain. The Anarcho-Syndicalists of Catalonia and Madrid did not join the Front, which was viewed by all conservatives and the church with alarm. The Popular Front was dominated by middle-class liberals, the communist elements adhering to a nonrevolutionary line. In the general elections a month later the Popular Front won 265 seats of a total of 473. President Alcalá Zamora was replaced by Manuel Azaña on 10 May 1936, but reform made slow progress. Strikes and anticlerical demonstrations prevailed. The Communists opposed immediate socialization of land and nationalization of industry in favor of a more disciplined evolution. The Socialists promoted a form of proletarian rule. The wealthy and the aristocracy saw symptoms of incipient social revolution and secretly mobilized to overthrow the Popular Front. In April 1936 Hans Hellermann became the leader of Spain's Nazi Party, which consisted largely of German nationals. By July moral and material help from Italy, Germany, and Portugal was being received regularly by fascist conspirators. The revolt was to begin in Spanish Morocco and move on the capital, Madrid. It began on 17 July.

Summary:

The uprising on the Spanish mainland began on 18 July 1936 and triggered a crisis for Republican Spain. The following day inquiries were made as to the scope of the rebellion; and orders were given to the remaining loyal troops in Spanish Morocco to resist. The Soviet Union was concerned that a fascist regime in Spain would change the European power balance to the USSR's detriment and Germany's and Italy's favor. Spain's major response to the internal military challenge was an order from newly appointed Prime Minister Giral y Pereira, on 19 July, to arm the CNT (trade union of the Anarchist Party) and the UGT (General Union of Workers, led by the Spanish Socialist Party, later under Communist control). Giral perceived that these unions formed the only possible effective resistance to the fascist (Falange) rebellion, which spread rapidly to one-third of the garrisons in north and northwest Spain but failed to gain support in the key cities--Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia, and Bilbao. He ordered the trade unions to enter into active combat against the rebels, while appealing to Premier León Blum of France on 20 July to send arms and planes. That day General Franco took command of the Moors and Spain's Foreign Legion.

The death of General José Sanjurjo in a plane crash on the 20th left Generals Francisco Franco and Emilio Mola the two figures in command of the rebellion, Franco in the south and in Spanish Morocco, Mola in the north. Three days later "La Junta de la Defensa Nacional" was formed in Burgos as the executive body of the rebel movement. And on 29 September, two days after the rebel victory at Toledo--the Battle of Alcazar--the junta named Franco Head of Government and Generalíssimo of the Nationalists' land, sea, and air forces. (Mola was to die in a plane crash in June 1937.)

The initial rebel siege of Madrid from 7 November 1936 to 9 January 1937 and again in February failed. Málaga in the deep south fell to the rebels on 8 February. Most important was the Republican (Loyalist) victory at the Battle of Guadalajara on 18 March 1937, eliminating the pressure on Madrid and terminating Spain's first crisis of the civil war.

During the onset phase of that war three major powers and one small power were actively involved--Italy, Germany, and Portugal on the side of the rebels, the USSR supporting the Republican government. However, none perceived the conditions--threat, time pressure, higher likelihood of war--that would have qualified them as crisis actors. France and the U.K. took the lead in forming the Non-Intervention Committee, comprising most European states; and the U.S. remained aloof. (Spain's principal adversary throughout was a nonstate actor, namely, that segment of the Spanish army that rose in revolt against the Republic in July 1936.)

Initial contact by the rebels with Italy and Germany began in the first week of the uprising. Both pledged assistance within days, as did Portugal. Italy dispatched transport, aircraft, and military equipment in late July; and Germany sent the Condor Legion, with 100 planes, in November. And on the 28th Italy signed a secret treaty of friendship and assistance with the rebel leader.

The Soviets sent arms and equipment to the Republican government early in the war. It also played a key role in organizing the dispatch of International Brigades of volunteers to fight alongside the Loyalist forces, starting in October 1936.

France promised aid to the Republican government on 20 July but reneged five days later. And early in August it initiated a nonintervention plan, along with the U.K. It also suspended the export of all war materiel to Spain. The Non-Intervention Committee began regular meetings in London in September 1936, formally supported by all European states. However, it was undermined by Italy's and Germany's recognition of the Franco-led Burgos regime on 18 November 1936.

Spain protested to the League of Nations against foreign intervention and requested a meeting of the Council. It convened on 12 December but took no action--except to attempt to strengthen the U.K.-France-dominated nonintervention regime.

(Foreign intervention was a prominent feature throughout the civil war. After the flurry of prorebel activity in the early months, Germany and Italy provided large-scale additional military assistance in early 1937. On the Loyalist side, about 40,000 volunteers from more than a dozen countries in Europe, along with the United States and Canada, fought in the International Brigades, though no more than 18,000 at any one time; and another 20,000 foreigners served in medical and auxiliary units. France gave passive aid to the Republic by opening its frontier in the spring of 1938. And massive German military aid to the rebels in the autumn of 1938 was crucial for their final triumph [see Case #67--Spanish Civil War IV--Last Phase].)

References:

Cameron and Stevens 1973; Carr 1945; Churchill 1948; Ciano 1947; Delzell 1970; Deutscher 1949; van der Esch 1951; Payne 1963; Preston 1986, 1994; Schuman 1939; Smith 1982; Thomas 1961; Walters 1952; Weinberg 1970; Wiskemann 1966.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


