CRISNO 311

RAID ON GAFSA

Background:

Tunisia and Libya were the protagonists in a crisis from 27 January to 30 April 1980.

Background Several issues contributed to strained relations between these North African Arab neighbors. One was a long-standing dispute over the delimitation of the continental shelf in the Gulf of Syrte (Sidra): a ruling by the International Court of Justice had not yet been made. Another was a failed Libyan attempt at union in January 1974: the merger was formally proclaimed, but Tunisia withdrew within a few weeks. These and other bilateral matters were exacerbated by acute differences in character and leadership style between President Bourguiba of Tunisia and Libya's Colonel Qaddhafi.

Summary:

A crisis for Tunisia was triggered on the night of 26-27 January 1980 when a group of 50 Tunisian insurgents crossing the border from Algeria attacked and captured army and police installations in the oasis town of Gafsa, killing 40 persons. Tunisian security forces regained control of the town in the evening of the 27th. Interrogation of prisoners revealed that they had been trained in Libya, with the goal of forming a pro-Libyan "revolutionary" government that would seek and receive Libyan military aid.

Tunisia immediately sought diplomatic, economic, and military aid from Western and Arab states. France sent military transport planes and advisors to Tunisia on 28 January, triggering a crisis for Libya. This was followed by the dispatch of three French warships and five submarines on the 30th to patrol off the Tunisian/Libyan coast. The same day Tunisia expelled Libya's ambassador. On the 31st the U.S. defense secretary announced that the delivery of military equipment to Tunisia would be expedited.

Libya, too, responded to its perceived threat with several measures. On 4 February the French embassy in Tripoli was burned by a crowd of demonstrators. France's cultural center in Benghazi was ransacked the same day. On the 5th France recalled its ambassador to Libya. On the 7th Qaddhafi accused Paris of a new imperialism in Africa. Three days later he threatened war against France. An emergency meeting of Libya's General People's Congress on 12 February demanded that France withdraw its "invasion force" from Tunisia. It also called for an alliance with the "oppressed people" of Tunisia in their armed struggle to overthrow the Bourguiba regime. That day French military aircraft were withdrawn from Tunisia.

Crisis tension declined on 27 February when Qaddhafi declared the confrontation with Tunisia over, after the "fall" of Tunisia's Prime Minister Hedi Nouira, who was hospitalized in Paris. The next day Libya's leader said that the possibility of a serious confrontation with France, too, had ended following President Giscard d'Estaing's statement on the 26th that French forces had not actively intervened in the Gafsa fighting.

Relations between Tunisia and Libya remained severely strained during March and the first half of April 1980, particularly after the execution on 12 April of 15 Tunisians convicted of participating in the Gafsa raid. By the end of April a more conciliatory tone was evident in statements by the two adversaries, and the crisis ended.

The most involved actor, other than the adversaries themselves, was France. Both Tunisia and Libya appealed to the OAU in early February: the former called for condemnation of Libya's alleged involvement in the raid on Gafsa, and Libya sought a censure of France for its "invasion of Tunisia." First, Africa's regional organization on 15 February and then the Arab League on 28 February adopted resolutions reaffirming the principle of noninterference in internal affairs and respect for national sovereignty. The Arab League also established a four-member mediation mission – led by Iraq and including Kuwait, Syria and Jordan – and called upon the two protagonists to take steps to normalize their relations. The commission’s mediation efforts were minimal and did not contribute to crisis abatement. U.S. activity in this crisis consisted of the dispatch on 7 February of two air force transport planes with armored vehicles for the Tunisian army. The USSR and the UN were not involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1980; AR 1980; ARB 1980; ARec 1980; Facts on File 1980; Keesing's 1980; MECS 1979-80.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


