CRISNO 32

BULGARIA-GREEK FRONTIER

Background:

An armed confrontation between Greece and Bulgaria occurred from 19 October to 15 December 1925.

Background Like most Balkan frontiers during the inter-world war era the border between Greece and Bulgaria in 1925 was tense and prone to military incidents.

Summary:

A minor incident between Greek and Bulgarian border guards on 19 October 1925--one Greek soldier was killed--triggered a crisis for Greece: due to distorted intelligence and faulty communications it was misreported to Athens as a large-scale premeditated Bulgarian attack and was perceived as threatening Greece's security. The Greek response was swift: on 20 October an army corps was ordered to the frontier; and on the 22nd Greek troops, reportedly supported by artillery and air power, crossed the border, triggering a crisis for Bulgaria.

Sofia massed troops in the area; but in order to secure great power support it responded to the crisis primarily by diplomatic means. During the first few days Bulgaria requested a cease-fire. On the 22nd it appealed to the League of Nations requesting an immediate meeting of the League Council to resolve the crisis.

Within an hour of his receipt of the Bulgarian telegram early in the morning of 23 October the League's Secretary-General called an emergency meeting of the Council for the 26th, the earliest possible date. He also informed the (French) President of the Council, Briand, who immediately exhorted both parties to cease all military movements at once and withdraw their troops behind their own frontiers.

The extraordinary meeting of the League Council on 26 October demanded confirmation within 24 hours that orders for the withdrawal of (Greek) troops had been issued, to be completed within 60 hours. The U.K., France, and Italy were "requested" to send their military attachés to monitor the withdrawal. Under League and great power pressure, Greece complied, ordering the suspension of hostilities two and a half hours before a scheduled launching of an offensive on Petric, a center of activity of the anti-Greek, Macedonian revolutionary organization, the Komitadji. Its forces were withdrawn by 29 October.

The League Council then dispatched a commission of inquiry, after securing from both parties a commitment to accept and implement its decision, that is, compulsory arbitration. Responsibility for the incident was divided: Bulgaria, for the killing of a Greek soldier; Greece, for the breach of the peace causing heavy casualties and material damage in Bulgarian border villages. Greece was ordered to pay a nominal indemnity (45,000 pounds sterling) to Bulgaria. The crisis ended on 15 December, when both parties accepted the Council's ruling. However, conflict over the frontier persisted.

There were many involved actors, both major and minor powers. The U.K., France, and Italy strongly supported the League's pressure on Greece to terminate the hostilities. Romania, Yugoslavia, Germany, and Turkey were less involved. The League of Nations played the pivotal role in crisis management: "The Graeco-Bulgarian dispute was the culminating moment of this [first] phase of the history of the League" (Zimmern 1936, 372).

References:

Barros 1970; Boulter 1928; Dexter 1967; Eagleton 1957; Logio 1936; Macartney 1928; Walters 1952; Zimmern 1936.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


