CRISNO 199

ALGERIA-MOROCCO BORDER

Background:

A crisis over territory between Algeria and Morocco lasted from 1 October to 4 November 1963.

Background The dispute centered around areas of the Sahara held by Algeria that Morocco claimed had been part of the Moroccan state in precolonial times. Algeria countered that the disputed territory had been administered by the French and was liberated by the Front Liberation National (FLN), along with the rest of Algeria. A long-standing nationalist revolt against French rule in Algeria (1954-62) exacerbated the situation.

Summary:

On 1 October 1963 Algeria's President Ben Bella announced that Moroccan troops had taken up positions in the disputed territory, triggering a crisis for Algeria. Further, he charged that the Moroccans were supplying aid to rebel leader Ait-Ahmad, a former member of the Algerian National Assembly, then controlling the nearby region of Kabylia. Algeria responded on 8 October when its forces clashed with Moroccan troops. This constituted the crisis trigger for Morocco, which subsequently withdrew. On 14 October Morocco responded by reinforcing its troops and reoccupying the lost outposts.

Efforts at negotiation were initiated by Algeria. Morocco, too, called for a peaceful settlement. The Bamako Agreement, a five-part cease-fire, signed on 30 October by both parties, was worked out through the mediation of Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie and Mali President Modiba Keita. However, fighting continued for several more days until a Malian officer monitoring the truce succeeded in bringing the fighting to an end on 4 November 1963, terminating the crisis.

In the agreement, Morocco obtained Algeria's consent to an examination of the border problem and an undertaking to cease propaganda attacks. Algeria secured Morocco's withdrawal from the positions it occupied during the fighting and an agreement to settle the dispute within the framework of the OAU. (In February 1964, Morocco withdrew its forces.)

In addition to the OAU, the Arab League was active in the crisis; but neither regional organization contributed to its resolution. (The OAU's role occurred in the later stages of negotiation and reconciliation after the crisis ended.) Cuba and the United Arab Republic (UAR, Egypt) were perceived by Morocco to be partial to Algeria in the dispute.

The UN, the U.S., and the USSR remained aloof from this crisis.

References:

Annuaire de l'Afrique du Nord 1963; Hassouna 1975; MEJ Chronology 1963; Touval 1972; Widstrand 1969; Wild 1966; Zartman 1966.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


