CRISNO 266

UGANDA CLAIMS

Background:

Ugandan claims to Kenyan territory caused a crisis for Kenya from 15 to 24 February 1976.

Background Disputes between Uganda and the two other members of the East African Community, Kenya and Tanzania, had occurred for five years prior to this crisis. In 1971 and 1972 confrontations took place between Uganda and Tanzania over Idi Amin's allegations of Tanzanian support for exiled Ugandans (see Cases #245 and #247). During the next several years Idi Amin's behavior became more aggressive. There was a gradual deterioration of relations between Uganda and Kenya since 1975.

Summary:

On 15 February 1976 a crisis was triggered for Kenya when Idi Amin announced that large parts of Kenya and the Sudan historically belonged to Uganda and that he was investigating the possibility of claiming these territories. The disputed area extended to within 20 miles of Nairobi, Kenya's capital. Amin stated further that, despite his preference for peace, he would consider engaging Kenya in war in order to recover the territory. Should Uganda's access to the sea be denied by any country (Kenya or Tanzania), war would be the result. The following day another Amin statement, while withdrawing an actual claim to the areas, guaranteed the security of any Ugandans within that territory who sought independence. He also intimated that he was connected with the Luos secession movement in western Kenya. Kenya responded on 17 February when President Kenyatta addressed a mass rally, stating Kenya's readiness to fight to protect its territorial integrity. Amin cabled the OAU Secretary-General setting forth Ugandan claims, along with vague threats accompanying a denial of any intention to go to war. The OAU never met to discuss the issue. Amin approached the UN as well, but there was no activity by the global organization either. In Kenya protests were held in the town of Kakamega. On 20 February Kenyatta canceled two ministerial meetings of the East African Community and refused to participate in any further Community work until the issue between Uganda and Kenya was settled. On 23 February dockworkers in Mombassa boycotted Ugandan cargo. The crisis ended on 24 February when Kenyatta received a message from Amin disavowing any intention to seize territory from Kenya or Sudan.

(A telephone conversation between the two presidents was reported the following day dealing with matters other than territorial claims.)

The U.S. and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1976; ARB 1976; Brownlie 1979; Keesing's 1976.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


