CRISNO 424

ETHIOPIA-ERITREA

Background:

A crisis occurred between Ethiopia and Eritrea from 6 May 1998 to 12 December 2000, with both countries accusing the other of having invaded their sovereign territory. According to US estimates, the war led to the deaths of tens of thousands of soldiers and the displacement of 650,000 people.

Background and Pre-Crisis

Eritrea became an independent nation in 1993, following a referendum on its secession from Ethiopia. Eritrean rebels had played an important role in establishing the Ethiopian government in 1991, and relations between the two countries had been cordial since the secession. The two countries were also linked by important economic agreements and had only recently ceased to use the same currency. The confrontation in May 1998 was a shock to the international community.

Summary:

On 6 May, border fighting between Ethiopian and Eritrean soldiers triggered a crisis for both countries. It is unclear which side triggered the hostilities. On 13 May 1998, the Ethiopian Council of Ministers issued a formal statement, in which it accused Eritrea of having used military force on 6 May, to occupy an unspecified area of northwestern Ethiopia. On 14 May, the Eritrean government countered that the 6 May incident involved Ethiopian forces attacking Eritrean soldiers on Eritrean territory. Ethiopia subsequently diverted its imports and exports from Eritrean ports to Djibouti, allegedly because Eritrea was preventing Ethiopian access to its ports. Despite attempts by regional and international leaders to mediate, by late May, both countries had mobilized further troops and dug trenches inside the disputed areas. The situation rapidly escalated to a full-scale war.

With the onset of the rainy season, there was a scaling down of ground fighting at the end of May 1998. On 16 June 1998, Ethiopia and Eritrea ended air attacks, but the conflict remained far from settled. A peace plan, originally drafted by the US and Rwanda, and endorsed by the OAU, was proposed to the countries by the Congolese president. The plan asked for Eritrea to unilaterally withdraw from the territory where hostilities broke out on 6 May. Ethiopia accepted the proposal, but refused to engage in peace talks until Eritrea withdrew. The peace bid failed when the plan was rejected by Eritrea, which insisted that the occupied territory rightfully belonged to it. Renewed fighting broke out in the Badme region on 6 February 1999, the first major violence since the bombings had stopped the previous year. Fighting continued until 14 July 1999, when the two countries tentatively accepted on OAU-proposed peace plan. About eight months of relative calm ended with the sudden outbreak of fighting on 23 February 2000 on the Bure front, about 70 km west of the Eritrean port of Asab. Each side accused the other of starting the violence, with Eritrea alleging that Ethiopia had launched the attack to coincide with a visit to the area by an OAU envoy. Fighting eventually ended when the OAU-brokered peace agreement was signed on 12 December 2000.

Even during the lull periods in the war, there were continuous minor clashes as well as expulsions of citizens of the opposing country in both nations. The mutual expulsion of enemy nationals was a major issue in the conflict. In July 1998, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights expressed concern regarding the harassment of Eritreans being expelled from Ethiopia, a charge dismissed by the Ethiopian government. By late 1998, each country claimed that the number of its nationals that had been expelled exceeded 30,000.

Early in the crisis, delegations from Djibouti and then the US attempted, unsuccessfully, at mediating between the warring neighbors. Finally, the Organization of African Unity (OAU), with backing from the UN Security Council was able to reach a substantive agreement on 18 June 2000. The agreement was formalized on 12 December 2000, signaling the termination of the crisis. The internationally brokered agreement was also signed by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. In effect, the agreement returned both sides to their positions before the war, with the Eritrean government agreeing to withdraw its troops from all territory captured from Ethiopia during the crisis. Under the agreement, a UN force of about 4,200 peacekeeping troops would patrol the border, arrange the exchange of prisoners, supervise the return of displaced persons and deal with compensation claims.

References:

Kessing's Record of World Events Online; Lexis Nexis Online, Polity; CIA World Fact Book Online; BBC World News Service and the Third World Quarterly.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


