CRISNO 68

CZECHOSLOVAKIA'S ANNEXATION

Background:

Germany's overt threat of annexation precipitated a crisis for Czechoslovakia on 14-15 March 1939.

Background and Pre-crisis The period between Munich and the annexation, October 1938 to March 1939, witnessed national and societal unrest in Czechoslovakia. Slovak and Ruthenian nationalities, supported by Germany and Hungary, were making increasing demands for independence. There was a rapid deterioration in Czechoslovakia's economic situation, apparently generated by the secession of important industrial areas of the Sudetenland and Teschen after September, as a result of the Munich Agreement. This economic and societal disruption formed the basis of Hitler's claim that, as Czechoslovakia was composed of dissatisfied nationalities precipitating social unrest that culminated in economic deterioration, it was in fact no longer a viable state.

On 17 December 1938 Hitler, assuming no resistance, directed his armed forces to make preparations to occupy the rest of Czechoslovakia. This directive was followed by a final order on 12 March, at the height of the Slovak tension, for the invasion of Czechoslovakia and its incorporation into the Reich. The following day the Czechoslovak President, Emil Hacha, requested an interview with Hitler. On 14 March both Ruthenia and Slovakia proclaimed their independence from Czechoslovakia.

Summary:

On the morning of 14 March Hitler informed Hacha that German troops had already occupied the important industrial town of Moravska Ostrava and that they were now poised all along the perimeter of Bohemia and Moravia. The crisis for Czechoslovakia had been triggered. Hitler, while ignoring the issue of Slovak independence, stated that, if the Czechoslovak president invited the entry of German troops, Czechoslovakia would be allowed to remain autonomous after incorporation into the Reich. If the Czechoslovak army resisted, Czechoslovakia would be annihilated.

Faced with this ultimatum, Hacha phoned his government in Prague early in the morning of the 15th and advised capitulation. After receiving their consent, he signed the note of surrender that had been drawn up earlier by the German foreign office. The crisis ended at 6 a.m. on 15 March, when German troops poured into Bohemia and Moravia. There was no resistance. The same day they entered Prague. A proclamation of Bohemia-Moravia and Slovakia as German protectorates followed.

The USSR took no action during the critical days of the crisis. The U.K. declared that its post-Munich guarantee of Czechoslovakia's territorial integrity and independence against unprovoked aggression was no longer applicable because the declaration of Slovak independence had put an end to the state whose frontiers London had promised to guarantee. An official protest from France was its only activity in the crisis. There was no League of Nations involvement.

(More than half a century elapsed before the beginning of a formal state-to-state reconciliation. On 21 January 1997, Chancellor Kohl of Germany and Czech Prime Minister Klaus signed a declaration expressing mutual regrets: the former, for the occupation and annexation of Bohemia and Moravia in March 1939 and for Nazi "policies of violence"; the latter, for the expulsion of 2.5 million Sudeten Germans from the restored Czechoslovakia in the aftermath of World War II. As expected, both the Sudeten Germans, concentrated in Bavaria since the mid-1940s, and right-wing Czechs objected strenuously to the concessions made by their respective governments.)

References:

Bullock 1962; Deutscher 1949; Kennan 1967; Laffan and Toynbee 1953; Mamatey 1973; New York Times December 1996, January 1997; Schuman 1939; Shirer 1964; Thorne 1967; Vital 1967; Watt 1989; Weinberg 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


