CRISNO 421

ZAIRE CIVIL WAR

Background:

A rebellion in eastern Zaire led to another international crisis for Zaire and Rwanda, which escalated into an eight-month civil war in Zaire, from 8 October 1996 to 16 May 1997.

Background and Pre-Crisis

The Tutsi victory in the Rwandan civil war in 1994 ended in a predominantly Tutsi Patriotic Front government (FPR) in Rwanda, and bases of Rwandan Hutu refugees camps in the Kivu region in eastern Zaire. During 1996, the extremist Hutu Interahamwe militia, backed by the Zairean Armed Forces (FAZ), ousted thousands of Banyamulenge - ethnic Tutsis - from the Masisi region in North Kivu, in order to use the area for cross-border raids into Rwanda.

In the weeks prior to the crisis between Zaire and Rwanda, the Interahamwe militia tried to expel Banyamulenge forces from South Kivu, who were well armed and trained to fight back. In September 1996, fighting between the two ethnic groups flared up, and Zaire accused Rwanda of arming the Banyamulenge. Rwanda denied the charge.

In October, a major rebellion by the Banyamulenge in eastern Zaire, led by Laurent Kabila - the coordinator of the Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Zaire-Congo (ADFL) - threatened the integrity of the state, whose president Mobutu Sese Seko had traveled to Switzerland for cancer treatment, and brought Rwanda and Zaire to the verge of war.

Summary:

On 8 October 1996, the deputy governor of South Kivu, Lwasi Ngabo, threatened to treat the Banyamulenge as rebels and to expel them unless they left Zaire in 6 days. As a result, about 1,000,000 Hutu refugees from Rwanda and Burundi, that lived in these camps, began to flee to the hills north of Uvira. The same day, a 4000-strong (Tutsi) Banyamulenge and ADFL force attacked the ill-prepared Zairean army and the refugee camps of the (Hutu) Interahamwe. That triggered a crisis for Rwanda and Zaire. On 23 October, the Zairean Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of National Defence, Adml. Mavua Mdima, claimed that Rwanda and Burundi had trained and armed the rebels. Both states denied the charge. On 29 October, Zaire declared a state of emergency in the Kivu region and imposed military rule. The same day, the Rwandan town of Cyangugu was shelled by Zairean troops. In response, Rwanda deployed troops to eastern Zaire on the 30th, and its Vice-President and Minister of Defence, Paul Kagame, warned that his country was ready to fight Zaire "if Zaire brings the war to us." Kagame also said that Rwanda would not allow Zaire to expel the Banyamulenge by force, yet denied that Rwanda was helping the rebels.

Meanwhile, the ADFL and the Banyamulenge forces captured Bukavu, and by the end of the month were advancing on Goma - the capital of North Kivu. The successful attacks by the rebels and the creation of a buffer zone between Rwanda and Zaire, strengthened the Zairean claim that the rebels were supported by Rwanda. The failure of the Zairean army, on the other hand, and the absence of President Mobutu from the country during the crisis, threatened Zaire's political stability and created fear of a coup against its government by the Zairean army. On 1 November, Zaire Parliament called for the expulsion of all Tutsis from Zaire. The next day, the ADFL, backed by the Rwandan army, captured Goma and took control of North and South Kivu. That day, thousands of people demonstrated in Kinshasa, the Zairean capital, demanded war against Rwanda and Burundi, and attacked the homes and businesses of Tutsis. On 6 November, the ADFL's military commander, Andre Ngandu Kissasse, declared that the ADFL wanted to liberate the entire country, including Kinshasa. The fighting in Kivu had displaced more than 1.1 million Rwandan and 143.000 Burundian Hutu refugees, and an unknown number of local Zaireans.

On 21 October, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) warned that "we are heading for a humanitarian crisis" if the international community did not intervene immediately. On 4 November, the ADFL declared a cease-fire to allow the refugees to return to Rwanda; and on the 11th it agreed to allow humanitarian aid; but the international concern for the refugees continued to increase. On 7 November, France and Spain proposed a UN-sponsored force to eastern Zaire. The US, Canada, the UK, South Africa and some other African states approved the proposal. The US also agreed to send 1,000 American troops. The UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, asked the European states to prepare a multinational military force, to insure the security of the aid workers in Zaire, and by 14 November such a force was ready. However, after Rwandan refugees began to return, the international community reevaluated the situation; on 22-23 November, representatives of 29 countries and 6 humanitarian agencies called for a cancellation of the multinational military force to Zaire, at a meeting in Stuttgart, Germany.

Meanwhile, the ADFL announced the termination of the cease-fire on 21 November, and began to strengthen its control in the Kivu region. At the end of 1996, the ADFL in collaboration with Rwandan, Burundian and Ugandan forces, launched an offensive along the eastern border of Zaire and took control of a 900-mile-wide part of eastern Zaire.

On 20 January 1997, the Zairian government announced that it would "wage war" against the Alliance rebels. On 9 February, the ADFL launched a new offensive and, by the 12th, had captured Isiro in the north and were moving toward Buta. Zaire had tried to supplement its army with some 300 foreign (white) mercenaries from Belgium, France, Bosnia, Serbia and South Africa. It was also assisted by Morocco, Sudan and Libya.

In February, the Security Council endorsed a five-point peace plan and entrusted Special Envoy Mohamed Sahnoun with the task of implementing it. In March, as the situation in Zaire deteriorated, an international force of more than 1,000 troops - most from the United States, France and Belgium - was stationed in neighboring Congo in case it became necessary to evacuate non-Zairian nationals from the country. On 20 March, President Mobutu of Zaire called for a cease-fire, and the next day he returned to Zaire. Peace talks between government and rebel representatives began on 5 April in South Africa, and on the 9th the US urged Mobutu to resign. The next day Kabila demanded Mobutu's resignation within three days or his forces would march toward the capital, Kinshasa. On 12 April, Mobutu agreed for the first time to meet with Kabila.

On 23 April, the U.N. refugee agency expressed "deep concern" over reports that rebels had killed many Rwandan Hutu refugees at camps near Kisangani, and accused the rebels of pursuing a "policy of slow extermination." On 27 April, Kabila gave the UN 60 days to repatriate more than 85,000 Rwandan Hutu refugees or "we will do it ourselves." The next day, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Bill Richardson flew to Zaire to try to broker an end to the crisis.

In the peace talks between President Mobuto and rebel leader Kabila, mediated under the leadership of South African President Mandela on 4 May, Mobutu proposed to hand power to the winner of an election in which he would not be a candidate, but Kabila demanded that Mobutu would step down immediately and cede authority to his rebel forces.

The peace talks resumed on 15 May: mediators held talks with representatives from both sides, focusing on terms for Mobutu's quick resignation. On 16 May, President Mobutu gave up power, ending 32 years of rule over Africa's third-largest nation, and left the capital. Mobutu's departure terminated the international crisis, arising from Zaire's civil war. On the 17th, as ADFL forces entered Kinshasa, Kabila announced the establishment of the Democratic Republic of Congo, and declared himself president of the state.

(The country had been known as the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 1964 until Mobutu changed it to Zaire in 1971. On 23 May the United Nations was informed of the changes in the country's name, leadership, national anthem and flag. On 7 September, Mobutu died in exile in Morocco.)

References:

The Seattle Times Company, CNN On-Line News, Keesing's Record of World Events

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


