CRISNO 293

AIR RHODESIA INCIDENT

Background:

The shooting down of a Rhodesian civilian plane precipitated a crisis for Rhodesia and Zambia from 3 September to 31 October 1978.

Summary:

On 3 September 1978 an Air Rhodesia Viscount civilian plane was shot down unexpectedly by ZAPU (Zimbabwe African Peoples Union) guerrillas near Kariba, in Rhodesia's border area with Zambia, triggering a crisis for Rhodesia. Ten survivors were reportedly murdered on the ground after the plane had crashed. The plane was shot down by a heat-seeking SAM-7 missile, the first time such advanced weaponry had been used in the war over Rhodesia. Zambia, anticipating Rhodesian retaliation, appealed to the U.K. to restrain Rhodesia. The U.S. and Britain urged Prime Minister Smith of Rhodesia not to retaliate. The UN Secretary-General condemned the guerrilla attack. Within Rhodesia, the incident had caused great indignation. Smith announced on 10 September that martial law legislation would be introduced. Four days later Smith rejected the inclusion of ZAPU leader Nkomo in any internal settlement and objected to British and American support for the Zimbabwean guerrillas. Zambia complied with a Rhodesian demand to ground all civil aviation.

Smith visited the U.S. on 7 October. On the l0th all racial discrimination in Rhodesia was formally abolished. The same day the Security Council passed a resolution, at India's initiative, condemning the U.S. for allowing Smith's visit. On 19 October Rhodesia launched a major offensive against targets in Zambia, triggering a crisis for the latter. The raid was mainly against ZAPU bases, and 300 followers of Nkomo were reportedly killed. Zambia responded with military resistance: minor clashes ensued. President Kaunda declared on 23 October that his country was militarily weaker than Rhodesia and was unable to fight back. Kaunda also had 18 foreigners arrested on suspicion of aiding Rhodesia. Kaunda's statement of weakness ended Zambia's crisis. Rhodesia's crisis ended on 31 October with an extension of martial law to half the country. The crisis ended with no change in the status quo.

The USSR was not involved, the U.S. marginally so.

References:

ACR 1978; AD 1978; ARec 1978; ARB 1978; Keesing's 1978.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


