CRISNO 63

CHANGKUFENG

Background:

A crisis between Japan and the USSR over an incident at Lake Hasan occurred between 13 July and 11 August 1938.

Background and Pre-crisis Both Soviet and Japanese border garrisons had been posted in the area of Lake Hasan (Changkufeng) on the Soviet-Manchukuo frontier since the initial Japanese occupation of Manchuria in 1931. Between 1935 and 1938 there were more than 50 border incidents among Soviet, Japanese, and Manchukuon forces, almost all minor skirmishes. Due to the complex terrain there were many areas where the frontier was not clear, including the Changkufeng hill area. In October 1937 there had been a minor clash in the vicinity, but Changkufeng itself was not involved. On 7 July 1938 local Japanese commanders received information of Soviet intentions to occupy the area, and on 11 July about 40 Soviet soldiers appeared atop Changkufeng and began construction of new fortified positions.

Summary:

On 13 July imperial headquarters in Tokyo perceived a crisis for Japan when they received information attesting to Soviet occupation of, and activity at, Changkufeng. The Korean army headquarters were also informed on that day. Both armies were preparing for a major campaign at Hangchow in the Sino/Japanese War, and their respective headquarters did not wish an escalation of the situation near Lake Hasan. The Japanese local commanders, seemingly acting independently, met the Soviet activity with military force. The major fighting began on 27 July, but there was no evidence to suggest official sanction by either a supreme military or civil decision-making body in Japan.

On 29 July the Soviets crossed the frontier at Shatsofeng, near Changkufeng, and began to construct positions there. On 31 July the Soviet Union perceived a crisis when its forces were involved in heavy fighting. The Soviets responded with a major counterattack on 2 August, the same day that Japan's major response occurred: the Japanese cabinet decided to settle the dispute through negotiation. Indeed, Japan's civilian authorities had been endeavoring to remove any possibility of further military clashes by ordering the withdrawal of Japanese troops from the area. Between 4 and 11 August Ambassador Shigemitsu and Foreign Affairs Commissar Litvinov met to discuss the possibilities of a peaceful settlement. By 7 August heavy artillery pieces were being employed by the Soviet forces as fighting continued. On 10 August Litvinov proposed a truce, which came into effect the following day, terminating the crisis for both actors.

This crisis was not submitted to the League of Nations.

References:

See sources for Case #72.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


