CRISNO 428

SYRIA-TURKEY

Background:

From 1 October to 20 October 1998, Syria experienced a single actor crisis triggered by Turkey.

Background

Syria and Turkey have had a history of sour relations. The most salient issue of contention had been Syrian alleged support of the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK), which has waged a civil war in southeast Turkey since 1984. Turkey specifically accused Syria of protecting and hiding the PKK leader, Abdullah Ocalan.

The two countries had also been at odds about water rights of the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, which flow from Turkey into Syria. Moreover, Syria has claimed sovereignty over the southern Turkish province of Hatay. Finally, Syria has felt threatened by a military-cooperation agreement between Turkey and Israel. On 26 September 1998, Israel and Turkey agreed to an arms deal, drawing the ire of many Arab countries including Syria.

Summary:

After Turkey's National Security Council (MGK) convened to discuss relations with Syria, Turkish President Suleyman Demirel announced on 1 October 1998, that Turkey reserved the "right of retaliation against Syria" for its "hostile attitude despite all our warnings and efforts and that our patience is about to be exhausted." The threats were primarily in reference to the alleged Syrian support of the PKK. Turkey also began mobilizing troops along the Syrian border, and there were reports of Turkish military aircraft violating Syrian airspace. Turkey also threatened to strike PKK camps in Syrian-controlled Lebanon. This triggered a foreign policy crisis for Syria, which immediately denied Turkey’s accusations and declared its intent to resolve the tension diplomatically.

After the Arab League urged Turkey to open "serious dialogue" with Syria, Egyptian President Mubarak began mediation efforts on 4 October with a visit to Syria, followed by a visit to Turkey a few days later. Mubarak warned Demirel that a Turkish military strike would lead to an "unending cycle of reactions and counter-reactions." During the meetings in Turkey, Demirel gave Mubarak a file listing the steps that needed to be taken to end the crisis.

On 8 October, Turkey gave Syria an ultimatum with 45 days to comply. The demands were for Syria to extradite Ocalan and to close down PKK camps in Syria and Syria-controlled Lebanon. On the same day, Iran's Foreign Minister, Kamal Kharazai, began additional mediation efforts, as he met first with Syrian President Hafez el-Assad and then flew to Turkey a few days later after a series of telephone conversations with both sides. In addition, Iranian President Mohammad Khatami called on Turkey and Syria to decrease tensions in separate messages to the respective presidents.

However, the Egyptian mediation remained the primary vehicle for conflict management, as Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Mussa delivered a "concrete message" from Asad to Demriel on 12 October that helped reduce some of the tension in the crisis. After Turkish and Syrian delegations met in Adana, Turkey, an agreement was reached that ended the crisis. Syria banned the PKK and its leader Ocalan, although it asserted that Ocalan was not in Syria at the time.

The UN Secretariat was minimally involved in the crisis, as Secretary General Kofi Annan urged the parties to resolve the dispute peacefully. The US and Russia also urged restraint on both sides.

References:

Sources: Keesings, Lexis-Nexis.

Last Updated: 1/23/2006


