CRISNO 245

TANZANIA-UGANDA I

Background:

A crisis for Tanzania and Uganda began on 20 October and ended on 25 November 1971.

Background and Pre-crisis On 25 January 1971, while Uganda President Milton Obote was out of the country, a coup took place and General Idi Amin assumed power. Obote took refuge in Tanzania where he was joined by about 1,000 loyal Ugandan soldiers. Other Ugandans fled to southern Sudan. Amin viewed Tanzania and Sudan as possible jump-off points for military operations against his regime. Sharp hostility existed between Tanzanian President Nyerere and Amin. On 7 July Amin closed the border with Tanzania, alleging that guerrillas had infiltrated from Tanzania into Uganda. Further allegations, in early August, pointed to Tanzanian violations of Ugandan airspace and tank and troop movements into Ugandan territory. On 24 August Amin announced that his troops had clashed with Chinese-led Tanzanian forces. More reports of troop movements and bombings followed, and by the end of September accusations were steadily exchanged between the two countries.

Summary:

A crisis for Tanzania began on 20 October 1971 when it was announced that Ugandan air force jet fighters had destroyed a Tanzanian military camp that was perceived by Amin as a base for ex-President Obote and his men. On 24 October Uganda claimed that Tanzania had mobilized its forces on the border between the two states, triggering a crisis for Uganda. The Tanzanian response was a statement by the minister of information and broadcasting the next day, objecting to the Ugandan threat to destroy Tanzanian bases established north of the Kagera River and declaring its intention to meet with resistance any troop movements in that area. Amin responded on 1 November with a declaration of his determination to defend "every inch of Ugandan territory." There is evidence that both Uganda and Tanzania had moved troops to the border.

On 21 November Amin reestablished air and telephone communications with Tanzania. The crisis ended for both actors on 25 November. Nyerere, though still refusing to recognize Amin, announced his intention to reduce the number of troops on the border. These unilateral acts terminated the crisis.

The U.S., the USSR, and the UN remained aloof from this crisis.

References:

ACR 1971; AR 1971; ARB 1971; ARec 1971; Gukiina 1972; Kyemba 1977; Low 1973; Martin 1974.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


