CRISNO 153

QALQILYA

Background:

A crisis for Jordan and Israel took place from 13 September until late October 1956.

Background and Pre-crisis Infiltration into Israeli territory from neighboring Arab states occurred with increasing frequency during the six years prior to the Sinai Campaign. Acts of reprisal against the Arab state from whose territory infiltrators crossed into Israel were numerous and swift (see Cases #134, #143, and #149). Most recently, during July and August 1956, dozens of Israelis were killed or wounded as a result of several infiltrations of feda'iyyun (guerrilla) groups from Jordan.

Summary:

On 13 September 1956 Israeli forces blew up a police station in the Jordanian village of Garandal. King Hussein's response, the following day, was a decision to visit Iraq to consult Prime Minister Nuri al-Sa'id about the possible stationing of Iraqi troops in Jordan. After several other incidents from Jordan, including the firing on Israeli archaeologists meeting at a border settlement, Israel carried out another reprisal on the Jordanian village of Husan. A third reprisal raid took place on 10 October at Qalqilya in response to a Jordanian ambush of an Israeli bus.

On the 12th Iraq issued a statement that it was ready to send troops to Jordan immediately, if requested to do so. This triggered a crisis for Israel. Foreign Minister Golda Meir responded the next day by declaring that the stationing of Iraqi troops in Jordan would be a threat to Israel's integrity and that in such an event Israel would retaliate. In addition, Israel's ambassadors to the major powers were called home for consultation, and a request was made to convene the UN Security Council.

Israel's crisis ended on 15 October with a Jordanian declaration that Iraqi forces would not enter Jordan at that time but would do so if Israel attacked. The crisis for Jordan faded at the end of October. At that time British planes from Cyprus flew over Jordan in a symbolic gesture to reinforce the Jordan regime which had been undermined by the Qalqilya raid.

The UN Secretary-General met with the representatives of the powers and the two crisis actors and warned of Security Council intervention if peace did not prevail in the area. After the raid on Qalqilya, General Burns, the head of the UN Observer Forces, attempted to stop the fighting but was not successful. The U.S. was involved politically; the USSR was not active.

References:

See sources for Case #152.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


