CRISNO 340

LIBYA THREAT TO SUDAN

Background:

Sudan, Egypt, and Libya were enmeshed in a crisis from 11 to 22 February 1983.

Background and Pre-crisis Sudan and Libya experienced a basic change in political regime almost simultaneously: a seizure of power by Brigadier-General Numeiri in Khartoum in May 1969; and a coup d'état led by Colonel Qaddhafi in Tripoli in September 1969, overthrowing the monarchy. Both proved to be durable leaders--Numeiri, until his ouster in 1985; and Qaddhafi, who is still in power. However, the two regimes differed markedly: Numeiri was pro-West; and Qaddhafi projected a messianic role, designed to transform the Arab world. The result was increasing tension and hostility between the two leaders and their states during the 1970s and early 1980s.

Sudan perceived continuous attempts at subversion by Qaddhafi, aimed at expanding his influence in Africa and the Arab world through mergers, as with Chad, Egypt, and Tunisia. Diplomatic relations were severed in 1976-77 and from 1981 to 1985. There were many border incidents and alleged overflights of Sudan's territory. One of these generated an international crisis.

Tension escalated in the autumn of 1983 with a visible increase in Libya's military presence, notably air power, near Sudan's northern border: MIG-23s and TU-22 bombers supplied by the Soviet Union were concentrated near the border.

Summary:

Evidence of a Libya military buildup and the perception in Khartoum and Cairo, by 11 February, of a Libyan plan to overthrow the Numeiri regime triggered a crisis for Sudan and Egypt. The next day Sudan complained to the UN and placed its forces on alert. Egypt, too, perceived Libya's military buildup as a threat, especially because of its commitments to Sudan under the terms of their mutual defense agreement in 1976 and their Charter of Integration in October 1982. Cairo responded on the 12th by sending fighter planes close to its border with Sudan and transport planes to Aswan in southern Egypt, within easy distance for a rapid deployment of troops to Sudan. President Mubarak also warned the U.S. of an impending Libyan attack on Sudan.

On 17 February the U.S. became militarily involved, though not as a full-fledged crisis actor: it dispatched four multipurpose AWACS reconnaissance planes to Egypt and the aircraft carrier, Nimitz, to the Red Sea off the coast of Sudan and Egypt. These signals of U.S. resolve to support Arab allies triggered a crisis for Libya. It responded the next day by concentrating more air power near the Egyptian border. On the 21st Sudan renewed its charge of a growing Libyan military buildup close to its border, despite U.S. and Egyptian assurances that the Libyan threat had declined. The same day Egypt accused Libya of interfering in Sudan's internal affairs and affirmed that it would assist Sudan's defense against military intervention. Sudan renewed this charge the next day and accused Libya of violating its airspace. However, on the 22nd Numeiri and Mubarak met in Khartoum to consider the implementation of their 1982 integration agreement: this reduced Sudan's stress and ended the 11-day crisis for all three actors, along with the international crisis as a whole.

The UN Security Council, on 22 February, provided a forum for debate on the crisis between Sudan and Libya; but it did not play a role in crisis management. And the USSR was not involved directly: its supply of arms to Libya made possible--but did not shape--Qaddhafi's behavior toward his neighbors.

(A year later, the same three actors were embroiled in another crisis [see Case #350].)

References:

ACR 1983-84; AR 1983; ARB 1983; ARec 1983; Keesing's 1983; MECS 1982-83.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


