CRISNO 305

GOULIMIME-TARFAYA ROAD

Background:

A Polisario attack on a strategic road in Morocco led to a crisis for Morocco and Algeria from 1 to 25 June 1979.

Summary:

A large-scale Polisario military operation inside Moroccan territory, on the Goulimime-Tarfaya road, triggered a crisis for Morocco on 1 June 1979. The targeting of an important mineral area within Morocco was quite rare. An additional incident took place on 4 June, north of Zag. The Moroccan response was multiple, including violence. Its troops met the Polisario guerrillas, losing about 20 soldiers, with a number of others wounded. On 6 June King Hassan announced that he had ordered the Moroccan army, in the future, to exercise its "right of pursuit" whenever lives of Moroccan citizens were endangered; that decision had been taken by the Moroccan Chamber of Representatives in March. The next day Hassan appealed to the OAU. Moreover, the ambassadors of the five permanent members of the Security Council were summoned to the Foreign Ministry and told that Morocco would not stand by "with arms folded" against repeated aggression. And on the 15th Morocco requested an urgent meeting of the Security Council.

The right of pursuit claim made by the king on 6 June triggered a crisis for Algeria, which feared Moroccan incursions into its territory. On the l0th Algeria appealed to the incumbent Chairman of the OAU, Sudan's President Numeiri. Ambassadors of the permanent members of the Security Council were summoned to Algeria's Foreign Ministry as well.

A major Polisario offensive took place at Tan Tan on 13 June. This city had been the victim of an earlier attack in January 1979 (see Case #299).

The Security Council discussed the issue from 15 to 25 June; no resolution was passed. On the 25th Morocco requested the indefinite suspension of the UN debate, having perceived the lowering of tensions after the incidents at the beginning of the month. Polisario attacks into Morocco had been temporarily stopped; and it did not exercise its right of pursuit into Algeria. Morocco's request ended the crisis, but there was no agreement between the adversaries. The OAU "Committee of Wise Men" (Sudan, Mali, Nigeria, Guinea, and the Ivory Coast) met on 23 June to discuss the conflict and set forth recommendations.

There was no superpower involvement during the 1979 crisis. However, Polisario was armed with Soviet-made antiaircraft missiles, tanks, and artillery, while the United States supplied King Hassan with large amounts of military equipment, including jet fighters and radar.

(In subsequent years Morocco adopted a strategy of building massive walls of sand across the Sahara Desert, advancing steadily and bringing nearly one-third of the territory of Western Sahara and almost all of its population inside their ramparts. Since 1981 Polisario has been unable to breach the advancing walls. Nonetheless, despite military losses, Polisario has scored important diplomatic victories: it was admitted into the OAU in 1982; and in November 1984 the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic was seated as a full-fledged member. In protest, Morocco quit the OAU. It was supported by Zaire, which suspended its participation.)

References:

ACR 1979; AD 1979; ARec 1979; ARB 1979; WA 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


