CRISNO 21

KARL'S RETURN TO HUNGARY

Background:

Three of the Austro-Hungarian Empire's successor states--Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Hungary--experienced a two-phase crisis from 27 March until 15 November 1921.

Background Karl IV, the last Hapsburg Emperor of Austria-Hungary, abdicated in November 1918 and was exiled to Switzerland; but he did not abdicate his right to the throne.

Pre-crisis Early in 1921 the Conference of Ambassadors, acting for the Supreme Council (Big Ten) at the Paris Peace Conference, issued a decree forbidding the restoration of the Hapsburg family to the vacant Hungarian throne. Moreover, several European governments issued statements indicating what recourse they might have if a Hapsburg reascended the throne in Budapest.

Summary:

On 27 March 1921 Karl unexpectedly returned to his homeland and called upon the Regent of Hungary, Admiral Horthy, to transfer his powers to the rightful ruler. This act triggered a crisis for Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia. The latter responded two days later by declaring that it would regard any attempt to restore Karl as a casus belli. And Prague responded on the 30th with a Note to Hungary threatening diplomatic, economic, and military measures if Karl was not deported promptly. These warnings triggered a crisis for Hungary: they were perceived as threats of invasion and occupation, as well as a challenge to its political regime, by two neighbors then bound by a military alliance. Budapest responded on 1 April by adopting measures to deport Karl.

More pressure was imposed by the Conference of Ambassadors: it sent a Note to Hungary warning of "disastrous consequences" if Karl was not removed. And on the 4th Czechoslovakia issued an ultimatum demanding Karl's deportation by the 7th. Yugoslavia supported the Czechoslovak action. So too did Romania. The first stage of this crisis--but not the international crisis as a whole--ended for all actors on 5 April when Karl was induced by Hungary, quietly, to return to Switzerland.

Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia each perceived a second crisis over a renewed Hapsburg attempt to regain the Hungarian throne. In the months following Karl's resumed exile in Switzerland efforts were made to solve the "Hapsburg Question." While negotiations were in motion Karl suddenly returned to Hungary once more, on 20 October 1921, triggering a fresh foreign policy crisis for the same three states. The situation was aggravated by his arrival in German-speaking Burgenland, then a contentious issue for Hungary and Austria (see Case #24--Burgenland Dispute)--and by the fact that royalist forces there rallied to Karl. In fact, he marched on Budapest with an improvised force.

On 22 October Hungary's government acknowledged a fear of invasion by its neighbors, with good reason. Czechoslovakia mobilized its army that day. And Yugoslavia did so the next day. The Conference of Ambassadors accentuated Hungary's concern by threatening to allow the Little Entente (Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Romania) to act as it saw fit in the crisis. On 29 October the first two Little Entente allies issued an ultimatum threatening to invade Hungary unless the Hapsburg Question was resolved. Karl was arrested, handed over to the Allies, and exiled on 1 November to Portugal's island of Madeira (where he died in 1922).

Under pressure from the victorious Allies, Hungary's National Assembly passed a law on 10 November 1921 excluding a Hapsburg restoration to the throne forever. As a result Yugoslavia demobilized its forces on the 12th and Czechoslovakia on the 15th indicating the end of the international crisis as a whole arising from Karl's attempt to regain the throne of Hungary.

(The former imperial family was also barred from neighboring Austria. When the Hapsburg heir defied this law 75 years later, in March 1996, President Klestil urged the repeal of an "anachronistic" law, noting that Karl's aged sons did not pose a threat to Austria.)

There were many involved actors. France, Italy, Japan, and the U.K., acting through the Conference of Ambassadors, as noted, adopted a tough stand against a Hapsburg restoration. Romania, even as a passive member of the Little Entente, was perceived by Hungary as another potential invader. Austria was perceived by Hungary as actively supporting the royalist forces backing Karl. Spain and Switzerland, along with Austria, were involved in the negotiations to find a suitable exile for Karl. Poland sent a protest note to Hungary. And Portugal provided a place of exile for Karl. This case also revealed the power and solidarity of the Little Entente in the early 1920s.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

DBFP (Medlicott et al.) 1980; Boulter 1928; Dedijer 1974; Horthy 1957; Kertesz 1953; Toynbee 1927c; Vondracek 1937.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


