CRISNO 333

U-137 INCIDENT

Background:

Sweden and the USSR were enmeshed in a crisis from 28 October to 6 November 1981 over the unauthorized entry of a Soviet submarine into a restricted Swedish military zone.

Background The Soviet Union was heavily engaged in international crises elsewhere when the U-137 crisis occurred: in Afghanistan (see Case #303--Afghanistan Invasion, in 1979-80, in Asia: Non-PCs); and in Poland (see Case #315--Solidarity, in 1980-81, in Europe: Non-PCs). Nor was this the first--or the last--Soviet penetration of Sweden's territorial waters: on 18 September 1980 an unidentified (probably Soviet) submarine infiltrated and withdrew by 6 October.

Summary:

On 28 October 1981 a Swedish fisherman discovered a submarine near the naval base of Karlskrona in southern Sweden, a restricted military zone. The "whiskey-class" submarine had become wedged on the rocks; hence the alternative name of this crisis--"Whiskey on the Rocks." Sweden responded the same day with a protest note to Moscow by its foreign minister. The Soviet ambassador in Sweden explained that the submarine was unable to leave because of "technical problems" and sought permission for a Soviet rescue operation.

A Swedish ad hoc crisis decision-making group, comprising the prime minister, foreign minister, supreme commander of the armed forces, permanent under-secretary of foreign affairs, and others, also decided the following on the 28th: to turn down a request for the entry of Soviet rescue ships; to prevent any contact between Soviet embassy personnel in Stockholm and the crew of the submarine; and to have the national research defense agency inspect the submarine, for nuclear material was suspected. That cluster of decisions triggered a crisis for the USSR. Moscow perceived a multifaceted threat: to its superpower image; to its influence among nonaligned states; to its relations with Sweden; and to its image for probity regarding nuclear material.

At a meeting of Sweden's crisis group on the 29th preparations were made for possible violence in the Karlskrona area. However, it ruled out the use of force against the submarine for the time being. Foreign Minister Ola Ullsten told the Soviet ambassador the same day that Sweden had the right to question the submarine commander, to investigate the incident, and to conduct rescue operations. He also demanded an apology for the violation of Sweden's territorial waters. And he rejected a request to permit Soviet representatives to visit the submarine.

Swedish leaders left Stockholm for a quiet weekend in order to convey the impression that the situation was under control. On 1 November, the Prime Minister, Thorbjorn Falldin, briefed the Opposition leader, Olof Palme. An alert was announced on the 2nd because of a reported approach of Soviet vessels. And top-level consultations were held on the nuclear issue: Swedish experts believed that the crippled submarine contained nuclear weapons. The submarine commander was interrogated the same day. And the next day Swedish experts inspected the submarine.

On 2 and 3 November the Soviet ambassador conveyed Moscow's irritation at Sweden's behavior and the prolonged interrogation of the submarine commander, as well as its "aggressive tone." On the 4th the Soviet ambassador neither confirmed nor denied the presence of nuclear weapons in the submarine. This aspect of the crisis remained ambiguous throughout, with Sweden avoiding a direct accusation to that effect.

The Soviet Tass news agency reported the incident for the first time on 4 November, describing it as an "accidental violation of Sweden's sovereignty." More Soviet ships were detected approaching the crisis area; and a second Swedish protest note was dispatched. Sweden's decision to release the submarine was made on 5 November. Due to weather conditions, it departed on the 6th, terminating the crisis for both states. On the 11th Moscow apologized to Sweden. It was viewed by Sweden at the time as its most serious foreign policy crisis of the postwar era.

The UN and the U.S. were not involved in this crisis.

(In February 1995, Sweden's premier confirmed that most intrusions into its territorial waters during the preceding 20 years were minks--which generated sound patterns similar to those of submarines--not Soviet subs!)

References:

Agrell 1983, 1986; Leitenberg 1982; Lofgren 1984; O'Ballance 1984; Stern 1992; Stern and Sundelius 1992, 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


