CRISNO 150

PUSHTUNISTAN II

Background:

High tension between Afghanistan and Pakistan in the border area was further revived from 27 March to November 1955.

Background This crisis was another stage in the ongoing conflict over Afghanistan's demand for the creation of an independent Pushtu (Pathan) state in territory that, at that time, was under Pakistani control.

Summary:

The crisis began on 27 March when information reached Afghanistan of the Pakistani government's proposal to incorporate the areas of Pushtu-speaking people in the North West Frontier into a unified province of West Pakistan, the "One Unit Scheme." Afghanistan responded with a broadcast by Prime Minister Daoud voicing his government's protest and a formal note protesting the proposed merger. This reached Karachi on 29 March and triggered a crisis for Pakistan. The next day Pakistan's embassy in Kabul was attacked. Pakistan responded on 1 April with a declaration by Prime Minister Mohammed Ali that Pakistan would not tolerate any intervention in its domestic affairs and would not rest until amends were made for the attack on its embassy. Further Pakistani steps were taken on 1 May: the breaking off of diplomatic relations; the closing of the borders; and the termination of economic relations, including the closing down of all Afghan trade agencies in Pakistan. The latter had a severe effect on Afghanistan, which was dependent on Pakistani ports for trade. Afghanistan announced a mobilization and declared a state of emergency. Pakistan dispatched troops to the border. By 9 September the two adversaries reached an agreement whereby Afghanistan promised to make amends for the insult to Pakistan's flag. On 14 October a united West Pakistan was inaugurated, including areas of the North West Frontier Province that bordered Afghanistan. The One Unit Scheme terminated Pakistan's crisis. The diplomatic issue regarding Pakistan's embassy in Afghanistan was solved by a formal reopening in Kabul in November 1955, terminating the crisis for Afghanistan.

The 9 September agreement resulted, in part, from multiple mediation efforts. The first attempt at mediation involved Prince Musaid Din Abdur Rahman from Saudi Arabia, Col. Anwar Sadat from Egypt and La-Sayed Abdul Kadir Al-Gaylani and Ibrahim Al-Rauri, the Iraqi ministers in Karachia and Kabul respectively. The mediation began with the arrival of Rahman in Kabul on 14 May 1955 but was deemed a failure by 6 June. However, a new round of mediated negotiations began in early July that ultimately was influential in facilitating crisis abatement. This second attempt at mediation included delegations from Iran, Iraq and Turkey.

(After diplomatic and economic relations were restored the core issue of independence for the Pushtuns was once more brought to the fore. Although the conflict over Pushtunistan continued, the high level of tension was reduced by reciprocal visits of Pakistan's prime minister and Afghanistan's president in August 1956 when both declared their intentions to improve relations.)

The USSR was marginally involved in this crisis. The U.S. and the UN were not involved.

References:

See sources for Case #129.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


