CRISNO 406

IRAQ NO-FLY ZONE

Background:

Iraq experienced a post-Gulf War crisis from 18 August to 8 September 1992 over the "no-fly zone" imposed by the U.S., the U.K., and France.

Background and Pre-crisis Notwithstanding its military defeat in January-February 1991 (see Case #393--Gulf War), Iraq's regime continued a long-standing policy of repression against its Kurdish minority in the north and the Shia in the south. The victors in the war, led by the U.S., created "safe havens" for the Kurds in April 1991, following their failed rebellion against Saddam Hussein's regime and the mass flight--estimated at almost two million refugees--into the mountains of Iraqi Kurdistan. That Western interventionist regime in northern Iraq was still in force, in a modified form, six years after the war.

The idea of a no-fly zone south of the 32nd Parallel emerged from reports in early August 1992 of increasing Iraqi military activity and violations of human rights among the Shia population in southern Iraq.

On 11 August, at a UN Security Council meeting convened at the request of France, the U.K., and the U.S., the UN rapporteur on human rights in Iraq reported that there was documentary evidence of a systematic policy by Iraq to destroy the Shia Arabs of the marshlands and their culture. The Council did not pass a resolution; but this meeting was perceived--by Iraq, the Western powers, and others--as a step toward enforcing Iraq's compliance with the provision of Security Council Resolution 688, passed at the end of the Gulf War, demanding that Iraq's regime cease suppressing its Kurdish and Shia minorities. On 12 August Iraq dismissed Mr. van der Stoel's report as "inaccurate."

Summary:

On 18 August 1992 senior officials from France, the U.K., and the U.S. announced that they had decided to impose an "air exclusion zone" over Iraq. This was followed by a U.K. announcement of the dispatch of six Tornado jets to take part in an allied operation to protect the population of southern Iraq. These two announcements triggered a crisis for Iraq, which perceived a threat to its sovereignty and territorial integrity. On 20 August France announced that it would send 10 Mirage-2000 jets to the region. The U.S. already had more than 200 planes in the area.

Iraq's initial response, on the 20th, was to denounce the Western plan for an exclusive zone--an "imperialist conspiracy" aimed at dismembering Iraq. The same day Egypt expressed concern for the sovereignty and integrity of Iraq's territory. Turkey, too, announced that it opposed any plan "directed against the integrity of Iraq." And on 23 August official statements from Algeria, Jordan, Libya, Sudan, Syria, Yemen, and the Arab League expressed concern about the integrity of Iraq, warning that the plan would increase tension in the region.

On 26 August U.S. President Bush officially announced the establishment of the exclusion zone by France, Russia, the U.K., and the U.S., in order to protect the Shia population of southern Iraq. The decision imposed an immediate ban on flights by Iraqi helicopters and aircraft south of the 32nd Parallel.

Iraq was officially notified about the decision through its Permanent Representative at the UN, Abdul Amir al-Anbari.

Al-Anbari responded by denouncing the decision as an "illegal act" that required "clear and firm" Arab opposition and warned that "Iraq will choose the proper way and the proper time to confront this outrageous aggression." Algeria, Jordan, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen condemned the decision as a dangerous precedent in the region and as an indicator of the West's intention of partitioning Iraq into three blocks--Kurdish in the north, Sunni in the center, and Shia in the south. Egypt and Sa'udi Arabia, the leading Arab allies in the U.S.-led, anti-Iraq coalition of 1990-91, expressed reservations. Only Kuwait publicly approved the plan.

In late August, with the no-fly zone in effect, Iraq increased its ground campaign against Shia rebels in the south. However, Baghdad showed tacit compliance with the decision: it ordered its air force to keep away from the exclusion zone and instructed its ground forces not to fire at Western aircraft.

The major powers who initiated the no-fly zone strengthened their military power in the area. France sent another four Mirage jets. And Russia, throughout the 1990 crisis and war the most empathetic toward Iraq, announced on 1 September that it would send two warships to the Gulf.

On 5 September King Hassan of Morocco issued a strong warning against the West's "dangerous policy" toward Iraq. Foreign ministers from the six-member Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), dominated by Sa'udia Arabia, met in Jiddah on 8-9 September and accepted the enforcement of the no-fly zone over southern Iraq.

On 8 September Iraq's government reassured U.S., British, and French pilots monitoring the 'air exclusion zone' that they had nothing to fear if forced to land on Iraqi territory because of mechanical problems.

The crisis for Iraq seemed to end on 8 September with Iraq's compliance and statements that reduced tension among the confronting parties.

(Four years later a fresh crisis--between Iraq and the United States--erupted over both no-fly zones. Iraqi troops and armor entered the Kurdish safe haven in September 1996, in support of one of the two factions vying for power in Iraqi Kurdistan for decades, the Kurdistan Democratic Party. The U.S., viewing this incursion as a violation of the safe haven--and a threat to its vital interests in the Gulf region, responded with two missile attacks against Iraqi air defenses in the southern no-fly zone; direct military intervention in the north was not politically feasible. After a symbolic Iraqi retaliation against a U.S. plane flying a reconnaissance mission in the south, both adversaries refrained from further escalation of the 1996 Iraq no-fly zone crisis.)

References:

Baker 1995; Keesing's 1992; New York Times 1992, 1996.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


