CRISNO 54

SPANISH CIVIL WAR II

Background:

Italy, Germany, and Spain were engaged in an acute intra-war crisis from 24 to 31 May 1937.

Pre-crisis Barely a month after the Republican victory in the Battle of Guadalajara (8-18 March 1937), Europe's great powers signed an agreement (20 April), designed to curtail the dispatch of arms to the protagonists in the Spanish civil war. However, it was ignored by the three most highly involved powers, Italy and Germany supporting the rebels, the USSR aiding the Republic.

On 26 April the city of Guernica in the Basque region of northern Spain was bombed into near oblivion by German planes, a precedent for the mass bombing of Coventry, Rotterdam, Dresden, and other cities during World War II.

Within the Republican-controlled part of Spain, civil strife among the myriad of leftist factions reached a peak: pro-Moscow Communist forces crushed a rebellion by anarchists and Trotskyites in Barcelona. Their pressure, too, led to the ouster of Socialist leader Largo Caballero from the premiership, a post he had held, with Communist backing, since early September 1936. He was replaced on 16 May by Juan Negrín, a physiology professor at the University of Madrid.

Summary:

On 24 May a crisis for Italy was triggered by a Republican air attack on the island of Palma de Mallorca which, inter alia, hit the Italian cruiser, Barletta, killing six Italian seamen. The Barletta was part of the Non-Intervention Committee's Naval Control, designed to monitor the dispatch of weapons to both sides in the civil war. But the port of Palma de Mallorca was a known center for arms shipments to the nationalist rebels--and had been assigned to France for this regulatory task, suggesting that the Italian ship's presence in Palma could not have been by chance.

The Non-Intervention Committee condemned the attack on the 25th. So too did the League Council the next day. However, Italy did not respond to a perceived threat to its self-image as a major power and, therefore, to its influence. That task was undertaken by its ally in the Spanish civil war, Germany, in a similar incident soon after.

On 26 May the battleship, Deutschland, then lying in port at Ibiza, was hit by two Republican planes, killing 31 German seamen and wounding 83. An enraged Hitler responded by ordering a retaliation raid. This was carried out on the 31st, when a German cruiser and four destroyers demolished 35 buildings and killed 19 persons by indiscriminate shelling of the Republican-controlled port of Almería. Germany and Italy also withdrew, temporarily, from the Non-Intervention Committee's naval patrol, returning to the fold on 16 July.

The naval bombing of Almería triggered a brief, but acute, crisis for Spain. At a meeting of the Republican cabinet in Valencia one of the most influential figures in the Negrín government, the Basque leader, Prieto, seriously proposed bombing the German fleet in the Mediterranean, fully aware of the possible escalation to major power war. After an intense discussion, President Azaña and most of the cabinet--and Moscow--opposed the idea; and the Almería "incident" was ignored. Spain's decision not to respond to the German attack thus ended the crisis for all three actors. The Almería crisis sheds much light on foreign intervention in the Spanish civil war.

References:

See sources for Case #52; and Weinberg 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


