CRISNO 437

MYANMAR-THAILAND

Background:

From 16 May to 15 October 2002, Myanmar (Burma) and Thailand experienced a crisis along Thailand’s northern border.

Background

Since the end of the Sleeping Dog Hill crisis (see Case #405), border tensions between Myanmar and Thailand remained tense, as rebel groups in Myanmar, including the Karen National Union and the Shan State Army rebels continued to battle the ruling junta and their ally, the ethnic Wa forces. Myanmar had long accused the Thai military of supporting the Shan rebels.

Summary:

On 16 May 2002, stray mortar rounds fired by Myanmar troops at Shan rebel positions landed inside Thailand, causing thousands of Thai people to flee from the border and triggering a crisis for Thailand. On the next day, Thailand submitted a formal protest and warned Myanmar that Thai forces would respond in kind if the shelling continued. Myanmar then accused Thailand of harboring rebel groups fighting in Myanmar. After more stray shells continued to land in Thailand on 20 May, the Thai troops responded by firing warning shots of artillery into Myanmar and, after the shelling from Myanmar continued, firing at Myanmar and Wa positions. On the same day, Shan rebels captured four Myanmar bases, and Myanmar blamed Thailand’s artillery support for this outcome. This triggered a crisis for Myanmar, which protested the retaliation and threatened military action against Thai forces.

On 22 May, Myanmar closed border-crossing points, disrupting trade and tourism between the two belligerents. During the subsequent five months, tensions remained at a high level, as stray Burmese shells continued to fall in Thailand, Thai workers were expelled from Myanmar, and the border crossings were not reopened. Moreover, Myanmar’s media began a strong anti-Thai propaganda campaign, which included banning advertising of Thai products and referring to Thailand as “Yodaya,” the Myanmar word for the old Thai capital that Myanmar forces sacked in 1767. Thailand protested the propaganda attacks, and the Thai media responded with accusations against the Myanmar junta government.

As relations thawed in September, and both sides appeared willing to deescalate the crisis, Thai Foreign Ministry Permanent Secretary Tej Bunnang visited Yangon, Myanmar to have talks with Myanmar’s Deputy Foreign Minister Khin Maung Win on 7 October. As a result of this visit, Myanmar decided to reopen the border crossings on 15 October. As part of the process, both Myanmar and Thailand agreed to address future disagreements jointly and to increase monitoring of cross-border flows. The reopening of the border terminated the crisis.

References:

"Border crisis with Burma," Keesing's Record of World Events, June 2002; "Sacking of army commander," Keesing's Record of World Events, August 2002; "Relations with Burma," Keesing's Record of World Events, August 2002; Lexis Nexis Online (Deutsche Presse-Agentur, Bangkok Post)

Last Updated: 1/18/2005


