CRISNO 300

RAIDS ON ZIPRA

Background:

Rhodesian raids on guerrilla bases in Angola and Zambia occurred during a crisis for these three states from 12 February to 31 May 1979.

Pre-crisis The transitional Rhodesian government established in April 1978 made little progress toward reaching an understanding with the Patriotic Front, with no cease-fire in sight. By the beginning of 1979 Rhodesia's security forces reportedly totaled 50,000, including a 10,000-man army. In February 1979 guerrilla attacks on power and transport installations in Rhodesia increased.

Summary:

On 12 February 1979 another Air Rhodesia Viscount, on a flight from Kariba to Salisbury, was shot down by a SAM-7 missile, and all 59 passengers and crew were killed (see Case #293). In response to the downing of the plane by guerrillas in Zambia, Rhodesian forces attacked Zimbabwe People's Revolutionary Army (ZIPRA) bases in Zambia on 23 February. Three days later seven Rhodesian planes bombed a ZIPRA base near Luso in Angola, marking a new phase in the Rhodesian war, with Angolan territory now a target for Rhodesian raids. The attack triggered a crisis for Angola, which responded the following day with a strongly worded statement condemning Rhodesia, as well as South Africa. (The latter was thought to have provided Mirage planes for the attack.) March 1979 was marked by repeated skirmishes on all fronts.

On 13 April Rhodesian commandos again attacked guerrilla bases in Zambia, including ZAPU leader Joshua Nkomo's house in Lusaka, as well as other targets in the city and countryside. This triggered a crisis for Zambia, which responded on the 16th with a declaration by President Kaunda of a curfew on parts of the country close to the national railway line. On the 22nd Kaunda announced that Zambia would be receiving new weaponry.

On 10 May 1979 Angola's President Neto met with Kaunda and concluded an agreement declaring that an attack on either party would be considered an attack on both. A Joint Security Force was to be set up to repel Rhodesian or South African incursions into their territories. This pact marked the termination of Angola's crisis, while Zambia's crisis ended two days later with the lifting of the curfew that had been imposed on 16 April. The crisis ended for Rhodesia on 31 May with the change of government: that day Ian Smith handed over the reins of government to Bishop Abel Muzorewa.

The UN Security Council met on 8 March 1979 to discuss the strengthening of sanctions against Rhodesia, while condemning the forthcoming Rhodesian elections as insufficient in the provision for black representation in government.

The Ministerial Council of the OAU met between 1 and 3 March and adopted a resolution condemning Rhodesia. The U.S. and the USSR were not involved in this case.

References:

ACR 1979; AD 1979; ARec 1979; ARB 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


