CRISNO 316

LIBYA-MALTA OIL DISPUTE

Background:

Malta experienced a crisis with Libya over disputed offshore oil deposits from 20 August to 15 September 1980.

Background and Pre-crisis Malta's political leaders hoped that the island-state could emulate the former colonial ruler, the U.K., and become self-sufficient in oil by exploiting offshore deposits. The most promising of these was the large Medina Bank 68 miles southeast of Malta's main island. Malta claimed jurisdiction over Mediterranean waters to a distance of 98 miles south of its southern coast, which was halfway between Malta and Libya. President Qaddhafi, however, as part of Libya's maritime claims that included the entire Gulf of Syrte (see Cases #330 and #363--Gulf of Syrte I and II, in Africa: Non-PCs), claimed two-thirds of the offshore waters, to a point 65 miles from the southern coast of Malta.

Libya and Malta had agreed in 1976 to submit their dispute to the International Court of Justice. Although Malta refrained during this period from prospecting in the disputed area, Libya proceeded with geological soundings. In July 1980 Malta's Prime Minister Mintoff responded belatedly by requesting the Texaco Oil Company to resume earlier prospecting in the Medina Bank on behalf of the government of Malta. In August Texaco chartered an oil rig from the Italian state oil company, which set out for the disputed area.

Summary:

On 20 August 1980 one of Libya's submarines and, soon after, a Libyan frigate began to harass the oil rig, triggering a crisis for Malta. Upon the advice of Italy's Foreign Ministry the Italian chartered vessel ceased operations at the Medina Bank. Malta responded to the threat by placing its minuscule air force on alert on 26 August. The next day 42 Libyan military personnel were expelled from the island-state. And on 30 August a Malta government statement accused Libya of endangering peace in the Mediterranean.

The UN became involved on 4 September, when the Security Council, at Malta's request, considered Libya's alleged "illegal act." However, the Council adjourned without taking any action.

Italy's intervention proved to be decisive for crisis management. On 15 September Italy and Malta exchanged notes formalizing an agreement on Malta's neutrality, announced a week earlier. Italy, an erstwhile protector of Malta, with historic interests in the central Mediterranean, recognized Malta's self-declared nonalignment and offered military aid and diplomatic support, in return for Malta's pledge not to join any alliance, not to permit foreign troops to be based on the island, and not to grant U.S. or USSR warships docking facilities. Italy also promised substantial economic assistance. That Italian initiative terminated Malta's foreign policy crisis and the international crisis as a whole.

(In the post-crisis phase UN Secretary-General Waldheim expressed his intention on 17 October to send a special envoy to Malta and Libya to mediate their dispute. On 13 November he submitted a report to the Security Council, indicating that Libya had undertaken unconditionally to seek ratification by Libya's People's Congress of a new agreement to seek adjudication by the International Court of Justice in December. Moreover, Libya reaffirmed its willingness to strengthen ties of friendship and cooperation with Malta.)

The U.S. and the USSR were not active in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1980; AR 1980; ARB 1980; Keesing's 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


