CRISNO 372

PUNJAB WAR SCARE II

Background:

India and Pakistan were embroiled in one of the many crises during their protracted conflict from mid-January to 19 February 1987.

Background Despite periodic attempts to improve relations between India and Pakistan, the dominant traits for almost half a century have been mutual mistrust, hostility, tension, and frequent eruptions of violence. So it was in 1986, when relations worsened because of renewed fighting in Kashmir, a prize territory in dispute since independence (see Cases #119--Kashmir I, in 1947-49; #216--Kashmir II, in 1965-66; and #392--Kashmir III, in 1990), and because of India's allegation of Pakistan's material assistance to Sikh guerrilla activities aimed at independence in the Indian state of Punjab.

The concerns of both parties began to escalate when the adversary's forces did not return to their bases after substantial military exercises in October-December 1986 along the Indo/Pakistani border. At the beginning of December India and Pakistan increased the number of soldiers concentrated near their border, each side claiming it was part of routine military exercises in the area.

Summary:

In mid-January 1987 Indian reports claimed that Pakistani troops had crossed the Sutlej, one of the five major rivers in the Indus river system, and had massed troops and equipment in Pakistani (West) Punjab. The Pakistani buildup triggered a crisis for India in mid-January.

Tension intensified with reports of a large-scale Indian military exercise code-named "Brass Tacks" in the Rajasthan Desert contiguous to Pakistan. On 20 January Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi expressed India's "tremendous concern" over the continuing massing of Pakistani troops along the border; but he added that India was always willing to discuss the situation with Pakistan to solve their problems.

India's major response to the crisis, on 23 January, was to place its army and air force on red alert and to move troops closer to the border. An Indian defence ministry spokesman said "India will not be taken by surprise"; and the Indian navy was asked to "keep its eyes open." India's crisis management also took the form of diplomacy: Pakistan's high commissioner to New Delhi was summoned to the Ministry of External Affairs the same day and was asked to convey to Islamabad India's concern over the continuing deployment of Pakistani troops on the border. At the same time India's view of Pakistan's warlike activities was also communicated to the U.S. and Soviet ambassadors and to the members of the UN Security Council, with an expression of India's sincere desire to de-escalate the tension.

India's assertive military and diplomatic response triggered a crisis for Pakistan. Whatever the intention of its military buildup, Pakistan adopted a conciliatory line at once. India's high commissioner (ambassador) to Islamabad was informed on the 23rd of Pakistan's willingness to begin a dialogue in order to wind down the border tension. And the next day Pakistan's high commissioner to Delhi said his country had no aggressive intentions. He described the deployment of Pakistani troops as part of normal military exercises; and he repeated Pakistan's willingness for immediate talks to defuse the tension. This was reciprocated by an Indian defence ministry spokesman, who declared that India's escalatory military moves were only a reaction to the provocative movements of Pakistani forces.

In the frame of diplomatic efforts at accommodation, talks began on 31 January in New Delhi at the level of senior civil servants--the foreign secretary of each state. After five days of negotiations India and Pakistan signed an agreement on 4 February. It provided for a gradual troop withdrawal, sector-by-sector, to end the military confrontation within 15 days. The two countries agreed "not to attack each other" and to avoid provocative actions along the border. India reportedly agreed that its large-scale military exercise in Rajasthan, Brass Tacks, would remain several kilometers from the border with Pakistan. It was also agreed that further talks would be held in Islamabad later.

On 19 February India and Pakistan completed the withdrawal of their troops from the Ravi-Chenab corridor in the Jammu sector along the border. That terminated the crisis for both sides. (The Brass Tacks exercise ended on 25 March.)

Unlike in earlier South Asian crises, neither of the superpowers, nor the U.K., or the UN, was involved in this India/Pakistan crisis: the global organization was highly involved in 1947-49 (see Case #119--Kashmir I), among others; the U.K. was active in 1965 (see Case #214--Rann of Kutch); the USSR was an active mediator in 1965-66 (see Case #216--Kashmir II); and the U.S. was active in 1971 (see Case #242--Bangladesh), among others.

The only, low-key, third party involvement was that of Egypt. On 28 January 1987 President Mubarak phoned Prime Minister Gandhi from Kuwait, where he and Pakistan's President, Zia-ul-Haq, were attending a meeting of the Islamic Conference Organization. Gandhi asked Mubarak to convey a message to Zia, namely, that he was totally opposed to the military buildup, and to inform all heads of state at the conference that India had no hostile intentions against Pakistan.

References:

Asian Recorder 1987; Bajpai 1995; Data India 1987; Facts on File 1987; Keesing's 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


