CRISNO 250

ZAMBIA RAID

Background:

Zambia experienced another crisis with Rhodesia from 19 January to 3 February 1973.

Pre-crisis On 9 January 1973 the Rhodesian government closed the border with Zambia except for copper exports, which constitute 90 percent of all exports from Zambia. Rhodesia's Prime Minister Ian Smith accused Zambia of harboring terrorists who were allegedly responsible for incidents threatening Rhodesian citizens. Preceding and immediately following the closure there had been several border incidents between the two countries.

Summary:

On 19 January 1973, the government of Zambia perceived that Rhodesia might use an incident in which Zambian troops and police fired on a threatening South African police motorboat on the Zambezi River as an excuse to launch a military attack on Zambia. The same day, in response to this trigger, Defense Minister Grey Zulu declared that Zambian forces had been moved to the border. On 24 January Zambia requested an urgent session of the Security Council and accused Rhodesia, with South African aid, of violating Zambia's sovereignty and territorial integrity. On the 27th President Kaunda sent a letter to Secretary-General Waldheim stating that Zambia would not tolerate violations of its territory by Rhodesia or South Africa. The Security Council met on the 29th (at that time, Rhodesia and South Africa were the targets of UN economic sanctions; and South Africa's formal status at the UN had been reduced). The crisis ended on 3 February, when Rhodesia, satisfied that its objectives had been achieved, reopened the border with Zambia.

Neither the U.S. nor the USSR was involved in this crisis.

(On 10 March, after the termination of the crisis, the Security Council passed a resolution calling upon Britain to convene a conference to bring about self-determination and independence to Rhodesia and called upon Rhodesia's government to release all political prisoners.)

References:

ACR 1973; AR 1973; ARec 1973; ARB 1973.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


