CRISNO 207

EAST AFRICA REBELLIONS

Background:

A crisis for the U.K. occurred in several East African states from 19 to 30 January 1964.

Background On 12 January 1964 a coup d'état took place in Zanzibar, a former British colony. Western observers claimed that there had been communist involvement. At that time Tanganyika, at Zanzibar's request, sent a group of armed police. The U.K. sent naval reinforcements to the coast off Dar es Salaam.

Summary:

On 19 January 1964 a crisis was triggered for the U.K. when soldiers of the First Battalion Tanganyika Rifles mutinied against their British and Tanganyikan officers. The European officers were captured and replaced by Africans. The rebel troops demanded an interview with President Nyerere, better pay, and the removal of the European officers. The Tanganyikan minister of the interior appealed to the U.K. to intervene in order to help control the rioting and looting. In the meantime British troops were moved from Aden to Kenya to protect British nationals in Tanganyika in case of a threat. On 21 January, in a broadcast by President Nyerere, the nation was informed that Tanganyika's internal crisis was over.

On 23 January soldiers of the Uganda Rifles mutinied and held their British officers prisoner. The U.K. received a request for aid from Prime Minister Obote and responded the same day by landing troops in Entebbe. Another request for British troops came from Tanganyika on 24 January when fighting broke out again. Troops were also rushed from Kenya to Tanganyika. Also on the 24th a brief revolt broke out in Kenya, and British troops stationed there, along with those offshore, were rushed to the scene.

On 27 January Nyerere of Tanganyika called for an emergency OAU meeting, but it did not meet. The British troops stayed in the area until 30 January when calm once more prevailed in the three former British colonies, Kenya, Tanganyika, and Uganda.

Neither the U.S. or the USSR, nor the UN, was involved in this crisis.

References:

AR 1964; ARec 1964; ARB 1964.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


