CRISNO 80

ROMANIAN TERRITORY

Background:

Romania's crises over Bulgarian, Hungarian, and Soviet claims on its territories occurred between 26 June and 7 September 1940.

Background and Pre-crisis After World War I Romania received disputed territories claimed by several of its neighbors, including the USSR, Hungary, and Bulgaria. In July 1935 Romania signed a Pact of Non-Aggression with the Soviet Union that involved tacit recognition of Romania's possession of Bessarabia and was the direct result of Hitler's election victory in Germany and Moscow's preoccupation with the situation in the Far East. The fall of France and the desperate position of Britain in the summer of 1940 (see Cases #78--Fall of Western Europe; and #81--Battle of Britain, in Multiregional PCs: World War II) caused shifts in the European balance that emphasized Romania's vulnerability. The USSR, in talks with Germany, indicated that it could no longer wait to solve the problem of Bessarabia, which had been Russian from 1812 to 1918. It became clear that, if one power pressed claims on Romania, others would seize the opportunity to follow suit. Both Hungary and Romania viewed Transylvania as an integral part of their history and territory. And Bulgaria had long been voicing its claims to southern Dobruja.

Summary:

On 26 June 1940 Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov handed the Romanian ambassador in Moscow a 24-hour ultimatum to evacuate Bessarabia. Further, as compensation for the years of loss, the USSR demanded northern Bukovina as well. Romania turned for aid to the Balkan Entente, without success, and to Germany, which advised acceptance of Soviet demands as the territories fell under the Soviet sphere according to the August 1939 Ribbentrop-Molotov agreement. Romania's major response, on 28 June 1940, was to yield. Nevertheless, military preparations and mobilization were also carried out. Advancing Soviet troops went beyond the areas designated in the agreement, and some minor clashes with Romanian forces occurred. Ultimately, the Soviets withdrew to the agreed boundaries and, on 2 July, the operation was completed, terminating Romania's crisis with the Soviet Union.

Encouraged by the Soviet victory, the Hungarian Nazi Party accused Romania, on 1 July 1940, of evicting Hungarians to make room for Bessarabian refugees, triggering Romania's crisis with Hungary over Transylvania. Hungarian leaders conferred with Hitler and Italy's Foreign Minister Ciano, where they were advised to attack only if there appeared to be no other way to achieve their aims. Romania compromised with a plan for a population exchange and some territorial concessions, but these were rejected. Its major response, on 13 July 1940, was an offer by King Carol to Hitler for an offensive-defensive alliance, clearly aimed at the possibility of receiving German support against Hungary, and a movement of troops. Hitler replied, on the 15th, that Romania must come to terms with Hungary. On 26-27 July Romania, upon the advice of Hitler and Mussolini, agreed to negotiate.

Meanwhile, in July, minor clashes occurred on the Bulgarian-Romanian border in connection with the Bessarabian refugees, and another crisis was triggered for Romania, this time with Bulgaria. While Romanian representatives met with Mussolini on 27 July, Hitler proposed negotiations to the Bulgarians. On 4 August 1940 Romania's major response to the Bulgarian crisis was to send a delegate to Germany empowered to open talks with the Bulgarians. A meeting was held on the 19th. As Bulgaria's claim was less drastic and generally justified, agreement was reached quickly. On 21 August, southern Dobruja was transferred. The formal agreement was signed on 7 September 1940 terminating Romania's crisis with Bulgaria.

The Hungarian claims were far more complex. After meetings on 16 and 24 August, negotiations broke off and both sides mobilized. Hungary's decision to invade followed air skirmishes. On 26 August German intervention was suggested by Ribbentrop. The following day, Hitler himself worked out the boundaries, and, on the 29th, he called upon Hungary and Romania to send envoys to Vienna. At the meeting Hungarian protests of inadequacies were shouted down while Romania's shock was simply ignored. Neither side had any real choice. After consulting the Crown Council, the Romanian minister accepted the terms of Hitler's imposed solution on 30 August 1940, terminating the crisis with Hungary. In return, Hungary was obliged to grant its German minority a privileged status, amounting to pro-Reich autonomy. The borders remained stable for several years as the war progressed.

Although the League of Nations existed, formally, it was not involved.

References:

Bantea 1970; Fischer-Galati 1969; Gafencu 1945; Macartney 1956-57; Pavel 1944; Waldeck 1943.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


