CRISNO 295

BEAGLE CHANNEL II

Background:

A second crisis for Chile and Argentina over the Beagle Channel lasted from 16 October 1978 to 8 January 1979.

Pre-crisis The first crisis over the Beagle Channel ended in February 1978 with a moratorium of 180 days in an attempt to settle the dispute (see Case #287). During that period six rounds of negotiations took place, with little progress. Soon after, Argentina began overt military preparations.

Summary:

On 16 October a crisis for Chile was triggered by Argentina's call-up of 50,000 reservists. Tank and troop movements, with minor clashes, were later reported near the Chilean border. Chile responded on the 24th by sending troops to the border and canceling naval maneuvers with the U.S. and Peru, due to take place 1,500 miles north of Chile, in the event that Argentina might try to occupy the disputed islands in the Beagle Channel.

On the day of the deadline, 2 November, the two states announced that they had reached an agreement on joint economic development of the Beagle region, but that the distribution of the maritime zones had still not been resolved. Chile's Foreign Minister, Herman Cubillos Sallato, proposed mediation by a friendly government. Argentina agreed on the 8th. On 11 December Sallato met with Argentina's Foreign Minister, Carlos Washington Paston, to designate a mediator, and they chose Pope John Paul II. but the talks collapsed after Chile rejected an Argentinian plan.

On 16 December a crisis for Argentina was triggered when Chile put 45,000 troops on full alert. It responded on the 21st with a complaint to the UN Security Council that Chile was creating a military imbalance in the disputed area by illegally deploying troops and artillery. The same day Chile asked for an urgent meeting of the OAS to prevent Argentina from attacking the islands; and the Pope announced that he would act as mediator. The offer was accepted by both states. On the 26th Cardinal Sumore arrived in Buenos Aires to start a mediation mission. The Pope’s mediation efforts contributed significantly to a reduction of tension and a decreased willingness to resort to violence as a means of crisis management. The crisis ended for both actors with the signing of the Declaration of Montevideo on 8 January 1979, in which the two parties accepted the Pope's mediation and committed themselves not to use force in their relations with one another.

The Security Council discussed the problem but did not pass a resolution. On 10 November 1978 the United States called on the OAS to offer its services to the parties in order to avoid a violent conflict; but it did not become more deeply involved in the crisis despite U.S. and Chilean requests.

(The issue remained unresolved until 1984 when a Vatican-mediated treaty was signed by Argentina and Chile. The accord granted Chile sovereignty over the islands but limited its maritime rights to the Pacific waters, while Argentina won control of the waters on the Atlantic side of the Beagle Channel.)

There was no USSR involvement in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #287.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


