CRISNO 353

THREE VILLAGE BORDER I

Background:

Thailand and Laos experienced the first of two crises over a disputed border from 5 June until mid-October 1984 (see Case #381).

Background Laos, a landlocked state in Indochina, was traditionally dependent on Thailand for its imports of vital goods and for its foreign trade generally. During the final phase of the prolonged Vietnam War the geopolitics of Indochina were transformed: in 1975 Laos became a communist state, the Laos People's Democratic Republic (LPDR), and a client of the regional superpower, the triumphant, united Socialist Republic of Vietnam (SRV). The signing by Laos of a defense cooperation agreement with Vietnam in 1977 escalated the ever-present low-level tension between Laos and Thailand. There were, too, sporadic minor clashes between them over border delineations since 1975.

The dispute between Thailand and Laos that generated their 1984 and 1987-88 crises (see Case #381) centered on the location of three border villages--Ban Mai, Ban Kang, and Ban Savang, with an area of 19 square kilometers and a population of 1,000. Both states accepted the watershed principle of border demarcation but disagreed about where the watershed lay vis-à-vis the Mekong and Me Nam Chao Phraya Rivers.

The dispute derived from ambiguity in the Franco-Siam treaty of 1907, which defined the border in the disputed area as the Hoeng River. The ambiguity was due to the fact that the river had two tributaries: Laos took one as the demarcation, Thailand the other. The territorial dispute was accentuated by the settling of Thai communist guerrillas in two of these villages. Moreover, Thai construction teams began building a road through the disputed area, leading to clashes with Laotian militiamen.

Summary:

Until early June 1984 both parties seemed willing to allow local officials to settle their boundary dispute. However, on 5 June, according to the Thais, Laotians moved wooden border markers into the villages, asserting an explicit claim: this was perceived as a threat and triggered a crisis for Thailand. The next day Thai troops moved into the villages to expel the Laotians, triggering a crisis for the LPDR. Laotian troops responded in kind, and minor clashes ensued for several days.

By the 9th Laos decided in favor of crisis management via diplomacy and so informed the Thai ambassador in Vientiane. With the military situation stalemated, Thailand, on 15 July, proposed negotiations between the two interior ministers. The LPDR accepted on the 17th, thereby terminating Thailand's crisis: as the state in occupation of the disputed territory, it no longer perceived a threat or time pressure or the likelihood of military hostilities.

Two rounds of negotiations, on 21-23 July and 6-15 August, ended in deadlock. Thus Laos's crisis lingered until mid-October, when Thailand agreed to withdraw its troops from the three villages and to cease construction in the disputed area. The outcome was a compromise, for neither party achieved all of its goals. In terms of values, the crisis was asymmetrical: for Laos, it was perceived as a serious threat to territorial integrity; for Thailand, it was a low value threat.

Both superpowers remained aloof, as did the regional organizations, SEATO and ASEAN. Only the UN was involved. Laos submitted the dispute to the Security Council. However, the Council's debate on 22 October 1984 indicated sympathy for Thailand's contention that Laos had instigated the crisis to undermine its (successful) campaign for a seat in the Council.

References:

Chawla and Sardesai 1980; Dommen 1985; Hinton 1987; Vichit-Vadakan 1985.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


