CRISNO 47

ETHIOPIAN WAR

Background:

One of the celebrated international crises of the inter-world war period, Ethiopian War, began on 6 December 1934 and lasted until 5 May 1936. There were four crisis actors: Ethiopia, the U.K., France, and Italy.

Background Italy's entry into East Africa as a colonial power in the late nineteenth century was made possible by a British objective of reducing French influence in the region. Italian expansion continued until their severe defeat by Abyssinian (Ethiopian) troops at the Battle of Adowa in 1896. Eritrea was transferred to Italy by British royal decree in 1899. Mussolini's efforts to achieve domination over Ethiopia began as early as 1923. In 1928 a Treaty of Friendship was signed; but Ethiopia refused to live up to its conditions, which granted Italy special privileges. In 1932 Mussolini sent his minister of the colonies to Eritrea to prepare it as a springboard for an invasion of Ethiopia. Thereafter roads and military installations in Eritrea were built and strengthened. Incidents occurred on the border as the Ethiopians became more and more apprehensive of Italy's designs.

Pre-crisis Wal-wal (Ual-ual), a watering site in a loosely designated border area between Italian and Ethiopian territory, had been used frequently by tribes from British and Italian Somaliland who wandered freely in the area. It became the site of an Italian garrison. In November 1934 a British mission surveying the border between British Somaliland and Ethiopia arrived at the wells of Wal-wal with an armed Ethiopian escort. The Italian garrison commander perceived an imminent attack from tribesmen nearby and requested reinforcements, while the British mission withdrew from the area.

Summary:

On 6 December 1934 Mussolini demanded an unconditional apology, a large indemnity, and punishment of those responsible for an attack by Ethiopian tribesmen against the Italians at Wal-wal the previous day. This triggered a crisis for Ethiopian Emperor Haile Selassie, who claimed that the dispute fell under the arbitration clause of the 1928 Treaty of Friendship. The U.K. proposed a conciliatory solution that Italy refused to consider.

Ethiopia appealed to the League of Nations on 9 December. When no progress was forthcoming it requested League intervention on 3 January 1935. The Council encouraged direct negotiations between the parties and, later, arbitration. The item was removed from the Council's agenda when Italy agreed to bilateral talks. However, negotiations began to break down in March in the face of new preconditions by Italy and the buildup of its forces in Eritrea. On 17 March and 3 April there were two more Ethiopian appeals to the League.

France and the U.K. supported Italy's view that the League should await the outcome of pending arbitration. (In an earlier Franco-Italian agreement, 7 January, Paris gave Rome a free hand vis-à-vis Ethiopia. France, Italy, and the U.K. met on 11-14 April to form the Stresa Front against Germany. Italy then conceded that it would consent to arbitration with Ethiopia under the 1928 treaty. Further negotiations between the two adversaries and France and Great Britain centered around the 20 May 1935 League Council meeting, which adopted two resolutions on the timing and form of arbitration: 25 August was designated as the final date for a ruling. A U.K. offer of economic concessions to Italy amounting to economic control over Ethiopia and a large part of Ogaden, with an Ethiopian access to the sea through British Somaliland, was refused by Italy in June. The situation was further aggravated by the signing of an Anglo-German naval agreement in June, which allowed German naval expansion to 35 percent of the size of the British navy.

A three-power meeting without Ethiopian participation began in August 1935. Italy, which by then had assembled 250,000 troops in East Africa, rejected Anglo-French proposals and refused to state its final demands. Sometime during that month a U.K. perception that Mussolini might attack Britain in retaliation for its support of Ethiopia triggered a crisis for the U.K. (As early as January 1935 London had informed the emperor that "no assurances of even the most general and personal nature" could be given.)

In response to a perceived threat of possible war the U.K. reinforced its Mediterranean fleet on 3 September 1935. It also began negotiations with other Mediterranean states, especially Yugoslavia and Turkey. At the same time, the "Hoare-Laval Plan" (see below) ruled out Anglo-French military action against Italy. And the British foreign secretary assured Mussolini that the U.K. would not close the Suez Canal to Italian ships or impose economic sanctions.

In early September Ethiopia appealed to the Council once more, under Article 15 of the Covenant. On 9 September a League Committee of Five was appointed to discuss the dispute, as well as Italian claims that Ethiopia was unfit for League membership. League observers were requested to witness Italian mobilization and the forward movement of its troops. And when Ethiopia perceived war as imminent it informed the League on 29 September of its intention to mobilize.

On 3 October 1935 Italy, the triggering entity for the international crisis as a whole, began a full-scale attack on Ethiopia transforming the incipient crisis over Wal-wal into the Ethiopian War. In addition to military resistance the victim appealed to the League the following day. Mussolini justified the war, alleging Ethiopian "aggression." The League Council condemned Italian aggression on the 7th. And on the 11th the League Assembly called on members to impose sanctions against Italy.

France feared that strong League action might provoke Italy to leave the recently formed anti-German Stresa Front and realign with Germany. Thus the Council's action triggered a crisis for France. Premier Pierre Laval, who as Foreign Minister had negotiated the January 1935 carte blanche deal with Italy, attempted to slow down the imposition of sanctions by a special League Committee of Thirteen, which had been set up on 9 October to draft specific measures. Its recommendations, issued on 6 November, triggered a crisis for Italy because they included sanctions on oil imports, as well as other vital raw materials. Italy responded in early December by informing France's premier that such League action would seriously affect Franco-Italian relations.

Laval took measures to stall the imposition of oil sanctions and succeeded in preventing their adoption, preferring a compromise agreement between the adversaries. U.K. Foreign Secretary Hoare and Laval began talks on 7 December. The result was the Hoare-Laval Plan announced on 9 December. The plan called for three areas of Ethiopia bordering Eritrea and Italian Somaliland to be ceded to Italy, and a large section of southern Ethiopia to be set aside for exclusive Italian exploitation. Ethiopia was to receive a corridor to the sea and the port of Assab in Eritrea.

The plan was uncovered by the press in Britain and published even before it was proposed to the belligerents. The subsequent backlash resulted in Hoare's resignation on 18 December 1935 and the fall of the Laval government in France on 22 January 1936. On 3 March the new French premier was able to thwart the final attempt to impose oil sanctions against Italy in favor of an appeal to the belligerents for conciliation.

Once the threat of effective League action was over, the crises for Italy, France, and the U.K. ended. Hitler's reoccupation of the Rhineland on 7 March 1936 (see Case #51--Remilitarization of the Rhineland, in France/Germany PC) diverted League attention from Italy. Meanwhile war raged in Ethiopia and escalated with the Italian use of mustard gas, despite League disapproval. Ethiopia appealed to the League, to other states, and to the world at large throughout April 1936. On 2 May Haile Selassie fled into exile through French Somaliland. On 5 May the capital, Addis Ababa, fell to Italy's forces; and Mussolini announced the end of the war and Italy's annexation of Ethiopia.

(The League Assembly lifted the sanctions against Italy in July 1936 and refused to recognize its conquest of Ethiopia. The United States passed the Second Neutrality Act on 29 February 1936 in response to the recommendations for oil sanctions against Italy.)

References:

Baer 1967; Boca 1969; Carr 1945; Cassels 1968; Chabad 1963; Drysdale 1964; Eagleton 1957; Eden 1962; Feis 1947; Garratt 1938; Haile Selassie 1976; Hallett 1974; Hull 1948, vol. I; Kirkpatrick 1964; Laurens 1967; Laval 1948; Lowe and Marzari 1975; Robertson 1977; Schaefer 1961; Schuman 1939; Sik 1970; Smith 1976, 1982; Torres 1941; Villari 1956; Walters 1952; Warner 1969; Young 1976; Zimmern 1935, 1936.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


