CRISNO 376

AEGEAN SEA III

Background:

Greece and Turkey were enmeshed in another Aegean Sea crisis from 1 to 28 March 1987.

Pre-crisis In January 1987 Greek Prime Minister Papandreou reiterated that the dialogue with Turkey should be based upon the status quo and offered to accept a judgment by the International Court of Justice, based upon the principle that islands have their own continental shelf. Turkey rejected the principle. And Greece rejected binding arbitration of the dispute. The situation was ripe for another crisis.

Summary:

The catalyst to Greece's crisis was an announcement by an international consortium on 1 March that its North Aegean Petroleum Company (NAPC) would begin prospecting for oil at the end of the month, 16 kilometers east of the island of Thassos, outside Greek territorial waters: Greece perceived Turkey's support of the NAPC's plan and, therefore, a high value threat, time pressure, and a heightened likelihood of military hostilities with its historic rival. Athens declared that oil prospecting in international waters was the responsibility--and right--of the geographically contiguous state and hinted that it might take over control of the NAPC. This triggered a crisis for Turkey. Its deputy prime minister replied on 2 March that Turkey would do "whatever is necessary" if the NAPC began to prospect for oil in international waters.

In early March, too, the Turkish ship, Piri Reis, was sailing in the vicinity of Greek islands. Greece protested that the ship's course was provocative, while Turkey claimed that Greece was challenging a legitimate voyage. On 6 March Greece hinted again that it might take control over the NAPC, which was mining the oil field, Prinos, off the island of Thassos.

The crisis escalated sharply on 25 March, when Ankara authorized the Turkish Petroleum Corporation to search for oil in the Aegean Sea outside Turkish territorial waters, off the Greek islands of Lesbos, Lemnos, and Samothrace. The next day Greece warned that, if the Turkish "research vessel," Sizmik I, probed for oil in areas that, under international law, belonged to Greece, it would "take the necessary measures to ensure its sovereign rights." Greece generated even more stress for Turkey on the 27th when its prime minister threatened that its armed forces would "teach the Turks a very hard lesson" if Turkey continued its "aggressive acts." In a further escalatory act the same day Premier Papandreou renewed his charge that the U.S. favored Turkey in their conflict and, more important, threatened to close U.S. bases in Greece if hostilities broke out between Greece and Turkey. The U.S. was asked to suspend operations at its telecommunications base at Nea Makri, northeast of Athens.

The armed forces of Greece and Turkey were put on alert. The Secretary-General of Turkey's General Staff, Brigadier-General Ergence, warned that any Greek act to disturb the Sizmik I would be countered by "unhesitating retaliation." NATO ambassadors called on the disputants, both NATO members, to do everything to prevent resort to violence. And NATO Secretary-General Lord Carrington offered to mediate.

The crisis de-escalated abruptly. Later that day, 27 March, Prime Minister Turgut Ozol declared that Turkey would not prospect for oil outside its territorial waters unless Greece did so first. The next day Greece announced that it, too, would not explore for oil in disputed waters. And the NAPC announced that it had frozen plans to operate outside Greek territorial waters. Thus ended the third Aegean Sea crisis.

Neither the UN nor the USSR was involved. The U.S. was drawn in by virtue of its leadership role in NATO and the Western political community; but its activity was confined to political acts to help wind down the crisis between two NATO allies.

(Although the Greece/Turkey protracted conflict was relatively quiescent for almost a decade, it was far from resolved. This was evident from another minicrisis at the end of January 1996. The issue was sovereignty over two tiny (10 acre), uninhabited rock formations in the eastern Aegean Sea, known as Imia by Greece, and Kardak by Turkey, located four miles from the Turkish coast and 12 miles from the undisputed Greek island of Kalimnos in the Dodecanese chain. Both parties made unqualified claims of sovereignty, lodged diplomatic protests, and sent troops and warships to the islets. It was only the personal intervention of U.S. President Clinton that persuaded Greece and Turkey, nominally two NATO allies, to de-escalate the crisis, a replica of their two-day crisis in March 1984 (see Case #349--Aegean Sea II).

References:

Keesing's 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


