CRISNO 455

CHAD-SUDAN IV

Background:

A crisis occurred between Chad and Sudan from 26 December 2007 to 1 August 2008. Since 2004, tensions had been high between Chad and Sudan. Chad accused Sudan of supporting Chadian rebels and Sudan accused Chad of supporting Sudanese rebels. Crises erupted between the two states in 2005, 2006, and early 2007. The crisis in 2005 ended with the signing of the Tripoli agreement in February 2006, the crisis in 2006 ended with an agreement in August 2006, and the crisis in early 2007 ended with the formation of a joint military committee in April 2007.

Summary:

The crisis began on 26 December 2007 when Chad held a crisis meeting to deal with what it perceived as preparations to attack by Sudan and Sudanese-backed rebels. The main threat was an attack by the Unified Military Command, an umbrella Chadian rebel organization comprising UFDD, RFC, and UFDD-F. Chad's major response came on December 28 when, according to Sudanese statements, Chadian troops crossed into Sudanese territory with Darfurian rebels from Justice and Equality Movement (JEM) and Chad's air force bombed two positions in Darfur. The Chadian-JEM incursion on December 28 marked the beginning of the crisis for Sudan. Sudan's response came on the same day when it accused Chad of participating in the attack and said it reserved the right to respond in any way. Throughout the remainder of the crisis, serious clashes occurred, although rarely directly between the two states. Chad and Sudan continued to accuse each other of supporting the other's rebel opponents.

The security situation in Darfur worsened with air and ground raids by Chadian forces and Sudanese rebels. Darfur's capital of El Geneina was under threat during January 2008. Sudan's government continued to obstruct the deployment of a hybrid U.N.-African force in Darfur, and the Sudanese army attacked a UN/AU convoy on January 7. In anticipation of the deployment of EUFOR forces in Chad and Central African Republic, Chadian rebels launched major military attacks inside Chad in late January. On February 2-3, Chadian rebels launched an assault on N'Djamena in an attempt to overthrow the government, which clearly perceived a threat to regime. However, Chadian rebels were forced to withdraw a day later, and they accused France of backing the government.

Libya and Eritrea had previously been the primary mediators between Chad and Sudan, but around the time of the late January 2008 Chadian rebel attacks, a new mediation endeavor occurred with an expanded set of third parties. On January 26, Gabon initiated the mediation effort between Chad and Sudan. The following day, these three states participated in a summit of African countries that was convened to try and defuse tensions between Chad and Sudan and resolve the crisis in Darfur. Libya, Egypt, Eritrea, Senegal, and Mauritania also attended this summit. At the January 27 summit, there was an attempt to gather information on and reconcile the positions of Chad and Sudan, as well as to set the agenda for an upcoming AU conference in which the conflict between these two states figured prominently. The AU Summit occurred from January 31-February 2, and the EU and Iran also attended. At this meeting, the AU tasked Libya and Congo Brazzaville with heading up the mediation effort between Chad and Sudan. On March 6, Senegal announced that it had been conducting shuttle diplomacy between Chad and Sudan, facilitating and proposing solutions and joining Libya and Congo Brazzaville as a lead mediator in the crisis. Senegal also announced that the two sides had consented in principle to sign an agreement at an upcoming meeting of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC) to be held in Dakar. Despite Chad's and Sudan's pledge to sign the agreement, both sides continued to accuse each other of supporting the other's rebel groups and questioning each other's prospective commitment to the agreement, blaming each other for breaking all previous agreements. Nevertheless, Chad and Sudan signed the Dakar Agreement on March 13 at the OIC summit. Both sides agreed to stop supporting each other's armed opposition movements and to stop allowing their respective territories to be used as bases from which rebels could launch border incursions. Additional terms of the agreement were as follows: all armed opposition movements would be disarmed by EUFOR peacekeepers in Chad, both sides would normalize their relations and definitively end their differences with each other, and both sides would commit to the string of previous failed agreements brokered by Libya, Eritrea, Egypt, and Saudi Arabia. The agreement also laid out an implementation plan, including the formation of a "contact group" that would meet monthly to ensure that the deal was implemented in good faith and that no violations occurred. The agreement failed to end the crisis however, as Chad accused Sudan of sending Chadian rebels to attack only hours before the agreement was signed. This confirmed the fears expressed by many analysts, as well as Chadian and Sudanese opposition movements, that the agreement would not be signed in good faith and would have little effect on the overall conflict.

In early May, JEM rebels advanced on Khartoum. On May 10, heavy fighting occurred and the government repelled the assault. The following day, Sudan cut diplomatic ties with Chad in response. On May 12, Chad countered by closing its border with Sudan and cutting economic and cultural ties. Despite this attempt on its capital, Sudan mainly perceived a limited military threat from Chad and JEM rebels. Despite warnings by France, Chadian rebels began a military offensive in early June 2008 and threatened to shoot down any French reconnaissance aircraft. On June 18, Chadian forces defeated the offensive. The EUFOR peacekeeping mission -- in which France played a major role -- had become operational on March 17 and was involved in the June clashes. Chad accused EUFOR of siding with the rebels. This marked the second time during the crisis that the EUFOR mission came under fire, as a EUFOR peacekeeper was killed on March 3 by the Sudanese army after accidentally crossing into Sudan.

The "contact group" charged with implementing the Dakar Agreement met numerous times throughout this series of clashes in the spring and into the summer. The contact group consisted of several African states -- Libya, Congo Brazzaville, Senegal, Gabon, and Eritrea -- as well as a group of high-profile international actors that were viewed as "guarantors" of the agreement -- UN, EU, AU, OIC, the Community of the Sahel and Saharan States (CEN-SAD, aka COMESSA), France, UK, and US. The first meeting of the contact group was held on April 10, and subsequent meetings were held on April 28, June 9, June 24, and July 17. A broad range of issues were discussed at the April and June meetings, but Chad and Sudan were only able to agree on the composition and logistics of a joint observer mission to be deployed in the border region between the two countries. Nevertheless, while working in conjunction with each other, several mediators in the contact group also met individually with one or both sides at various points during the remainder of the crisis and/or issued statements condemning offensives launched by Sudanese and Chadian rebels. While implementation of the Dakar Agreement was a key concern, of prime importance to the mediators in the wake of JEM's early May offensive was to get Chad and Sudan to restore diplomatic relations with one another. At the July 17 meeting of the contact group, Senegal convinced Sudan to agree to restore diplomatic relations with Chad by arguing that the Dakar Agreement could not be implemented if official ties between the two countries were severed. Chad called this move a step in the right direction, but said that it required a stronger commitment from Sudan to stop destabilizing Chad before it would agree to resume relations. Following up on this effort by Senegal, Libya met with Chad and Sudan in late July and made proposals that were accepted by both sides, including the restoration and normalization of diplomatic relations and resumption of cooperation between the two countries, as well as the establishment of a tripartite summit to oversee their previous agreements that was to be sponsored by Libya and include the participation of Presidents Deby and al-Bashir. After meeting with Libya on August 1, Sudanese President al-Bashir instructed the relevant domestic authorities to immediately restore relations with Chad and reopen the Sudanese embassy there. This terminated the crisis for both sides.

After previously criticizing what they viewed as the ineffectiveness of various members of the mediation team (particularly the guarantors of the Dakar Agreement), Sudan and Chad both expressed satisfaction with Libya's efforts that helped contribute -- along with a general stalemated situation -- to the conclusion of the crisis. The contact group continued to meet after the crisis terminated, convening for the final time on 15 November 2008. Several subsequent attempts by the contact group to meet failed. In addition to the large-group primary mediation effort, the African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) Group also mediated between Chad and Sudan in late July 2008, sending an ambassadorial mission on a fact-finding mission to the region and talking with both sides in an attempt to find a lasting peaceful settlement.

The UN was heavily involved in the crisis, and in two distinct ways: the Secretary General's participation in the mediation effort as part of the contact group, and the Security Council's provision of emergency military assistance through the deployment of EUFOR and AU/UN forces (although both had been authorized before the crisis).

References:

Lexis-Nexis Online, Dow Jones Factiva Online, CIA World Fact Book Online, World Bank World Development Indicators Online, International Crisis Group.

Last Updated: 7/26/2010
