CRISNO 352

SINO-VIETNAM CLASHES

Background:

Vietnam and China were enmeshed in a crisis from 2 April until the second half of June 1984.

Summary:

A crisis for Vietnam was triggered by Chinese long-range shelling from across the border in Yunnan Province and the Guangxi autonomous region, beginning on 2 April 1984. This attack coincided with Vietnam's military offensive near Kampuchea's (Cambodia's) border with Thailand. Two days later Vietnam's foreign minister accused China of a calculated act to put pressure on Vietnam from two sides. China denied the linkage and termed its action a response to Vietnam's "provocations." On 6 April Chinese forces penetrated deep into Vietnam, to a point only 150 kilometers from Hanoi. On the 8th Hanoi Radio acknowledged heavy casualties and accused Beijing of an act of war, reflecting China's expansionist aims. The same day the PRC's foreign minister responded in kind, claiming that Vietnam forces crossed the frontier into Yunnan on 5 April. On the 12th Vietnam dismissed this charge as "nonsense."

During the month of April 1984 both sides claimed that incidents occurred almost daily, with heavy casualties for the other side. A major border clash was reported on 28 April, the probable trigger to China's crisis. Beijing accused Vietnam of invading the Loashan area; Vietnam denied the charge. However, on 3 May a Vietnam defense ministry spokesman told a press conference that Vietnam had succeeded in stopping a Chinese invasion from 28 April to 1 May.

Another serious border clash occurred on 15 May. Again, both sides claimed victory, with heavy casualties suffered by the enemy. Low-intensity violence continued through May and much of June. The crisis faded in the latter part of June.

There was no direct involvement by either superpower in this crisis; but both were exploited by the adversaries. The U.S. president's visit to China from 26 April to 1 May 1984 was noted in a critical vein by Vietnam: on 1 May Hanoi Radio linked the 28 April border clash, the peak of Sino/Vietnamese tension and hostilities, to President Reagan's presence in Beijing. The USSR, too, was involved on the periphery--by its client's adversary: on 8 May China criticized Moscow for a display of military support for Vietnam, a landing exercise by 400 Soviet sailors on the Vietnamese coast 145 kilometers from Haiphong. Vietnam complained to the UN, but the world body remained aloof.

References:

Keesing's 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


