CRISNO 397

YUGOSLAVIA I: CROATIA-SLOVENIA

Background:

Yugoslavia (Serbia), Slovenia, and Croatia were embroiled in a grave crisis during the first phase of Yugoslavia's disintegration as a federal state, from 25 June 1991 to 3 January 1992.

Background The three main ethnic constituents of twentieth-century Yugoslavia were the products of varied historical experience. For Serbia, it was Greek Orthodox Christianity and five centuries of Turkish (Muslim) rule: the Serbs suffered a decisive defeat at the Battle of Kossovo in 1389, when Serbia became a vassal state of the Turks; and it was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire in 1459. Serbia reemerged as an independent state in 1878 as part of the peace settlement at the Congress of Berlin. Both the Slovenes and the Croats were predominantly Roman Catholic and fell within the cultural and political orbit of Central Europe, most recently as parts of the polyglot Austro-Hungarian empire from 1867 until its dissolution in 1918.

In the political vacuum created by World War I and the demise of the Dual Monarchy, the "South Slavs" united: on 4 December 1918 they proclaimed the Kingdom of the Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, with young King Peter of Serbia as its monarch and Prince Alexander as Regent. Alexander succeeded to the throne upon Peter's death in 1921 and ruled until he was assassinated in 1934 (see Case #46--Assassination of King Alexander). In 1929 he had proclaimed a dictatorship over the kingdom and renamed it Yugoslavia in a symbolic effort to eradicate the historic and ethnic divisions. Peter II served as king from 1934 to 1945, with power in the hands of Prince Paul as regent.

During World War II the Communist-led Yugoslav Partisans successfully resisted all German attempts to overrun Yugoslavia from 1941 to 1944. Belgrade, the Serbian capital, was liberated by Soviet and Yugoslav forces in October 1944.

In November 1945 the Constituent Assembly, with a majority held by the Communist-dominated National Front, proclaimed the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia. Josip Broz Tito was the dominant figure in Yugoslavia until his death in 1980. Thereafter the state was ruled by a collective presidency, with its chairperson rotating among the six republics of the federation--Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Bosnia-Hercegovina, Montenegro, and Macedonia. By 1990 communism as an ideology and political system was in disrepute throughout Eastern Europe. Economic deterioration during the preceding decade accentuated the always latent ethnic conflicts, which exploded in 1991 into crisis and war.

Pre-crisis A wave of political and ethnic unrest erupted in the spring of 1991, with Croatia and Slovenia pressing to transform Yugoslavia into a confederation of independent states. These two republics organized their own armed forces and, during May and June, proceeded rapidly along the path to independence. Both held a referendum, which resulted in strong support for independence. And Slovenia began constructing border-crossing stations along the Croatian border.

The European Community (EC) and the U.S. announced that they would not recognize Croatia's and Slovenia's independence if this included secession from Yugoslavia. On 1 June the Yugoslav Prime Minister, Ante Markovic, condemned Croatia's and Slovenia's moves to secede and claimed they were illegal. On the 24th he asked Slovenia and Croatia not to declare their independence, warning that such a step could create economic and social catastrophe.

Summary:

Declarations of independence by Croatia and Slovenia on 25 June 1991 triggered a crisis for Yugoslavia (Serbia), for they threatened the continued existence of Yugoslavia as a federal state and Serbia's dominance. The federal government responded the same day by condemning the declarations as illegal; and the federal Prime Minister, Markovic, called on the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) to take control of Yugoslavia's international borders. JNA tanks began to move toward Ljubljana, the Slovenian capital. These acts by Serbia-dominated Yugoslavia triggered a crisis for Slovenia and Croatia.

Minor clashes began in Slovenia, becoming more intense on 26 and 27 June, as JNA troops used force to take control of several border posts from Slovenian authorities and deployed tanks and troops around Slovenia's airport. In Croatia, Serbs stormed a police station, killing three persons. While the President of the newly proclaimed Croatia, Franjo Tudjman, made efforts to restrain violence, Slovenia's Defense Minister, Jansa, announced on the 27th that "Slovenia is at war"; and the Slovenian President, Milan Kucan, called on Slovenians to defend their sovereignty against Serb "aggression."

An EC mission, comprising the foreign ministers of Luxembourg, Italy, and the Netherlands, initiated the first cease-fire agreement in the Yugoslavia I crisis on 28 June; but the agreement broke down the next day, and minor clashes were renewed. The fighting escalated in Croatia during July; but it ended in Slovenia by 3 July and did not spread to the other republics. On the 2nd the Slovenian capital was heavily bombed by Yugoslavia's air force. After talks between Stjephan Mesic, the (Croat) President of the Federal Presidency of Yugoslavia, and Slovenian leaders that day, Slovenia agreed to release prisoners, and a cease-fire agreement was reached. On 3 July some JNA units began to withdraw from Slovenia. And on the 5th Slovenia announced that it had demobilized 10,000 soldiers in its defense force and began to lift blockades. Thus tension declined in Slovenia at the beginning of July.

A formal agreement, which was reached in talks between the EC mission and officials from Slovenia, Croatia, and the Federal Presidency on 7 July on the island of Brioni, marks the termination of Slovenia's crisis. Slovenia (and Croatia) agreed to suspend implementation of their independence, but not the declarations themselves. It was also agreed that, during a three-month cessation period, negotiations would begin on the future of all republics and provinces in the Yugoslav federation, and that hostilities would cease immediately. Further, the JNA would soon withdraw to its bases, and the Slovenian militia would be demobilized.

At an emergency meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) on 3-4 July in Prague a decision was made to dispatch an EC-based mission to Yugoslavia to supervise the cease-fire and to send a CSCE good offices mission to mediate among the parties. The EC foreign ministers decided on 5 July to impose an arms embargo and to freeze financial aid to Yugoslavia. A meeting of central European states on 26-27 July, including Yugoslavia and its neighbors (Italy, Austria, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia), issued a statement supporting the EC proposals to end the violence in Yugoslavia.

A hint of things to come--enlargement of the Yugoslavia crisis--became evident in August: discussions by Serb and Croat officials, with a view to partitioning Bosnia-Hercegovina, threatened the republic; and Sarajevo approached the EC and Turkey for support. (The Bosnia crisis was to erupt in March 1992 [see Case #403--Yugoslavia II: Bosnia].)

In the meantime, Croatia's crisis intensified. On 22 August Croatia's President Tudjman warned that, unless Serbian "aggression" against Croatia ceased and the JNA withdrew from Croatia by the end of the month, "all necessary steps" would be taken to protect the new state. On 27 August a new cease-fire between Croatia's militia and the JNA was signed; but it was broken within hours. EC foreign ministers, meeting in Brussels, held Serbia responsible for the conflict, as did U.S. officials on the 29th. The EC proposed an international peace conference to resolve the crisis.

An international peace conference on Yugoslavia opened in London on 7 September. An arbitration commission of lawyers from France, Italy, and Germany was appointed. The meeting was brief and did not mark a major change in the crisis.

During September the war in Yugoslavia escalated, and Croatia lost about one-third of its territory (Krajina) to Serb forces in Croatia. (Croatian forces recaptured Krajina in a two-day campaign in August 1995.) All six Yugoslav republics and the President of the collective State Presidency, Mesic, and the (Croat) Federal Prime Minister, Markovic, signed another cease-fire agreement in Belgrade on 2 September. The agreement was reached through mediation by Dutch Foreign Minister Hans van den Broek. However, as often in the past and the future, the cease-fire broke down quickly, and heavy fighting in Croatia resumed. On 25 September, at France's initiative, the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 713, calling for a complete arms embargo on Yugoslavia and requesting the UN Secretary-General to assist with mediation. It has been speculated that France brought in the UN because, as a member of the Security Council, it wished to gain greater leverage in the negotiation process vis-à-vis Germany, which was using its prominent position in the EC to insist on recognition of Slovenian and Croatian independence.

Fighting spread for the first time to Serbian territory in early November 1991 as Croatian forces attacked Serbian villages. The most serious clashes between Serbs and Croats began on 18 November in Vukovar, Croatia: 900 people were killed; and the Croats were forced to surrender to the Serb-dominated JNA. This battle weakened the Croats and led to the end of the crisis within six weeks.

On 8 November the EC Council of Ministers imposed trade sanctions on Yugoslavia; and on the 25th it suspended Yugoslavia's special status in the European Parliament. President Bush said in December that the U.S. would also impose trade sanctions against Yugoslavia.

The first cease-fire mediated by the UN was signed on 23 November. JNA forces began to withdraw from Zagreb, the Croatian capital, on the 28th. However, fighting resumed in December.

With Germany taking the lead, the EC agreed in principle to recognize the independence of the seceding Yugoslav republics; and on 9 December an EC peace conference stated that Yugoslavia was "legally in process of dissolution." On the 10th the EC lifted its sanctions on four of the Yugoslav republics, but not Serbia and Montenegro, which were accused of aggression.

On 19 December two Serb enclaves in Croatia--the Serbian Autonomous Region of Krajina, and the Serb Autonomous Region of Slavonia, Baranja, and Western Srem--declared themselves the Serbian Republic of Krajina. The two regions did not have a common border; but together they encompassed a third of Croatia's territory. Serbia recognized the republic the next day.

On 20 December the parties signed another cease-fire agreement, the 15th brokered by UN special envoy (and former U.S. Secretary of State) Cyrus Vance. Politically, it was a compromise for both parties: Croatia retained its demand for independence but lost about one-third of its territory to Serbia. The cease-fire took effect on 3 January 1992. It was the first to last and create some stability. As such, the implementation of this agreement terminated the crisis for both Croatia and Yugoslavia (Serbia).

The UN was highly involved in this crisis, as noted: the Security Council's Resolution 713; and successful mediation by the Secretary-General and his Special Representative-- notably the cease-fire agreement that brought the crisis to an end. U.S. activity was limited to several political statements. The USSR was not visibly involved. The EC and the CSCE, by contrast, were highly involved and NATO modestly so. As noted, the EC and the UN were very active in mediating the crisis, with the UN the most effective in achieving crisis termination.

References:

Baker 1995; Forbes et al. 1915; Glenny 1992; Kaplan 1993; Keesing's 1991, 1992; Magas 1993; New York Times 1991, 1992; Owen 1995; Silber and Little 1995; Touval 2002; West 1941; Woodward 1995.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


