CRISNO 94

D-DAY

Background:

An intrawar crisis for Germany was triggered by the Allied landing in Western Europe on 6 June 1944. It lasted until Germany's surrender on 7 May 1945.

Pre-crisis By 1944 the tide of war had definitely turned in the Allies' favor. The end of Axis resistance in North Africa had been achieved by 13 May 1943 (see Case #90--El Alamein). The Soviets had defeated the Germans at Stalingrad and at Kursk-Orel and were advancing rapidly through Eastern Europe (see Cases #89 and #93). German divisions in southern Italy had been forced to retreat (see Case #91). And the war in the Pacific was proceeding successfully for the U.S. (see Case #95). For many months careful and elaborate plans for the invasion of France had been made by the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Expeditionary Forces, commanded by General Eisenhower. The chief base for the concentration of troops and war materials was the U.K.; and the plan of the campaign had been rehearsed and prepared to the finest detail.

Summary:

An IWC was triggered for Germany on 6 June 1944 when British, American and Canadian forces invaded Nazi-occupied Western Europe. The German response was immediate: wherever they encountered Allied troops they fought back, hoping to prevent a firm Allied foothold on the Normandy coast. Within one week, however, a strip of beach 60 miles long had been occupied and artificial harbors were constructed--to offset the lack of port facilities for disembarkation. With the capture of Cherbourg on 27 June the Allies gained a major port. Throughout the summer they advanced into France and Belgium, and, on 2 September 1944, the U.S. First Army crossed the German frontier. The advance was halted when an Allied attempt to outflank the West Wall through the flat Dutch territory in the north failed, and survivors of an Allied airborne division, which had been dropped in Holland at Arnhem, had to be withdrawn. On 16 December the Germans broke through U.S. defense lines in the Belgian and Luxembourg sector. The Battle of the Bulge inflicted heavy losses, and the Allied forces were driven back to the Meuse. The gap was closed by the end of December when the Allies rallied to attack on both sides of the "Bulge."

From the beginning of 1945 the Allied drive into Germany from the west coordinated with the rapid and powerful Soviet offensive from the east (see Case #100). President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill, and Marshal Stalin met at Yalta in the Crimea on 7 February to plan the final defeat and occupation of Germany. The U.S. First and Third Armies crossed into Germany in February and March, and the British and Canadians opened an offensive southeast of Nijmegen, Holland. By 12 April the U.S. Ninth Army had reached the Elbe River. On that day President Roosevelt died. Soviet forces fought their way into Berlin on the 25th. And on the 26th the armies of the U.S. and USSR met on the Elbe at Torgau. On 29 April German resistance in northern Italy broke. And on 1 May the Battle of Berlin began. A German radio announcement from Hamburg declared that Hitler had died that day. On 7 May a group of German army leaders sent envoys to Reims where they signed terms of surrender, ending the crisis for Germany and the war in Europe.

References:

Baldwin 1966; Bryant 1959; Calvocoressi and Wint 1972; Churchill 1951, 1953; Eisenhower 1948; Liddell-Hart 1970; Palmer 1973; Weigley 1981; Weinberg 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


