CRISNO 257

CYPRUS III

Background:

This crisis lasted from 15 July 1974 until 24 February 1975. As in earlier crises over Cyprus, there were three actors: Cyprus, Turkey, and Greece.

Pre-crisis The 1960 agreement among Greece, Turkey, and the U.K. for the maintenance of the status quo in Cyprus was undermined once more when a terrorist group, EOKA-B, advocating enosis (union with Greece), planned a coup against President Makarios. On 2 July 1974 in a letter to the Greek government, the president accused Greek officers in the Cypriot National Guard of plotting his assassination and demanded their removal. New policies were introduced by Cyprus to reduce their influence.

Summary:

On 15 July 1974 a military coup was engineered in Nicosia by officers from Athens, and parliamentary rule was overthrown, triggering a crisis for Cyprus. Makarios escaped to London, and Nikos Sampson was installed as President. Heavy fighting followed. The Cypriot response, on the 19th, was an appeal to the UN Security Council and to the U.K. for assistance. The 15 July coup also triggered a crisis for Turkey, which then proceeded to mount a counterpolice action, after the military junta in Greece rejected its demand to restore Makarios as President of Cyprus. Immediately after the coup, British and U.S. diplomats began mediation intended to lead to a cease-fire. Britain, one of three guarantor powers to Cyprus, was the lead mediator, and U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger assisted.

On 20 July, after rejecting pleas from the U.S., the U.K., and the UN for restraint, Turkey invaded Cyprus. Soon 40,000 Turkish troops were in control of the territory stretching from Kyrenia on the north coast to Nicosia. Fighting was extensive, and there were thousands of casualties. A crisis was triggered for Greece with the invasion on 20 July.

The superiority of the Turkish forces and the distance between Greece and Cyprus prevented a Greek counterattack: and the disastrous failure of the Greek military junta's attempt to precipitate enosis toppled the regime in Greece. On 23 July a civilian government was restored in Athens. Sampson resigned as President of Cyprus, and Glafkos Clerides was installed as Acting President.

Peace negotiations opened on 25 July attended by representatives from the U.K., Greece, and Turkey and an observer from the USSR. An agreement was signed on 30 July confirming a cease-fire and establishing a security zone between the Greek and Turkish forces. Talks, however, broke down on 4 August, and Turkish forces advanced to occupy the entire northern part of Cyprus, over 40 percent of the island's territory. Human rights violations against the Greek population were reported. Once Turkey had achieved its military objectives, it called for a cease-fire on 16 August, which went into effect immediately. Following a series of talks between Archbishop Makarios and Clerides during November, Makarios returned to Cyprus on 7 December 1974. In February 1975 a Turkish-Cypriot Federated State was proclaimed and, on 24 February, a Constituent Assembly for Turkish Cyprus was convened, ending the crisis for Turkey. By their failure to challenge this act, the crisis ended for Cyprus and Greece as well.

The UN played an active role in the third international crisis over Cyprus. An emergency meeting of the Security Council was held immediately after the coup on 15 July. Several resolutions were passed, calling for a cease-fire, an end to foreign military intervention in Cyprus and respect for its sovereignty, and the resumption of negotiations, as well as cooperation of the parties with UN forces. The abortive cease-fire agreements of 22 and 30 July were to come into effect under UN auspices. The UN Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) supervised the cease-fire of 16 August. Talks between Acting President Clerides and the Turkish Cypriot leader, Denktash, were also held under UN auspices. On 13 December the UNFICYP mandate was extended for another six-month period.

The U.S., beset by the Watergate political crisis at home, was nevertheless active in efforts to mediate among the parties. Cyprus and Greece maintained that the absence of U.S. pressure on Turkey to stop military action encouraged Ankara. And when U.S. military aid to Turkey was stopped in December, relations between those two countries deteriorated. NATO was not active in the crisis. Greece, protesting that security organization's inability to restrain Turkey, withdrew its forces from NATO.

The Soviet Union made several military moves during the crisis. A Soviet task force moving toward Cyprus was reinforced at sea; and seven airborne divisions were put on alert. More than two decades later, the partition of Cyprus remained intact.

References:

See sources for Cases #202 and #223; and Callaghan 1987; Campbell 1976; Coulombis 1983; Kaplan 1981; Kissinger 1982; MEJ Chronology 1974, 1975; Nixon 1978; Wilson 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


