CRISNO 72

NOMONHAN

Background:

A crisis for the Soviet Union and Japan arising from an incident at Nomonhan occurred between 28 May and 15 September 1939.

Background Nomonhan is an oasis in the Gobi Desert whose pastures have been used for centuries by Mongol nomads. The territory, partly under Japanese and partly under Soviet control in the 1930s, was inhabited by Mongols. Japanese troops were engaged as allies of Manchukuo, by virtue of the 1932 Japan-Manchukuo Treaty of Mutual Assistance; and Soviet forces were allies of Outer Mongolia under their 1936 Pact of Mutual Assistance. The Manchukuo government claimed that the Khalha River was the boundary between Manchukuo and Outer Mongolia, whereas the government of Outer Mongolia declared that the boundary lay a number of miles east of the river.

Summary:

On 28 May 1939 a clash took place on the Mongolia/Manchukuo border in which 39 Outer Mongolian planes were shot down and 150 Mongols killed by Japanese forces. This triggered a crisis for the Soviet Union, which perceived a territorial threat. Moscow warned Japan on the 31st that the Soviet Union would defend Outer Mongolia's borders as if they were its own. A counterattack by Soviet forces in the vicinity of Nomonhan on 18 June, accompanied by air attacks on key strategic points in the rear, triggered a crisis for Japan. The Japanese attacked again on 28 June. During July the Japanese military attaché in Moscow reported that the Soviets were sending reinforcements to the Far East and that a new offensive was expected around the middle of August. It was thought that Japanese strength in the area would be sufficient to halt an enemy offensive.

Fighting continued throughout July; the major Soviet response came on 20 August when Soviet-Mongolian troops inflicted a heavy defeat on the Japanese, including 17,000 casualties, a third of their forces in that battle. They were subsequently driven out of the disputed area. The major Japanese response, on 28 August, was a decision to commence discussions with the Soviets in Moscow without delay. All this occurred while Japan's Kwantung Army was planning a major counteroffensive with four fresh divisions. On the 30th an imperial order was sent to the Kwantung Army to desist from further operations in the Nomonhan area. After several days of negotiations, Foreign Ministers Togo and Molotov reached an agreement on 15 September 1939, providing for a cease-fire along the lines held that day and the setting up of a commission to settle the boundary problem.

This crisis did not come before the League of Nations.

References:

Coox 1977; Dallin 1948; Ikuhiko 1976; Jones 1954; Kutakov 1972; Maxon 1957; Wu 1950.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


