CRISNO 370

CHAD-LIBYA VIII

Background:

Chad and Libya were embroiled in another crisis from 12 December 1986 to 11 September 1987.

Background and Pre-crisis In the months following the violence of February-March 1986 (see Case #362--Chad/Libya VII), Libyan forces remained in northern Chad, supporting the GUNT, as in the past. In June Chad complained to the UN Security Council against Libya's continuing occupation of its northern territory.

A crucial change in the balance of internal Chadian forces occurred in August, a split in the GUNT. This was followed in October by a new round of fighting--between the forces of former GUNT leader Goukhouni and the Libyans. Chad claimed on 10 November that Libyan armed forces had killed hundreds of people in air and ground attacks in the north. On the 15th President Habré of Chad stated that government forces (the FANT) were cooperating with Goukouni's forces, now known as the Popular Armed Forces--FAP.

Summary:

On 11 December 1986 Libyan troops launched an attack on Goukouni's FAP forces in northern Chad and, according to the Chad government, used napalm and poison gas. This triggered a crisis for Chad. The same day a Libyan fighter plane was shot down over northern Chad.

Habré appealed for French, U.S., and Soviet armed intervention. On the 17th French aircraft dropped food, medical supplies, and ammunition to the FAP forces. However, the French defense ministry declared the same day that no French soldiers or aircraft would intervene to liberate northern Chad from Libyan occupation: the 1,000 French troops and aircraft in N'Djamena would be used only to defend the capital. On the 18th the U.S. State Department said it was rushing emergency military aid to the Chadian government.

Libya responded by appealing to the Arab League and the OAU for help against "a dangerous threat as a result of the U.S.-French military intervention" in the crisis. Chad, by contrast, complained that the OAU did not condemn Libya, despite its "inhuman acts." The USSR demanded that all "imperialist interference" in Chad cease.

In late December Chad government troops, now allied with Goukouni's former rebels, succeeded in crossing the 16th Parallel, the informal boundary between Libyan and French spheres of influence in Chad since 1984. Moreover, on 2 January 1987 Chad pressed its attack; and, after heavy fighting it claimed the recapture of the northeast oasis of Fada and the northwest oasis of Zouar. This triggered a crisis for Libya. On the 4th Libyan aircraft bombed civilians in Arada, south of the 16th Parallel. The same day Libya called up all army reservists.

In accord with France's defensive strategy, French forces in Chad established an air defense system to prevent any further Libyan military action south of the 16th Parallel; and French aircraft bombed Libyan radar at the airstrip at Qadi-Doum. France also continued to send military aid to the Chadian government army.

Fighting continued in the north, especially around the area of Zouar, a crucial point in Libya's plan to form a ring around the northern Tibesti region.

In this phase of the fighting, Algeria, Nigeria, and Zaire offered to mediate; and Niger called for an emergency OAU meeting to consider the crisis. The OAU Secretary-General visited the Chadian and Libyan capitals. Egypt condemned Libya's military intervention in Chad's internal affairs.

Despite the flurry of African mediation diplomacy, both sides continued their military buildup in the north. Low-intensity clashes continued intermittently during the next six months.

In a brief breakthrough, Chad government troops captured the town of Aozou in the disputed Strip on 8 August. On the 29th Libya launched a counterattack and took back control over Aozou. Libya also continued to bomb Chad, including towns south of the 16th Parallel.

Following the Chadian attack on 8 August, Libya complained to the UN Security Council that Chad had attacked its territory.

Despite repeated requests from Habré, France refused to provide air cover for its exposed towns, other than the capital.

As the fighting escalated, Chadian government forces invaded Libya on 5 September 1987--for the first time--and occupied the important air base of Maaten-es-Sara: it claimed the destruction of 30 combat aircraft and the base itself. France expressed concern at Chad's actions, while the U.S. welcomed the Chadian raid.

Following successful and well-received mediation efforts by the OAU Chairman, President Kaunda of Zambia, de-escalation was swift. The crisis came to an end on 11 September, when both sides accepted an OAU call for a cease-fire. They also agreed to a meeting of an ad hoc OAU committee in Lusaka on 23 September.

(The long-standing territorial dispute between Chad and Libya--Libya first occupied the Aozou Strip in 1973--was submitted by them to the International Court of Justice [ICJ] in 1990 for a binding ruling. In a turning-point decision on 3 February 1994 the ICJ ruled, by a vote of 16-1, in favor of Chad's claim to the Strip. The Court decided that the international border between Chad and Libya had been formally fixed by a treaty between France, then the colonial power in Chad, and Libya in 1955, which clearly assigned the Aozou Strip to Chad. Libya had also claimed 310,000 square miles of northern Chad and had long occupied it under the terms of a de facto agreement with France that divided Chad at the 16th Parallel into spheres of influence [see Case #290--Chad/Libya III].

Negotiations between Chad and Libya to implement the Court's ruling led to an agreement on the withdrawal of Libyan troops from the Aozou Strip, to begin on 15 April and to be completed on 10 May, and to be monitored by international observers. The Strip was formally transferred by Libya to Chad on 30 May 1994.)

References:

ACR 1986, 1987; AR 1986, 1987; ARec 1986, 1987; ARB 1986, 1987; Keesing's 1986, 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


