CRISNO 442

IRAN NUCLEAR I

Background:

In early 2003, the IAEA commenced inspections of Iran's nuclear installations amid suspicions that Iran was developing nuclear weapons. On 13 June 2003, the IAEA issued a report in Vienna. In it, the IAEA concluded that Iran had not met all of its obligations under the Safeguards Agreements. This report represented the beginning of the crisis for Iran and the EU3—the United Kingdom, France, and Germany.

Summary:

Iran's major response to the IAEA report came on 16 June 2003 when Iran rejected EU and IAEA calls for it to accept surprise inspections. For Iran, the gravest threat faced during the crisis was a threat to its influence. If its nuclear ambitions were stopped, it risked losing important influence among both allies and adversaries in the region. Moreover, the acquisition of nuclear weapons would have the opposite effect. Furthermore, the presence of nuclear weapons in Iran would limit the United States' ability to interfere in Iranian affairs. Despite the fact that the U.S. was not a crisis actor, the U.S. remained the source of military threat for Iran. The EU3 would not commence military hostilities without the support of the U.S. Iran's negotiations with the IAEA and the EU3 were handled by the Secretary of the Supreme National Security Council. The Iranian President did issue statements throughout the crisis, but the primary communications were handled by Iran's negotiator.

The major response from the EU3 occurred on 14 June 2003. In a verbal statement, the EU3 urged Iran to allow surprise inspections to all sites. For the EU3, the crisis was a threat to Europe's influence. Internally, the EU3 wanted to secure their influence within the EU. Externally, the EU3 wanted to show that the EU is a relevant actor in foreign affairs. The foreign ministers of the UK, France, and Germany were primarily responsible for negotiations. As a regional organization, the EU's foreign policy chief was also involved in negotiations.

In addition to the four crisis actors, the United States, Russia, and Israel were involved in the crisis. Despite its importance in international relations, China was not sufficiently involved to be considered an involved actor. American involvement was a source of frustration for all parties. American condemnations and threats during this crisis were viewed extremely unfavourably by the Iranian government. The American hard-line positions and occasional impatience with the Europeans was a source of frustration for the EU3. However, the primary source of frustration for the EU3 was the lack of American involvement in the negotiating process. Russian involvement was viewed favourably by the four crisis actors. Russia took a conciliatory approach that helped to ease tensions.

The UN's involvement in the crisis came mainly from the IAEA. Although an IAEA report triggered the crisis, the IAEA helped to terminate the crisis through fact-finding and negotiations. It was therefore viewed favourably by the EU3 and Iran. However, the IAEA was willing to condemn Iranian actions when it was deemed appropriate.

Throughout the crisis, there were no instances of violence. Instead, negotiations were the primary crisis management technique for the four crisis actors. Negotiations between Iran and the EU3 began in October 2003. After more than a year of negotiations, Iran and the EU3 signed an agreement on 15 November 2004 in which Iran pledged to suspend nuclear enrichment. In return, Iran would not be taken before the UNSC and the Europeans would negotiate with Iran about future trade ties and civilian nuclear technology. This voluntary formal agreement concluded the crisis for all actors. The agreement was a compromise that satisfied all parties. The EU3 received an important pledge from Iran. Iran avoided being taken before the UNSC, had opened up positive bargaining space with the EU, and could easily withdraw from the agreement.

References:

n/a

Last Updated: 1/23/2006


