CRISNO 285

FRENCH HOSTAGES MAURITANIA

Background:

As part of the ongoing conflict over Western Sahara, French citizens working in Mauritania were held hostage by Polisario. This created a crisis for France and Algeria from 25 October to 23 December 1977.

Pre-crisis The Mauritanian town of Zouerate was attacked by Polisario guerrillas on 1 May and 16 July 1977. Zouerate was an important mining settlement housing a fairly large French community, consisting mainly of engineers and their families. In the May attack two French citizens were killed and six others taken prisoner. France, which had been supplying Morocco and Mauritania with arms and instructors, evacuated 450 women and children and issued a strong protest calling on Algeria to use its good offices to free the hostages. In May Mauritania and France considered reactivating their military defense agreements, which the former had terminated in January 1973. France brought the matter before the UN. However, all attempts to release the prisoners met with little success, due mainly to Polisario's unwillingness to cooperate.

Summary:

The abduction of two French engineers working on the Mauritanian railway 60 kilometers west of Zouerate, on 25 October 1977, triggered a crisis for France. On the 28th eight alleged members of Polisario were expelled from France.

France's major response, which was also the trigger to Algeria's crisis, was the placing of French paratroops on alert on 29 October, amid rumors that French troop-carrying aircraft had departed for Senegal. Algeria feared that the French would attack targets on Algerian soil, which housed major Polisario bases and training camps. On the 30th Algeria responded with a démarche from Foreign Minister Bouteflika to the ambassadors from the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, drawing their attention to the risks of French intervention in the area and the subsequent danger to international security. On 1-2 November DC-8 and Transall transport planes flew to Dakar with approximately 300 reinforcements for the 1,100 French troops stationed in Cape Vert, Senegal. During the first two weeks in November French instructors were sent to Mauritania to establish communication facilities. From 1 to 7 November a French Foreign Ministry official, Claude Chayets, talked with Polisario leaders in Algiers, and from 5 to 6 November a second official visited the Algerian capital. On 7 November the Front Liberation National (FLN), Algeria's sole legal political organization, staged a demonstration against French threats of intervention--reportedly one of the largest since Algeria's independence from France in 1962. From 12 to 18 December French Jaguar aircraft strafed Polisario columns in Mauritania.

Negotiations with Polisario succeeded in freeing the hostages, who were handed over to UN Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim in Algiers on 23 December 1977. Waldheim played a considerable mediation role throughout the crisis. On 12 November, he met Polisario representatives at UN headquarters in New York City. During the course of the crisis, Waldheim also met with Algerian Foreign Minister Bouteflika and Claude Chayets. The release of the hostages ended the crisis for Algeria and France.

At France's request, the UN General Assembly met on 31 October. The Secretary-General offered his good offices. And a resolution was adopted by the General Assembly on 9 November, calling upon all members to respect Western Sahara's right to self-determination. The U.S. was not involved; the USSR, marginally so.

References:

See sources for Cases #261 and #268; and WA 1977.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


