CRISNO 79

CLOSURE OF BURMA ROAD

Background:

The closure of the Burma Road by the Japanese created a crisis for the U.K. from 24 June to 14 July 1940.

Background Throughout the 1930s Britain's support for the Nationalist regime in China was viewed by Japan as hostile to its interests. Britain's involvement in the European war provided Japan with an opportunity to proceed without hindrance to establish its proclaimed "New Order"--the "Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere." As the tide of the war turned against Britain, Japan increased its pressure.

Summary:

On 24 June Japan demanded that the U.K. cease assistance to Chiang Kai-shek, withdraw its troops from Shanghai, and close the transit routes for supplies to China through Hong Kong and the Burma Road. A force of about 5,000 Japanese troops took up positions along the border of the leased Kowloon territory in Hong Kong. The British perceived that, if they yielded to the Japanese demands, the security of the British Commonwealth would be compromised. Yet Britain could not afford to risk war with Japan, being already involved in the European and Mediterranean theaters.

The U.K.'s major response, on 27 June, was to seek American assurances that the U.S. would stand by Britain in resisting Japanese demands, either through an embargo on all exports to Japan or by sending U.S. warships to Singapore. The U.K. also requested U.S. cooperation in mediating a peace settlement between China and Japan. The U.S., while urging the U.K. to stand firm, rejected any plan for joint action. On the 30th the Hong Kong military authorities ordered the destruction of the frontier rail and road bridges over the Shumchun River. An evacuation of British women and children from Hong Kong to Manila and Australia followed.

A Japanese foreign ministry communiqué, on 8 July, demanded British reconsideration. On the 12th the U.K. informed U.S. Secretary of State Cordell Hull that Japan would declare war at any time unless the British government closed the Burma Road.

The crisis ended on 14 July 1940 when an Anglo-Japanese agreement was reached in Tokyo whereby all transit of war materials was stopped for three months. Four days later the agreement was communicated to the British parliament by the prime minister and the foreign secretary. The U.K., perceiving a high probability that Japan would enter the war on the side of the Axis, and unable to meet the threat without U.S. support, yielded to the Japanese demands.

(The Burma Road was cleared of Japanese forces in the spring of 1945 following a two-pronged attack on Japanese positions in northern Burma by Chinese troops under the direction of U.S. General Stilwell.)

References:

Boyle 1972; Hull 1948, vol. I; Jones 1954; Lowe 1977; Morley 1974.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


