CRISNO 347

OPERATION ASKARI

Background:

Angola experienced another crisis with the Union of South Africa from 6 December 1983 until 16 February 1984.

Summary:

On 6 December 1983 the South Africa Defence Forces launched their most formidable invasion of southern Angola since Operation Protea in 1981 (see Case #331): they attacked targets more than 150 miles inside Angola. According to a Pretoria spokesman, the aim of the operation was to disrupt preparations by SWAPO guerrillas for their annual incursions into South-West Africa.

Serious clashes continued throughout December around the towns of Cubama, Caiundo, and Cassinga, with the most intense fighting early in January at Curelai, where South African troops clashed not only with SWAPO, but also with Angolan and Cuban forces. Angola responded to the crisis with military resistance and with a complaint to the UN Security Council that South Africa had committed aggression against its territory, requesting an emergency session of the Council.

The Council adopted a resolution on 20 December 1983: it censured South Africa for its military operations in Angola and demanded the SADF's unconditional withdrawal from Angola.

The winding down of this international crisis began soon after its eruption. South Africa's Foreign Minister, Pik Botha, put forward proposals for a cease-fire in Angola on 15 December, to take effect at the end of January 1984. President dos Santos responded on 30 December with a conditional acceptance. On 20 January 1984 talks were held in Cape Verde among Angolan, South African, and UN representatives. While South Africa had only claimed to be observing at Cape Verde, secretive trilateral mediation efforts had begun on the previous day among the U.S., Angola and South Africa. The U.S. and Angola came to an agreement, the Act of Sao Vicente, in which Angola agreed to control SWAPO once South Africa withdrew from Angola. The U.S. delegation had been headed by Frank Wisner, who reported the successful negotiations to his superior, Chester Crocker, the U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Africa. On 26 January Crocker flew to Cape Town with a "special message" from the Angolan government. On 27 January, he met with Prime Minister Botha, who then announced to the South African Parliament that he had ordered a complete SADF withdrawal from Angola on the 31st.

Angola's President dos Santos met with Zambia's President Kaunda on 6 February. Ten days later, on 16 February, Angolan and South African delegations, with Crocker and Kaunda directing the proceedings, reached the "Lusaka Agreement" to establish a joint monitoring commission to supervise the withdrawal of South African troops from Angola which, in return, undertook not to permit SWAPO forces to move into Namibia. This marked the end of Angola's crisis and, with it, the end of Operation Askari.

Both of the superpowers were politically active in this crisis. As noted, the U.S. was influential in brokering the Lusaka Agreement between South Africa and Angola. The USSR, on 5 January 1984, called for concerted international action to halt South Africa's "aggression" against Angola. Later that month it warned Pretoria of the logical consequences of its behavior, without specifying any likely Soviet action beyond support for Angola. On 11 January military delegations from Angola, Cuba, and the USSR reached an agreement in Moscow on strengthening Angola's defenses.

References:

ACR 1983-84; AR 1984; ARB 1984; Keesing's 1984; New York Times 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


