CRISNO 259

MAYAGUEZ

Background:

The Mayaguez episode was a crisis for the United States and Cambodia from 12 to 15 May 1975.

Background America's prestige was at a low point in the wake of the U.S. withdrawal from Indochina and the collapse of U.S.-supported regimes in Cambodia and Vietnam. In Cambodia the Khmer Rouge had emerged victorious from the civil war. While U.S. relations with China had improved considerably since 1971, relations with the new government of Cambodia were hostile.

Summary:

On 12 May 1975 a U.S.-registered cargo ship, the Mayaguez, was seized off Cambodian coastal waters by the Khmer Rouge, triggering a crisis for the United States. The ship was taken into custody, together with its crew, with no word of their fate. Washington looked upon this incident as a challenge to U.S. influence in Southeast Asia. Following demands for the return of the ship and crew, on the 12th, the U.S. threat, on 13 May, to use force if necessary triggered a crisis for Cambodia.

The U.S. decision to use military force was taken on the 14th by President Ford at the fourth and final meeting of the National Security Council on this issue. Cambodia's response, also on the 14th, was a statement accusing the U.S. of interfering in its internal affairs and threatening reprisals. A few minutes after fighting began, the Cambodians released the ship and crew, ending the crisis for the United States. Nevertheless, even after Cambodia's acquiescence, serious clashes took place between Khmer Rouge forces and U.S. marines in the vicinity of Koh Tong, an island thought to be in the area where the Mayaguez crew was being held. The U.S. employed massive force, and heavy casualties were reported on both sides.

The crisis for Cambodia ended on 15 May when the U.S. ceased its military operations. UN involvement was minimal: the Secretary-General offered his good offices to settle the dispute, but this had little effect. In addition to the two crisis actors, the PRC became involved when Cambodia requested Beijing to conduct limited negotiations on its behalf. The USSR remained aloof from this crisis.

References:

Hearings 1975; Head et al. 1978; Paust 1976; Poole 1976; Simmons 1976.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


