CRISNO 281

EGYPT-LIBYA CLASHES

Background:

Border clashes between Libya and Egypt created a crisis for these two north African states from 14 July to 10 September 1977.

Background The problem of undemarcated boundaries between Egypt and Libya was long-standing. The personal enmity between President Sadat and Colonel Qaddhafi increased after the conclusion of the October 1973 war between Egypt and Israel, when the Libyan leader accused Sadat of working toward a thaw in Egypt/Israel relations, as well as developing stronger ties with the United States. Egypt, on the other hand, resented the increasing Muslim fundamentalism in Libya and feared the spread of Soviet influence then prevalent in that country. For several years the two African neighbors had accused each other of acts of sabotage and had carried on an almost unbroken propaganda campaign (see Case #314--Libya's Threat to Sadat, in 1980).

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for Libya when Egyptian armed forces attacked a Libyan border police fort on 14 July 1977. The Libyan response, on 19 July, was artillery fire on an Egyptian border post killing nine soldiers and capturing 14. This triggered a crisis for Egypt. On the 21st Egyptian forces, supported by tanks and aircraft, crossed the border into Libya. During August intermittent clashes continued, with each side accusing the other of aggression. Yasser Arafat, leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization, along with President Boumedienne of Algeria, President Gnassingbe Eyadema of Togo and Foreign Minister Shaikh Sabah al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah of Kuwait, succeeded in mediating the crisis. The mediators traveled to both countries, worked out a peace formula and called for a cease-fire on 24 July that was upheld. On 10 September Egyptian and Libyan troops withdrew from the border, terminating the crisis for both actors.

The United States provided arms and weapons to Egypt, as did the Soviet Union to Libya. Libya brought the matter before the United Nations, the Arab League, and the OAU, but no discussion took place.

References:

ACR 1977; ARec 1977; ARB 1977; Keesing's 1977; MECS 1977-78; MEJ Chronology 1977; Oliver and Crowder 1981.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


