CRISNO 371

SINO-VIETNAM BORDER

Background:

Vietnam and China were embroiled in another border crisis from 5 to 10 January 1987.

Summary:

The two long-standing adversaries accused each other of initiating the crisis on 5 January 1987 by an attack across their border--in the Vi Xuyen District of Ha Tuyen Province of Vietnam, claimed Hanoi; in Yunnan Province of China, asserted Beijing. For both it was a threat to territorial integrity.

Whichever state set the crisis in motion, the response was identical--a large-scale counterattack across the border. Vietnam claimed that 1,500 Chinese were killed in battles that raged for three days and that the Chinese had penetrated 18 kilometers into Vietnam territory. By the 8th, according to Hanoi, the Chinese advance had been halted, with Chinese forces being compelled to retreat across the border. This marked the end of Vietnam's crisis. China acknowledged that, on 7 January, its "frontier guards" made "counterattacks" against Vietnamese troops--as a response to a Vietnamese attack in the Laoshan area of Yunnan Province. The crisis ended for China on 10 January when it claimed that 500 Vietnamese troops were killed or wounded. China also denied Vietnamese reports that 1,500 Chinese soldiers were killed, although it admitted that there were "considerable losses," due to the inexperience of its soldiers.

While both parties claimed victory, the crisis ended in a stalemate: neither had achieved its main objective--defeating and, if possible, humiliating its long-standing rival for influence in Southeast Asia; neither emerged with enhanced power and influence; and both suffered considerable casualties. In all of these respects, the outcome seemed to replicate their full-scale war from mid-December 1978 to March 1979 (see Case #298).

Neither the U.S. or the USSR, nor the UN or any regional organization, was involved in this crisis.

(On 13 January China rejected a Vietnamese proposal for talks on the border confrontation and linked the resolution of their conflict with the withdrawal of Vietnam from Cambodia--which Vietnam had occupied since the beginning of 1979 [see Case #284--Vietnam Invasion of Cambodia, in Indochina PC].

Although this crisis ended quickly, further border incidents between China and Vietnam occurred during the months of February and March. More important, it was followed a year later by a major Sino/Vietnam crisis over potentially valuable territory and a continuing source of tension [see Case #384--Spratly Islands]. And their protracted conflict remains unresolved.)

References:

Foreign Broadcast Information Service--Daily Report/China (FBIS--DR/ China) 1987; Keesing's 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


