CRISNO 93

SOVIET OCCUPATION OF EAST EUROPE

Background:

Soviet offensives into Eastern Europe in 1944-45 created an intrawar crisis for Romania, Germany, and Hungary from 26 March 1944 to 13 February 1945.

Background and Pre-crisis Romanian oil fields had been protected by Germany since 1939. And on 23 September 1940 Romania became a member of the Tripartite Pact (Germany, Italy, Japan), fighting alongside Germany against the Soviet Union. As the tide turned at the Battle of Stalingrad (see Case #89), Soviet troops began major offensives into Eastern Europe. In December 1943 the U.S. and the USSR, followed by the U.K., warned Romania, Bulgaria, and Hungary that Germany's defeat would mean a defeat for those countries as well. Romania's King Michael began to try to find ways to arrange an agreement with the Allies. By the end of March Soviet troops were marching toward Romania's borders.

Hungarian peace feelers throughout 1943 provoked German suspicions, resulting in its occupation by Germany on 19 March 1944, at the time that Hungarian Regent Horthy was meeting with Hitler. The economic situation in Hungary was severe from 1943, along with increased repression, as a result of the German occupation.

Summary:

A crisis for Romania was triggered on 26 March with the arrival of Soviet forces at its border, threatening defeat and occupation. A USSR announcement on 2 April declared that the Soviet Union did not wish to take over Romanian territory; nor did it aspire to create a new social order there. Soviet troops would enter the country only as needed to continue the resistance to enemy forces.

On the 4th the Allies began mass bombings of Romania, especially oil production installations. One week later Soviet armistice terms were rejected by Romania. By 5 May oil production was down to half of its previous level.

Romania's major response, on 23 August, was King Michael's acceptance of armistice terms proferred covertly by the Soviet Union. An amnesty was declared for political prisoners, and a Government of National Union was set up: Romania would henceforth fight alongside the Allies. The Romanian response triggered a crisis for Germany, with the loss of an ally, and the threat of the Soviet thrust extending to Germany itself. The German response, the same day, was an order to seize the Romanian oil fields and the nearby harbor of Constanta, and to set up a pro-German government in Romania. On the 25th Germany bombed Bucharest while negotiations between the Soviets and the Romanians continued. On 12 September an armistice was signed in Moscow, ending the crisis for Romania.

Within a week Soviet forces approached the borders of Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Hungary. And on 22 September they expelled the Germans from Romania, ending Germany's crisis over Romania in defeat.

A crisis for Hungary was triggered on 22 September with an invasion by Soviet and Romanian forces. Hungary attempted to contact the Allies that day, and again on 10 October, when a provisional armistice was arranged in Moscow conditional on Hungary's joining the war against Germany. Hungary responded on 15 October with Horthy's proclamation of an armistice. Some Hungarian troops, however, joined the German forces. Hungary's response triggered another crisis for Germany, which responded on the 16th by placing Horthy under protective custody; and, as the Hungarians surrendered, German forces took over Budapest. Horthy finally signed the appointment of Szalasi, head of the pro-Nazi Arrow Cross movement, as Prime Minister.

By December 1944 the Red Army had begun a siege of Budapest, completely encircling the city by the 26th. The battle lasted two more months, and on 13 February 1945 Budapest fell, terminating the crisis for both Germany and Hungary in defeat, with the latter effectively out of the war.

Bulgaria held a series of negotiations with the Soviet Union and eventually withdrew from the Axis and entered the war against Germany.

References:

Bullock 1962; Erickson 1983; Fenyo 1972; Ionescu 1964; Macartney 1956-57; Shirer 1964; Weinberg 1994; Ziemke 1968.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


