CRISNO 135

PUNJAB WAR SCARE I

Background:

Another crisis for India and Pakistan began on 7 July 1951 and ended the following month.

Pre-crisis Protests against a number of alleged Pakistani violations of the Kashmir Cease-fire Agreement of 1 January 1949 (see Case #119) were made to the UN Security Council by India in the latter half of June 1951. In a letter on 25 June it was stated that the Indian government saw the incidents as being "very grave," especially when "coupled with the fanatical war propaganda that is daily growing in volume in Pakistan which justify the suspicion that they are part of a planned program calculated to lead, if unchecked, to an outbreak of hostilities between the two countries." The Pakistani minister of Kashmir affairs maintained that there was nothing new or extraordinary in the incidents mentioned by India.

Summary:

India's crisis was triggered on 7 July 1951 when Pakistan moved a brigade to within 15 miles of the Kashmir district of Poonch. These military movements, along with the perception of talk of jihad (holy war) and the growing evidence of political instability in Pakistan, led Prime Minister Nehru to respond on 10 July with an order to move Indian troops to the Punjab border and to Jammu and Kashmir. Leaves for Indian army officers were canceled. Nehru's response constituted the trigger to Pakistan's crisis.

Acting upon advice by Pakistan's Chief of Staff, General Ayub Khan, that Pakistan was unprepared for war, Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan decided to attempt to manage the crisis through diplomatic channels. His major response, on 15 July, was to inform a press conference that the heavy concentration of Indian troops was within easy striking distance of Pakistan's borders. He requested that Nehru remove the threat and added that Pakistan "would not allow itself to be intimidated or influenced by any threat of force." In addition, on 27 July, four battalions of the Pakistan National Guard were sent to reinforce the Pakistani army on the border. Prolonged correspondence between Nehru and Liaquat Ali Khan took place from 15 July throughout August.

The crisis wound down sometime in August when the withdrawal of forces by both armies began. Violence was not employed by either country.

U.S. activity was limited to an expression of concern, and there was no Soviet activity. Prior to the onset of crisis, Dr. Frank Graham, the UN Representative for India and Pakistan, began conversations in New Delhi and then in Srinager and Azad, Kashmir. This began a line of communication via telegrams between the prime ministers of India and Pakistan. During the mediation, charges and counter charges over the others’ intentions were exchanged. Graham stayed and mediated beyond the end of crisis. His mediation efforts had no effect on crisis abatement.

References:

Ayub Khan 1967; Gopal 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


