CRISNO 165

IRAQ-LEBANON UPHEAVAL

Background:

Riots in Lebanon and a coup in Iraq precipitated an international crisis for four states, Lebanon, Jordan, the U.S., and the U.K., lasting from 8 May to the end of October 1958.

Background and Pre-crisis A crisis in Lebanon occurred during a period of continuing unrest in the Middle East. The United States, in an effort to counter a Soviet threat to U.S. interests, tried to unify the pro-Western Arab states through the "Eisenhower Doctrine" in January 1957, pledging U.S. aid to any Middle East state attacked by "international communism." It was publicly supported by Lebanon alone. President Nasir's strong anti-Western policy was strengthened by the union of Syria and Egypt in February 1958, which weakened Sa'udi Arabia and Lebanon while bringing Iraq and Jordan closer together in an Arab Federation set up at the same time (see Case #162--Formation of UAR).

In Iraq discontent focused on the Baghdad Pact of 1955 (CENTO [Central Treaty Organization]) (see Case #148). A conspiratorial group of "Free Officers" hostile to the monarchy laid plans for a coup and elected Brigadier 'Abd-ul-Karim Qassem as Chairman of the Executive Committee.

Summary:

A crisis for Lebanon was triggered on 8 May 1958 by the murder of a reformist editor of a pro-communist Beirut newspaper, a vocal critic of President Camille Chamoun's Western orientation, including his attempt to amend Lebanon's constitution in order to run for a second term. Opposition elements believed the government was responsible for the assassination. Full-scale rioting ensued. On the 12th the Lebanese army took over security in Beirut, Tripoli, and other cities.

Lebanon responded to the crisis with several acts. Foreign Minister Malik accused the UAR of massive interference in Lebanon's internal affairs. Chamoun sent a message to Eisenhower inquiring about American action if he were to request U.S. assistance. On 21 May Lebanon lodged a formal complaint with the League of Arab States: its attempt to settle the dispute took the form of a neutral resolution without any call for action. And on 22 May Chamoun brought the matter to the UN Security Council.

The Council's discussions on 6 and 11 June resulted in a Swedish-sponsored resolution to dispatch an Observer Group to Lebanon to determine if there was infiltration from Egypt or Syria across the Lebanon border. The group's first report, submitted on 3 July, indicated no border infiltration. Lebanon criticized the report as being inconclusive and misleading. It also contended that the number of observers was insufficient to cover the entire border area and that their activity was ineffective.

On 14 July, a successful coup in Baghdad against the Hashemite monarch triggered a crisis for the United States. The same day U.S. marines were ordered to Lebanon in an attempt to end the violence and stabilize the area. The coup in Baghdad, followed by the dispatch of U.S. troops to Lebanon, triggered a crisis for Jordan and Britain. King Hussein appealed to the U.K. for help on the 16th; and the following day British paratroops landed in Jordan. By 31 July the situation in Lebanon was sufficiently calm to allow a special presidential election: Fu'ad Shihab was elected President.

When Security Council action was effectively blocked by a Soviet veto, an Emergency Session of the General Assembly was called for 8 August. After 15 meetings a mild resolution was adopted, calling on all parties to abide by the Arab League's principle of nonintervention.

A Five-Power Summit Conference called for by Khrushchev did not take place: on 5 August the Soviet leader withdrew his support for a conference. Events in Lebanon remained unstable; and it was not until 14 October that tension dissipated with the acceptance of the new government in Lebanon by all political factions, marking the end of the crisis for Lebanon and the U.S.

The crisis faded for the U.K. and Jordan toward the end of October 1958. At that time King Hussein voiced his perception that the crisis had terminated. The crisis ended with no agreement among the adversaries.

The USSR's involvement was mainly political, but Soviet warships moved westward through the Baltic during the crisis, an act interpreted as an attempt to prevent the victory of pro-U.S. Lebanese forces.

References:

Agwani 1965; Curtis 1964; Dowty 1984; Eisenhower 1965; Goodspeed 1967; Hassouna 1975; Heikal 1973; Hoopes 1973; Horne 1989; Hussein 1962; Kerr 1972; Macmillan 1971; MEJ Chronology 1958; Miller 1967; Murphy 1964; Penrose 1978; Quandt 1978; Qubain 1961; Shwadran 1959.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


