CRISNO 18

GREECE-TURKEY WAR II

Background:

A second--multiphase--international crisis during the Greece/Turkey War in Anatolia lasted from 6 January until 12 September 1921. Once more, Turkey was the crisis actor, Greece the triggering entity.

Pre-crisis Greek Prime Minister Venizelos's defeat in the autumn 1920 elections and the subsequent return of exiled King Constantine intensified the dream of many Greeks for an Anatolian empire. The restoration of the old regime, however, gave France and Italy a pretext to disassociate themselves from Athens's ambitions; and they came to terms with Kemal Atatürk, leading to a withdrawal of their forces from Anatolia. Only the U.K. remained loyal to Greece. In the meantime Turkish nationalists achieved control over the stillborn Armenian state. They also concluded a military agreement with Bolshevik Russia in late April 1920 thereby securing their eastern flank, with the added benefit of potential Soviet military aid.

Summary:

Perceiving an opportunity for territorial gain in the midst of Turkey's turmoil, Greece launched a second--multiphase--campaign of the ongoing war east of Bursa on 6 January 1921. This triggered another crisis for Turkey. However, Greek forces met fierce resistance in the valley of Inönü and hurriedly retreated to Bursa four days later.

After a pause Greece resumed its offensive on 23 March, to the north of Bursa and in central Anatolia from Usak: the key goal was the Turkish nationalist stronghold of Eskisehir. The Greeks captured Afyonkarahisar and penetrated Turkish defenses near Inönü. But Turkish resistance again drove the Greeks back ending this phase on 1 April. They attacked once more on 10 July, from the south, with Eskisehir still the main target, but this time more successfully. The Turks were taken by surprise and were compelled to evacuate that strategic city in central Anatolia in late July.

The last phase of the Greek campaign in 1921 began on 13 August, this time in the direction of Ankara, the nationalist capital. Full-scale war raged for a month, until 12 September, by which time all Greek forces had been expelled to the west of the Sakarya River, Ankara's last natural defense line. Negotiations between the adversaries took place in London but played no role in crisis abatement. Violence and the balance of military power determined the outcome, which was a victory for Turkey, even though Greek forces had captured and held Eskisehir. The end of the second crisis of the Greece/Turkey War was a watershed event stopping hostilities for almost a year.

Three major powers were involved in Greece/Turkey War II. The U.K. provided political support to Greece, though less vigorously than in the first military campaign when Venizelos, whom Prime Minister Lloyd George admired, was in power in Athens. Russia provided military assistance to Turkey during the August 1920 phase of the fighting. And Italy, resentful of Greece after the Smyrna crisis (see Case #7, in Middle East: Non-PCs), was supportive of Turkey as well.

As with the other two Greece/Turkey War cases, the League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Cases #7 and #16.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


