CRISNO 246

VIETNAM PORTS MINING

Background:

South Vietnam, the United States, and North Vietnam were the crisis actors in a Vietnam intrawar crisis that lasted from 30 March to 19 July 1972.

Pre-crisis The period preceding the 1972 Vietnam Ports Mining crisis was marked by periodic escalation in fighting. Announcements of substantial U.S. troop withdrawals undermined the political strength of the U.S. at the Paris Peace Talks, conducted between Henry Kissinger and the North Vietnamese representatives Le Duc Tho and Xuan Thee. This crisis occurred during a U.S. presidential election year. At the same time there were ongoing demonstrations in the United States against the war in Vietnam.

Summary:

North Vietnam launched another spring offensive in South Vietnam on 30 March 1972, triggering a crisis for South Vietnam and the United States. South Vietnam, perceiving a threat of a further loss of territory, responded the same day with defensive fighting. The U.S. immediately renewed B-52 bombing of the Hanoi-Haiphong industrial complex. Despite these bombings, the North Vietnamese undertook further escalation on 24 April by initiating a renewed attack on South Vietnamese troops in the Central Highlands and forcing them to withdraw. The major U.S. response was an order by President Nixon on 8 May to mine all North Vietnamese ports in an effort to prevent military shipments from reaching North Vietnam by sea.

The announcement of the mining and blockade of the ports triggered a crisis for North Vietnam. Its response to the threat of isolation from crucial sources of supplies was a statement at the Paris Peace Talks on 9 May declaring the American act to be the gravest step so far in the escalation of the war, and that North Vietnam would never accept an American ultimatum. At the same time North Vietnamese delegates appealed to all governments and peoples of fraternal socialist countries to persuade the U.S. to negotiate seriously at the Paris talks.

The USSR and China played constructive roles in abating the crisis. Diplomatic talks between the U.S. and the USSR, including a summit meeting held in Moscow in May, resulted in intensive Soviet pressure on North Vietnam.

The crisis ended for all actors on 19 July 1972 with renewed talks in Paris: the negotiations shifted to a serious exchange of views, with a promise of compromise.

In a letter from UN Ambassador George Bush to the president of the Security Council on 8 May 1972, U.S. actions were reported to be measures of collective self-defense. Secretary-General Waldheim held a series of meetings at the Security Council between 8 and 10 May and advocated an active UN role in ending hostilities. However, he received no support. On 19 May the Security Council merely issued a statement calling on all the parties to act with utmost restraint.

References:

See sources for Case #225; and Kalb and Kalb 1974; Kissinger 1979, 1994; Nixon 1978.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


