CRISNO 274

POPLAR TREE

Background:

The United States and North Korea were enmeshed in a crisis in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) from 17 August to 16 September 1976.

Background Since the end of the Korean War (1950-53) there had been many incidents and several full-scale crises between North Korea and South Korea and/or the U.S.

The most recent were Pueblo in 1968 and EC-121 Spy Plane in 1969 (see Cases #224 and #233, in Multiregional PCs: East/West). High tension in and near the DMZ was endemic, with a potential for instantaneous military flare-ups. One such outbreak generated a crisis in the summer of 1976.

Pre-crisis During the first half of August there were several indicators of a North Korean perception of higher-than-normal threat. One was a White Paper issued on the 5th by the Pyongyang regime, which declared that "war may break out at any moment," that is, a U.S.-South Korean invasion of the North. Another was President Kim Il-Sung's cancellation, on the 15th, of his planned trip to Sri Lanka to participate in the conference of the Non-Aligned Movement. But the catalyst was a curious incident.

On 6 August, after notifying North and South Korea of its (the UN Command's) intent to enter the Joint Security Area (JSA) of the DMZ for construction work, six South Korean workers and four UN (U.S.) guards approached a poplar tree, which had long obscured the view from one UN observation post to another, with the intention of cutting it down. North Korean guards immediately demanded their withdrawal, and they complied. Neither the commander of UN forces nor Washington was yet aware of this episode. It required a more dramatic incident to trigger a full-scale crisis.

Summary:

On 17 August, in a scuffle between forces of the UN Command and the North Korean People's Army, two U.S. soldiers were killed and nine wounded in the JSA of the DMZ: they were members of a group of 15 who had entered the area to prune the poplar tree. This triggered a crisis for the United States. President Ford was informed immediately. In an initial response the State Department demanded that the Pyongyang regime do the following: accept responsibility for the casualties; pledge that such an incident would not occur again; and punish those who perpetrated the attack. More significantly, two meetings of the crisis management group in the Ford (and Nixon) administrations, the WSAG (Washington Special Action Group), on 18 and 19 August, led to a series of visible military measures. These included the dispatch of a squadron of 20 F-111s and a navy task force, including an aircraft carrier, along with a B-52 training mission, to South Korea; and the placing of U.S. forces in South Korea on a higher state of alert--Defcon (Defense Condition) 3, the same as in the 1973 October-Yom Kippur crisis-war and only slightly lower than in the Cuban Missile crisis. U.S. decision makers at the highest level (Ford and Secretary of State Kissinger) perceived this incident as a test of their resolve and a challenge to U.S. influence worldwide.

The U.S. military response, though non-violent, triggered a crisis for North Korea on the 19th. Kim Il-Sung responded the same day with an order for a war posture by the Korean People's Army, reserves, and all auxiliary forces. The next day the U.S. president approved General Stilwell's plan to cut down the poplar tree--to demonstrate U.S. resolve--but with strict orders not to use force first. "Operation Paul Bunyan" was implemented on the 21st, with U.S. bombers and fighters flying over South Korean airspace, B-52 strategic bombers flying close to the DMZ, and 26 helicopter-gunships protecting the special unit of tree cutters, protected by U.S. and South Korean troops. The operation was completed without violence. It was the most dramatic show of U.S. force in Korea since the Korean War.

The Poplar Tree crisis began to wind down with a rare statement by Kim Il-Sung on 22 August, within hours of the completion of Operation Paul Bunyan. It was conveyed by North Korea's foreign minister to his U.S. counterpart at Panmunjom. "It is regretful that an incident occurred....; an effort will be made so that such incidents may not recur in the future"; and "Our side will never provoke first." After an initial cool reaction, because it did not meet the three U.S. conditions, the State Department, on 23 August, termed the message "a positive step."

The de-escalation phase had begun. After several meetings within the framework of the Military Armistice Committee (MAC) beginning on 25 August, the U.S. and North Korea signed a new JSA agreement on 6 September. It took effect on 16 September, marking the end of the most serious international crisis in Korea since the Korean War. The outcome was a compromise, an informal apology by North Korea, with the U.S. desisting from its three-condition ultimatum.

The USSR, on 19 August, called for the withdrawal of U.S. forces from South Korea. North Korea's other ally, the PRC, remained aloof from this crisis. So too did the UN, other than the UN (U.S.) Command in Korea. The conference of Non-Aligned States in Sri Lanka passed a resolution condemning U.S. acts.

References:

Head et al. 1978; Kirkbride 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


