CRISNO 445

SOUTH OSSETIA-ABKHAZIA

Background:

From 10 June 2004 to 5 November 2004, Georgia and Russia experienced a crisis as a result of the separatist movements in South Ossetia and Abkhazia.

Since its independence, Georgia has struggled to stabilize the three major separatist movements within its territory; Adzharia, South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Early in 2004, Georgia faced unrest in Adzharia but was able to restore order. Talks scheduled between Georgia and South Ossetia on 1 June 2004 were canceled after the two sides failed to reach an agreement. This led Georgia to send hundreds of troops to the South Ossetian border. The deployment of Georgian forces was condemned by the president of South Ossetia as well as Russia, which saw the Russian population in South Ossetia as an excuse to intervene in the conflict between Georgia and South Ossetia. The attempts of the self-proclaimed republic of South Ossetia to seek Russia's recognition of its independence increased the tension between Georgia and Russia.

Summary:

The arrival of South Ossetian president, Eduard Kokoyty, in Moscow to submit an official appeal to the Russian president and the federal assembly for the accession of the republic to Russia triggered a crisis for Georgia on 10 June 2004. Although the trigger of the crisis was from an internal actor within Georgia, the close relationship between South Ossetia and Russia turned the situation into a foreign policy crisis for Georgia with Russia.

In the following weeks, Russia accused Georgia of violating the existing agreements between Georgia and South Ossetia by deploying troops to the border and escalating the conflict by setting up checkpoints in the border zone. In the first week of July, Georgian forces detained several Russia peacekeepers in South Ossetia. Clashes between Georgian and South Ossetian forces also occurred in the following days. In mid-July, the tension between Georgia and Russia increased when Georgian president Saakashvili accused Russia of stirring up ethnic clashes, and warned Russia that the conflict with South Ossetia would not be an internal conflict but an international conflict between Georgia and Russia.

The situation became more complicated at the beginning of August when Georgia complained about the increase in military preparations in Abkhazia and accused Russia of supporting the separatists there. On 3 August, Georgia threatened to open fire on Russian ships that enter the Black Sea waters of the Abkhazian region. While this threat was the major response of Georgia after the crisis started, it also triggered a crisis for Russia. The next day, Russia replied to this threat by implying that it could resort to military action in response to the Georgian threat.

At the beginning of September, the siege of a school by Chechen rebels located in southern Russia increased the vulnerability of the country to problems related to separatist threats. Moreover, the hostage crisis Russia experienced occurred in North Ossetia which is contiguous to South Ossetia that lies within Georgian territory.

In his speech to the UN General Assembly on 21 September, Saakashvili argued that his country is committed to resolving the conflicts in its breakaway republics of Abkhazia and South Ossetia by peaceful means and he outlined a three-stage peace plan for conflict resolution. During the speech, the president also hinted at Russia's role in escalating the conflicts in those two regions. The General Assembly did not take any direct action towards the resolution of the crisis. Thus, the UN did not play a significant role in resolving the conflict between Georgia and Russia or in terminating the crisis.

The role of the United States in this crisis was also limited. During his visit in the US at the beginning of August, the Georgian president met with several high ranking officials, including Secretary of State Powell and Defense Secretary Rumsfeld, and discussed the situation in South Ossetia and Abkhazia. However, the involvement of the US was limited to political and verbal support of Georgia.

A demilitarization agreement between Georgia and South Ossetia on 5 November and Russia's presence in these negotiations marked the termination of this fading crisis between Georgia and Russia.

References:

Keesing’s Record of World Events, Lexis Nexis Online (Agence France, BBC, AP).

Last Updated: 4/27/2007


