CRISNO 288

CHAD-LIBYA II

Background:

Libya's continuing involvement in Chad's internal conflict generated a second crisis for those two states between 22 January and 27 March 1978.

Background In April 1972 Libya occupied the Aozou Strip. (Later that year, on 28 November, Tombalbaye agreed, under pressure, to the cession of the Strip to Libya, and in December 1972 Chad and Libya signed a Treaty of Friendship.)

Chad President Tombalbayé was overthrown in an army coup on 14 April 1975 and was replaced by Felix Malloum, who pledged national unity by peaceful means. Within the opposition FROLINAT, Hissene Habré was ousted from the leadership by Goukouni Oueddei, who led the loosely organized Command Council of the Northern Armies. In April 1976 a Qaddhafi-supported mutiny and planned assassination of President Malloum failed. Throughout 1977 there were continuous pro-Libyan rebel attacks against Chad troops, with Libyan activity reaching its peak in the summer, when FROLINAT forces occupied territory south of the Aozou Strip.

Summary:

As in 1971, Libya perceived a threat to its influence in Chad as a result of a domestic Chadian political agreement, on this occasion between Hissene Habré and President Malloum, signed in Khartoum on 22 January 1978 with the help of Sudan's mediation. The agreement provided for a National Unity Government; the establishment of a constituent assembly; an amnesty for all political prisoners; and the reorganization of Chad's armed forces. Libya's major response, on the 29th, was active support for a FROLINAT offensive against Faya-Largeau, the administrative center of the province of Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti, in northern Chad.

This act, in turn, triggered a crisis for Chad. President Malloum responded by severing diplomatic relations with Libya on 6 February. A Chad appeal to the UN Security Council on the 8th to condemn Libya's involvement in the renewed fighting, as well as its occupation of the Aozou Strip, had to be withdrawn and a cease-fire accepted because of the loss of half the Chad army and the fall of Faya-Largeau to FROLINAT forces on 19 February. Libya halted the advance of its proxy on the Chad capital because of strong pressure by France, then an important arms supplier to Libya, and partly to avoid a clash with French military forces in Chad.

The crisis ended for Libya on 24 February when, at the first Sebha Conference, Chad and Libya agreed to settle their differences in a "new fraternal spirit"; to resume diplomatic relations; to hold a peace conference between the Chad government and FROLINAT on 21 March; and to establish a joint military committee to supervise affairs in Chad during the interim period, thereby legitimizing Libyan intervention in Chad. President Malloum of Niger, and the vice president of Sudan attended the conference and were influential in mediating the peace.

Chad's crisis and the second Chad/Libya international crisis as a whole ended on 27 March 1978, following a second Sebha Conference and a comprehensive agreement announced in Benghazi that day. Under the Benghazi Accords, Chad agreed to recognize FROLINAT. Both agreed to abide by the cease-fire; to allow free movement throughout Chad; and to assist a Libya-Niger military committee in implementing the Accords. Most important, Chad agreed to the termination of foreign (French) military bases and military presence in Chad. However, the Benghazi Accords were short lived, and other Chad/Libya crises were soon to erupt.

The two superpowers, as well as the UN and the OAU, were not involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #243; and ACR 1978; AR 1978; ARec 1978; ARB 1978; Decalo 1980; Deeb 1991; Kelley 1986; Lemarchand 1985, 1988; Moose 1985.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


