CRISNO 158

FRANCE-TUNISIA

Background:

Tunisia's three-stage crisis started on 31 May 1957 and ended on 17 June 1958.

Background France, reluctant to give up its position as a colonial power, attempted to retain control over its North African colonies, especially Algeria. Following Tunisia's independence in 1956, France was granted the right to maintain military bases on Tunisian soil. However, Tunisian sympathy for Algeria's struggle for independence created hostile feelings toward the French military presence. Moreover, President Bourguiba saw this as a threat to his regime. France, frustrated by its inability to crush the Algerian Front Liberation National (FLN), accused Tunisia of providing sanctuary for retreating Algerian guerrillas, thus creating further tension between France and Tunisia which erupted in sporadic clashes.

Summary:

The trigger to Tunisia's crisis was a clash on 31 May 1957 between French troops and Tunisian soldiers and National Guards, in which seven Tunisians were killed. This took place on the Algerian-Tunisian frontier where about 2,000 Algerian refugees had crossed into Tunisia. Tunisia responded the next day by issuing a strong protest to France, along with a call for negotiations concerning the evacuation of French forces from Tunisia and an order forbidding the movement of French troops without the Tunisian government's authority.

Negotiations between France and Tunisia led to an announcement on 27 June that approximately 10,000 of the 25,000 French troops stationed there would be transferred to Algeria during the following six months, with the remainder confined to military bases. This marked the end of the first stage of this crisis.

The outcome was unsatisfactory to both sides, and the tension between them remained high.

The second stage began on 8 February 1958, when French medium-range bombers attacked the Tunisian town of Sakiet Sidi Youssef along the Tunisian-Algerian border, killing 69 Tunisians. Although this action was not authorized by Paris, the French government defended it as a legitimate retaliation for Tunisia's assistance to Algerian FLN rebels. Tunisia responded later that day, following an emergency cabinet meeting: its ambassador to France was recalled; all French troop movements in Tunisia were henceforth forbidden unless approved by Tunisian authorities; and the demand was renewed for the evacuation of all French forces from Tunisia, apart from the naval base at Bizerta. Tunisia also appealed to the UN Security Council. The United States, faced with the dilemma of choosing between supporting France as a NATO ally and promoting U.S. regional influence in North Africa by supporting Tunisia, discouraged Security Council discussions and resolutions, always subject to a Soviet veto.

The debate in the Security Council ended when the U.S. and Britain offered their good offices in an attempt to resolve the dispute. France and Tunisia accepted this offer on 17 February and agreed to begin negotiations. However, the French National Assembly refused to support the government's decision to resume direct talks with Tunisia, and in May, tension increased as clashes broke out once more.

The trigger to the third stage of Tunisia's crisis with France was a violent clash at Remada on 24 May. Once again it responded by complaining to the Security Council, on 29 May. The Security Council debate was suspended on 2 June following an appeal by President de Gaulle to President Bourguiba to settle the differences between the two countries. The crisis came to an end on 17 June following direct negotiations, when France agreed to withdraw all its forces from Tunisia except those at Bizerta.

The USSR was not involved in this crisis.

References:

AR 1957; Barraclough 1962; Ling 1967; MEJ Chronology 1957.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


