CRISNO 443

HAIFA SUICIDE BOMBING

Background:

From 4 October to 2 December 2003, Israel and Syria were involved in another crisis within the Arab-Israeli protracted conflict.

Background

Israel and various Arab groups -- e.g., Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hezbollah -- that support the Palestinians and oppose Israeli statehood had frequently been in conflict. Israel suspects that the Arab groups had not only staged attacks from Palestinian-controlled areas, but they had also used neighboring countries to mobilize, train and plan attacks against Israel. Consequently, Israel frequently used air strikes against suspected Hezbollah positions in Lebanon since Israel pulled its troops out of Lebanon in 2000. While Israel lamented Syria's alleged direct and indirect support of terrorist groups, Israel had not attacked Syria in 21 years.

Summary:

A crisis for Israel was triggered on 4 October 2003 by a suicide bomb attack in Haifa that killed at least 21 people. Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for this suicide attack on the eve of the Yom Kippur holiday in a crowded sea-side restaurant. On 5 October, Israeli fighter jets struck a suspected terrorist training camp near Damascus used by Islamic Jihad and Hamas. The Israeli air strike in Syrian territory, which coincided with the 30th anniversary of the 1973 war, triggered a crisis for Syria. While Israel claimed that the camp was used by terrorist organizations under Syrian patronage, Syria denied that the target was a training camp for Palestinian militants and claimed that it was a shelter for Palestinian refugees. Following the air strike, Israeli Prime Minister Sharon warned Syria that if it continues to protect terrorist organizations preparing anti-Israeli attacks, Israel could launch more air strikes.

Syria responded to the Israeli air attack immediately by lodging a complaint with the U.N. Security Council. After Syria's demand for an emergency meeting, 15 members of the Security Council met and considered the Syrian-drafted resolution accusing Israel of violating the U.N. Charter and international law. Although the Syrian ambassador called for an immediate vote on the draft, the emergency meeting ended without taking a vote or setting a date for the resumption of the meeting. On 6 October, Lebanon also lodged a complaint with the U.N. Security Council supporting Syria's position. Lebanese Prime Minister Hariri called on the international community to restrain Israel. The League of Arab States defined the air strike as "state terrorism" and released a statement demanding the U.N. to stop it. The role of the Arab League throughout the crisis was confined to criticizing and condemning the Israeli attack.

The European Union, as well as the governments of the U.K., France, Germany, and China condemned the Israeli air strike. The U.S., on the other hand, stood behind Israel. President Bush said that Israel had the right to defend itself in the face of terrorist attacks. Although Bush urged Sharon to avoid escalating tensions in the region, the U.S. called on Syria to stop harboring terrorists. Russia joined the international community in condemning the Israeli air strike but Moscow said that a U.N. resolution must also call for an end to attacks against Israel. The U.S. also said that it would veto any resolution that did not explicitly condemn Palestinian terrorism.

Israel and Syria exchanged rhetorical threats during October and November 2003 at a high diplomatic level. Israeli Prime Minister Sharon warned Syria that "Israel would strike in every place and with any means to defend its citizens," while Syrian President Bashar al-Assad accused Israel of trying to "terrorize" Damascus and the Middle East.

Towards the end of November, Syria's rhetoric vis-a-vis Israel shifted to emphasize the importance of the Middle East peace process and the return of the Golan Heights, as well as the important role of the U.S. in the peace process. Thus, Syrian statements became relatively more constructive and less hostile at the end of November. The interview with Bashar al-Assad in The New York Times on 1 December 2003 demonstrated Syria's rather conciliatory approach. The next day, both Syrian and Israeli papers quoted from the interview in The New York Times and some high level Israeli officials described it as a positive step. Thus, 2 December 2003 marks the end of the crisis. In general, the crisis faded without a definitive outcome and mostly as a result of Syria's softening position toward both the U.S. and Israel.

The U.N. did not reach a conclusion on the Syrian-drafted resolution, and its role during the crisis consisted of discussion without resolution and bilateral talks between Kofi Annan and Syrian diplomats. The U.S. Congress voted on 8 October to approve the Syria Accountability Act, which demanded that Syria stop its support for terrorism and withdraw its troops from Lebanon; however, this event was separate from the unfolding crisis. The Accountability Act had been a result of long discussions between Congress and the White House which started long before the crisis between Israel and Syria took place. Although it demonstrated the hardening U.S. position against Syria, the passing of the act did not affect the crisis between Israel and Syria much.

References:

Keesing's Record of World Events; Lexis-Nexis Academic Search; Financial Times; New York Times; Agence France Presse; Deutsche Presse; United Press International.

Last Updated: 2/6/2009


