CRISNO 13

POLISH-RUSSIAN WAR

Background:

A crisis-war between Russia and Poland erupted on 25 April 1920 and lasted until 12 October.

Pre-crisis On 27 March 1920 the Poles demanded Russian acquiescence in the restoration of their border of 1772, with a plebiscite to be held in the region west of that boundary. Russia rejected the demand but made several attempts to find a compromise. The Poles were adamant. The result was full-scale war.

Summary:

On 25 April 1920, three days after securing a green light from "White" Russian commanders, Poland launched a major offensive toward the Ukraine triggering a crisis for Soviet Russia. Kiev was captured on 7 May. Russian forces regrouped and launched a counterattack in mid-May triggering a crisis for Poland. The latter was compelled to evacuate its Ukrainian-occupied territories, including Kiev, on 11 June. A major Russian offensive began in mid-July, assisted by a Russo-Lithuanian agreement on 12 July that allowed Russian troops to use Lithuanian territory to prosecute the war. (This was to trigger a separate crisis--see Case #17--Vilna I, in Lithuania/Poland PC.) The Poles were defeated near Vilna (Vilnius) on 15 July. The Russian advance penetrated deep into Polish territory, barely 20 miles from Warsaw on 14 August. Poland had appealed to the Allies earlier (7 July) for help and had obtained military aid from France including military advisers. By late August Polish forces turned the tide and expelled the Russians from ethnically Polish territory.

The two adversaries, exhausted by the war, agreed to an armistice on 18 September 1920. Peace talks began in Latvia's capital on 23 September and led to a preliminary agreement on 12 October ending the crises for Poland and Russia and the international crisis as a whole.

As noted, France and Lithuania were involved actors, the first actively supporting Poland, the second passively assisting Russia. British offers of mediation were rejected by Russia.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis. Poland did not seek its assistance. And Russia, not a member at the time, declared that it would reject any attempt at League intervention.

(The Treaty of Riga, signed on 18 March 1921, defined the frontier between the two adversaries. Poland was the clear victor, for it was awarded a border 200 kilometers east of the old Curzon Line. Russia's partial compensation was an end to the war, a high-priority goal because of the multiple dangers to the survival of the Bolshevik regime arising from civil wars against several autonomous White Russian armies and military intervention by major powers in the Far East and North Russia. [See Cases #1--Russian Civil War I--Siberia; and #3--Russian Civil War II--North Russia, in Multiregional PCs: East/West.])

References:

Kennan 1960; Langer 1972; Ullman 1972.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


