CRISNO 164

ABORTIVE COUP-INDONESIA

Background:

An internally generated international crisis for Indonesia took place from 21 February until 20 May 1958.

Background and Pre-crisis A series of bloodless army coups in regional districts of Indonesia served to undermine the power of the central government in Djakarta. Nationwide martial law was imposed in March 1957. The dispute between the Netherlands and Indonesia over West Irian had not been resolved in UN discussions. An abortive attempt on President Sukarno's life took place on 30 November 1956. On 3 December labor groups began seizing Dutch enterprises in Indonesia: within a fortnight virtually all were under military control. That month 46,000 Dutch nationals were repatriated. Tension between the president and regional powers was high. By 10 February 1958 opposition in the outer islands had erupted. An ultimatum demanding central government changes was rejected by the Djakarta cabinet the following day. On the 15th a revolutionary state was proclaimed. U.S. sympathies lay with the anti-communist secessionists, and there is evidence that U.S. military aid had arrived in West Sumatra before the ultimatum, along with the presence of U.S. intelligence officers. Sukarno returned to Indonesia on 16 February and called for cabinet deliberations to consider the issue of civil war, compounded by an apparent threat of possible U.S. intervention.

Summary:

The first indication of an Indonesian government perception of a threat of foreign involvement was Sukarno's rejection of rebel demands on 21 February 1958: in his call for measures against the rebels, he cited his conviction that the rebels were acting as instruments of a foreign power, clearly implying the U.S., which wished to force Indonesia to join the Western bloc. Indonesia's major response was a military move against the rebels in central Sumatra on 22 February, with air force bombing and strafing. During the course of the fighting, from 7 to 12 March, government paratroops occupied Pakanbahru, where U.S. personnel were located at oil fields. This step was taken partly out of fear that the U.S. might send in marines. The Seventh Fleet, situated offshore, caused great anxiety in Djakarta, where anti-American sentiments were at a fever pitch. By mid-April two key rebel towns had fallen. After the fall of Padang, the U.S. began an effort to improve relations with Indonesia. U.S. Ambassador Jones's initiatives met with positive Indonesian responses. On 20 May, in the form of an official statement, Secretary of State Dulles formally reiterated the U.S. position of not being involved in what was an internal Indonesian affair. The statement set in motion a chain of events pointing to a rapprochement between the two states and marks the end of Indonesia's crisis.

The USSR provided political support to Indonesia during this crisis. The UN was not involved.

(The rebellion lasted until 4 April 1961. There was guerrilla warfare with several thousand casualties.)

References:

Feith 1962; Feith and Lev 1963; Kahin 1963; Kosut 1967; Lev 1966; Mozingo 1976.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


