CRISNO 378

INDIA INTERVENTION IN SRI LANKA

Background:

Prolonged ethnic strife in Sri Lanka generated a crisis with India from 3 June to 30 July 1987.

Background The roots of this South Asian crisis lay in the one-way migration of Indian Tamils to Ceylon (later, Sri Lanka) during the extended period of British rule: from 1757 to 1947 in the Indo/Pakistani subcontinent, from 1796 to 1948 in Ceylon. During the nineteenth century Indian Tamils, pushed by the endemic poverty of their homeland, the South Indian province of Madras (later, Tamilnadu), and pulled by the opportunities for employment in the labor-intensive rubber plantations of Ceylon, migrated in large numbers. By the time of independence, the Hindu Tamils comprised approximately 20 percent of Ceylon's population, with a vast majority of Buddhist Sinhalese.

From the outset the Tamils, concentrated in the northern Jaffna Peninsula, perceived acute discrimination in all aspects of Sri Lanka's society, economy, and polity. Ethnic resentment erupted into open rebellion in 1983 under the leadership of the most militant and disciplined Tamil group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the LTTE, best known as "the Tamil Tigers" or "the Tigers." Their goal for more than a decade has been an independent state for the Tamils of Sri Lanka, the vast majority of whom reside in the Northern and Eastern Provinces.

Pre-crisis There have been several escalation points in an increasingly bitter ethnic conflict. One was a large-scale offensive launched by Sri Lanka's armed forces against the Tamil Tigers on 26 May 1987, "Operation Liberation." Not for the first time, the plight of their ethnic and religious kin generated a massive pressure group in Tamilnadu, a state in south India, which urged the government of India to intervene on behalf of Sri Lanka's Tamils. Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi repeated earlier calls for restraint by Sri Lanka's government and urged a resolution of the conflict through negotiation. On 1 June India's high commissioner (ambassador) to Sri Lanka conveyed a proposal to send unarmed Indian ships, under Indian Red Cross auspices, to deliver relief supplies to the Tamils of Jaffna. Following an emergency cabinet meeting, Sri Lanka's government stated on the 2nd its willingness to consider the idea but vigorously opposed "unilateral action" by India which, it added, would be regarded as a violation of its "independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity."

Summary:

On 3 June a flotilla of 19 Indian fishing boats sailed from the Tamilnadu port of Rameswaram, carrying food, medicine, and kerosene. Officials from the Indian Red Cross and India's External Affairs Ministry and many journalists were aboard. Three hours later, at 5:00 p.m., the Indian flotilla was stopped by Sri Lankan patrol boats off Kachchative Island and denied entry into Sri Lanka's territorial waters.

After four hours of futile talks, the Indian boats returned to Rameswaram. Sri Lanka's act triggered a crisis for India, posing a threat to its regional primacy. New Delhi's initial response, on 4 June, was a plan devised by the Indian cabinet's Political Affairs Committee, its standing crisis management body, to air-drop relief supplies to the Tamils in Jaffna. The plan was implemented the same day: five transport planes, escorted by four Mirage fighter aircraft, dropped 22 tons of supplies over the Jaffna Peninsula.

This unilateral Indian operation triggered a crisis for Sri Lanka, a direct challenge to its sovereignty over its northern province. Colombo, angered by the half-hour notice of the Indian operation--India claimed it had informed Sri Lanka three hours earlier--sent a formal complaint to New Delhi charging India with a clear violation of Sri Lanka's territorial integrity. Soon after, both parties followed the path of negotiation. The result was an interim agreement on 15 June, which permitted unarmed Indian vessels, without escort, to deliver relief supplies to Sri Lankan officials in Jaffna, for distribution to the Tamil residents. This agreement marked the end of the high stress crisis period but not yet of the crisis as a whole.

Food shipments began on 24 June and continued in July. Negotiations were held quietly at a high level. On 16 July President Jayawardene and members of the Sri Lanka cabinet met with India's high commissioner. A formal peace plan was submitted to Delhi on the 18th. Sri Lanka's parliament approved the plan on the 22nd. There was a setback on the 27th, when the Tiger leader, Prabhakaran, rejected the proposal. The next day, under pressure from India's prime minister, he softened his opposition. And four other militant Tamil groups indicated their support for the peace plan. Finally, during a festive visit to the island on 29-30 July by India's prime minister, an agreement was formally signed by all of the interested parties. Sri Lanka agreed to merge the Tamil-majority Northern and Eastern Provinces into one province. An island-wide cease-fire agreement went into effect. And India undertook to provide a peacekeeping force for the Tamil majority areas of Sri Lanka. To that end, 3,000 Indian soldiers arrived in Jaffna on 30 July to supervise the disarming of Tamil militants. Moreover, Indian planes transported 600 Sri Lankan troops to the capital, Colombo, to assist the police in asserting control over large numbers of Sinhalese demonstrating against the accord. With the agreement of 30 July, the India/Sri Lanka crisis over the Tamils of the island came to an end.

The UN, the U.S., and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

The domestic ethnic conflict continues.

References:

Hellmann-Rajanayagam 1994; Keesing's 1987; Kodikara 1989; Muni 1993; New York Times 1987; O'Ballance 1989; Rao 1988; de Silva 1982; de Silva 1995; Singer 1990, 1992; Vanniassingham 1988; Wilson 1988.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


