CRISNO 178

CENTRAL AMERICA-CUBA II

Background:

This crisis occurred from 9 November to 7 December 1960, with two actors, Nicaragua and Guatemala.

Background In 1959 Panama, Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti were confronted with crises involving Cuban-supported rebels (see Case #170--Central America/Cuba I). Each state succeeded, with OAS support, in repelling the invaders. In Guatemala, domestic political and economic instability was present, with high unemployment, demonstrations, strikes, and rapid inflation.

Summary:

Nicaragua was invaded once more on 9 November 1960 when exiles crossed into its territory from Costa Rica and captured two small towns. Martial law was imposed, and troops were rushed to the area. And on 13 November dissident units of the Guatemalan army seized a port 70 miles northeast of Guatemala City. President Ydigoras responded on 14 November by stating that the government had proof of Cuban involvement and appealed to the U.S. to dispatch naval and air patrols. The revolt in Guatemala collapsed on the 16th.

The Nicaraguan response was an appeal to the United States on 17 November. That day President Eisenhower announced that surface and air units of the United States navy would act to prevent invasions by communist-directed elements. The crisis for both Nicaragua and Guatemala ended when the U.S. president, having received assurances from both governments that coastal defense was no longer required, ordered the withdrawal of the Caribbean patrol on 7 December 1960.

During the crisis Guatemala and Nicaragua submitted a joint complaint about Cuban interference to the OAS. This was denied by Cuba, which protested the U.S. naval presence in the area, describing it as a violation of the principle of nonintervention and an act of aggression.

Soviet and Chinese newspapers and broadcasts took a similar stand. The UN was marginally involved.

References:

See sources for Case #170.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


