CRISNO 65

SPANISH CIVIL WAR III

Background:

Republican Spain experienced another intra-war crisis in its prolonged civil war, from 30 October to 18 November 1938.

Pre-crisis The war raged on, the Loyalists actively supported by the USSR and the International Brigades, the Nationalists by Italy and Germany. Moreover, many ships, notably those of interested European major powers, were attacked by "unknown" submarines, especially in the summer of 1937. An agreement reached on 14 September, with Germany and Italy absent, authorized ships of the Non-Intervention naval patrol to respond in kind if attacked. The indiscriminate raids continued, however. And the patrols failed to prevent massive foreign intervention throughout the Spanish civil war, mainly because the primary motive of the U.K. and France, the prime movers of "Non-Intervention," was to avoid hostilities with Germany and Italy. The latter was given a zone off the Mediterranean to patrol, which enabled it to continue sending military equipment to the rebels via Majorca.

There were many important military campaigns. The Battle of Brunette took place in July 1937, with a reverse outcome to that at Guadalajara, that is, a Nationalist victory, and very high Loyalist casualties (25,000 killed). The Republic's moderately successful Aragón offensive took place in August. And the rebels ultimately triumphed in the bitter, costly, three-month Battle of Teruel in February 1938. Barcelona was bombed by the rebels in mid-March. By mid-April 1938 rebel forces had reached the sea at Vinaroz, cutting off Catalonia from the rest of Republican Spain.

These were important developments, militarily; but none was--or catalyzed--an international crisis.

The Battle of the Ebro was to become a decisive engagement of the Spanish civil war. It began with a surprise attack by Republican forces on 24 July, designed to reduce the pressure on Valencia. Its initial success generated a sense of defeatism among the rebels in Burgos, Franco's capital. The Loyalist advance was stopped on 2 August. Nevertheless, Republican optimism about the war's outcome increased in August-September, kindled by a hope that preoccupation with the Czechoslovak crisis would lead to Germany's withdrawal from the Spanish civil war. That hope was shattered on 19 September when Germany, in the midst of the Munich crisis (see Case #64, in Czechoslovakia/Germany PC), reaffirmed its support for the Nationalists. A Republican attempt on 2 October to set in motion a negotiated solution was rebuffed by the rebels. And Soviet support for the Republic now declined sharply, largely because, having failed to forge an alliance with France and the U.K. against Nazism, Moscow began a basic shift in policy that was to culminate in the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact of August 1939.

Summary:

The Battle of the Ebro was transformed into an international crisis for Republican Spain on 30 October 1938 when the rebels launched a major counteroffensive at Sierra de Caballs. By that time the International Brigades, then with about 13,000 volunteers, had disbanded. These included 7,000 who were at the front in the Battle of the Ebro. By contrast, Italian involvement in the war was at its peak, with 48,000 troops actively engaged and 10,000 more offered by Mussolini.

Nationalist forces reached the Ebro River on 3 November, a turning point in the war. By the 10th there were only six artillery batteries west of the river. The Battle of the Ebro ended on 18 November in total defeat for the Republic, with an estimated 30,000 killed, among 70,000 casualties, compared to 33,000 on the Nationalist side. This crisis for Republican Spain had ended, a prelude to the last phase--and crisis--of the civil war.

References:

See sources for Cases #52 and #54.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


