CRISNO 412

IRAQ TROOP DEPLOYMENT-KUWAIT

Background:

Kuwait, Sa'udi Arabia, the United States, and Iraq were enmeshed in another Gulf crisis from 7 October to 10 November 1994.

Pre-crisis During the years that followed the Gulf War the U.S., the U.K., Kuwait, and Sa'udi Arabia were steadfast in their determination to maintain the sanctions regime until Iraq had fully complied with all UN demands as set out in the 7 March 1991 resolution, including an explicit demand that Iraq recognize Kuwait's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Russia and France adopted a softer line, calling for the gradual lifting of sanctions, primarily because they perceived major economic benefits from Iraq's return to the international community.

In late September 1994 President Saddam Hussein had to stop subsidizing food prices. This caused a large price increase that led to internal unrest in Iraq. Baghdad renewed its demand that UN sanctions be lifted on humanitarian grounds--Iraqi children were suffering the ill effects of malnutrition, and the population at large was experiencing the adverse effects of a persistent shortage of medicines and general medical services. Hussein warned that Iraq would retaliate if the Security Council, at its next scheduled meeting on 10 October, decided to renew economic sanctions, especially the oil embargo. In this atmosphere of escalating tension, very similar to the prelude to the 1990-91 Gulf crisis-war, Iraqi forces began to move toward Kuwait on 2 October. On the 4th Saddam Hussein condemned the U.S. insistence on retaining the sanctions, which continued to cripple the Iraqi economy.

Summary:

Iraq's deployment of troops near its border with Kuwait on 7 October 1994, estimated at 40,000-50,000, triggered a crisis for Kuwait and Sa'udi Arabia: it threatened their territorial integrity and rekindled memories of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Iraq's massive military buildup in a few days also triggered a crisis for the U.S., a renewed threat to its influence and economic (oil) interests in the region. (Since the Gulf War the U.S. has been committed to protect the Gulf states from Iraqi attacks.)

The gravity of the threat perceived by the U.S. was evident in several statements and actions on the 7th: "the most threatening moves Iraq had taken since the Gulf War," according to unnamed U.S. officials; Iraq's moves "are not routine … and therefore cause us concern," said Defense Secretary Perry; and President Clinton expressed his resolve not to permit Baghdad to threaten the UN into lifting sanctions.

Among the "precautionary" steps, Clinton ordered the aircraft carrier Eisenhower, to the Red Sea, along with the Aegis cruiser equipped with Tomahawk missiles. The U.S. also sent 4,000 troops to Kuwait the same day. These military moves triggered a crisis for Iraq. There were other visible expressions of U.S. resolve. At a meeting with the Sa'udi Foreign Minister, Sa'ud al-Faisal, on the 7th, Clinton reaffirmed the U.S. commitment to Sa'udi Arabia's security. In a telephone call Secretary of State Christopher reassured Kuwait's foreign minister of U.S. support and its readiness to respond firmly to Iraq's "aggression." On 8 October Clinton, wanting to avoid President Bush's mixed signals of U.S. intent in 1990, warned Saddam Hussein in unmistakable words: "It would be a grave error for Iraq to repeat the mistakes of the past or to misjudge either American will or American power." The next day Clinton announced the dispatch of 36,000 more troops and planes to the Persian Gulf. On the 10th Iraq announced that its forces would be withdrawn from the Kuwaiti border.

In telephone calls on the 10th Clinton spoke with the leaders of the U.K., France, Russia, Egypt, and Turkey, seeking support for military action against Iraq, if necessary. The six leaders reportedly expressed support for "quick and vigorous military measures to defend Kuwait" and agreed to oppose Iraq's attempt to press the UN to lift the economic sanctions.

On 11 October Iraq began to withdraw forces from the Kuwaiti border. Nevertheless, the U.S. announced the same day the deployment of more troops and planes to the region and placed 155,000 ground troops on alert. A major U.S. concern was the danger that Iraq would indulge in similar threats in the future and create further international crises. Defense Secretary Perry emphasized that the U.S. did not want to maintain substantial forces in Kuwait for a long time.

The display of rapid U.S. resolve elicited gratitude from the six members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (Sa'udi Arabia, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, Oman, and the United Arab Emirates): at a meeting with Christopher on the 12th their foreign ministers affirmed a commitment to pay the cost of deploying U.S. forces to the Gulf to defend Kuwait. The Gulf states also undertook to send their "Peninsula Shield Force" to help defend Kuwait.

Kuwait sought international support for a buffer zone in southern Iraq and called on the UN to press Iraq for information on the 600+ Kuwaiti hostages taken to Iraq during the 1990 invasion. The U.K. and France sent modest, symbolic forces to the region: the former, 900 troops, ships, and warplanes, the latter, a warship. King Hussein of Jordan, in contrast to 1991, condemned Iraq's provocation on 11 October. He did not deploy troops; but he expressed support for the possible use of military force by the U.S. and its allies to punish Saddam Hussein.

Among the many involved actors Russia was the most active on the diplomatic front. During a visit of Foreign Minister Kozyrev to Baghdad, Iraq and Russia announced an agreement on 13 October: Iraq would recognize Kuwait's sovereignty and borders; and this act would be linked to the lifting of some of the international sanctions within six months. The U.S. and U.K. responded the same day that there would be no negotiations with Iraq on terms for lifting the sanctions. To the contrary: U.S. officials, viewing Iraq as a long-term threat, spoke of requesting the UN to create a demilitarized zone in southern Iraq, from which Iraqi forces would be excluded.

On 15 October President Yeltsin wrote to Clinton, conveying his support for the Kozyrev-initiated idea of Iraq's recognition of Kuwait in exchange for the lifting of sanctions. Clinton replied with an expression of concern, since this was a sharp shift in Russia's long-standing support of the U.S. position of no negotiations on sanctions until after Iraq demonstrated full compliance with all UN resolutions.

The Security Council unanimously approved a U.S.-U.K.-initiated resolution on 10 October condemning Iraq's new threat to the Gulf region. It also demanded that Iraq withdraw immediately all its forces deployed in southern Iraq and avoid using force and aggressive acts to threaten its neighbors in the future, or to disturb UN activity in Iraq. Russia voted for the resolution, despite differences about how to deal with the Iraqi threat.

On 17 October Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council informed its National Assembly of the intention to recognize Kuwait. The foreign ministers of the six Gulf states, along with Egypt and Syria, met on 19 October in Cairo to discuss the crisis. Kuwait's foreign minister reaffirmed that Kuwait would not accept any solution less than Iraq's complete compliance with UN resolutions. The Arab League called on Iraq to show restraint. It was U.S.-led resolve that determined the crisis outcome.

On 10 November Iraq's National Assembly formally declared "Iraq's recognition of the sovereignty of the state of Kuwait, its territorial integrity and political independence." This statement, signed by President Saddam Hussein, terminated the crisis for all the actors. All except Iraq were satisfied with the outcome; Iraq suffered an unqualified defeat.

References:

New York Times 8 October-11 November 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


