CRISNO 388

CAMBODIA PEACE CONFERENCE

Background:

Cambodia and Vietnam experienced a shared crisis over the former's political system from 30 August 1989 to 27 January 1990.

Background and Pre-crisis At the end of a lengthy, complex post-Vietnam War crisis in Indochina, Vietnam swept the Khmer Rouge from power in Cambodia in a swift military campaign and, on 7 January 1979, installed a puppet regime in Phnom Penh (see Case #284--Vietnam Invasion of Cambodia). During the next decade Vietnam was the de facto ruler of Cambodia with 160,000 troops stationed there. All attempts to end Vietnam's occupation failed. By the late 1980s, however, the declining power and foreign aid resources of Vietnam's patron, the Soviet Union, along with Vietnam's growing isolation in Southeast Asia, its internal economic stagnation, and the cumulative high cost of occupying Cambodia, created a favorable climate for a new diplomatic effort to resolve the conflict over Cambodia.

France and Australia took the lead in convening an international peace conference on Cambodia in Paris on 30 July 1989, with many other participants or observers: Canada, India, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, Malaysia, Thailand, the U.S., the USSR, Vietnam; and all the major Cambodian factions--the Armed National Sihanoukistes (ANS), led by former ruler Prince Norodom Sihanouk; the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), led by Son Sann, a former premier under Sihanouk; and the Party of Democratic Kampuchea (the China-backed Khmer Rouge), comprising the anti-Vietnam Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK); and, on the other side, the Vietnam-created People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK), led by Premier Hun Sen.

Summary:

Cambodia and its then-patron, Vietnam, perceived a crisis when the Paris conference was suspended on 30 August 1989 because of an irreconcilable disagreement over the place of the Khmer Rouge in a future Cambodian political system: the pro-Vietnam PRK regime was unalterably opposed to legitimizing a party responsible for genocide while in power from 1975 to 1979; and Sihanouk insisted on its inclusion, to avert a prolonged civil war. It was widely feared that the diplomatic deadlock would lead to the resumption of hostilities among the contending Cambodian factions. The expected escalation of military hostilities did, in fact, occur, especially because of the uncertainty accompanying Vietnam's withdrawal of its forces from Cambodia: it was publicly pledged on 5 April 1989 and was completed on 30 September, on schedule.

An attempt by Thailand's prime minister to arrange a cease-fire in September failed. However, the idea of an enlarged UN role in the Cambodian peace process, initiated by U.S. Congressman Stephen Solarz, revived the diplomatic effort. It took the form of a three-point peace plan formulated and urged upon all parties by Australia's Foreign Minister, Garth Evans. The plan called for the following: UN verification of Vietnam's complete withdrawal from Cambodia; a cease-fire and termination of external arms aid to all parties; and UN-supervised elections.

The Security Council approved the plan on 16 January 1990. China played a key role in enlisting the support of the three leaders of the anti-Vietnam coalition, Sihanouk, Son Sann, and the Khmer Rouge's Khieu Samphan. And Vietnam ensured the approval of the PRK regime--Hun Sen expressed his approval on 27 January. This marked the end of the crisis arising from the Cambodia peace conference.

Cambodia experienced a crisis because the Paris conference and pressure from the international community posed a threat to its political system, specifically, continued rule by the PRK. For Vietnam, its future influence in Indochina was at risk. China was actively involved, supplying weapons and diplomatic support to the Khmer Rouge, but it did not perceive a crisis for itself. The U.S. was marginally involved, primarily through Solarz’s initial efforts at formulating a peace plan and supporting the Australian diplomatic initiative. The USSR continued to provide military and diplomatic support to Vietnam.

References:

Keesing's 1989, 1990.

Last Updated: 1/21/2004


