CRISNO 399

FOREIGN INTERVENTION IN ZAIRE

Background:

Zaire, along with Belgium and France, was enmeshed in a crisis arising from internal turmoil from 23 September to 4 November 1991.

Background The former Belgian Congo became independent on 30 June 1960 and was almost immediately confronted with an international crisis triggered by a mutiny among its soldiers (see Case #176). The occupation of Stanleyville by rebel forces and the formation of a Revolutionary Council on 4 August 1964 led to another Congo crisis with high-profile foreign military intervention (see Case #211). In November 1965 Colonel Mobutu seized power in a coup d'état--and remains Head of State in Zaire (formerly Congo) 32 years later.

Summary:

As in 1960 and 1964 a crisis for Zaire, Belgium, and France was triggered by an internal challenge on 23 September 1991: the catalyst was rioting by regular troops of Zaire's army and their occupation of Kinshasa Airport, in protest against low wages. The Mobutu regime correctly perceived this as a serious threat to Zaire's political system. For France and Belgium, as for Belgium and other states in the two earlier crises in the Congo, turmoil in Zaire's army posed a threat to influence in this raw material-rich state, the largest in central Africa.

Belgium and France responded on the 24th by announcing their intention to dispatch troops to Zaire to protect and evacuate foreign (Western) residents.

The next day President Mobutu termed the riots in Kinshasa the worst since those that accompanied the coming of independence, in July 1960. Opposition parties, which protested against impending foreign intervention, proposed Etienne Tsisekedi as Premier of a "public salvation government" to cope with the riots. Mobutu acquiesced on 30 September, under pressure from the U.S., France, and Belgium. And on 3 October the newly appointed premier, in open opposition to the president's policy, asked France and Belgium not to withdraw their troops prematurely.

More clashes occurred in Kinshasa in mid-October. Tension between the president and premier escalated over the allocation of ministerial portfolios between Mobutu supporters and the opposition. Mobutu dismissed Tsisekedi on 20 October. The result of this act and the deteriorating economic situation was an eruption of violence in major cities of Zaire from 21 to 27 October. The evacuation of European residents from Zaire by Belgium and France was nearly complete by 25 October. And Belgium and France announced that they would withdraw shortly. France also announced the suspension of economic aid to Zaire. On the 27th Mobutu announced that he would remain in office, despite growing domestic and international pressure to resign. Four days later a group of opposition parties, the "Sacred Coalition," intensified its struggle with the president by forming a parallel regime in Kinshasa.

French troops departed on the 31st. Belgian troops followed on 4 November. This marked the end of Belgium's and Zaire's foreign policy crises and the international crisis as a whole, even though internal turmoil, violence, and political opposition to Mobutu continued for years.

The U.S. provided transport planes for the Belgian-French evacuation project. The USSR and the UN were not involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1991; AR 1991; ARB 1991; ARec 1991; Facts on File 1991; FBIS-DR/CA 1991; Keesing's 1991; New York Times 1991.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


