CRISNO 82

EAST AFRICA CAMPAIGN

Background:

The U.K. and Italy were the crisis actors in an IWC from 19 August 1940 until 17 May 1941.

Pre-crisis On 10 June 1940 Italy declared war on Britain in the belief that the impending collapse of the Allies in Europe would make any serious Italian participation unnecessary. With the expected downfall of the British, Egypt, British Somaliland, and British East Africa would be added to Italy's existing possessions covering an immense area in northeast Africa. When Italy entered the war, the reinforcement of British forces through the Mediterranean became extremely dangerous. This threat intensified in July when the collapse of opposition in French Somaliland led to a French-Italian armistice. Large Italian forces had now been released for use against British Somaliland. During July Italy occupied Sudanese and Kenyan frontier posts. On 3 August the Italians crossed the frontier into British Somaliland.

Summary:

On 19 August 1940 the British were forced to evacuate British Somaliland. This setback at the hands of the Italians came as a shock to British public opinion. Although Italian attacks on Aden were now more easily facilitated, the protectorate had no significant strategic value for the U.K. Nevertheless, the location of an Italian East Africa on the flank of Britain's vital sea route, the Red Sea, was a threat to Britain's influence among its client states, and the forced evacuation triggered a crisis for the U.K. The British responded, months later, on 2 December 1940, with a decision to expel Italy from East Africa. The campaign in North Africa began on 8 December. The East African offensive began in February 1941 when the British advanced from the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and Kenya into Ethiopia and Eritrea.

On 13 February Kismayu fell, and Mogadiscio (Mogadishu) submitted on the 25th. And on 17 March the Italians abandoned Sigjiga. The British advances had revealed the weakness of the Italian colonial forces, and internal disorder increased greatly. On the 22nd Neghelli in southern Ethiopia was occupied by British and Ethiopian forces.

The crisis trigger for Italy was at the Battle of Keren on 27 March 1941. The loss of 3,000 men in that battle broke the back of Italian resistance, which now abandoned hope of retaining control over Eritrea. Italy responded on 30 March with a decision to concentrate resistance at Amba Alagi. Mussolini was so informed by the Duke of Aosta, Supreme Commander of all Italian armed forces in East Africa. On 3 April the duke united the remainder of his reserve force with the remnants of the Italian Eritrean army.

On 6 April Addis Ababa capitulated. Prior to the defeat, Mussolini had instructed the duke not to abandon the capital unless absolutely necessary because it would be politically equivalent to losing the empire.

On 11 April President Roosevelt announced that the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden were no longer combat zones within the meaning of U.S. neutrality and U.S. vessels could now carry war supplies to the British Middle East forces by this route.

The termination of the crisis for both the U.K. and Italy came on 17 May 1941 when the Duke of Aosta surrendered and signed an armistice agreement. Italian resistance in Eritrea collapsed by June. And before the end of 1941 all of East Africa was under British control.

References:

Churchill 1949; Ciano 1947; Collins 1947; Playfair 1954.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


