CRISNO 415

TAIWAN STRAIT IV

Background:

The fifth crisis in the protracted Taiwan Straits conflict began on 22 May 1995 and lasted until 25 March 1996. The Republic of China (ROC) and the People's Republic of China (PRC) were both crisis actors.

Background and Pre-Crisis

While a fundamental disagreement persisted between the PRC and the ROC about the potential independence of Taiwan, leaders of both countries made efforts in 1995 to ease tensions between the two actors. In a New Year's Day address, Chinese President Jiang Zemin had called for a peaceful resolution to the dispute between Beijing and Taipei, encouraging leaders in both capitals to work toward a mutually acceptable "one country, two systems" framework. In April 1995, Taiwanese President Lee Teng-hui responded to Jiang's statement with a call for greater economic cooperation between China and Taiwan and establishment of regular dispute resolution mechanisms for disagreements between the two. Optimism that these statements might lead to direct talks between Jiang and Lee receded in late April when Jiang noted that the conditions were not yet ripe for a summit meeting between the two leaders. Days later, scheduled working-level cross-strait talks were cancelled after representatives from both sides could not agree on an agenda for the meeting.

At the same time, Taiwanese officials were at work trying to secure a visa to allow President Lee to come to the United States to visit his alma mater (Cornell University in New York state). On 7 April, US Secretary of State Warren Christopher assured Chinese Foreign Minister Qian Qichen that, consistent with its long-standing policy, the US would not issue such a visa to the Taiwanese leader. Christopher warned Qian, though, that legislators in the US were pressuring the Clinton administration to allow Lee to visit. Officials in Beijing were especially concerned that a visit by Lee to the US would be a catalyst to a renewed and aggressive campaign by Taipei for an independent Taiwan, especially in light of Taiwan's upcoming presidential elections, in which Lee was hoping to become the first democratically elected leader of the island.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for the PRC on 22 May 1995 when the US State Department announced that it would issue a visa to allow Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui to make a private visit to the United States in June, thus reversing the US policy restricting high-level contacts between US officials and Taiwanese leaders, over the objections of Chinese officials. Chinese Foreign Minister Qian argued that the US action violated three joint agreements between the China and the US, represented a violation of Chinese sovereignty, and destroyed hopes of a peaceful resolution between mainland China and Taiwan. China cancelled or postponed a series of meetings between US and Chinese officials in subsequent months, but dialogue resumed between the two countries on a variety of officials by September.

The crisis also strained the already troubled relations between Taiwan and China. During Lee's 3-day visit to the US in early June, he met with members of the US Senate and House of Representatives and noted that the people of Taiwan were dissatisfied with their marginalized status in the international commuity. Cross-straits discussions between the PRC and the ROC were again postponed in early June, and China responded to this crisis by launching a series of military exercises in the East China Sea, lasting from 21 to 26 July. The exercises included a series of tests of M-9 surface-to-surface guided missile tests that were fired only 60 km north of Taiwan's Pengchaiyu Island. These military maneuvers were coupled with fiery rhetoric from the official Chinese news agency Xinhua, which called on China to be willing to spill blood and lose lives in efforts to stop what it considered to be moves by Lee towards potential independence for Taiwan. These military exercises and rhetoric triggered a crisis for Taiwan, which responded on 27 July with a special address from President Lee in which he noted that Taiwan could not be repressed by outside forces.

The cycle of Chinese military exercises and missile tests, followed by statements by Lee that Taiwan would not be intimidated continued through 1995 (notably in August, September, and October), and by early 1996, the PRC had redeployed forces to coastal areas facing Taiwan and had set up additional command structures with responsibility for potential military action against Taiwan. Chinese military maneuvers peaked with war exercises only about 25 miles off of the Taiwan coast in March 1996 in anticipation of Taiwan's first democratic presidential elections and were seen as an effort to hurt the electoral chances of President Lee. Despite the threatening tests, the elections were held, as scheduled, on 23 March 1996, and Lee Teng-hui became the first elected president of Taiwan. As scheduled, China's military exercises stopped after the elections, thus ending the crisis for both the PRC and the ROC.

Taiwan attempted to involve the UN in this crisis by submitting an application for Taiwan's membership to the organization, but the application was not approved. The UN was not a major actor in this crisis, and there were no mediation efforts during the crisis. The US was involved not just in triggering the crisis for the PRC but also by helping to ensure the safety of Taiwan by sending the aircraft carrier USS Nimitz to the Taiwan Straits in December 1995, marking the first time US ships had patrolled the area since 1976. Additionally, carrier battle groups were sent to the region in March 1996, during the election period prior to the conclusion of this crisis.

References:

Keesings Lexis-Nexis Federation of American Scientists, "Taiwan Strait: 21 July 1995 to 23 March 1996," http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/ops/taiwan_strait.htm Robert Sutter, "China Policy: Crisis Over Taiwan, 1995-A Post-Mortem," CRS Issue Brief. Washington DC: Congressional Research Service, December 1995. Richard L. Russell, "The 1996 Taiwan Strait Crisis: The United States and China at the Precipice of War?" Pew Case Study #231. Washington DC: Institute for the Study of Diplomacy, Georgetown University, 2000.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


