CRISNO 7

SMYRNA

Background:

Greece and Italy were directly engaged in a crisis over Anatolia from early March to 29 July 1919.

Background and Pre-crisis Turkey's defeat in World War I accelerated the dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire. France and the U.K. had already laid claim to its non-Turkish territories (see below). Constantinople was controlled, de facto, by the British; the Ottoman government had lost all autonomy in foreign policy. The Greeks had invaded Eastern Thrace and had made no secret of their claims to western Anatolia, especially to Smyrna (Izmir) with its large Greek population. However, spheres of influence had already been drawn by the Allies in Anatolia and the Middle East in secret agreements during the war.

The Treaty of St. Jean de Maurienne (21 April 1917) had awarded Italy primacy in the Adalia Province of southern Anatolia and in western Anatolia including Smyrna--in return for Italy's recognition of the Sykes-Picot Agreement of 9 May 1916. That agreement had divided the Arab Near East lands of the Ottoman Empire into British and French spheres of influence--Palestine and Mesopotamia (Iraq) to the former, the coastal strip of Lebanon, Syria, Cilicia, and southern Kurdistan to the latter. Behind the scenes Britain's Prime Minister Lloyd George, a strong Hellenophile, was adamant about curtailing Italy's influence in the Near East.

Summary:

Acting under the terms of the Treaty of St. Jean de Maurienne, Italy began to occupy southern Anatolia in early March 1919. This triggered a crisis for Greece which, with the backing of the U.K. and France and, more quietly, the U.S., responded on 15 May 1919: 20,000 Greek troops landed in Smyrna. This triggered a crisis for Italy, which perceived a threat to its influence in the Near East. Minor clashes occurred in Smyrna between Greek and Turkish civilians and between Greek and Italian forces in the region.

Bilateral negotiations culminated in the Venizelos-Tittoni Agreement on 29 July 1919. Italy undertook to support Greece's claims in Thrace, northern Epirus, the Aegean Islands, and Smyrna. Greece, in turn, recognized Italian primacy in southwest Anatolia and pledged support for Italy's demands for a League of Nations Mandate over Albania. Moreover, Italy would retain Rhodes, and Greece received the Dodecanese Islands. This agreement ended the international crisis over Smyrna.

Although Greece achieved most of its territorial objectives, Greek/Turkish hostility, a constant in the eastern Mediterranean, was sharply intensified. (See Cases #16, #18, #25--Greece/Turkey War I, II, III, in 1920, 1921, 1922, in Multiregional PCs: Greece/Turkey.) Ottoman Turkey made the most concessions but did not experience a higher probability of war--with Greece or Italy--or time pressure. Thus Greece and Italy were the only crisis actors, with Turkey, the U.K., and France heavily involved in the Smyrna crisis.

There was no global organization at the time of this crisis.

(The terms of the Venizelos-Tittoni Agreement, along with those of Sykes-Picot, were later incorporated into the Treaty of Sèvres, 10 August 1920, between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire with some changes: a plebiscite was to be held in Smyrna and its hinterland after five years of Greek administration; and the Dodecanese Islands were given to Italy, the rest of the Aegean Islands to Greece. The Turks under Kemal Atatürk captured and largely destroyed Smyrna in September 1921 during the prolonged Greece/Turkey War [see Case #18--Greece/Turkey War II]. As a result Turkey regained control over all of Anatolia and recovered Eastern Thrace from Greece, in the Treaty of Lausanne, 24 July 1923, which replaced the Treaty of Sèvres.)

References:

Evans 1982; Graves 1941; Hale and Bagiz 1984; Kent 1984; Kinross 1964; Lewis 1961; Psomiades 1968.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


