CRISNO 95

FALL OF SAIPAN

Background:

The defeat at Saipan precipitated an IWC for Japan between 9 and 18 July 1944.

Background and Pre-crisis The war in the Pacific had been turning against Japan since the Battle of Midway in June 1942. Toward the end of 1943 and the beginning of 1944 Japanese sea lanes came under continuous attack from the American and British navies. Although the Japanese leadership understood the gravity of the situation, the Japanese press continued to inform the public of the war's progress--in Japan's favor. In February 1944 the largest carrier-launched air armada in history attacked Japan's strategic Caroline Islands base at Truk, sinking 19-26 ships and destroying about 200 planes. Prime Minister Tojo carried out a major reorganization and consolidation of his cabinet on 19 February. He assumed the post of Chief of the Army General Staff and appointed Navy Minister Shimada as Chief of the Navy General Staff. For the first time in Japanese history administrative and command posts were held by the same persons.

Severe restrictions were placed on Japanese society. There was mobilization and reorganization of labor and business. Air raid defense networks were built, and entertainment centers were closed. As the pressure of the Allied forces grew, so did the opposition to Tojo within the Japanese elite. In June American forces delivered a series of devastating attacks upon Saipan, Tinian, Guam, and Rota in the Marianas. The strategic cordon of defense that Japan had created around the home islands vanished rapidly. The American invasion of Saipan, "Operation Forager," began with a bombardment of Japanese positions on 13 June 1944. The island's strategic importance was due to the fact that long-range American bombers, if installed on airstrips there, could threaten the Japanese people in their cities and towns.

Summary:

The defeat at Saipan on 9 July 1944 triggered another intrawar crisis for Japan, which perceived a threat of grave damage to its population centers. On the 13th Prime Minister Tojo sought advice from the Lord Privy Seal, the Marquis Kido, who had been Tojo's supporter for the position of Prime Minister. Kido presented the prime minister with three conditions aimed at changing the nature and style of his government. He demanded the separation of the war minister and army chief of staff posts, the replacement of the navy minister, and the formation of a United Front cabinet which would include members of the senior statesmen-group (Jushin), consisting of former prime ministers.

During the next four days Tojo attempted to reorganize his cabinet. Most ex-prime ministers refused to join and demanded Tojo's resignation. On 18 July Tojo resigned terminating this crisis for Japan.

References:

See sources for Case #88.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


