CRISNO 124

HYDERABAD

Background:

India experienced a crisis over Hyderabad from 21 August to 18 September 1948.

Background and Pre-crisis Hyderabad was the second largest princely state in the subcontinent, after Jammu and Kashmir. It is located in the geographic center of India and, in 1948, 80 percent of its population was Hindu while most of the political elite were Muslim. The nizam of Hyderabad did not favor accession to distant Pakistan. Nor did predominantly Hindu India attract him. He therefore opted for independence a few days after the British left. The Indian government stated that Hyderabad was far too important to India's territorial integrity and economic needs to be permitted to choose independence.

Throughout late 1947 and early 1948 tension and communal violence mounted. India, insisting that the nizam liberalize his government and curb the violence, organized an economic blockade. The nizam then loaned Pakistan some of his Government of India securities which it began to cash, despite promises not to do so while the Standstill Agreement between Hyderabad and India continued to operate. These developments, coupled with border raids and frequent attacks on trains passing through the state territory, had undermined the Standstill Agreement. Hyderabad raised the question of arbitration on the alleged breaches of the Agreement; but the infringements had become relatively unimportant in the context of the increasing deterioration of law and order within the state.

Summary:

India's crisis over the state of Hyderabad, which had proclaimed its independence, was triggered on 21 August 1948 by Hyderabad's request for UN discussion of India's economic blockade and incidents of violence in the area. India's reply to a grave threat to its territorial integrity came on 9 September after efforts to deploy Indian troops in the state failed. A decision was taken to send troops into Hyderabad to restore law and order: this was implemented on the 15th. The crisis terminated on 18 September 1948 when an Indian military governor was appointed and a military administration was installed in Hyderabad.

On 23 September the nizam sent a cable to the Security Council withdrawing the Hyderabad case from its agenda. Pakistan continued to press for discussion, but it was ultimately dropped. Hyderabad's complaint to the Security Council was included in the Council's provisional agenda. India argued that, because Hyderabad was not an independent state, it had no right to seek international legal intervention in what was a purely domestic affair.

There was no substantive consideration of the question at the UN. Neither the U.S. nor the USSR was involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #119.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


