CRISNO 77

INVASION OF SCANDINAVIA

Background:

The German invasion of Scandinavia generated a crisis for Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands, France, and the U.K. from 8 April to 10 June 1940.

Pre-crisis The Finnish War (see Case #76, in Finland/Russia PC), which had ended in March 1940, emphasized the strategic importance of Scandinavia's waterways for both the Allies and Germany. Winston Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty, pressed for the mining of Norwegian waters, which were the passageway for Swedish ore to Germany. Early in 1940 the German tanker Altmark, sailing in Norwegian waters and carrying British prisoners of war, was boarded by the British while moored in Jossingfjord, and the prisoners were released. Both Norway and Germany issued strong protests to London. Norway, which feared German retaliation, emphasized that the British ships had violated its neutrality. The Altmark incident accelerated German plans for the invasion of Norway and spurred British cabinet approval of Churchill's naval plans. Due to Britain's superior naval strength, Germany decided upon a surprise attack against Norway.

Summary:

On 8 April 1940 a crisis was triggered for Norway when it received intelligence reports predicting a German invasion the next day. Several U.K. vessels did spot and engage the Germans that day, but the British viewed these as isolated clashes. On 9 April the Germans invaded Denmark and Norway, creating a crisis for Denmark, France, and the U.K. A crisis was also triggered for the Netherlands, which perceived the invasion as presaging an attack on Holland, for it was the first German offensive since the "phony war" of the preceding winter and spring and was accompanied by perceptions of German plans to attack Western Europe. While Denmark and Norway perceived no more than grave damage at the outset, for Germany demanded free passage only, as the crisis escalated they perceived a threat to their existence in the form of German occupation.

The Norwegian and Danish responses occurred on 9 April. Norway's King Haakon offered to abdicate rather than capitulate. Norway reorganized its defenses and began strong resistance under a new Commander in Chief, General Ruge. Denmark held cabinet meetings with King Christian and, under his leadership, decided not to resist, ending its crisis on the 9th.

The U.K. and France had been considering the dispatch of troops to aid Norway. The German attack hastened their decision, on 13 April, to do so. Haphazard and insufficient planning prevented the success of the operation. The target areas were too narrow for the ships carrying artillery to land, and the landing sites were changed, confusing the troops. Norwegian forces had tried to keep landing areas and key ports free for the Allies.

On 19 April the Netherlands responded to the crisis by mobilizing its troops and issuing a strong statement of its intention to defend itself against German attack. Holland's tension eased as the German invasion concentrated on Denmark and Norway and, on 27 April, its crisis ended, with military preparations returning to normal.

The Anglo-French forces, together with the Norwegians, resisted for another month. In the interim, on 10 May, Britain's Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain, resigned and was replaced by Winston Churchill. By the end of May the Allies had been badly beaten, and a decision was made to withdraw. The last troops were evacuated on 8 June 1940, following the French defeat in northern France (see Case #78), terminating the intrawar crisis for France and Britain. The king of Norway and his government left the country with the British and French on the 8th, and, on 10 June, a member of General Ruge's staff signed an armistice with Germany, ending the last fighting around Narvik and terminating the crisis for Norway.

References:

Bullock 1962; Calvocoressi and Wint 1972; Carlgren 1977; Churchill 1948; Derry 1952; Olsson 1975; Petrow 1974; Royal Institute of International Affairs (RIIA) 1947; Schuman 1941; Snell 1963; Weinberg 1994; Ziemke 1960.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


