CRISNO 235

FOOTBALL WAR

Background:

A crisis between El Salvador and Honduras began on 15 June and terminated on 30 July 1969.

Background and Pre-crisis Honduras, a sparsely populated country, was the domicile of large numbers of Salvadorans who, since the 1920s, had left overcrowded El Salvador to farm, squat, or work on the banana plantations of Honduras. Reports of their ill-treatment were brought to the attention of El Salvador. In Honduras the economic situation at the end of the 1960s was bleak, with societal unrest increasing. The first football (soccer) game between teams of the two countries in the elimination rounds of the 1970 World Cup Championship was played in the Honduras capital, Tegucigalpa, on 8 June 1969. Following the opener, Salvadoran players complained of suffering at the hands of their hosts. Violence in the stadium followed. In the next game, on 15 June in San Salvador, Honduran players were subjected to reciprocal treatment by their hosts, and riots broke out once again.

Summary:

The aftermath of the second football game, combined with reports from large numbers of Salvadoran refugees fleeing from Honduras and alleging maltreatment and confiscation of property, triggered a crisis for El Salvador on 15 June 1969. El Salvador declared a state of alert, and Foreign Minister Francisco Jose Guerrero appealed to the OAS, claiming that 12,000 Salvadorans had been expelled from Honduras.

On 26 and 27 June diplomatic relations between the two states were broken. Tension, accompanied by incidents along the border, continued until El Salvador's major response: troops crossed into Honduras on 14 July.

Honduras responded the same day with air attacks on Salvadoran cities and ports. A cease-fire, due to effective OAS mediation, came about on 18 July. By this time casualties on both sides exceeded 2,000.

El Salvador's victories led to the conquest of sizable chunks of Honduran territory from which it refused to withdraw after the cease-fire. Subsequent threats of OAS sanctions against El Salvador convinced it to do so. A compromise agreement, brokered by the OAS secretary-general, came into effect on 30 July 1969, marking the termination of the crisis.

The U.S. embargo on arms to both countries was perceived by Honduras as favoring the better equipped Salvadoran army. At the same time, there was U.S. pressure on El Salvador to withdraw from the Honduran territory it had invaded. Costa Rica, Guatemala, and Nicaragua attempted to mediate at the beginning of the crisis, but without success.

The UN offered its good offices. The USSR was not involved.

(Thirteen years after the Football (Soccer) War the International Court of Justice ruled in favor of Honduras, awarding it two-thirds of the disputed territory. And another 13 years passed until, in the summer of 1995, El Salvador and Honduras agreed to begin demarcating their border.)

References:

Brzoska and Pearson 1994; Cable 1969; Day 1987; Holly 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


