CRISNO 408

NORTH KOREA NUCLEAR I

Background:

North Korea, South Korea, and the United States were enmeshed in a post-Cold War crisis over nuclear proliferation from early March 1993 until 21 October 1994.

Background and Pre-crisis The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) formally came into effect in 1970. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK, or North Korea) became a signatory in December 1985, part of the price for Soviet assistance in realizing its nuclear reactor program. As such, it undertook not to engage in activities that could lead to the production of nuclear weapons.

Further commitments were undertaken--by both Koreas--in their 1992 Denuclearization Agreement, notably a ban on the production of fissile material and the signing of a Joint Declaration on Denuclearization, an agreement in principle to establish a nuclear-free zone on the Korean peninsula. More tangibly, in the January 1992 IAEA Safeguards Agreement, the DPRK undertook to reveal the existence of 13 hitherto-unknown nuclear facilities and to permit regular inspections of North Korea's Yongbyon complex by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Notwithstanding these commitments, evidence of an incipient North Korean nuclear bomb program was reported by U.S. intelligence as early as February 1992.

Tension between the International Atomic Energy Agency and North Korea was endemic: the former, acting as the NPT's monitoring body, kept pressing for total access to the latter's nuclear facilities, while North Korea attempted to restrict access.

In February 1993 IAEA inspectors, on a routine check, discovered a substantive discrepancy between the amount of weapons-grade plutonium and the amount reported by North Korea to the IAEA. This created the setting for an impending crisis.

Summary:

In early March 1993 the IAEA sought permission from the DPRK for a "special inspection" of two suspect, that is, hitherto-undeclared, nuclear waste sites. This triggered a crisis for North Korea, which perceived a threat to the "crown jewel" of its national security. It refused the request, claiming that these were restricted military nonnuclear facilities.

More ominously for the DPRK's adversaries, the ROK and its patron, the U.S., North Korea responded by giving public notice on 12 March of its intention to withdraw from the NPT regime. The reasons cited were the IAEA's unprecedented pressure to conduct special inspections and the impending annual "Team Spirit" military cooperation exercise by ROK and U.S. forces. Pyongyang's announcement, raising the specter of a full-scale, unmonitored North Korean nuclear weapons program, triggered a crisis for South Korea and the U.S.

South Korea's leaders had perceived a threat of renewed war with the DPRK since the Korean Armistice in 1953. The declaration from Pyongyang sharply accentuated Seoul's perception of the high likelihood of war, initiated by the North's larger and more powerful armed forces. For the U.S., the crisis threatened its primacy in the post-Cold War world order and, specifically, constituted a potentially dangerous precedent of nuclear proliferation by a small, ambitious state. The next day, 13 March, the IAEA called upon North Korea to reconsider its announcement.

Further escalation occurred in May-June. On 14 May the DPRK reportedly began removing nuclear fuel rods from its Yongbyon reactor--without the presence of IAEA inspectors. On 10 June the IAEA's Board of Governors adopted a sanctions resolution, suspending technical assistance to Pyongyang. North Korea responded on the 13th by formally withdrawing from the IAEA. And on 14 June the U.S. called for an international coalition against North Korea's nuclear program, to be implemented through UN-authorized economic sanctions.

In a context of acutely rising tension the DPRK and the U.S. held two rounds of talks in June-July 1993. The first, 2-11 June in New York, achieved a "suspension" of the DPRK's withdrawal from the NPT. At the second, 14-19 July in Geneva, the DPRK made a proposal that turned out to be the core of their ultimate accord--a replacement of its more dangerous graphite-moderated nuclear reactors with light-water nuclear reactors. After a lengthy period of deadlock they reached an interim agreement on 25 February 1994: the U.S. and the ROK would not hold the Team Spirit military exercise that year; and North Korea would allow a resumption of IAEA inspections.

The crisis escalated once more on 14 March 1994 when IAEA inspectors reported the discovery of additional discrepancies in the DPRK's nuclear program; but Pyongyang denied them permission to take samples for further examination. This led to a suspension of bilateral U.S./DPRK talks. On 31 March the UN Secretary-General called on Pyongyang to allow IAEA inspectors to complete their investigation.

On 15 April South Korea made a concession--giving up its demand for North/South Korea talks before additional North Korea/U.S. meetings. The North reciprocated on the 19th by inviting IAEA inspectors to be present when nuclear fuel rods were removed from one of its reactors. On 19 May these inspectors reported that there was no evidence of misuse of the extracted nuclear fuel.

On 16 June, at the invitation of North Korea's ruler, Kim Il-Sung, former U.S. President Jimmy Carter went to Pyongyang as a "private" mediator. Although Carter had met with U.S. President Clinton’s advisors prior to the visit, he declared that he would act independently of Washington. During the mediation visit, Carter specified the intentions of the U.S. and offered compromises that North Korea might make without losing face. Carter returned to Seoul on the 18th and delivered a message from Kim Il Sung to South Korean President Kim Young Sam that reciprocated the desire to have a bilateral meeting. Carter also brought news that North Korea had agreed not to expel IAEA inspectors and to freeze its nuclear program if the U.S. would allow North Korea to develop light-water nuclear reactors, agree to a third round of U.S.-DPRK talks and make a promise not to use nuclear weapons against North Korea. Carter's statement on 19 June that the crisis was over turned out to be premature; but it provided both a cooling-off period and a necessary face-saver for the adversaries.

Intense North Korea/U.S. negotiations took place very briefly in July 1994. They were interrupted on 8 July by the death of Kim Il-Sung but were resumed from 5 to 12 August and from 20 September to 17 October 1994. The outcome was a four-page "Agreed Framework" and a separate secret document signed on 21 October. The terms revealed a carefully calibrated schedule of mutual concessions.

The DPRK pledged to freeze its nuclear activities within a month and to store, that is, not reprocess, its 8,000 spent fuel rods. Once it received two replacement reactors, by the year 2003, it undertook to dispose of--abroad--its inventory of spent nuclear fuel, the sine qua non of a weapons program. It also promised not to refuel its existing five-megawatt reactor and not to complete the construction of two large reactors, one of 50 megawatts, the other of 200 megawatts, which the IAEA and the U.S. feared could generate enough weapons-grade plutonium to produce several--some estimates were as high as 30--nuclear bombs each year. In sum, the DPRK renounced any ambition to become a nuclear power, a goal that it constantly denied during the negotiations.

In return, the U.S. agreed to arrange for an "international consortium" to build two new light-water "proliferation-resistant" nuclear reactors, with a generating capacity of 2,000 megawatts, by the year 2003. These would provide North Korea with ample nuclear energy, with much less risk of extracting plutonium for a weapons program. The reactors were to be financed almost entirely by South Korea and Japan, the two most directly concerned states, and would be built in South Korea. In the interim, as compensation for the DPRK's freezing of its nuclear program, the U.S. would provide, at no cost to the DPRK, all of its heavy oil requirements for heating and electricity until the new reactors were installed: this would reach 500,000 metric tons annually by 1996. Finally, North Korea would not be obliged to open for inspection the two suspect nuclear facilities until a "significant portion" of the light-water project was completed, that is, for five years. The quid pro quo was that the DPRK would not receive the nuclear components to start its light-water reactors until it allowed all nuclear inspections sought by the IAEA. In sum, North Korea achieved almost all of its goals, through a comprehensive security, political, and economic package, but it yielded on its nuclear weapons program, a very high value. The U.S. seemed to have succeeded in aborting a nuclear weapons program by what it perceived as a rogue state.

Throughout the nuclear crisis on the Korean peninsula South Korea assumed a very low profile: it did so largely because of U.S. pressure not to compel the DPRK to lose face by negotiating directly with its mortal enemy, whose legitimacy it denied. In this sense the ROK was an observer of the very-high-stakes nuclear poker game between its patron and its feared foe. However, Seoul made known to Washington, frequently, its dissatisfaction with aspects of agreements reached in the bilateral talks.

In June 1993 President Kim Young Sam publicly cautioned the U.S. against acquiescing in the DPRK's efforts to shut the ROK out from any role in implementing an agreement. He also pressed for holding the Team Spirit military exercise in 1994, a point on which the U.S. conceded to the DPRK. He urged the U.S. to deploy Patriot missiles in the ROK, which the U.S. did in January 1994. And he successfully pressed the U.S., through former President Carter, to arrange a meeting with Kim Il-Sung. Only the sudden death of North Korea's leader in July 1994 prevented the realization of a North/South Korea dialogue. Most important, South Korea made known its dissatisfaction with the vagueness surrounding its intended role in the implementation of the 21 October 1994 agreement, especially since it was to bear the overwhelming financial burden, $4 billion. And this spilled over to public criticism of the U.S. by the ROK's president on 7 October 1994 for its "naive and overly flexible" negotiations with a regime on the verge of collapse. In this respect, South Korea ultimately achieved its primary goal during the crisis (see below).

The October 1994 agreement terminated the North Korea Nuclear Crisis--but not the conflict over the DPRK's suspected aspirations to join the nuclear weapons club.

(For eight months after the agreement its implementation foundered on the extremely sensitive issue of who would construct, supply, and install the two light-water nuclear reactors. The U.S. contended that the only possible source was South Korea, especially since it had agreed to bear most of the $4 billion cost, and that North Korean negotiators had accepted this provision. DPRK negotiators denied this contention and adamantly refused to accept reactors from its archenemy, the ROK. The obstacle was overcome through a bilateral agreement reached in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, on 12 June 1995: North Korea accepted South Korea's primary role in building, supplying, and installing the two new reactors. The U.S. provided a fig leaf to its adversary: everything to do with the two new reactors was to be implemented through the newly created (9 March 1995) Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization [KPEDO], comprising South Korea, the U.S., and Japan. The implementation process was set in motion by a supplementary supply contract agreement between North Korea and the KPEDO on 15 December 1995, which included "compensation" to the former for dismantling its nuclear reactors.)

Russia played no role in this crisis. China, the DPRK's sole major power ally, offered important political support, notably a threat to veto any UN Security Council economic sanctions resolution; for the rest it was passive throughout. Japan perceived a threat from North Korea's nuclear program along with time pressure. But unlike with South Korea, the crucial "high probability of war" condition was not visible. Japan was highly involved but not a direct crisis actor. It offered financial assistance in the construction of the two new reactors. At the same time, along with China and South Korea, it urged Washington not to impose economic sanctions, which North Korea had repeatedly declared it would treat as an "act of war." The UN was involved indirectly, through its specialized agency, the IAEA.

(Concerns for North Korea’s nuclear problem led to another crisis that began in late 2002, after North Korea admitted to the U.S. that it was pursuing the development of nuclear weapons and announced in January 2003 that it was withdrawing from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. This latest crisis is yet to be resolved as the U.S. and other powers in Asia have attempted a number of diplomatic and economic incentives to curtail the willingness of North Korea to pursue the development of nuclear weapons.)

References:

Garrett and Glaser 1995; Kim 1995, 1996; Lee and Sohn 1995; Mack 1993; Merrill 1994; New York Times, June-November 1994, June 1995; Snyder 1995.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


