CRISNO 357

AL-BIQA MISSILES II

Background:

Syria and Israel were embroiled in the second crisis over the Biqa (see Case #327) from 19 November 1985 to 15 January 1986.

Background and Pre-crisis The Israel Air Force (IAF) has been conducting regular reconnaissance flights over Lebanon since the mid-1970s. These were accepted by Syria, the dominant power in Lebanon, in the 1976 "Red Line" agreement, which governed Israeli/Syrian military relations vis-à-vis Lebanon until the outbreak of the Lebanon War in 1982 (see Case #337). Although incidents did occur--sometimes Israeli planes, at other times Syrian planes, withdrew to avoid a direct military confrontation--this U.S.-brokered agreement maintained relative stability in a volatile region. According to the commander of the IAF at the time, Syria attempted to interfere with Israel's reconnaissance flights over Lebanon on several occasions in November 1985.

Summary:

On 19 November 1985 two Syrian MIG aircraft were shot down by two Israeli planes over Lebanon; according to Israel, this occurred after Syrian fighters threatened Israeli planes on reconnaissance missions over Lebanon. This incident, very common in the Israeli/Syrian protracted conflict, triggered a crisis for Syria.

Tension rose on 24 November when Syria responded by deploying SAM-6 missiles in the Biqa (Bekaa) Valley and along the Beirut-Damascus road. However, those missiles were soon withdrawn following U.S. pressure.

Israel's crisis was triggered on 15 December, when Syria redeployed SAM-6 and SAM-8 missiles close to the Lebanon border. Israel reacted the same day by accusing Syria of also deploying long-range SAM-2 missiles in southwestern Syria, posing a threat to mutually agreed Israeli reconnaissance missions over Lebanon. The Syrian government claimed on 16 December that the redeployment was a defensive move. Israel, in turn, through Defense Minister Rabin, warned on 27 December that the IDF would respond to the threatening missiles "whatever the cost."

Tension between the two long-time adversaries declined in early January 1986 as a result of U.S. mediation that succeeded in devising an acceptable resolution framework: Syria agreed not to interfere with IAF reconnaissance missions; and Israel agreed not to attack Syrian missile sites as long as they did not threaten Israeli reconnaissance flights over Lebanon.

On 15 January the IAF announced that Syria's long-range missiles had been withdrawn from Lebanon. That Syrian act ended the crisis for both states.

References:

Keesing's 1986; MECS 1985-86.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


