CRISNO 304

CHAD-LIBYA IV

Background:

Another crisis for Libya, Chad, and France in equatorial Africa occurred from 12 April to 10 November 1979.

Pre-crisis Shortly after the formation of a National Unity Government for Chad on 29 August 1978, fighting erupted once more between government and rebel forces. Rivalries among the latter and mass killings of minority Muslims in the south aggravated the situation. The Malloum-Habré coalition government broke down in February 1979. Thousands of Christian Saras were reported slaughtered in the capital by Habré's followers. By the end of February, FROLINAT leader Goukouni's forces entered N'Djamena. And by 11 March, when the first Kano Conference on national Chad reconciliation opened, there were four competing power centers, led by Goukouni, Habré, Asil, and Kamougue. France and Nigeria pressed Goukouni and Habré to share power. And this was done in a new Provisional State Council, Gouvernement de l'Unité Nationale Tchadienne (GUNT), formed on 23 March in accordance with an agreement a week earlier. Goukouni became interim Head of State, following Malloum's resignation that day. And in mid-April, after an inconclusive second Kano Conference from 3 to 11 April, Goukouni took over the Interior portfolio, with Habré as Defense Minister. While they had yielded to Libyan and Nigerian pressure at Kano to enlarge GUNT, they reneged upon their return to Chad.

Summary:

It was the volte-face by Goukouni and Habré that triggered a crisis for Libya on 12 April 1979, the onset of Chad/Libya IV. While there was some minor Libyan troop activity in the norththat began on the 13th, and Libyan support for a secessionist movement in southern Chad, its major response did not come until 25 June, following another inconclusive reconciliation conference, mediated by Nigeria in Lagos from 26-27 May. The four factions represented in the Provisional State Council were absent from Lagos; however, dissidents, backed by six of Chad's neighbors (Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Libya, Niger, Nigeria, and Sudan), demanded the formation of a new, enlarged National Unity Government by 25 June. When this call went unheeded, Libya sent 2,500 troops into northern Chad aimed at Faya-Largeau. The Libyan invasion, in turn, triggered a crisis for Chad and France the same day. The former appealed to Paris not to withdraw its forces from Chad. France agreed, and French reconnaissance planes and bombers played a crucial role in the Chad counteroffensive that forced the Libyans to retreat.

A second Lagos Conference, the fourth concerned with Chad in 1979, met in mid-August, with all eleven Chad factions represented, along with all of Chad's neighbors and also Benin, Congo, Liberia, and Senegal. The upshot was an agreement providing for the following: a cease-fire to be monitored by a peace force with contingents from states not bordering Chad, headed by the OAU Secretary-General; demilitarization of N'Djamena; amnesty for all political prisoners; the merger of all factional militias into a national army; and the formation of a broad-based transitional National Unity Government. When that government was established on 10 November 1979, the crisis ended for all three actors, Chad, France, and Libya. Yet the complex civil and international conflict over Chad continued.

The U.S. and the USSR were not involved in this crisis, the UN marginally so.

References:

ACR 1979; AR 1979; ARec 1979; ARB 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


