CRISNO 6

HUNGARIAN WAR

Background:

In one of several World War I "fall-out" crises Hungary experienced crisis and war with Czechoslovakia and Romania from 20 March to 3 August 1919.

PRE-CRISIS The primary foreign policy objective of the Western powers in the aftermath of World War I was to reverse the revolutionary tide in Russia. At the same time small powers in Central-Eastern Europe aimed at expanding their territory at the expense of successors to the defeated Austro-Hungarian Empire. The new state of Hungary was at the crossroads of these two currents. Romania and Czechoslovakia were already violating the demarcation lines set by the 13 November 1918 Military Convention. France, concerned with strengthening Russia's western neighbors, tacitly encouraged the partition of Hungary. The Mihály Károlyi-led government in Budapest was not recognized by France, the U.K., or the U.S.

Summary:

International pressure on Hungary reached its peak on 20 March 1919 in the form of an ultimatum from the Supreme Council's delegate in Budapest, Lieutenant-Colonel Fernand Vix, to Károlyi: in accordance with a 26 February Paris Peace Conference decision the Hungarian government was instructed to accept the implementation of a neutral zone between Hungary and Romania. The ultimatum triggered a crisis for Hungary because of the following: it threatened the loss of extensive Hungarian territory, even more than indicated in the November 1918 Armistice; there was intense time pressure--30 hours--for acceptance; and because Vix, exceeding his orders, threatened military reprisals if the ultimatum were rejected. Károlyi responded to a perceived threat to Hungary's existence by rejecting the ultimatum and by resigning in favor of the pro-Soviet Socialist Béla Kun.

The ultimatum and the response increased the risk of war in Central Europe. There were, in fact, some clashes with the Czechoslovaks and the French, escalating to full-scale war on 16 April, when Romania invaded Hungary. Later that month Czechoslovakia attacked from the north. And the French were directly involved, occupying Hungarian towns in the south and, together with Italian military officers, advising the invading Czechoslovak troops. Hungary was able to resist and succeeded in launching a counteroffensive against the Czechoslovak forces on 11 May triggering a crisis for Prague. The Czechs were expelled from Hungarian territory; and Hungarian troops, with Polish military assistance, occupied part of Slovakia. At that point France intervened: on 8 and 15 June 1919 it sent two ultimatums to Budapest demanding its withdrawal from Slovakia. Hungary's government complied on the 16th thereby ending its brief crisis. Then on the 24th an armistice was signed between Hungary and Czechoslovakia ending the latter's crisis. Prague perceived the withdrawal of Hungarian troops as a victory.

War on Hungary's eastern front had receded, although the resumption of hostilities remained likely. And in fact Hungary launched an attack on 20 July triggering a crisis for Romania. Bucharest responded on the 24th with a counteroffensive, which quickly overcame Hungarian forces. And on 3 August Romanian troops occupied Budapest terminating this three-actor international crisis.

France, as noted, was very highly involved, the U.K. and the U.S. much less so. Russia provided statements of support to the communist regime in Hungary and relieved the pressure from Romania by diverting its attention to the northeast, sending an ultimatum on 1 May 1919, which triggered Romania's crisis over Bessarabia (see Case #10--Bessarabia).

There was no global organization at the time of this crisis.

References:

Hadju 1979; Juhász 1979; Pastor 1976; Szilassy 1971; Volgyes 1971.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


