CRISNO 365

SOUTH AFRICA CROSS BORDER RAID

Background:

Botswana, Zambia, and Zimbabwe experienced a crisis with the Union of South Africa in May 1986.

Background and Pre-Crisis The African National Congress (ANC), the largest organization of black South Africans opposed to the white regime in Pretoria, was founded in 1912. For almost half a century it pursued non-violence as the path to racial equality. In 1960 it adopted a strategy of military struggle against the apartheid system and was outlawed. Its campaign of guerrilla attacks from neighboring states, notably Botswana, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, reached a peak in 1985-86. On 15 May 1986 President Botha warned these three "front-line states," all of which were vulnerable to South Africa's military and economic power, of the risk of providing a sanctuary for ANC fighters.

Summary:

The crisis trigger for these three states was "punitive" air and commando raids by the South African Defence Forces on 19 May against selective ANC targets in Botswana, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. The U.S. condemned the attack the same day but persisted with its policy of "constructive engagement" and opposition to economic sanctions against South Africa.

On 20 May the six front-line states of southern Africa opposed to the apartheid regime--Angola, Mozambique, and Tanzania, along with the three targets of South Africa's cross-border raid--condemned the Pretoria regime and called upon the international community to impose mandatory, comprehensive, economic sanctions in order to bring about "peace and stability in the region." The OAU called for world pressure to prevent further Union of South Africa raids against its neighbors. The Secretary-General of the Arab League, too, urged sanctions. By contrast, South Africa's President Botha, clearly seeking U.S. understanding and support, compared the cross-border raid to the U.S. air raid on Libya two months earlier (see Case #363).

At the UN, the Secretary-General condemned the raids as violations of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the three target states and of the UN Charter. A Security Council draft resolution calling for mandatory economic sanctions, sponsored by Senegal on behalf of the OAU and by Zambia speaking for the front-line states, received a large majority but was vetoed by the U.K. and the U.S. on 23 May. After the Security Council's vote the crisis faded in late May. The USSR was marginally involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1985-86; AR 1986; ARB 1986; ARec 1986; Keesing's 1986.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


