CRISNO 273

NAGOMIA RAID

Background:

A Rhodesian "hot pursuit" operation precipitated a second crisis for Mozambique on 9 August 1976 ending in November of that year.

Pre-crisis In March 1976 President Machel had announced the closure of his country's borders with Rhodesia, and Mozambique was put on a war footing (see Case #267--Operation Thrasher). A sharp rise in guerrilla activity had increased Rhodesian hot pursuit operations since Rhodesia's war spread to its eastern border with Mozambique. Early in August guerrilla attacks on Rhodesian security forces occurred at a camp at Ruda.

Summary:

On 9 August 1976 Rhodesian forces raided a guerrilla camp at Nagomia, Mozambique, and triggered a crisis for that state: it was reported that more than 300 Zimbabweans were killed. This dramatic operation, in which, according to Mozambique sources, approximately 600 were killed, was the largest raid across the border by Rhodesia. Mozambique responded on 11 August with a 30-minute mortar attack by government troops on a white residential suburb in Umtali, Rhodesia, close to the Mozambique border. Mozambique requested an investigation by the UN High Commissioner for Refugees: it subsequently reported that the Pungwe camp on the Nagomia road was a refugee camp containing 8,000 black Rhodesians and that many women and children were among the 500 dead counted by UN officials. Rhodesia, on the other hand, produced captured documents on 29 August to provide evidence that the camp was a military base for several thousand Rhodesian African nationalist guerrillas. Further attacks on Mozambique territory were reported during August.

On 6 September the "Front-Line States" (then Botswana, Mozambique, Tanzania, and Zambia) met in Dar es Salaam to coordinate their defense policies. Secretary of State Kissinger arrived in the area on the 13th, and soon thereafter agreements were concluded for $10 million in U.S. aid to Mozambique. Mozambique's foreign minister addressed the UN General Assembly on 5 October. And at a meeting in November 1976 of the Inter-State Defense Commission, created by the Front-Line States, it was decided to organize joint action for their defense. This ended the crisis for Mozambique.

The USSR, which had been supplying military, medical, and other aid to the guerrillas, published a condemnation of Rhodesia in Pravda in August.

References:

ACR 1976; AD 1976; ARec 1976; ARB 1976; Keesing's 1976.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


