CRISNO 271

SUDAN COUP ATTEMPT

Background:

A Libyan-backed attempt to overthrow President Numeiri caused a crisis for Sudan from 2 to 15 July 1976.

Background With Sudan's independence on 1 January 1956 the predominantly Muslim north was united with the Christian and animist south. Regional diversity persisted in the postindependence period, with the most acute domestic problem being the question of Sudan's southern provinces, where open rebellion to the regime began in 1963. Harsh military action caused a large number of southern Sudanese to take refuge in neighboring countries. A guerrilla war began in January 1964. The unrest in the south was one of the main reasons for the bloodless military coup staged by a group of army officers under Colonel Numeiri in May 1969, which invested absolute powers in a National Revolutionary Council. Numeiri formally recognized southern autonomy and attempted to include southern political leaders in the government.

Negotiations with the Anya-Nya guerrilla organization, based in Uganda, began in 1971. The following year the civil war ended in Sudan, but hostilities in the south persisted. Relations between Sudan and Libya were strained. The former, together with Egypt and Sa'udi Arabia, was in the Western camp; Libya was strongly supported by the USSR. Libyan forces in Chad were another bone of contention between Libya, which wished them to remain, and Sudan, which advocated their withdrawal (see Case #243--Chad/Libya I, in Chad/Libya PC). Libya's leader, Qaddhafi, took advantage of Sudan's north/south problem and Numeiri's absence from the country to encourage an attempt to overthrow Sudan's government.

Summary:

Minutes after President Numeiri arrived at Khartoum airport, on his return from a visit to the United States and France, on 2 July 1976, grenades exploded in many parts of the city, and armed civilians advanced on the airport. The coup was suppressed by loyal government troops after some loss of life and considerable damage to property. Sudan accused Libya of designing the coup attempt and of an act of armed aggression: Libya, Numeiri claimed, provided training, arms, ammunition, and transport to the rebels. A complaint was lodged by Sudan in the Security Council on 4 July, and on the 6th Sudan broke off diplomatic relations with Libya. The crisis ended for Sudan with the signing of a joint Defense Agreement between Egypt and Sudan on 15 July: Libya was defined as the common enemy in the agreement.

The OAU and the Arab League were both involved in this crisis, although neither regional organization had any effect on the outcome: the latter urged President Numeiri to withdraw his complaint to the Security Council with a promise that his accusations against Libya would be investigated. The UN was inactive, as were both superpowers.

References:

ACR 1976; AR 1976; ARB 1976; ARec 1976; Nelson 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


