CRISNO 332

GALTAT ZEMMOUR I

Background:

Morocco experienced one of many crises over the Western Sahara from 13 October until 9 November 1981.

Pre-crisis From the outset Polisario favored a UN-supervised referendum, including the option of independence. Morocco's King Hassan rejected this idea and pressed for a settlement with Algeria, Polisario's long-standing protector. Algeria insisted that only direct negotiations between the parties could resolve this byproduct of colonialism. The UN and the OAU shared the Algerian approach to conflict resolution. The Western powers, by contrast, notably the U.S. and France, were primarily concerned about demoralization in the Moroccan army and, therefore, potential instability in a pro-Western North African state.

Early in July 1981 King Hassan offered to hold a referendum in Western Sahara. On the 12th Polisario reiterated the need to include the option of independence. An OAU implementation committee adopted a compromise resolution on 26 August regarding the modalities of the referendum. Morocco demurred.

Summary:

A crisis for Morocco was triggered on 13 October 1981 by a large-scale Polisario attack--3,000 troops, tanks, and armored personnel carriers--on its garrison at Galtat Zemmour, 25 miles from the border with Mauritania. Morocco accused Polisario of launching the attack from Mauritania. The latter denied any involvement in the crisis.

The same day King Hassan informed the presidents of France and the U.S., the UN, and the OAU of the attack and accused his neighbors--Algeria and Libya--of supporting Polisario. On 19 October he assured Mauritania that Morocco would not intrude into its territory; but his field commander acknowledged doing so in "hot pursuit" of the Polisario guerrillas who had sought sanctuary in Mauritania after their attack.

During 10 days of fighting the Polisario guerrillas shot down three Moroccan planes, allegedly using Soviet-type SAM missiles, and put to flight Moroccan troops at their Galtat Zemmour base and another base to the southwest. The crisis ended by a unilateral act of Morocco: it withdrew from these bases on 7 and 9 November 1981.

Mediation efforts on the part of the OAU had proven ineffective. On 29 October, OAU Secretary-General Edem Kodjo visited the disputed area, where he spoke separately with Polisario Secretary-General Abdelaziz and King Hassan of Morocco. OAU Chairman Daniel Arap Moi also sent messages to King Hassan and President Chadli Benjedid of Algeria, encouraging them to cooperate fully with an OAU implementation committee. However, the OAU efforts seemed to not be a factor in Morocco’s withdrawal.

Soviet President Brezhnev, on 5 November, denied a Moroccan charge on 26 October that the USSR had provided SAM missiles to Polisario. The U.S. adopted a pro-Morocco "neutral" stance: on 23 October its assistant secretary of state for Africa affirmed a U.S. role in resolving the Polisario/Morocco conflict because it had relations with all the parties; but in early November a U.S. military delegation visited Morocco and reiterated its support.

References:

ACR 1981-82; AR 1981, 1982; ARB 1981, 1982; ARec 1981, 1982; Keesing's 1981, 1982; WA 1981, 1982.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


