CRISNO 53

ALEXANDRETTA

Background:

A lengthy five-stage international crisis over Alexandretta began on 9 September 1936 and lasted until 23 June 1939, with Turkey and France as crisis actors.

Background The Sanjak of Alexandretta (Hatay) is a district in northwestern Syria that became a part of France's Syria Mandate in 1921, with strong opposition from Turkey. The territory, which included a valuable harbor, has a large Turkish population and had been the subject of negotiation in 1926. Turkey considered the Sanjak and port of Alexandretta important to its security and objected to Arab (Syrian) rule over Turks. France maintained that separating Hatay from Syria would mean the latter's dismemberment. In addition, as guardian of the area, France could not risk the loss of reputation and prestige among other states. On the other hand, events in Europe preoccupied France, and it later looked to Turkey as a potential ally against Germany and Italy or, at least, as a neutral state.

Summary:

On 9 September 1936 a crisis for Turkey was triggered by the publication of the contents of a Treaty of Alliance between France and Syria, which identified the Sanjak of Alexandretta as part of Syrian territory. President Kemal Atatürk responded by promising his people on 2 November that Hatay would be returned to Turkey. The dispute was brought before the League of Nations by Turkey's foreign minister, who also expressed a willingness to enter into direct negotiations with France. On 7 January 1937 the Turks moved troops to the border, triggering a crisis for France. France responded on the 22nd by entering into talks with Turkey and welcoming League intervention. On the 27th both agreed to an autonomous government for the region, which remained nominally part of Syria. This ended the first stage of the crisis over Alexandretta. The French Mandate was to end in three years, with Syria and Lebanon becoming independent states, and safeguards were planned for the minorities.

The manner in which the agreement was reached encouraged Turkey to reopen the issue. On 3 June 1937 Turkish troops were again sent to the border when the French imposed a curfew in Alexandretta because of local disturbances. France responded on the 7th with an offer to hold direct negotiations in Paris. The matter was brought to the League of Nations by France and Turkey, and two core documents were envisaged. The League was to draw up a Statute providing for protection of minorities and Turkey's economic rights. A Fundamental Law was to define for the Sanjak autonomous governing institutions. They were both ratified in May 1937. A Treaty of Amity was signed by the adversaries on 4 July 1937, ending the second stage of the crisis.

Turkey, still dissatisfied, threatened France with war on 29 October 1937 if new demands for changes in the electoral regulations for the Sanjak were not met. On 16 December France once more opened negotiations with Turkey and agreed to the demands on 29 January 1938, ending the third stage of the crisis over Alexandretta.

On 4 June 1938 Turkey raised its demands to include Turkish participation in the military control of the Sanjak and moved its 7th Division from its base at Adana toward the frontier. That day France responded by holding talks with the Turkish ambassador in Paris. Further negotiations were carried out on 13 June, and the French cabinet instructed General Huntziger to yield. On 4 July 1938 another treaty of friendship was signed between France and Turkey.

On 5 April 1939 a rumor of Turkish annexation was strengthened by Turkish military maneuvers in the Sanjak and a further concentration of troops near the border. France reacted the same day by dispatching a warship to the area and strengthening its troop positions. Turkey demanded the cession of Hatay. Finally, on 23 June 1939 the crisis as a whole ended with a Declaration of Mutual Assistance and France's acquiescence in the transfer of Hatay to Turkey.

The League of Nations, as noted, played a key role in the early stages of this lengthy crisis. It drafted the Statute of the Sanjak, governing its relations with a future government of Syria, and the Fundamental Law of the Sanjak. It sent a commission and observers but withdrew them on 26 June 1938. The League commission also drafted the Electoral Law and fixed a date for elections. Elections were not held under League supervision but under Turkish and French military control. The U.K. pressured France to end the conflict and to yield to Turkey. Protests were made about French concessions to Turkey by Italy, Yugoslavia, and Iraq.

References:

Clough 1970; Hourani 1946; Kayali 1976; Kilic 1959; Longrigg 1958; Shaw and Shaw 1977; Tamkov 1976; Tibawi 1969; Vere-Hodge 1950; Walters 1952; Ziadeh 1957.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


