CRISNO 258

FINAL NORTH VIETNAM OFFENSIVE

Background:

The final crisis for South Vietnam and Cambodia during the long war in Indochina occurred from 14 December 1974 to 30 April 1975.

Background Civil wars in Cambodia and Vietnam persisted after the United States formally withdrew its forces in 1973. The U.S. continued to supply economic and military aid to the governments of both Cambodia and South Vietnam. Some U.S. advisors stayed in the area. By the end of 1974 forces of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia and the Vietcong and North Vietnamese army in South Vietnam had increased their activities in preparation for a final offensive.

Summary:

The trigger for South Vietnam occurred on 14 December 1974, with the beginning of the North Vietnam offensive. For Cambodia, the crisis was triggered on 1 January 1975 with the launching of a major Khmer Rouge offensive. Several areas in Cambodia were lost and recaptured as fighting raged between the two sides. On 17 February Cambodia responded with a counteroffensive. The South Vietnamese response was a combination of continued fighting, a request to the U.S. for aid, and a tactical retreat instigated by President Thieu on 11 March. On 17 April the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, fell to the rebels, forcing the government to flee and marking the end of Cambodia's last crisis in the Vietnam War. Meanwhile, North Vietnamese troops pressed on with their offensive as the South Vietnam army retreated toward Saigon. Thousands of refugees fled before the advancing troops, clogging the roads and filling the ports and airports. Saigon fell on 30 April, ending the crisis--and independent existence--for South Vietnam.

U.S. involvement took the form of aid to both governments. Despite special appeals to Congress on 28 January by President Ford and, subsequently, by Secretary of State Kissinger, Congress decided to cut aid to both Cambodia and South Vietnam. Assistance was given to Vietnamese refugees; and by the end of the crisis U.S. activity was limited to evacuating U.S. citizens. UN involvement was confined to calls for a cease-fire and the fact-finding activities of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.

References:

See sources for Cases #225 and #246.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


