CRISNO 85

BARBAROSSA

Background:

The Soviet Union's existence crisis arising from the German invasion culminated in a massive attack on Moscow. It lasted from 22 June to 5 December 1941.

Pre-crisis The Italo-German campaign in the Balkans ended at the end of May 1941 with a greatly strengthened Axis position. As a result of the conquest of Greece and Crete, the Aegean Sea became unsafe for British ships (see Case #83--Balkan Invasions). On 13 April Soviet and Japanese diplomats signed a Non-Aggression Pact at Moscow. In late May representatives from Finland, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria met with the German high command to coordinate plans to invade Russia. Hitler floated a rumor of Soviet intentions to attack Germany as a pretext for his own premeditated designs against the USSR.

Summary:

On 22 June 1941 the Germans, in a surprise attack, invaded the Soviet Union along a front of 2,000 miles, triggering a crisis for the USSR. Romanian and Finnish troops participated actively with those of Nazi Germany, while Hungary and Bulgaria provided free passage for German troops on their way east. The Soviets responded the same day with fierce resistance but were soon forced into a slow retreat. Prime Minister Churchill promised that the U.K. would extend all possible aid to the Soviets. A Mutual Assistance Pact was concluded between them on 13 July. During the month of July Riga, Latvia's capital, and Smolensk were captured by the Germans. On 19 August the Germans claimed all Ukrainian territory west of the Dnieper River, except Odessa, and on 4 September the siege of Leningrad began. During September Axis forces continued their advance, and by the end of the month the Germans had entered the Crimea on the southern end of the front and had commenced the battle for Moscow. This triggered a short but intense IWC for the USSR, which ended on 29 October, when the Germans were hurled back at the gates of the Soviet capital. Before then, in mid-October, the Soviet government had transferred its headquarters further east, to Kuybyshev.

On 30 October the United States expedited Soviet purchases of promised U.S. supplies by extending the USSR a credit of one billion dollars. This was later supplemented by a Master Lend-Lease Agreement in 1942. In early December the Soviets began a major counterthrust before the gates of Moscow. On 5 December the German high command decided to halt operations on the eastern front for the winter because German troops were exhausted, short of ammunition, suffering from the cold, and beset by logistical problems. The German halt outside of Moscow on 5 December 1941 ended the first stage of Germany's Russian campaign and, with it, the Soviet intrawar crisis over the fate of its capital, as well as the Barbarossa crisis as a whole. Hitler had not fulfilled his objective--defeat of the Soviet Union within three months. Japan adhered to its Pact with the USSR and remained strictly neutral, but two days later launched the Pacific war with an attack on Pearl Harbor (see Case #88).

References:

Bullock 1962; Calvocoressi and Wint 1972; Cecil 1975; Churchill 1950a; de Gaulle 1971; Glantz and House 1995; Palmer 1973; Weinberg 1954, 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


