CRISNO 168

BERLIN DEADLINE

Background:

The crisis over the Berlin Deadline began on 27 November 1958 and lasted until 15 September 1959. The crisis actors were France, the U.K., the U.S., West Germany, East Germany, and the USSR.

Background Since the end of World War II Berlin--and Germany as a whole--had been administered as four zones by the victorious powers: France, the U.K., the United States, and the Soviet Union. The Berlin Blockade crisis occurred in 1948-49 (see Case #123). An abortive East German Uprising took place in 1953 (see Case #141, in Europe: Non-PCs). The crises of 1956 in Poland and Hungary (see Cases #154 and #155, in Europe: Non-PCs) caused further apprehension in the Kremlin about the appeal of West Berlin for East Berliners and East Germans generally, offering them a haven from the rigors of socialism as practiced in the DDR. West Germany's role within NATO and its extensive rearmament were of primary concern to the Soviet Union.

Pre-crisis In the summer and autumn of 1957 the USSR demonstrated new missile and rocket capabilities. In response, the U.S. proposed sending tactical nuclear weapons and intermediate-range ballistic missiles to Europe, including Germany, but under U.S. control. This was transformed into formal Western policy on 15 December, in the form of a NATO foreign ministers resolution. This reinforced Moscow's deep mistrust of the intentions of the U.S., the Western bloc, and West Germany vis-à-vis East Germany and the Communist bloc generally. But Moscow did not yet manifest crisis behavior.

Moscow first tried to prevent this ominous development by calling for a nuclear-free zone in Central Europe, along with conventional force reductions and measures to prevent surprise attacks in Europe. It also announced unilateral troop reductions. The Kremlin then proposed a summit conference and threatened to deploy ballistic missiles in East Germany, Czechoslovakia, and Poland if NATO would not agree to the Soviet proposals. When none of the above had any effect on Western determination to rearm Germany, Khrushchev decided upon harsher measures. In a speech on 10 November 1958 he announced that the Soviet Union intended to turn over control of East Berlin, including all access routes to West Berlin, to East Germany (the German Democratic Republic or DDR), thus forcing the West to recognize and to deal with East Germany. High tension, normal in the Cold War, was approaching crisis intensity.

Summary:

Khrushchev, increasingly concerned about publicly announced U.S.-NATO plans to nuclearize the East/West conflict in Europe, especially the West German army, and to undermine the DDR, and under mounting pressure from East Germany's Walter Ulbricht, initiated a crisis for France, the U.K., the U.S., and West Germany by an ultimatum on 27 November 1958. A Note to the four Western ambassadors in Moscow proposed that West Berlin be demilitarized and declared a "Free City," a status that would be guaranteed by the Western powers, the Soviet Union, and, perhaps, the United Nations. If no agreement could be reached on this proposal within six months, the Soviet government would turn over to the DDR full sovereignty over East Berlin, including access routes to West Berlin. At a press conference the same day the Soviet leader denied that the six months constituted an ultimatum but stated that Moscow did indeed intend to carry out its proposals; and should the West use force against the Ulbricht regime, the USSR was committed militarily to the defense of East Germany as a Warsaw Pact ally. On 11 December the Tass news agency warned that a Western attempt to force its way into West Berlin by land, an option considered in the 1948 Berlin Blockade crisis (see Case #123), would lead to war. Foreign Minister Gromyko repeated the warning two weeks later.

After several rounds of negotiations among the three Western powers, their joint response, on 14 December 1958, was a communiqué that rejected the Soviet Note and its repudiation of USSR obligations to the Western powers to maintain the status quo in Berlin and vis-à-vis the access routes. After approval by the NATO Council, the formal replies of France, the U.K., and the United States were presented to Moscow on 31 December. West Germany's reply was presented on 5 January 1959.

The firm Western response triggered a crisis for both East Germany and the Soviet Union: a higher value threat--the continued viability of the DDR; a (self-imposed) time pressure, the 27 May 1959 deadline; and the distinctly higher probability of military hostilities with the West over the future status of West Berlin.

On 7 January 1959 the East German government announced its support for the Soviet proposal. On 10 January the Soviet Union responded to the reply of the Western powers by presenting a draft of a peace treaty with Germany to all countries who fought against Germany between 1939 and 1945. And on 16 February the three Western powers and West Germany sent replies with NATO approval, counterproposing a Foreign Ministers' Conference to deal with the problem of Germany. Moscow agreed to a Foreign Ministers' Conference for 2 March, but the proposed agenda was unacceptable to the West. The Soviet Union also demanded a summit conference for the end of April.

Further negotiations for lower and higher level conferences took place among the crisis actors. The UN Secretary-General attempted conciliation. On 19 March Khrushchev revealed his willingness to accede to a Foreign Ministers' Conference on 11 May if the agenda were limited to Berlin and a German peace treaty, implying the need for a summit meeting to discuss the larger issues of disarmament and European defense. This was made formal in Notes dated 28 March 1959. On 30 March the Soviet Union formally agreed to a May conference, in return for U.S. agreement to a summit conference the following year.

Nonetheless, the crisis escalated. Still suspicious of Soviet intentions, the U.S. began to reinforce its combat and support units in Europe, and U.S. transport planes prepared for an airlift. In May, as the deadline of the six months from 27 November approached, U.S. aircraft carriers with nuclear weapons aboard were redeployed to the Mediterranean, and marines were alerted for rapid movement to West Berlin.

An interim agreement was signed on 3 August 1959, after 25 sessions of the Foreign Ministers Conference, when President Eisenhower visited Khrushchev in Moscow. The formal agreement was signed on a return visit to Washington on 15 September, the crisis termination date for all the participants. The agreement called for the banning of all nuclear weapons and missiles from Berlin and the limiting of Anglo-French-U.S. forces in the city. Negotiations on Germany would be resumed.

References:

See sources for Case #185; and Ambrose 1984; Barraclough 1962, 1964; Embrée 1963; Harrison 1993a, 1993b; Hoopes 1973; Macmillan 1971; Richter 1994; Slusser 1978; Trachtenberg 1991; Zubok 1993.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


