CRISNO 292

SHABA II

Background:

A second invasion of Shaba from Angola created a crisis for Zaire, Angola, Belgium, France, and the U.S. from 11 May to 30 July 1978.

Summary:

After a year of reorganizing and strengthening their forces, Katangan rebels invaded Shaba on 11 May 1978, triggering a crisis for Zaire. Zaire accused Angola of harboring the rebels and threatened to retaliate, triggering a crisis for Angola the same day. During the ensuing four days killings occurred on the part of both the rebels and the Zairian army. President Mobutu called for intervention by Belgium, France, Morocco, China, and the U.S. in order to quell the insurgents. In addition, he accused the governments of Algeria, Angola, Cuba, Libya, the Soviet Union, and Zambia of supporting, training, and actively fighting alongside the rebels.

On 14 May a crisis was triggered for Belgium, France, and the U.S. when their governments were informed of a massacre of French and Belgian citizens working in the mines, and of the danger facing the white community in Zaire. The U.S. viewed the events in Zaire as threatening its influence in the international system. On 16 May it responded with a decision to mount an airlift to carry foreign troops to the battleground. The French response, on 17 May, was a decision by President Giscard d'Estaing, together with the foreign and defense ministers and the chief of staff, to dispatch French troops to Zaire. Belgium, too, decided on the 18th to send troops. The foreign troops arrived in Zaire on the 19th, airlifted in American planes. That day, at the UN, Zaire accused Angola of aggression. However, the issue was not brought up for discussion in the Security Council since it was claimed that the dispute was an African matter.

The tide of battle turned with the intervention of foreign forces. Within two days Belgian troops had evacuated those persons who wished to leave the Shaba area. On 22 May the crisis ended for the United States and Belgium as Belgian forces began to withdraw from Shaba. French troops assumed a larger burden of the fighting. They occupied the towns around Kolwezi and cleared the area on 25 May, terminating the crisis for France. An African force, consisting of soldiers from Morocco, Senegal, and Zaire, took over from the French and the Belgian forces on 4 June. On the l0th Angola's major response to the crisis took the form of an announcement by President Neto that the incursion by FLNC rebels across Angola's border would be halted and that any Zairian troops crossing the border into Angola would be disarmed. Angola also denied any Soviet involvement in the invasion. By the end of June all foreign troops had left the conflict area.

Throughout July, a number of mediation attempts occurred, involving Deputy U.S. Representative to the UN Donald McHenry and Presiden Yhombi Opango of the Congo. McHenry had arrived in Angola on 28 June with the dual strategy of negotiating a rapprochement between Angola and Zaire and pressing for Namibian independence (related to the concurrent crisis 291). McHenry arranged for a series of talks between Zaire and Angola that opened in Brazzaville on 15 July under the chairmanship of Opango. The opening round of talks was one of rapprochement between the two combatants. A second round of talks occurred under the mediation of Opango and McHenry from 21-22 July, and a final round took place from 20-30 July. In the final round, Mobutu and Neto reached the Brazzaville Agreement on 30 July, which terminated the crisis for both sides. Zaire vowed to end border incursions and halt all aid to UNITA, FLEC and the FNLA, while Angola similarly pledged to disarm the FLNC and reopen the Benguela railroad to facilitate Zaire copper shipment for Atlantic export. Moreover, the two leaders promised to repatriate 500,000 Zairian and Angolan refugees and prisoners.

References:

See sources for Case #277; and ACR 1978; ARec 1978; ARB 1978.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


