CRISNO 299

TAN TAN

Background:

A Polisario attack on the Moroccan town of Tan Tan triggered a crisis for Morocco on 28 January 1979. The crisis faded in March of that year.

Pre-crisis On 10 July 1978 the government of Mauritania, under President Mokhtar Ould Daddah, was overthrown in a bloodless coup led by Lieutenant-Colonel Mustapha Ould Mohammed Salek. Polisario immediately announced a unilateral cease-fire in Mauritania and entered into peace talks with that country. Concentration of activities by Polisario then moved against Moroccan troops stationed in the northern section of the disputed territory.

By the fall of 1978 Polisario raids began to creep closer to southern Morocco, and in September a group of guerrillas carried out a spectacular raid 70 kilometers into Moroccan territory. Morocco appealed to the UN, without success. On 27 December Algerian President Houari Boumedienne died. He had been viewed by Polisario as one of its main sponsors and supporters and a source of political, military, and ideological strength. His death gave rise to a series of Polisario offensives that were termed "Houari Boumedienne Attacks." In December alone, Morocco reportedly lost 600 troops.

Mauritania's involvement in the Saharan conflict had resulted in serious economic difficulties. With the overthrow of President Ould Daddah, Mauritania began to pull out of the Western Sahara conflict in 1979. On 1 January 1979 Colonel Salek of Mauritania spoke of his support for the right of self-determination for all peoples. Shortly thereafter he announced that he had asked Morocco to withdraw all its forces from Mauritania by March 1979. More serious Polisario attacks in Morocco occurred on 16 and 17 January 1979.

Summary:

On 28 January Polisario forces attacked Tan Tan, a garrison town, air force base, and convoy assembly point 40 kilometers inside Moroccan territory. Fighting continued for three days as the Moroccan forces in the area resisted and ultimately succeeded in defeating the invaders. King Hassan sent his top military advisor to the area and summoned other military officers to a meeting in Marrakesh. On 2 February Morocco's Foreign Minister, Boucetta, stated, in a message to his Algerian counterpart, Bouteflika, that Morocco did not intend to exercise its "right of pursuit." Morocco's major response, on 8 March, was an announcement by King Hassan that he had decided to establish a Defense Council, comprising two members of each political organization or party, to deal with the Saharan situation which, he said, had reached the "limit of the intolerable." The Moroccan Chamber of Representatives approved the king's decision and adopted a declaration that recommended that the government exercise its right of pursuit and mount retaliatory operations whenever Moroccan territory was the object of military aggression.

The crisis faded sometime in March, with a temporary halt in Polisario activities.

Neither the U.S. nor the USSR, nor the UN, was involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1979; ARB 1979; WA 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


