CRISNO 301

NORTH-SOUTH YEMEN II

Background:

War between North and South Yemen triggered a crisis for both from 24 February to 30 March 1979.

Pre-crisis In the years following their 1972 crisis, relations between the Yemen Arab Republic (YAR) in the north and the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) in the south oscillated between statements of friendship and calls for unity, and expressions of hostility and border clashes. After the assassination of the YAR's president in June 1978 there was a sharp rise in tension between the two states, and relations with the PDRY were severed. In the following month, both heads of state were killed within days of each other. Accusations and counteraccusations of murder and penetration across each other's border followed. Despite PLO leader Yasser Arafat's attempt at mediation in September, serious border incidents continued, with both sides massing troops along the frontier. In December the YAR sent troops to restore control over some villages on the border. Localized clashes escalated into open hostility as the YAR charged the PDRY with training saboteurs, harboring foreign troops from Cuba, Ethiopia, and the USSR, and having aggressive designs. The PDRY rejected these accusations, claiming the YAR had made open declarations of war. Renewed attempts by Iraq, Kuwait, Syria, and the PLO to ease the tension and stop border clashes were made during the first half of February 1979.

Summary:

On 24 February 1979 North Yemen (the YAR) informed the U.S. ambassador that South Yemen (the PDRY) had launched a three-pronged attack across the border, with Soviet assistance, while the latter maintained it was successfully repulsing an attack launched by North Yemeni forces and had penetrated into the YAR capturing border towns. North Yemen called for an emergency meeting of the League of Arab States (LAS) to discuss South Yemen's "aggression" and appealed to the United States for arms.

Sa'udi Arabia placed its armed forces on a state of alert on the 28th. The Sa'udis, while remaining a staunch ally and supporter of North Yemen, also wished to improve their relations with the PDRY and sought to preserve the military balance in the area.

That day, too, the U.S. announced a speedup of delivery of Sa'udi-financed U.S. arms to North Yemen. This move reflected, at least in part, the profound impact of the Iranian revolution and a fear that Yemen would be the next target in a Soviet plan to dominate the region. The USSR was the main supplier of arms and weapons, directly, or indirectly through Cuba, to South Yemen.

On 2 March mediation efforts by the LAS – specifically involving Iraq, Syria, Jordan and Kuwait – succeeded in bringing about an agreement on a cease-fire to begin the next day. Nevertheless, fighting continued for two weeks after the 3 March agreement. On the 5th the LAS adopted a resolution calling for a cease-fire and agreed to form a follow-up committee to supervise its implementation and work toward normalizing relations between the two adversaries. A meeting in San'a between the chiefs of staff of both Yemens on 16 March resulted in a second cease-fire agreement. The withdrawal of YAR and PDRY troops began on the 18th and was completed the next day. The presidents of both states arrived in Kuwait on the 28th, and, under the auspices of Kuwaiti mediation, on the 30th they announced a provisional agreement to unite their countries, thereby terminating the crisis. (With the beginning of the unity talks after the Kuwait summit, a new atmosphere prevailed--both Yemens abstained from public accusations, and propaganda ceased immediately.)

The UN remained aloof during this crisis.

(The two Yemens united in 1990. In 1994, a full-scale war erupted between the two former independent states of (North) Yemen and South Yemen: the latter tried to secede but was not successful. It was in substance, though not in form, an international crisis in the still unresolved conflict between long-standing Yemeni adversaries.)

References:

Bidwell 1983; Bissell 1978; Garthoff 1985; MECS 1978-79; MEJ Chronology 1979; Peterson 1981, 1982; Safran 1988; Stookey 1982.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


