CRISNO 375

SAND WALL

Background:

Morocco, along with Mauritania and Algeria, experienced a crisis from 25 February to 4 May 1987 over the "Sand Wall" Morocco constructed across Western Sahara.

Background and Pre-crisis In February 1976, early in the protracted conflict over Western (former Spanish) Sahara, the Polisario Front proclaimed an independent Saharan Arab Democratic Republic (SADR or SAHRAWI) (see Case #261). Despite strenuous efforts by Morocco to abort the incipient political entity, the SADR was recognized by many African states and was admitted to the OAU as a full member in 1984. This led to Morocco's withdrawal from Africa's regional organization.

As part of its defensive "wall strategy" in the ongoing war against Polisario, Morocco began in mid-February 1987 to build a new sand wall, the sixth: it was designed to go further south along the Mauritanian border in order to prevent Polisario direct access to the Atlantic Ocean, unless it passed through Mauritanian territory.

Summary:

Heavy fighting broke out in Western Sahara on 25 February 1987 between Morocco's armed forces and the Algerian-backed Polisario Front, in the area between Farsia and Mahbes near the Algerian border. That triggered a new crisis for Morocco in the protracted conflict over Western Sahara.

In late February and March both sides claimed victory on the battlefield. Morocco accused Polisario of launching an offensive in order to "bring down the defense wall and get a foothold inside the wall enclosure" and claimed success "along the whole defense line," including progress in the building of the sixth defensive wall in Oued Eddahab Province. Polisario reported that "hundreds of Moroccan soldiers were put out of action" and claimed failure in Morocco's defensive wall strategy.

On 4 March the SADR ambassador in Algeria announced that an assassination attempt against the President of the SADR, Mohamed Abd-ul Aziz, planned for 27 February, had failed. He accused Morocco's interior minister of being behind the plot. The official Algerian Press Service (APS) condemned Morocco for its trying to "bring about the physical elimination of SAHRAWI leaders." On the 17th Morocco denied any involvement in the assassination attempt.

In mid-April 1987 the new Moroccan sand wall impinged on Mauritania's territorial integrity since Polisario forces would be obliged to pass through Mauritania in order to reach the Atlantic Ocean: the Moroccan wall, at one point, was only 400 meters from a key Mauritanian railway line, used to transport iron ore from the mines at Zerouate to Mauritania's commercial capital, Nouadhibou.

This development catalyzed a crisis for Mauritania and, as a spillover effect, for Algeria as well. The likelihood of new clashes on its territory triggered a crisis for Mauritania in mid-April. That threat to Mauritania, in turn, increased the danger of a wider conflict involving Algeria, thus triggering a crisis at the same time for Algeria as well.

On 13 April Mauritania delivered a strong warning to Morocco over the new sand wall close to its border; specifically, that the wall obliged Mauritania to "give priority to ways of defending itself." The Mauritanian statement, however, reaffirmed its neutrality in the war over Western Sahara.

Morocco, through its commander in the southern zone, tried to reassure Mauritania by claiming that there was a no-man's-land between the borders of Morocco and Mauritania and that the latter's railway installations would not be impaired by the wall.

Algeria, too, expressed concern over the "dangerous situation" created by Morocco's new sand wall, blaming Morocco for undermining the stability of the region and for acting against the efforts to solve the conflict. Its foreign ministry issued a statement that declared total support for Mauritania's territorial integrity and for the "security of its towns and economic installations which are now directly exposed to military operations linked to the conflict imposed on the Western Saharan people." On 26 April President Chadli Ben-Jedid of Algeria visited Mauritania and promised support for Mauritania's territorial integrity.

Notwithstanding this verbal tension, the Moroccan/Algerian dimension of this episode in the protracted conflict de-escalated quickly. On 4 May King Hassan of Morocco and President Ben-Jedid of Algeria met on the Algerian-Moroccan border under the auspices of King Fahd of Sa'udi Arabia. King Hassan and President Ben-Jedid met briefly for fifteen minutes, King Fahd met at length separately with both parties, and then all three held a 75-minute meeting. The summit was held in order to defuse tension on the border and did not attempt to resolve the whole Western Sahara conflict. They agreed only to continue contacts to "solve the existing problems." Following the meeting, both Hassan and Bendjedid issued statements to pursue meetings in the future and work to resolve problems. Although their summit meeting did not generate a formal agreement or any solution to the conflict, it reduced tension between Morocco and Algeria and terminated the crisis for all three state participants.

Before the meeting Polisario expressed doubt about King Fahd's role as a mediator since it perceived Sa'udi Arabia as the major source of financial aid to Morocco; and it demanded a direct dialogue with Morocco. Algeria, as usual, backed Polisario's demand for direct negotiations between Morocco and the SADR. A U.S. State Department spokesman said on the 4th that the U.S. "applauded" the meeting, the first one between Morocco and Algeria since 1983.

The UN and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1987-88; AR 1987; ARB 1987; ARec 1987; WA 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


