CRISNO 98

GREEK CIVIL WAR I

Background:

A crisis for the U.K. over Greece lasted from 3 December 1944 to 15 January 1945.

Background After the withdrawal of the German occupation forces from Greece in October 1944, there was an intense struggle for power among Greece's political factions. The British, who were determined to impose a settlement that would ensure stability and their strong presence in the country, were in direct opposition to Greece's Communists. The Caserta Agreement, signed on 20 September 1944, called for all guerrilla forces in the country to be placed under Greek government command, headed by British General Scobie.

Summary:

The crisis trigger for the U.K. was an exchange of fire between Greek Communist demonstrators and the police on 3 December 1944. This touched off a violent civil war that was perceived by Britain as a threat to its influence in the international system. More specifically, a communist takeover in Greece would virtually end all British influence in the region. Prime Minister Churchill responded the next day by ordering General Scobie to intervene with his forces and to open fire if necessary. Churchill flew to Athens on 24 December in an effort to bring the various factions together and settle the crisis. In the course of serious clashes, British and Greek troops succeeded in driving the Greek Communists out of Athens.

The U.K.'s crisis ended on 15 January 1945 with the implementation of a truce agreement. The United States was not active in this crisis, though Churchill and Roosevelt corresponded regularly. State Department criticism of British intervention was viewed unfavorably by Churchill. On the other hand, USSR inactivity was viewed favorably because it meant that Stalin was living up to the terms of the "spheres of influence" agreement struck at an earlier meeting in Moscow. The civil war in Greece erupted into another crisis for Britain in 1946 (see Case #112--Greek Civil War II, in 1946-47, in Multiregional PCs: East/West).

The League of Nations was moribund by 1944-45.

References:

See sources for Case #112.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


