CRISNO 51

REMILITARIZATION OF THE RHINELAND

Background:

The international crisis over Germany's remilitarization of the Rhineland took place between 7 March and 16 April 1936. The actors were Belgium, Czechoslovakia, France, Poland, Romania, the U.K., and Yugoslavia.

Background The international status of the Rhineland, an area separating Germany from France and Belgium, had been determined at Versailles at the end of World War I, and in the Locarno Pact of 1 December 1925. Germany was forbidden to maintain or construct any fortifications either on the left bank of the Rhine or on the right bank to a line drawn 50 kilometers to the east of the river. The Locarno Pact pledged Germany, France, and Belgium to nonaggression and pacific settlement. It guaranteed established frontiers and the demilitarization of the Rhineland. If the Reich armed this demilitarized zone, France was legally authorized to declare it an unprovoked act of aggression, and Britain, Italy, and Belgium would all be bound to come at once to France's aid. France had secured itself by alliances with Poland and the Little Entente states (Czechoslovakia, Romania, and Yugoslavia) which had built their security against German aggressiveness upon these military alliances with France. The Germans claimed that France's 1935 military pact with the Soviet Union, exclusively directed against Germany, was a violation of the Locarno Pact. Hitler proceeded to fulfill his election promises when plans were laid for Germany's reoccupation of the Rhineland.

Summary:

On 7 March 1936 three German battalions entered and occupied the demilitarized zone of the Rhineland, triggering a crisis for Belgium, Czechoslovakia, France, Poland, Romania, the U.K., and Yugoslavia. The border countries, France and Belgium, had assumed since the end of World War I that the Rhineland would remain permanently demilitarized. Britain had formally obligated itself to protect them. Moreover, it had been a cornerstone of British foreign policy that a threat to France and Belgium was, by nature of their geographic proximity, also a threat to the U.K. The Little Entente states and Poland, which were now obliged to act in France's defense, perceived their own safety and security to be threatened in the event of France's collapse. Each actor in the Remilitarization of the Rhineland crisis sought a pacific solution that might condemn Germany overtly but at the same time allow for a negotiable settlement.

France responded immediately with a cabinet decision on 7 March to act through the League and consult the Locarno guarantors in order to achieve a German withdrawal; a military solution was rejected as too dangerous. Czechoslovakia also responded that day with a declaration to conform its attitude exactly to that of France in every contingency. The following day Romania and Yugoslavia responded more reticently: they suggested to France that a peaceful solution to the crisis be sought but refused to commit themselves in the event of a forceful confrontation with Germany or the imposition of economic sanctions. The British responded on 9 March with a cabinet decision to consult with Hitler, the Locarno powers, and the League Council in the hope of negotiating a coordinated compromise settlement. A military response and economic sanctions were rejected. On 10 March Belgium's response was contained in a statement by its prime minister that it would demand at least a partial restoration of the status quo. He intimated that economic sanctions should be used; but when it became clear that this was not viewed favorably by the other Locarno powers it was withdrawn. That day, too, Poland declared that the Franco-Polish treaty covered unprovoked aggression against France proper, and as the remilitarization of the Rhineland did not fall into that category it would not act forcefully in the present crisis or support economic sanctions against Germany.

Members of the League Council began meetings in London on 13 March. On the 19th all members of the Council except Germany endorsed a White Paper condemning German action in the Rhineland as a threat to European unity. The Council proposed the appointment of a committee to recommend measures to be adopted to safeguard peace. Tentative solutions were put forth concerning the partial withdrawal of German troops and the establishment of an international force in a new and narrow demilitarized zone of 20 kilometers between Germany, France, and Belgium. They were rejected outright by Hitler, who threatened that a punitive resolution by the League Council would be regarded by Germany as an unfriendly act. This specter of war, together with Italy's reluctance to cooperate and Germany's veto, finally paralyzed the League completely: the Council meeting dissolved on 23 March 1936, terminating the crisis for Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia. The crisis for France and the U.K. lasted until 16 April as France continued to insist that Britain compensate it for the loss of security on its eastern border. On 2 April Britain agreed to hold staff talks with the French on 15 and 16 April. These talks concluded the punitive phase of the crisis; and from that point on no further demands were made directly to Berlin over the Rhineland issue.

Involved in the Remilitarization of the Rhineland crisis were the seven crisis actors, along with Germany, Italy, and the Soviet Union. Italy, although a guarantor of the Locarno Pact, had moved away from the Western powers in the ensuing decade and had developed closer ties with Germany. The Soviet Union did not depend upon France's military strength for its security. Indeed Soviet decision makers perceived that, should the crisis lead to armed conflict, it would be located in Western Europe and would not affect the USSR. As for the U.S., Secretary of State Hull made it plain that he considered the Rhineland remilitarization to be a European development in which the United States was not involved.

A far-reaching effect of the Remilitarization of the Rhineland crisis on Belgium was the termination of the Franco-Belgian treaty of 1920 and Belgium's formal declaration of neutrality in October 1936. More generally, Hitler's first major gamble in international politics succeeded: the Versailles powers acquiesced, paving the way for Munich in 1938 (see Case #64, in Czechoslovakia/ Germany PC) and, the next year, the outbreak of World War II (see Case #74, in Multiregional PCs: World War II)

References:

Bullock 1962; Emmerson 1977; Schuman 1939; Shirer 1964; Taylor 1966; Walters 1952; Weinberg 1970.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


