CRISNO 12

RHENISH REBELLIONS

Background:

France and Germany experienced a crisis over the Rhineland and the Ruhr from 3 April to 17 May 1920.

Pre-crisis In the aftermath of Germany's defeat in World War I the stability of the newly proclaimed Weimar Republic (November 1918) was undermined by several internal uprisings. The most serious was a promonarchist putsch in Berlin by Wilhelm Kapp in mid-March 1920. Although he held power for only four days, 13-17 March, this incident triggered widespread rebellion, especially a Spartacist (Communist) revolt in the Ruhr mining districts. Coping with these challenges was made more difficult by the Versailles Treaty requirement (Article 160) of a reduction of German armed forces to 100,000 by 31 March 1920, as well as by Article 43, which forbade German occupation of the Ruhr Neutral Zone.

In an attempt to suppress these rebellions the German government made two requests on 15 and 17 March for authority to send troops into the Ruhr. France refused. The U.K., backed by the other members of the Supreme Council at the Paris Peace Conference, Italy, Japan, and the U.S., took the position that it would be preferable to allow the Germans to crush the rebellions rather than to involve the Allies in German internal disputes. On the 20th, amplified on the 28th, France offered to accept the entry of German troops into the restricted zone if, as a quid pro quo, Allied troops occupied parts of Germany, to last as long as the German presence in the Ruhr. The U.K., perceiving this as a cover for long-term French occupation, disapproved, as did the Supreme Council. On 30 March Chancellor Müller informed the Reichstag that French consent to Germany's request had been granted and that 2 April had been set for the initial dispatch of troops to the Ruhr. On 31 March France withdrew its offer by making it conditional on approval by the Rhineland Commission.

Summary:

Despite British advice to Germany to delay implementation of its plan, forces of the Reichswehr entered the Ruhr Neutral Zone on 3 April and suppressed the Spartacist revolt with great severity. That act triggered a crisis for France, which perceived a threat to its influence in Western Europe generally and, in particular, the Franco/German border area. France responded on the 4th by placing its armed forces on alert and, more important, by occupying Frankfurt and Darmstadt on the 6th. That in turn triggered a crisis for Germany, which viewed France's unilateral act as a threat to its political regime.

Germany strongly opposed the French occupation of its territory, warning of "the gravest political and economic results." On the 8th the U.K. sent a sharp note to Paris condemning France's action, as well as boycotting the Conference of Ambassadors. This blunt criticism was elaborated two days later by a carrot-stick démarche from one ally to another: British Foreign Secretary Curzon told French Ambassador Cambon that, if France admitted it had erred in acting unilaterally and if it promised to refrain from such actions in the future, the U.K. would consider the matter "cleared up." Premier Millerand, who considered Anglo-French solidarity more important than the temporary presence of German troops in the Ruhr, gave the necessary assurances on 11 April, with a reciprocal German announcement the same day that all German forces in the Ruhr not required to put down the rebellion would be withdrawn immediately. Then on 24 April Germany informed France that its troops in the Ruhr were being withdrawn thereby terminating France's crisis. On the 26th, at the San Remo Conference, Millerand agreed to withdraw French forces as soon as German troops were evacuated. French (and supporting Belgian) troops began their withdrawal from Germany on 17 May ending Germany's crisis and the international crisis as a whole. In an infrequent crisis outcome both France and Germany perceived the outcome as a victory.

Belgium, as noted, was a highly involved actor. Italy, the U.S., and Japan were less involved, supporting the high-profile and active British posture on the optimal path to effective crisis management. The League of Nations declined a German request that it attempt to resolve the dispute. The League Council held its first meeting less than three months before the outbreak of this crisis and was not involved.

References:

Documents on British Foreign Policy (DBFP) 1958, 1960 (Butler et al.); Boulter 1928; Carsten 1984; McDougall 1978; Toynbee 1927c.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


