CRISNO 46

ASSASSINATION OF KING ALEXANDER

Background:

The international crisis that followed the assassination of Yugoslavia's King Alexander began on 8 October and ended on 10 December 1934. The crisis actors were Yugoslavia and Hungary.

Background In 1921 King Alexander became the ruler of the Croatian, Serbian, and Slovene peoples. In 1929 he proclaimed a royal dictatorship and changed the name of the state to Yugoslavia. A new constitution was proclaimed in 1931, based on the will of the Serbs and the suppression of the minority Croats and Slovenes. Croatian refugees fled to Italy, Bulgaria, and especially Hungary where they organized terrorist acts against Alexander's tyranny. The attempt to halt the movement of terrorists led to shooting and border incidents between Yugoslavia and Hungary. Alexander accused Hungary of giving aid to Yugoslavia's enemies. Budapest denied the allegation and brought the Croatian claim before the League of Nations. French Foreign Minister Louis Barthou extended an invitation to King Alexander to visit Paris in October 1934. He wished to confer with the monarch on future policies toward Austria and Italy.

Summary:

On 8 October 1934, hours after King Alexander reached Marseilles, he and Louis Barthou were killed by a Macedonian assassin bearing a Hungarian passport. This triggered a crisis for Yugoslavia. Leaders of the Croatian terrorist organization were arrested in Italy at the French government's request, but Rome refused to extradite them to France or allow for their interrogation. Anti-Italian demonstrations broke out in Yugoslav towns. The Quai d'Orsay (a synonym for France's foreign ministry), on the eve of a Franco-Italian rapprochement, persuaded Yugoslavia to minimize the evidence of Italian complicity and to concentrate its anger on Hungary.

The delayed Yugoslav response, and the crisis trigger for Hungary, was a Yugoslav appeal to the League of Nations on 22 November, alleging that the assassins had been selected at Janka Puszta and had left Hungary freely with Hungarian passports. Budapest denied most of the charges in its response of 24 November. (Hungary had first approached the League Council, on 12 May, complaining of conditions on the frontiers of the two states.)

Threats of war passed, but feelings between the two countries were bitter and angry. A report was presented to the League affirming that certain Hungarian authorities had, at least by negligence, failed to prevent and repress political terrorism, with the result that the task of the assassins had been facilitated. Hungary was asked to make further investigations and report the result. The League discussions ended with a resolution requesting Hungary to "take at once appropriate punitive action in the case of any of its authorities whose culpability may have been established" and to report back to the Council. A commission of experts was set up to study the possibility of an international convention to discourage terrorism. The crisis terminated on 10 December 1934 when both states accepted the League resolution.

(In December, too, Belgrade initiated a brutal eviction of several thousand innocent Hungarian peasants from its territory but stopped when indignant protests were issued from abroad. In January 1935 Hungary informed the Council that a detailed investigation had disclosed no official responsibility for the Marseilles crime.)

References:

Bullock 1962; Carr 1945; von Papen 1952; Schuman 1939; Shirer 1964; Walters 1952; Weinberg 1970.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


