CRISNO 432

EAST TIMOR II

Background:

A crisis between Indonesia and Australia broke out from 4 September to 10 October 1999, precipitated by violence between militia groups in East Timor. Australia led a peacekeeping mission, which involved minor support from 19 other countries.

Background and Pre-Crisis

Indonesia had ruled East Timor since it invaded the former Portuguese colony in 1975. Only India and Australia recognized Indonesia's authority over the region. In September 1999, Indonesia's President B J Habibie announced that a mush anticipated referendum would be held in the province to decide upon East Timor's independence from Indonesia. The referendum had been delayed out of fear that violence would erupt between pro-Indonesian and pro-independence militia groups, regardless of the outcome. The election was held on 31 August 1999.

Summary:

The election results were announced on 4 September 1999. Despite reports of widespread voter intimidation, the people of East Timor had voted overwhelmingly in favor of independence. The election results immediately triggered widespread violence in East Timor, with pro-Indonesia militias being supported by factions of the Indonesian army. The outbreak of violence triggered an international crisis for Australia, which was committed to ensuring peace in an area so close to its borders, and Indonesia, which would have to quell the violence or deal with direct Australian intervention.

Australian Prime Minister John Howard had been under increasing criticism in his own country for his government's tacit support to the Indonesian government. As the election results were announced, and violence escalated, it became apparent that the Australian government would be taking action in the troubled region. The Indonesian government, while keen to have UN support for maintaining peace in the region, was highly critical of Australian involvement, which it viewed as unwarranted bullying and interference.

Nineteen countries joined the UN-authorized and Australian-led peacekeeping force, Interfet, which had the stated goals of restoring peace and security in the region, protecting refugees and safeguarding humanitarian aid for displaced people. A war of words ensued between the Australian and Indonesian governments, and there were several clashes between militias and Interfet. On 6 October 1999, Interfet troops in East Timor shot dead two pro-Indonesian militiamen in the first fatal clash since they were deployed. Interfet came under criticism for moving too slowly and putting humanitarian operations at risk, an allegation rejected by the Australian commander of the peace-keeping force in East Timor.

On 19 October 1999, Indonesia's parliament endorsed East Timor's independence vote, paving the way for the half-island to become the world's newest nation. The ratification signaled the end of the crisis, as UN peacekeepers prepared to take over Australia's role. While Australia achieved its objective of contributing to the restoration of peace in the region, the outcome was more ambiguous for Indonesia. Even though Mr. Habibie and other members of the government appeared to be in favor of granting East Timor independence, there was evidence that the Indonesian military, acting with some autonomy, had extended considerable assistance to pro-Indonesia militias responsible for mass killings in East Timor.

The United Nations was active in the peace efforts, and gave full support to Interfet. The United States was politically involved in resolving the crisis and contributed to the Interfet mission. There was no mediation in this case.

(East Timor received international recognition as an independent state on 20 May 2002, after over two years of direct UN advisement and protection.)

References:

Keesings Online; Agence France Presse, British Broadcasting Corporation

Last Updated: 4/27/2007


