CRISNO 291

CASSINGA INCIDENT

Background:

Fighting between South African forces and guerrillas based in Angola led to a crisis for South Africa and Angola from 3 to 17 May 1978.

Background For much of the period since the SWAPO guerrilla war against the SADF stationed in Namibia began in 1966, its raids had been carried out from neighboring states. Since its civil war in 1975-76 (see Case #260--War in Angola), Angola had become the main staging area for SWAPO raids. In the early months of 1978 there was an intensification of SWAPO activity. SADF losses were reported in periodic clashes in the northern Namibian border region. In February 1978 Angola complained to the UN Secretary-General of South African violations of its territory and airspace.

Summary:

A SWAPO attack on the Ruacana hydroelectric power station in Namibia's border area with Angola on 3 May triggered a crisis for South Africa. The South African foreign minister and the army chief of operations reported that a raid of approximately 700 South African troops into Angola, on 4 May, was a response to the upsurge of guerrilla activity and the SWAPO raid the day before. That act catalyzed a crisis for Angola.

Angolan sources stated that the SADF occupied the town of Cassinga, 230 kilometers north of the border, which South Africa claimed to be SWAPO's main operational base. The town of Chetequera was also attacked. South Africa's raid was the largest since 1975-76, when its forces were involved on the side of UNITA in the Angolan civil war. In the operations at Cassinga, which lasted for 12 hours, six South African soldiers and about 1,000 refugees were reportedly killed. In addition to ground forces, aircraft were alleged to have been involved.

Angolan troops met the attacking forces. On 5 May Angola appealed to the United Nations for support. The following day a resolution was passed by the Security Council unanimously condemning South Africa and warning that "more effective measures might be taken." With the resolution, and the end of the raid, the crisis ended for Angola on 6 May. The ambassadors of Canada, France, the U.K., the U.S., and West Germany in South Africa formed a committee, known as the Contact Group, to investigate and propose solutions to the problem. On 17 May, for the first time since the raid, the South African foreign minister met with the Contact Group. This meeting, signaling a major reduction in stress, ended the crisis over Cassinga for South Africa.

U.S. activity was confined to the political realm. On 6 May the United States expressed grave concern and urgently requested that South Africa explain its behavior. The U.S. also participated in the Contact Group. The USSR was a major supplier of arms to Angola through Cuba, as well as arms and advisors to SWAPO. The OAU condemned South Africa on 9 May 1978 and called for the withdrawal of South African troops from Namibia.

References:

ACR 1978; ARB 1978; Keesing's 1978

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


