CRISNO 411

HAITI MILITARY REGIME

Background:

The United States and Haiti were embroiled in a crisis from mid-July to 15 October 1994.

Background and Pre-crisis For most of its history Haiti was ruled by a foreign power. It was a colony of Spain from the earliest days of European contact with the Americas at the end of the fifteenth century. It was ceded to France in 1697 and remained a French colony until a successful slave revolt and victory over a large French army sent by Napoleon, leading to independence in 1804.

After a century of Haiti's isolation, the U.S. became the hegemonial power. It began with the landing of marines in 1915 and an imposed treaty that made Haiti a political and financial protectorate of the United States, initially for 10 years and then extended to 1936. Thereafter Haiti was ruled by despots, notably the Duvaliers, father and son, from 1957 to 1990.

In the first democratic elections, held on 16 December 1990, Father Jean Bertrand Aristide, a left-wing Roman Catholic priest, was elected President. However, less than a year later (30 September 1991) he was ousted by a military junta headed by Lieutenant-General Raoul Cedras. All attempts to restore Aristide to power failed, including an agreement to step down, brokered by the U.S. and signed by the junta on 3 July 1993 (Governors Island Agreement).

From 1991 to 1994 Haiti was characterized by brutal repression and violation of human rights, including the killing of 3,000 civilians by paramilitary "death squads." In desperation, Haitians sought refuge in the U.S.--on a massive scale: in one eight-day period, 1-9 July 1994, an estimated 12,300 "boat people" were rescued and sent to makeshift camps in Panama and then to the U.S. naval base in Cuba, Guantanamo Bay.

Summary:

It was this dramatic upsurge of refugees that triggered a crisis for the U.S.: the potential--and likely--flood of Haitian boat people was perceived by the Clinton administration as a threat to domestic stability at a time when the U.S. was still in the grip of economic recession. This concern was accentuated by the image of U.S. impotence in the face of a military junta in the poorest and weakest state in the Americas resisting all efforts by the hegemonial power to restore democracy to the island. These themes were central to Clinton's announcement on 15 September 1994 of impending U.S. intervention (see below).

A major escalation point in the crisis was UN Security Council Resolution 940, passed on 31 July 1994 by 12-0, with two abstentions (Brazil and China) and one member absent (Rwanda): it authorized member-states "to use all necessary means to facilitate the departure from Haiti of the military leadership." The phrase, "all necessary means," was identical to the wording of the Security Council's authorizing resolution in the Gulf crisis of 1990 (see Case #393--Gulf War, in Middle East: Non-PCs). As in 1990, too, it was designed to legitimize U.S. military intervention, in this case to oust the junta from power in Haiti. (In both crises it served that purpose.) Resolution 940 also reaffirmed all nine earlier Council resolutions on Haiti, six in 1993, three in 1994, again following the precedent of the Council's Resolution 678 on 29 November 1990 during the Gulf crisis.

During the next six weeks attention shifted to the U.S. Congress and to public opinion: both seemed hostile or indifferent to military intervention, especially in light of the emergent fiasco of the U.S.'s humanitarian intervention in Somalia.

(Before the intervention only 31 percent of the public approved sending troops to Haiti; and even after its success only 41 percent approved.) Fearful of taking a grave political risk and hoping to forge a consensus, the Clinton administration attempted one more type of peaceful crisis management, namely, an "unofficial" mediation effort by three high-profile Americans, former President Carter, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Powell, and Senator Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee.

Their mission to Haiti on 16 September led to an agreement with the junta two days later, which provided the framework for non-violent crisis resolution. The three members of the junta, Cedras, his chief of staff, Brigadier-General Philippe Blamby, and Colonel Michel François, the chief of police, were to step down and leave Haiti. President Aristide was to be restored to power. And UN economic sanctions on Haiti, including a crippling trade embargo, were to be lifted.

What made the agreement possible was a strong public statement by Clinton on 15 September: in an address to the nation the president announced the decision to intervene militarily, linking it to the Monroe and Truman Doctrines. It was, he said, designed "to protect U.S. interests," which were specified as putting an end to the atrocities on the island, "to secure our borders and preserve stability in our hemisphere, and to promote democracy and uphold the reliability of our commitment around the world." He also announced the Carter mediation mission as a willingness "to go the final mile" in an effort to resolve the crisis without violence. He was unequivocal that the mission was not going to negotiate with the junta but merely to settle the modalities for their departure from power and from Haiti.

The Clinton announcement of an imminent invasion triggered a crisis for Haiti, that is, the military junta. Only then did it perceive U.S. resolve to compel their abdication from power and their departure from Haiti. Their response was to accept these terms in the negotiations with the Carter mission from 16-18 September.

With the Carter-brokered agreement in hand, 20,000 U.S. troops landed in Haiti in the following week, with a mandate to remain up to six months, if necessary. They rapidly took control of the island, with virtually no opposition and minuscule violence. Cedras resigned as commander in chief of Haiti's armed forces on 10 October. Three days later he and Blamby left for Panama; François had already fled to the Dominican Republic. Finally, with much fanfare, Aristide returned to the island and the president's palace on 15 October, marking the end of the Haiti Military Regime crisis.

References:

Bemis 1943; New York Times July-November 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


