CRISNO 67

SPANISH CIVIL WAR IV

Background:

Republican Spain's last intrawar crisis during the Spanish civil war lasted from 23 December 1938 to 31 March 1939.

Pre-crisis As a result of their triumph in the Battle of the Ebro (see Case #65), General Franco's rebels were confident that they could now win the war. They planned their Catalonia campaign for 10 December 1938. It was postponed until the 15th and then to the 23rd. A decisive input was a massive flow of arms from Germany in November.

Summary:

The Nationalists' "Christmas Offensive," with the Italian forces in Spain playing a central role in their campaign, began on 23 December with a crossing of the Segre River. This triggered an intra-war crisis for Republican Spain. By 3 January 1939 the Loyalists' defense line was pierced. Italian Foreign Minister Ciano warned of direct intervention by "regular" Italian divisions if France intervened on behalf of the Republic. But, as always during the Spanish civil war, this was unlikely. Tarragona fell to the rebels on 17 January. And the great prize of Barcelona, symbol of the Republic, fell on the 26th.

Panic led to a mass migration of Catalans toward the French border: between 27 January and 10 February half a million Spaniards, including 250,000 members of the Republican army, crossed into France. The Nationalists' Catalan campaign ended on 9 February in total triumph.

By then the remnants of the Loyalists' regime had crumbled. On 1 February Premier Negrín had offered three conditions of surrender--a guarantee of Spain's independence, a guarantee of the right of Spain's people to choose their own government, and freedom from persecution. These were rejected by Franco. Most of the Republic's leaders fled to France.

France and the U.K. recognized the Nationalist regime in Burgos on 27 February, despite vocal opposition from the moderate Left in both parliaments. The next day President Azaña resigned from the Republican presidency. Negrín left for France on 6 March. Finally, on 31 March 1939, the Nationalist forces occupied Madrid, ending Republican Spain's last intra-war crisis and the Spanish civil war. On 1 April the United States recognized the Franco regime, leaving the USSR as the only major European power that refused to recognize the outcome of the war.

The League of Nations was embroiled in the Spanish civil war from the outset, but never decisively. It began a series of discussions on Spain in 1936. The attempt by the League Council to pass a resolution in 1938 failed to achieve unanimity. Its only role was to supervise the withdrawal of volunteers enrolled in the International Brigades. It did not contribute to crisis abatement or, more generally, to conflict resolution.

References:

See sources for Cases #52 and #54.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


