CRISNO 306

SOVIET THREAT-PAKISTAN

Background:

Soviet statements implying USSR intervention in the event of war between Afghanistan and Pakistan created a low-threat crisis for Pakistan from 1 June to 3 July 1979.

Background Hostile relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan date to Pakistani independence in 1947 when Afghanistan demanded the creation of a separate Pushtu-speaking Pathan state in part of Pakistan's North West Frontier Province. Several crises occurred over this issue, in 1949-50, 1955, and 1961-62 (see Cases #129, #150, #182--Pushtunistan I, II, III, in Afghanistan/Pakistan PC). Between 1976 and 1978 Kabul dropped its insistence on self-determination for the Pathans on the Pakistani side of the border, and an active search for a solution began. After the marxist coup in Afghanistan in April 1978 clashes between Afghan government forces and anti-communist rebels led to a large-scale influx of refugees into Pakistan. The nature and length of the border made it almost impossible for Pakistan to control the border crossings.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for Pakistan by a statement in Pravda on 1 June 1979 accusing it of allowing Afghan rebel groups to attack Afghanistan from its territory, and indicating that the USSR would not remain indifferent. Pakistan, although perceiving its military strength as sufficient to cope with direct Afghan threats, viewed a Soviet-backed and Soviet-protected Afghanistan with alarm.

The Soviet statement, which charged Pakistan with willingly providing border sanctuaries to the Afghan rebels, made it clear that Moscow would intervene in the event of war between Afghanistan and Pakistan. Pakistan responded the same day with a denial of Soviet allegations, adding that it adhered strictly to the five principles of peaceful coexistence and calling for a resumption of normal relations between Pakistan and Afghanistan.

On 11 June the Tass news agency charged that the U.S. was training Afghan rebel forces in Pakistan. This was denied by a spokesperson for the State Department: the U.S., as Pakistan's long-time patron, extended political support to its client.

The dialogue between Afghanistan and Pakistan was renewed on 1 July when Afghan Foreign Minister Shah Mohammad Dost arrived in Pakistan for talks with President Zia-ul-Haq. The crisis ended on 3 July with a joint decision to continue the talks: the two parties agreed to prepare the ground for a summit meeting. It was also agreed that the refugees in Pakistan would return to Afghanistan as soon as possible, on a voluntary basis.

(Agreement between the two parties did not alter the situation. The flow of Afghan refugees into Pakistan continued, as did attacks on Afghanistan by rebels operating from Pakistani sanctuaries. A summit meeting never took place. Six months later the USSR invaded Afghanistan and imposed a pro-Soviet regime (see Case #303--Afghanistan Invasion, in Multiregional PCs: East/West). Afghan anti-communist guerrillas engaged in warfare against Soviet forces lasting a decade.

The UN was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Cheema 1983; Ziring 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


