CRISNO 69

MEMEL

Background:

Germany's demand for the annexation of Memel created a crisis for Lithuania from 15 to 22 March 1939.

Background and Pre-crisis Memel and its surrounding area, once part of East Prussia, were awarded to Lithuania by the Versailles Treaty, under the supervision of a League High Commissioner, and were formally incorporated in 1923. The city, German-speaking, was made semiautonomous on 7 May 1924 and was guaranteed by France, Britain, Italy, and Japan. The surrounding area, Lithuanian-speaking, was placed under Lithuania's sovereignty. Increasing tension between the area's populations followed, especially after the Nazi accession to power in Berlin in 1933.

In 1934 many prominent Germans were arrested in Memel and were accused of planning a Nazi putsch there (see Case #49--Kaunas Trials). The Germans retaliated by boycotting Lithuanian agricultural produce. By 1936 the situation had normalized, and a trade treaty was signed between the two countries. The Nazi Party, though illegal, grew in Memel, and more arrests took place in the late spring of 1937. Elections were due to be held in late 1938; and despite Lithuanian electoral law concessions, Nazi strength grew in Memel during the campaign, with the anticipation of a reintegration into Germany after the Austrian Anschluss of March 1938 (see Case #60). After the elections German representation had improved to slightly over 80 percent of the Memel Diet (legislature). The new Lithuanian government, formed in December 1938, endeavored to be firm on the issue of Memel's autonomy, while Nazification and demands for incorporation into the Reich continued and German pressure increased. In early March 1939 the German press took up a renewed anti-Lithuanian campaign. On the 13th the Lithuanian prime minister perceived the danger of a German coup in Memel and related this to the British chargé d'affaires: he anticipated an announcement at the forthcoming meeting of the Memel Diet.

Summary:

On 15 March, when Germany took over Bohemia and Moravia, the remnant of Czechoslovakia (see Case #68--Czech. Annexation, in Czech./Germany PC), a crisis over Memel was triggered for Lithuania. Nazi party leader Neumann addressed a special meeting of the Memel Diet, pressing for a radical change in the relations between Memel and Lithuania. Rumors of immediate Nazi annexation followed rapidly. At a meeting between the local Lithuanian governor and German party leaders the governor refused to consider any concessions. The following day his attitude became more conciliatory, and a promise was made to convene the Diet on 25 March.

On 20 March Lithuanian Foreign Minister Urbsys was summoned to Berlin and was handed an ultimatum to return Memel to Germany. He was also warned not to consult any other power. Nonetheless, he spoke to the British, French, and Polish military attachés, indicating that Lithuania's decision would depend on their willingness to provide aid. Upon his return to Kaunas, German troops were reported moving toward the frontier with Lithuania. Shortly thereafter, Germany demanded an agreement. The Lithuanian cabinet met on 20 March and accepted the ultimatum. Two communiqués, issued by Lithuania, were withdrawn upon German disapproval.

The crisis ended on 22 March with the formal approval of an agreement signed in Berlin. Hitler arrived in Memel the following day to an enthusiastic welcome. The agreement safeguarded Lithuanian economic access and a free harbor zone and pledged nonaggression between the two countries. Britain, France, and Poland, the other involved actors, denied aid to Lithuania.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Cienciala 1968; Gerutis 1969; Sabaliunas 1972; Schuman 1941; Shirer 1964; Thorne 1967; Toynbee 1953a; Weinberg 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


