CRISNO 20

GERMAN REPARATIONS

Background:

Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands experienced a crisis over reparations payments from 3 March to 11 May 1921.

Pre-crisis The Treaty of Versailles, signed on 28 June 1919, incorporated the principle of reparations by Germany following World War I. A schedule of reparations payments was formulated at a conference of victorious European powers in Paris in January 1921 and was reaffirmed at a conference in London in February-March. France was insistent on their enforcement. German counterproposals on 1 March were rejected.

Summary:

An ultimatum by the Allies led by France and the U.K. on 3 March 1921 triggered a crisis for Germany. This was followed by a threat of sanctions on the 7th. The next day Duisburg, Ruhrort, and Dusseldorf were occupied by French forces. President Ebert decried the occupation of German territory as a breach of the Versailles Treaty but acknowledged that Germany was "not in a position to oppose force with force." German ambassadors to London, Paris, and Brussels were recalled. On 10 March Germany appealed to the League of Nations, but Secretary-General Drummond ignored the petition. The League remained aloof throughout this crisis.

Both the Belgians and the Dutch were quietly opposed to the French occupation of the Ruhr: the former viewed it as a danger to Belgium's security; and the latter feared being drawn into a Franco/German conflict. For Belgium, a crisis was triggered by Prime Minister Briand's speech to the French Senate on 5 April indicating that France would act unilaterally and occupy the entire Left Bank of the Rhine if Germany did not meet its financial obligations by 1 May. Belgium was concerned about both the consequences of not joining France against Germany--"a violent storm would burst against them"--and of participating in a French-led occupation, not knowing how far France would go in its punitive action. It also feared that French control of the Ruhr would make the Belgian economy more dependent on France. Reluctantly Belgium agreed to join France in its declared intention to occupy the Ruhr on 2 May, if necessary. The Netherlands, too, was concerned about the likely negative spillover effects of French occupation of the Ruhr, specifically the possibility of Franco/German military hostilities at Duisburg, which lay close to the Dutch frontier.

The trigger to Holland's crisis was partial mobilization of France's armed forces on 2 May in preparation for occupation of the Ruhr. The same day the Dutch foreign minister sought U.S. diplomatic intervention to dissuade France from proceeding with the occupation; and Belgium's premier informed the U.S. ambassador in Brussels that the occupation "was to be avoided if at all possible."

The U.K. was loyal to France throughout this crisis. A joint Anglo-French ultimatum on 5 May set in motion the de-escalation of the crisis by renewing the threat of occupation of the Ruhr if Germany did not accept the schedule of payments by the 12th. The German government resigned in protest. Its successor under Wirth accepted the conditions on the 11th terminating the crisis for all three actors and the German Reparations crisis as a whole.

(The issue of reparations generated other crises in 1923 and 1924--see Cases #27 and #30.)

References:

Documents on British Foreign Policy (DBFP) (Butler et al., Medlicott et al.) 1967, 1968; Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) 1921, vol. 2; Baudhuin 1946; Boulter 1928; Helmreich 1976; Mahaim 1926; McDougall 1978; Toynbee 1927c.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


