CRISNO 309

US HOSTAGES IN IRAN

Background:

A crisis for the U.S. and Iran over American hostages held in Iran lasted from 4 November 1979 to 20 January 1981.

Background and Pre-crisis On 11 February 1979 an Islamic fundamentalist movement led by Ayatullah Khomeini established a new regime in Iran to replace the exiled Muhammad Riza Shah. During the course of government efforts to crush the power of the clergy--90 percent of Iran's population belonged to Shiite Islam--Ayatullah Khomeini had been exiled from Iran in 1963, after leading students in a protest march against the shah. The shah's regime was protected by the Savak--a secret police force known for its harsh methods--and was bitterly opposed by many Iranians. The U.S. was viewed by anti-shah Iranians as propping up the shah, exploiting Iran's oil, profiting from the enormous sale of arms, and helping the Savak.

Two factions joined forces to overthrow the shah: a coalition of the clergy, masses of the Muslim faithful, and the traditional merchants of the bazaar; and the emerging class of Westernized nationalist students and intellectuals. On 26 October 1979, four days after the shah had been admitted to a New York hospital, young Iranian revolutionaries met and planned a sit-in at the U.S. embassy in Teheran. The previous week the provisional government of Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan had turned marching demonstrators away from the U.S. embassy.

Summary:

On 4 November a crisis was triggered for the U.S. when some 400 Iranian students, acting under the inspiration of the new revolutionary regime in Teheran, broke away from one of Teheran's frequent demonstrations and stormed the U.S. embassy. U.S. marines held them back for a time with tear gas while diplomats within tried to shred secret documents. Minutes later the students occupied the embassy, indicating that this had been done in order to protest the admission of the shah to the U.S. for medical care. As support for the students grew, a decision was made to put the U.S. hostages on trial if Washington did not return the shah to Iran. The U.S. rejected this demand two days later. On the 6th, as well, the provisional Bazargan government collapsed.

In the following days President Carter sent two representatives, Ramsey Clark and William Miller, to Iran to seek to secure the release of the hostages. Khomeini would brook no compromise on his demand that the shah be returned to Iran for trial. On 10 November all Iranian students in the U.S. without legal documents were ordered to leave. Two days later U.S. oil purchases from Iran were discontinued. The following day U.S. and British naval vessels began maneuvers in the Arabian Sea. Iran called for a meeting of the Security Council on 13 November. All Iranian assets in the United States were frozen the following day, and the U.S. initiated action against Iran in the International Court of Justice.

On 20 November Iran suddenly released all black and female U.S. hostages. An internal political struggle began between the students and the clergy, on the one hand, and the secular political leaders in Iran, on the other.

After receiving medical treatment in the U.S., the shah went to Panama on 15 December. On that day, too, the International Court ordered the return of the U.S. embassy in Teheran to U.S. control, while the Iranians declared that the trial of the hostages would certainly take place. The U.S. approached the Security Council for economic sanctions, but the Soviet Union (and East Germany) voted against the draft resolution, thus preventing its approval.

Major efforts at negotiation began in January 1980. The UN set up a five-member commission under Secretary-General Waldheim to inquire into Iran's grievances. The U.S., in an effort not to provoke Iran further, delayed imposing formal economic sanctions on 6 February. On the 18th Iran's President Bani-Sadr authorized a visit by the UN commission. However, when it arrived in Iran on the 23rd, Khomeini announced that the hostage issue would be decided by the new Iranian Majlis (Parliament), to be elected in March. The ayatullah also called upon the militant students not to allow members of the commission to see the hostages until the commission's report was published. On 10 March the UN commission met with the Revolutionary Council. When the commission members felt they had reached an impasse, they gave up. Parliamentary elections in Iran were postponed on 22 March. The same day, at a meeting of the U.S.'s National Security Council, President Carter authorized a plan to rescue the hostages. The U.S. broke diplomatic relations with Iran on 7 April. And on the 11th the fateful U.S. decision was taken to send an airborne rescue mission to Iran. U.S. helicopters landed in Iran on 24 April. However, a collision between two helicopters, causing the death of eight U.S. soldiers, led Carter to abort the mission.

The U.S. attempt to rescue the hostages by military means triggered a crisis for Iran on 24 April 1980. By the end of the month Iran had responded by dispersing the hostages among 16 locations. Secretary of State Vance resigned on the 27th and was replaced by Senator Edmund Muskie. The shah died on 27 July in Egypt.

In September a German diplomat in Washington informed Muskie that a close associate of Khomeini wanted to meet urgently in Bonn with senior representatives of the U.S. government to work out conditions for the release of the hostages. A week later Sadeq Tabatabai met with U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The former agreed, on 22 September, to inform Khomeini of U.S. proposals, but on that day war broke out between Iran and Iraq, and the hostage issue was set aside. In November, two days before the U.S. presidential elections, the Iranian Parliament adopted the conditions outlined by Khomeini for the release of the hostages. Algeria was asked to serve as the mediator. The Algerian mediators controlled the transmission of messages between the two parties, often evaluating both sides’ arguments and making suggestions for compromise.

In December Iran demanded $24 billion from the U.S. to cover its claims on frozen Iranian assets and property taken by the shah and his family. However, by early January 1981 the claim had been reduced to $9.5 billion. Christopher flew to Algiers to work out a complex international agreement with Algeria's Foreign Minister, Muhammad Ben Yahya. The final documents were signed in Algiers on 20 January; and later that day word was received in Washington that the hostages had been freed--35 minutes after Ronald Reagan was installed as President of the United States.

Unsuccessful negotiation and mediation efforts were made throughout the crisis by Swiss and West German diplomats, as well as by private citizens. Pope John Paul II and Yasser Arafat of the PLO also tried to mediate between the two adversaries.

References:

Brzezinski 1983; Carter 1982; Christopher 1985; Keesing's 1979, 1980; MECS 1979-80, 1980-81; New York Times 1979, 1980; Sick 1985, 1991; Vance 1983.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


