CRISNO 198

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC-HAITI II

Background:

The Dominican Republic and Haiti were the actors in a two-phase crisis from 26 April to 3 June 1963.

Background The Dominican Republic's dictator, Trujillo, was assassinated in 1960; and members of his family fled to Haiti. Newly elected President Bosch feared that Trujillo's exiled relatives would try to regain power. An attempt on the lives of the children of Haiti's dictator Duvalier (Papa Doc) aroused suspicions of Dominican Republic complicity: the conspirators had sought refuge in the Dominican Republic embassy in the Haitian capital, Port-au-Prince.

Summary:

On 26 April 1963 Haitian policemen forcibly entered the Dominican Republic embassy and arrested opponents of Haiti's regime. This violation of diplomatic immunity triggered a crisis for the Dominican Republic. The next day President Bosch responded by issuing a 24-hour ultimatum to Haiti that triggered a reciprocal crisis. Bosch also appealed to the OAS and proposed a joint democratic Latin American force to oust Duvalier. On the 28th Haiti severed diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic. The following day the Dominican Republic began stationing troops along its border with Haiti.

An OAS fact-finding mission arrived in Haiti on 30 April. On 5 and 6 May the crisis reached its peak. OAS officials shuttled between the two countries in an attempt at de-escalation. A new OAS five-nation mediation committee was created on the 8th. The mediation efforts of the OAS committee consisted mainly of helping the parties communicate with each other and to save face. The effect of the mediation was only minor compared to the other developments in the crisis.

By 10 May the possibility of a Dominican Republic invasion of Haiti had lessened considerably. On the 14th Duvalier released the hostages, terminating the crisis for the Dominican Republic. This was followed by the demobilization of Dominican Republic forces. On 3 June Haiti's crisis ended with the publication of the final report by the OAS committee, which did not recommend further action against Haiti. The U.S., fearing for the lives of foreign citizens in Haiti, sent a naval task force. This was withdrawn after the final report of the OAS, and normal relations with Haiti were restored.

The UN Security Council met on 8-9 May at Haiti's request and discussed the issue but left action to the regional organization.

References:

MacDonald 1964; Martin 1966; Slater 1967; Tomasek 1968-69.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


