CRISNO 166

TAIWAN STRAIT II

Background:

A second international crisis in the Taiwan Strait, from 17 July to 23 October 1958, comprised three actors: Taiwan, the United States, and the People's Republic of China.

Background East Asia again became a theater of armed conflict between communist and anti-communist forces in 1958, breaking an informal truce that prevailed in the region since 1955 (see Case #146). The unresolved issue of "one China" erupted once more, at the same time as a new crisis in the Middle East, when U.S. forces landed in Lebanon, British forces entered Jordan, and the Iraq monarchy was overthrown (see Case #165--Iraq-Lebanon Upheaval, in Middle East: Non-PCs). The PRC was critical of Soviet silence on Middle East and East Asian events and decided to test Soviet and U.S. resolve by building up its forces in the coastal areas opposite the offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu.

Summary:

By 17 July 1958 the massing of mainland China's military forces near the offshore islands had triggered a crisis for Taiwan. Khrushchev arrived in Beijing for conversations with Mao from 31 July to 3 August. On the 23rd of August, when the PRC began bombarding Quemoy and Matsu, a crisis was triggered for the United States. Taiwan responded that day by returning fire. The U.S. responded two days later by threatening to move into the area with the reinforced Seventh Fleet, a decision implemented with some restriction on the 27th. This, in turn, triggered a crisis for the PRC.

Between 2 and 4 September the U.S. administration met to frame a detailed policy position. On the 4th the PRC responded to the crisis by announcing the extension of its territorial waters to 12 miles offshore, thereby blockading Quemoy and Matsu. This threat to U.S. ships supplying the islands was promptly rejected by the U.S. in a statement by Secretary of State Dulles, who strongly implied that the U.S. would intervene if Quemoy were invaded, and that such an intervention might involve the use of nuclear weapons. Zhou Enlai suggested that ambassadorial talks between the PRC and the U.S. be resumed.

On 7 September Khrushchev sent a letter to Eisenhower in which he warned that "an attack on the PRC is an attack on the Soviet Union." Nevertheless, one week later it was clear that the Soviets intended to remain aloof from the crisis. Talks between the PRC and the United States were resumed in Warsaw on 14 September, ending the crisis for the latter. On the 30th the crisis ended for the PRC when Secretary Dulles declared that the U.S. favored the evacuation of Nationalist Chinese forces from the offshore islands if the PRC would agree to a cease-fire. Taiwan's crisis termination date was 23 October, when Chiang and Dulles issued a joint communiqué: this constituted a tacit understanding between Taiwan and the PRC, for there was a clear indication that an invasion of the mainland would not be supported by the U.S. Washington recommended a redefinition of Nationalist China's objectives.

The Soviet position was clarified in a Tass news agency statement on 5 October that excluded military support for Beijing's efforts to "liberate" Taiwan. However, while publicly disavowing Soviet military intervention in the crisis, Moscow extended covert aid in support of the PRC.

The General Assembly held discussions, but no resolution was passed.

References:

See sources for Case #146; and Bundy 1988; Eisenhower 1965; Halperin 1966; Segal 1985; Thomas 1962; Whiting 1975b; Xiaobing et al. 1995-96; Zubok 1995-96.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


