CRISNO 11

CILICIAN WAR

Background:

Turkey and France experienced a crisis-war in Anatolia from November 1919 to 20 October 1921.

Background Secret agreements among the Great Powers during World War I had awarded France a sphere of influence in Cilicia, that is, southeastern Anatolia bordering on Syria (see Background and Pre-crisis, Case #7).

Summary:

As with Italy in the Smyrna crisis, France began to occupy its assigned area in November 1919, taking control of the three main cities--Maras, Aintab, and Urfa. This triggered a crisis for the new nationalist regime in Turkey under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal (Atatürk).

(Atatürk had succeeded in forging a National Pact through the summer and autumn of 1919, notably at the Erzurum and Sivas congresses in July-August and September. By December 1919 nationalist forces controlled Ankara, the agreed-upon capital of a renascent Turkey, and had liberated large parts of Anatolia. The Sublime Porte, the government of the Ottoman Empire in Constantinople, was reduced to an empty shell.)

Turkey responded to the French occupation in late January 1920, around the 20th, with an attack on French forces and their Armenian supporters in Maras, triggering a crisis for France. Hostilities escalated to full-scale war, and the French were evicted from Maras within three weeks. The parties agreed to a 20-day armistice on 23 May 1920; but the French broke the agreement on 10 June and opened another front in northern Anatolia.

British forces attempted to divert the Turkish nationalists by landing troops on the Anatolian coast off the Sea of Marmara. And Greece repeatedly attacked the Turks in 1920 and 1921 (see Cases #16 and #18, in Multiregional PCs: Greece/Turkey). Kemal Atatürk successfully resisted the Greek invasion and secured an agreement with Soviet Russia in December 1920 to relieve his eastern front.

As their military stalemate persisted, France and Turkey began secret negotiations in the summer of 1921. A formal agreement, the Ankara Accord, was voluntarily signed on 20 October 1921 ending the Cilician crisis-war: it had lasted almost two years and had been a considerable drain on French resources, in a region where French interests were secondary. France evacuated Cilicia and agreed to a special regime in Alexandretta, Syria, to safeguard the interests of the city's substantial Turkish population, in return for economic concessions, notably rights to sections of the Baghdad Railway.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

(Following the end of the Cilician War, France and Turkey entered upon an era of cooperation, though they were later enmeshed in a prolonged crisis over Alexandretta, from 1936 to 1939 [see Case #53].)

References:

See sources for Case #7.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


