CRISNO 393

GULF WAR

Background:

Kuwait, the U.S., Iraq, and Sa'udi Arabia were the main participants in a crisis-war over the Gulf from 2 August 1990 to 12 April 1991. The other crisis actors were Bahrain, Egypt, France, Israel, Oman, Qatar, Syria, United Arab Emirates (UAE), the U.K., and the USSR.

Background Iraq's oil production, which was vital to its economy, declined drastically during the Iran/Iraq War from 1980 to 1988 (see Iran/Iraq PC). As a result Iraq was experiencing great difficulty in repaying loans received during that war from Arab states, notably Kuwait and the UAE, amounting to billions of dollars. Iraq requested cancellation of the debts; they refused.

Iraq expounded two arguments. One was that, in carrying the full human and material burden of war against Iran, it was defending the vital interests of all Arab states in the Gulf region against a fundamentalist regime intent on establishing its hegemony and taking control of their vast oil resources. The second was that these loans derived mainly from the large increase in their oil revenues due to the sharp reduction in Iraq's oil exports during the war years. For both reasons, argued Iraq, these "loans" should be regarded as contributions to a common war effort and should be canceled.

Pre-crisis President Saddam Hussein's verbal attacks on Kuwait and the UAE began at an Arab League meeting on 28 May 1990. He accused them of waging economic war against Iraq by overproducing oil and causing a collapse in world oil prices. On 17 July, a week after the Gulf states agreed to cut their oil production, Hussein threatened that "if words fail to protect Iraq's interests, something effective must be done." The next day Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, accused Kuwait of stealing a vast amount of oil from the southern section of the disputed Rumaila oil field since 1980, worth $2.4 billion. Kuwait responded by placing its army on alert and by rejecting Iraq's claims and charges. Iraq moved forces to the Sa'udi Arabian border on the 23rd.

Talks between Iraq and Kuwait began on 31 July amid rising tension, despite informal mediation efforts by some Arab leaders. That day, too, six Iraqi divisions were concentrated along the border with Kuwait. The talks were suspended after only one session, when Kuwait rejected Iraq's demand for the strategically valuable Bubiyan and Warba islands.

Summary:

On 2 August 1990 Iraqi forces invaded Kuwait and occupied the emirate within six hours. This triggered the gravest of all possible crises for Kuwait, a threat to its existence as a state. The occupation of Kuwait and its huge oil resources was also perceived by the United States as a basic value threat. A U.S. statement on the 2nd condemned Iraq's invasion and called for the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of all Iraqi forces from Kuwait and the restoration of its legitimate government. The same day the UN Security Council adopted Resolution 660, the first of 15 during the crisis, calling for Iraq's complete and immediate withdrawal from Kuwait. The Arab League also condemned the invasion and called for Iraq's immediate withdrawal.

On the 3rd Iraqi forces concentrated on the Sa'udi Arabian border. In an emergency meeting on the 4th the Council of Europe decided to impose sanctions against Iraq. The UN Security Council, too, imposed wide-ranging sanctions against Iraq on 6 August.

A U.S. announcement on 7 August of its intent to deploy troops to Sa'udi Arabia marks the beginning of a massive military buildup of U.S. forces in the Gulf region. On the 8th the U.S. announced that up to 50,000 troops might be dispatched to Sa'udi Arabia to press for Iraq's compliance with UN resolutions.

Iraq's Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) responded the same day by annexing Kuwait "in a comprehensive, eternal, and inseparable merger." On the 10th, 12 of the Arab League members supported a resolution to send a Pan-Arab force to Sa'udi Arabia: the decision obliged only the supporting states. NATO members decided at a special meeting in Brussels to respond individually to the crisis, not through collective action.

On 12 August Saddam Hussein initiated a "linkage" between the Gulf conflict and the Palestinian issue, a tactic he employed throughout the crisis to win support from the Arab and Muslim worlds. The U.S., the U.K., and Israel rejected the linkage. France and the European Community supported it.

In a further escalatory step on the 16th, Iraq took thousands of foreigners, mostly Westerners, as hostages. A UN resolution three days later demanded their release. On 21 September the RCC called on Iraq's citizens to prepare for the "mother of all battles." On the 23rd Saddam Hussein threatened to attack Sa'udi oil fields, unfriendly Arab states, and Israel if UN economic sanctions were to "strangle" Iraq.

On 30 October President Bush secretly approved a military plan to launch an air and naval strike against Iraq in mid-January 1991 and a ground campaign in February. This decision triggered a full-scale crisis for the U.S. because it generated the three defining conditions of a crisis--basic value threat, namely the human and material costs of war, finite time, and the higher likelihood of military hostilities. In a follow-up action, Bush announced on 8 November the deployment of 150,000 more troops to the Gulf region. Hussein responded by announcing on the 19th the deployment of 250,000 more troops to Kuwait and southern Iraq.

On 29 November, at U.S. urging, the Security Council adopted Resolution 678, authorizing the "use (of) all necessary means" by member-states to secure Iraq's compliance with all its earlier resolutions: it specified a deadline of 15 January 1991 for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait, triggering a crisis for Iraq and for the U.S.'s allies as well--all the other crisis actors noted previously. Saddam Hussein rejected the resolution the next day. In a conciliatory gesture on 30 November, Bush offered to invite Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, to Washington and to send the U.S. Secretary of State, James Baker, to Baghdad soon after "to discuss all aspects of the Gulf Crisis." The RCC accepted the offer of high-level talks. And on 6 December Hussein announced the release of all foreign hostages.

The Gulf states met in Doha on the 22nd for a summit meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). They noted that the multinational force was coming "at the request of the GCC and will leave the region when the GCC states request." They also called for Iraq's unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait and reparations payment for the damage done.

On 2 January 1991 NATO decided to dispatch aircraft to protect Turkey from a possible Iraqi attack. A coalition of 28 states was formed, led by the U.S.: its most visible members were the U.K., France, and three Arab states, Sa'udi Arabia, Egypt, and Syria. The USSR was not an active member of the coalition but supported all UN resolutions during the crisis, including authorization of military action against Iraq. At the same time, Moscow took some dramatic diplomatic initiatives to resolve the crisis and prevent military intervention against Iraq.

The Aziz-Baker meeting took place in Geneva on 9 January: it ended in total impasse. On the 11th Baker requested Sa'udi approval of U.S. plans to intervene; and on the 15th Bush made a formal commitment to war. The U.S. informed the Sa'udi and Israeli ambassadors and coalition leaders of the decision on the 16th. The Soviet foreign minister was informed early in the morning of 17 January that coalition forces would attack Iraq an hour later. The USSR asked for additional time to make a last attempt to influence Saddam Hussein; and almost immediately after the war began it urged Iraq's leader to announce the beginning of a withdrawal from Kuwait.

The war, named "Operation Desert Storm," began with a massive bombardment of Iraq. Iraq responded with antiaircraft fire; but the U.S.-led coalition force had enormous superiority in firepower. Iraq retaliated by launching Scud missiles against Sa'udi Arabia and Israel. Intensive U.S. pressure succeeded in preventing an Israeli military riposte. In the early days of the war many of Iraq's most advanced planes flew to Iran for sanctuary. During the 38-day air campaign Iraq experienced saturation bombing.

The USSR was quiet during the first three weeks of Operation Desert Storm. In February President Gorbachev launched a high-profile mediation campaign to end the war. On the 9th the Soviet leader publicly condemned Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, warned the U.S. against going beyond the mandate defined by the UN, and called upon Saddam Hussein to adopt "realism." A Soviet mission to Baghdad by an academic specialist on Asia, Yevgeny Primakov, led to Iraq's conditional offer on the 15th: withdrawal from Kuwait; a guarantee of all Iraq's "historical rights"; abdication by the ruling al-Sabah family of Kuwait; and Israel's complete withdrawal from all occupied Arab territories. The offer was categorically rejected. A Tariq Aziz visit to Moscow on 17 February then generated a six-point plan on the 22nd. The U.S. rejected the plan and issued an ultimatum to Iraq the same day to begin large-scale withdrawal from Kuwait the next day. Saddam Hussein rejected the ultimatum. Also on the 22nd, Bush and Gorbachev spoke, ending the mediation efforts that proved to have only a marginal effect on crisis abatement.

The military intervention plan was set on 11 February. The combined land, air, and sea attack on Iraqi forces began early in the morning of 24 February. In four days the Iraqi forces were mauled--but not decimated--by the coalition's ground forces. On the 27th the U.S. declared a unilateral "suspension of offensive combat operations." Iraq accepted the informal cease-fire on the 28th. The terms for an interim cease-fire were codified and adopted by the UN Security Council on 2 March--Resolution 686. Iraq accepted on the 6th. The conditions for a long-term cease-fire were set down in Resolution 687, passed by the Council on 3 April. Iraq acquiesced on the 6th.

U.S. troops began to leave Iraq on 8 April. On the 9th the Security Council authorized the deployment of a peacekeeping force of 1,440 to patrol a demilitarized zone along the Iraq/Kuwait border. The beginning of the implementation of the formal cease-fire on 12 April 1991 marked the end of the Gulf War crisis.

References:

Foreign Broadcast Information Service--Daily Report/Near East/South Asia (FBIS--DR/NESA) May 1990-April 1991; Baker 1995; Brecher 1993; Cigar 1992; Freedman and Karsh 1993; Keesing's 1990, 1991; Miller and Mylroie 1990; New York Times 1990, 1991; Powell 1995; Schofield 1991; Schwarzkopf 1992; Sciolino 1991; Sifry and Cerf 1991; Stein 1992; Woodward 1991.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


