CRISNO 449

CHAD-SUDAN II

Background:

Chad experienced a one-actor crisis from 12 April 2006 to 8 August 2006 after Chadian rebels, allegedly backed by Sudan, launched an attack on its capital, Ndjamena.

Background and Pre-crisis: Since 2004, Chad and Sudan have had tense relations. Chad has accused Sudan of hosting and backing Chadian rebels while Sudan has blamed Chad for supporting Darfur rebels. A crisis erupted between the two countries in 2005, which ended with the signing of the Tripoli agreement in February 2006. Though the treaty prohibited the use of each other's territory for hostile activity directed against its neighbor, both countries continued to accuse each other for violating the agreement.

Summary:

In early April 2006, Chadian rebel organization United Front for Change (FUC) increased its attacks in eastern parts of the country. On April 12 the threat to the stability of the government became severe when the rebels launched a dawn raid on the Chadian capital Ndjamena. Though the raid was quickly quelled by government troops, the attack triggered a crisis for Chad. Chadian President Deby accused Sudan of backing the FUC attack on Ndjamena in an attempt to overthrow him and destabilize Chad. In response to this perceived threat from its neighbor, Chad cut off diplomatic ties with Sudan on April 14 and ordered Sudanese diplomats to leave the country. Chad also closed its border with Sudan on the same day. Sudan denied Chad's accusations immediately and affirmed its commitment to the Tripoli agreement. Although Sudan was clearly an involved actor in the conflict, it never experienced a crisis because Chad's political actions against Sudan did not pose a military threat. Chad was the only actor experiencing a crisis since Sudan did not perceive any military threat coming from its neighbor.

The international community reacted to the FUC attack on the Chadian capital immediately. The UN, which had withdrawn its staff from Chad's capital as the rebel attack intensified, condemned the rebel offensive. The Security Council urged both countries to uphold the provisions set forth in the Tripoli agreement. The African Union also condemned the FUC attack and called for a dialogue to end the dispute. In order to investigate Chad's accusations, the AU sent a fact-finding mission to the region at the end of April. The United States made statements calling for an end to the violence in the region and expressed its concerns over Chad's decision to sever diplomatic relations with Khartoum. However a week after the FUC attack the U.S. suggested that Sudan could be involved in the rebel offensive, but Washington stopped short of officially endorsing Chad's allegations against Sudan.

Having been involved in the mediation between Chad and Sudan which led to the signing of Tripoli agreement, Libya contacted both sides as soon as the crisis started for Chad. On April 16, Libyan foreign minister made a brief visit to Chad and a Libyan envoy met with the Sudanese President on April 17. Libya's initial efforts to ease the tension between Chad and Sudan turned out to be fruitless as Chad continued to accuse Sudan of backing the FUC and violating the Tripoli agreement. Sudan, in the mean time, maintained that Chad was experiencing a domestic rebellion for which Sudan should not be held responsible. In response to President Deby's accusations, Sudanese government blamed Chad for supporting Darfur rebel factions and undermining the peace process with the rebels in Sudan. During the month of May, Libyan leader Al-Qadhafi and his envoys continued their mediation efforts to improve the relations between the two neighbors.

In early June, the AU fact-finding mission concluded that Chad's accusations could not be confirmed. As President Deby became more discontent with the AU's involvement, Chad further accused Sudan of trying to destabilize the entire region, using Darfur as a base of rebel operations. Chad briefly threatened to expel Sudanese refugees who had sought refuge from the war-torn Darfur region, though Deby quickly backed off on this threat as a result of international pressure.

Throughout June, Sudan looked for ways of reconciliation with Chad. Sudanese Foreign Minister asked France for help in mending its relations with Chad. The UN and the AU also continued to put pressure on both sides to normalize their relations and abide by the Tripoli Agreement. During the seventh AU Summit in Gambia, Libyan President arranged a tripartite meeting with Sudan and Chad on July 2-3. At the end of the meeting, President Al-Bashir of Sudan and President Deby of Chad agreed to set up a joint committee for normalizing their relations and reaffirmed their commitment to the Tripoli Agreement. As a follow up to this meeting, Chadian foreign minister went to Khartoum for several days in mid-July and met with the Sudanese government to discuss political and security matters as well as the possibility of resuming diplomatic relations.

The meeting between Chad and Sudan in Gambia arranged by Libya was not the only development that came out of the AU Summit in early July. During the summit, the AU charged Senegal with mediating a full peace accord between Chad and Sudan as soon as possible. In mid-July the Senegalese President announced his desire to bring Chad and Sudan together for peace talks. He paid short visits to both countries to arrange this meeting. As a result, a mini-summit between Chad and Sudan was scheduled to take place on 9 August in the Senegalese capital, Dakar.

Although Senegal was charged with mediation by the AU, Libya's mediation efforts since the beginning of the crisis turned out to be much more effective. After the Chadian foreign minister's visit to Sudan in mid-July, which was an outcome of the Libyan initiative during the AU Summit, the two countries continued their negotiations that led to a peace deal. On 26 July 2006, Chad and Sudan signed a peace deal agreeing to take steps to normalize their relations. The agreement called for a joint military commission to monitor the border and forbade the presence of rebel elements in both countries. The peace deal repeated much of the text from the Tripoli agreement. Though it was a step in the right direction, the peace deal left the resumption of diplomatic relations between the two countries to the appreciation of the two heads of state who were not present at the signing of the agreement.

The presidents of Chad and Sudan were supposed to meet on August 9 in Dakar to finalize their commitment to the agreement and to restore the diplomatic relations between the countries. However, Libya found a window of opportunity before that date to arrange a reconciliatory meeting between the two heads of state. On August 8, many African leaders, including the President of Sudan, were present in Ndjamena to attend President Deby's inauguration ceremony after his re-election as president. Libyan leader Al-Qadhafi persuaded Sudanese and Chadian Presidents to hold an impromptu mini-summit after the inauguration ceremony. The mini-summit was also attended by the head of the AU, and the leaders of the Republic of Congo and Gabon. At the end of this impromptu mini-summit, Chad and Sudan agreed to put a definitive end to their differences and immediately restore diplomatic ties by reopening their common border and respective embassies. These decisions were also confirmed in an official statement issued by Chad after the summit. As a result of this development, the Dakar meeting did not take place on August 9 because Chadian and Sudanese officials decided that it was no longer necessary. The mini-summit organized by Libya officially marked the end of the crisis for Chad on 8 August 2006.

References:

Keesing's Record of World Events, Lexis-Nexis Online, CIA World Fact Book.

Last Updated: 2/6/2009


