CRISNO 119

KASHMIR I

Background:

The first crisis between India and Pakistan over Kashmir lasted from 24 October 1947 to 1 January 1949.

Background and Pre-crisis In 1847 the British sold the Vale of Kashmir to the Dogra ruler of Jammu who, in turn, acknowledged British paramountcy. In 1947 it was run along orthodox Hindu lines. If the disposition of Jammu and Kashmir had been made according to the principles applied to British India, the state--with the possible exception of a Hindu majority area in Jammu, adjacent to the Indian Punjab--would have gone to Pakistan. At that time Kashmir had a Hindu ruler, with an overwhelming Muslim population, approximately 75 percent of more than four million. However, the power of decision rested with the maharaja. Accession to a democratic India had no appeal for him; but the future looked even less promising in a Muslim Pakistan.

The last viceroy of British India visited Kashmir in July 1947 in an effort to convince the maharaja to accede to either India or Pakistan. However, he was suspicious of the British and resisted Mountbatten's pressure to make a definite decision. Hoping to achieve independence, the maharaja arrested most of the state's politicians and tried to arrange "standstill agreements"--status quo arrangements--with both India and Pakistan.

The importance of this territory for Pakistan lay in the fact that the upper regions of four of the rivers upon which Pakistan depended for irrigation--the Indus River and its tributaries--were inside Kashmir or on the border. The location of Kashmir, contiguous to India and Pakistan, Chinese-controlled Tibet, and the Afghanistan-controlled narrow Wakhan corridor leading to the Soviet Union, endowed it with strategic value. For India, in addition to the strategic dimension, Kashmir, the only Muslim majority state in independent India, was crucial to its claim and goal of being a secular, multireligious, pluralist democracy.

The communal rioting in Punjab spread to Jammu, where Hindu and Sikh refugees attacked Muslims. In September a Muslim revolt against the government of Kashmir erupted in the western part of the state. A provisional Azad (Free) Kashmir government was established by the rebels. At this point, with much of the northern and northwestern parts of the subcontinent in near chaos, Muslim tribesmen from the North West Frontier Province of Pakistan invaded Kashmir. Pakistan aided these tribesmen by allowing them to use its territory as a base and enabling them to pass through to Kashmir.

Summary:

The trigger to India's crisis was an invasion of the Kashmir valley by Pakistan-armed and Pakistan-backed Muslim tribesmen from the North West Frontier Province on 24 October 1947. The (Hindu) maharaja of Kashmir immediately appealed to India for help in suppressing the threat to his rule. India responded on the 26th, only after receiving Kashmir's formal accession, by ordering an airlift of troops, equipment, and supplies into the area. This triggered Pakistan's crisis on 27 October.

On 6 February 1948 rebel forces launched an attack on the key junction of Naushara. At that point Pakistani officers realized that the Azad Kashmir forces could not hold the Indian army. They decided to maintain the Pakistani Seventh Division in position behind the front. Pakistan's major response came on 17 March 1948, long after it had become involved in a related crisis over Junagadh: Pakistan launched an unsuccessful attack on Poonch that resulted in an Indian spring offensive. The crisis over Kashmir ended for both India and Pakistan with a UN-mediated cease-fire on 1 January 1949.

India referred the issue to the UN, charging Pakistan with complicity in the tribal invasion: it asked the Security Council to call upon Pakistan to halt its assistance to the Muslim tribesmen fighting in Kashmir. Pakistan charged New Delhi with genocide. Resolutions were adopted on 15 and 17 January 1948 calling upon the parties to refrain from aggression. A UN Commission for India and Pakistan (UNCIP) was established to investigate and mediate the dispute. UNCIP consisted of members from the US, Belgium, Colombia, Argentina and Czechoslovakia, and it arrived on 7 July 1948. After meeting with both sides without much success UNCIP submitted a three-part resolution proposing a cease-fire, Indian and Pakistani withdrawals, with India retaining forces in Kashmir to maintain order, and a plebiscite. Pakistan refused. A cease-fire resolution of the Security Council was finally accepted by both parties in December 1948 and took effect on 1 January 1949.

The U.S. and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

(Since then two-thirds of Jammu and Kashmir has been occupied by India and one-third by Pakistan, with a UN Observer Group to monitor the cease-fire. Almost half a century later, the conflict over Kashmir remains unresolved).

References:

Birdwood 1956; Blinkenberg 1972; Brecher 1953; Brines 1968; Choudhury 1968; Das Gupta 1958; Day 1987; Ganguly 1986; Goodspeed 1967; Gupta 1966; Hodson 1985; Keesing's 1973; Korbel 1954; Lamb 1966; Menon 1956; Muhammad 1967; Nehru 1956.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


