CRISNO 45

AUSTRIA PUTSCH

Background:

The crisis over the attempted putsch (plot to overthrow the government) in Austria occurred between 25 and 31 July 1934. Austria, Czechoslovakia, Italy, and Yugoslavia were crisis actors.

Background and Pre-crisis Chancellor Dollfuss began ruling Austria by emergency decrees in March 1932 and built his dictatorship on the anti-Nazi and anti-marxist principles of the Heimwehr (Home Guard) militia. All elections were prohibited after the Nazis won nine of the 20 seats in the Innsbruck municipality. In May 1933 about 100 Austrian Nazis were arrested at a political demonstration. A Nazi campaign of terror led to the formal suppression of the Austrian Nazi Party, the NSDAP. The party went underground. Germany's aggressive policy toward Austria increased in the summer of 1933. Dollfuss's efforts to secure support abroad succeeded in acquiring moral and financial support for Vienna from France and the U.K. His appeal to his patron, Mussolini, led to an Italian warning to Hitler on 5 August and subsequent assurances of Italian support. A series of provocative German broadcasts directed at Austria were initiated from the Bavarian capital. Italy, France, and Britain sent representatives to Berlin to discuss the cessation of German subversive activity in Austria, with partial success, although the broadcasts continued. On 11 August 1933 there was a shooting incident on the Austro-German frontier. On the 14th alleged documents of the Austrian Nazi Party were published, but their authenticity was denied by the Party. On 3 October there was an unsuccessful assassination attempt on Dollfuss. Attempts at reconciliation between Austria and Germany did not produce results.

On 12 February 1934 the headquarters of the Socialist Party in Linz was stormed. A strike by the electrical workers paralyzed Austria. Arrests of most of the Socialist leaders followed. Three days of heavy fighting between the Heimwehr and the Socialists followed. Martial law was proclaimed, together with the dissolution of the Socialist Party, trade unions, and all affiliated organizations. On 1 May the Austrian cabinet declared a new constitution: the country would henceforth be ruled by the clerical fascists of the Heimwehr. Dollfuss assumed the portfolios of public security, foreign affairs, and war, apart from the chancellorship. Hitler and Mussolini met in Venice on 14 June to discuss the Austrian question. On 12 July the Austrian cabinet decreed the death penalty for unauthorized possession of explosives following discovery that a new supply of arms was pouring across the German border. A Czechoslovakian worker was beaten and hung by the police in Vienna on the 24th. A cabinet meeting was rescheduled for the following day.

Summary:

On 25 July 1934 Austrian Nazis attacked the chancery and killed Dollfuss, triggering a crisis for Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Italy. Austria's response, the same day, was to repress the rebellion and arrest participating members of the SS unit. The vice-chancellor took charge of the government. Two days later Czechoslovakia, fearing that a German invasion of Austria would lead to an Italian invasion as well, threatened to move troops in the direction of Vienna to protect its own territory. Italy, determined to prevent an anschluss (union) of Austria with Germany, responded immediately by rushing troops to the border at the Brenner Pass on 25 July and by warning Hitler that, if the Germans invaded Austria, Italy would cross that border. At that time Dollfuss's family was in Italy, as Mussolini's guests, and were awaiting the chancellor's arrival on the 27th.

The Italian response of 25 July triggered a crisis for Yugoslavia, which had a long-standing dispute with Italy over Carinthia. Italian troops at the Brenner Pass constituted a serious security problem for Yugoslavia. Its response, that day, was a threat to move forces, mobilization, the strengthening of frontier guards, and the movement of some troops to the Moribor area on the Yugoslav/Austrian border.

The crisis ended for Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Italy on 31 July, by which time the Austrian militia had completed the suppression of Nazi uprisings that had belatedly broken out in the provinces. Yugoslavia's crisis ended that day as well, as a result of Italy's decision not to send troops into Austria. Germany's decision to pull back from an attempted anschluss constituted a tacit agreement with Italy not to take such action then or later without the latter's approval.

France, the U.K., and Germany were involved actors. The first two feared a war in Europe as a consequence of a successful putsch, while Hitler decried its failure, fearing Western blame for the attempt and not being militarily prepared as yet for a showdown with Britain and France.

There was no League of Nations activity in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #60; and Ball 1937; Weinberg 1970.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


