CRISNO 106

KARS-ARDAHAN

Background:

The Kars-Ardahan crisis, the first in the East/West Cold War, lasted from 7 June 1945 to 5 April 1946. Turkey alone was a crisis actor, while the U.S., the USSR, and the U.K. were highly involved.

Background The territories of Kars and Ardahan are located in northeast Turkey bordering Armenia. Following its defeat in the Russo/Turkish War, the Ottoman Empire transferred Kars and Ardahan to Russia in 1878. They reverted to Republican Turkey in March 1921. At the end of World War II long-standing Soviet designs on the Turkish Straits were revived when the USSR requested a revision of its 1925 alliance with Turkey--due to changed conditions. A Soviet press campaign was launched against Turkey.

Summary:

On 7 June 1945, at a meeting in Moscow with the Turkish ambassador, Foreign Minister Molotov submitted a set of Soviet proposals to revise the 1936 Montreux Convention on the Straits. The demands, including the return of the Kars and Ardahan territories, triggered a crisis for Turkey. Its ambassador informed the Turkish government, which apprised the U.K. on 12 June. In Washington the U.K. ambassador proposed a joint U.S.-U.K. démarche, to be presented before the scheduled July Potsdam Conference; this was rejected by the U.S. at that time. Later in June and in early July information about the massing of Soviet forces on the Turkish frontier was relayed to Washington. The USSR, in exchanges with the U.S., presented its territorial demands for parts of Turkish Armenia, emphasizing the need for adequate security on the Black Sea coast, with free passage for Soviet warships and the right to close the Straits to all ships should it so desire. On 2 July Turkey responded by requesting aid from the U.K. and the U.S., emphasizing the dangerous situation in which the U.S. was being placed. This succeeded in getting Washington's agreement to bring the matter before Stalin at Potsdam.

When Churchill refused to consider Stalin's demands for bases in Turkey, Truman proposed a revision of the Montreux Convention under a three-power guarantee, to ensure free passage through the Straits for the ships of all states in peace and war. Discussion was postponed. As U.S. concern about Soviet ambitions increased, Washington decided on an unusual show of force. On 5 April 1946 the U.S. navy announced that the body of the deceased Turkish ambassador to the U.S. would be returned to Istanbul via the battleship Missouri, with full escort. This move, pointing to assured U.S. support, terminated the crisis for Turkey.

The situation remained stable throughout the summer until a renewal of Soviet demands triggered another, closely related crisis for Turkey in August 1946 (see Case #111--Turkish Straits).

Although the League of Nations formally continued to exist until April 1946, it was not involved in this crisis. The disputants discussed the idea of submitting this issue to the UN; but in the end the new global organization was not approached.

References:

See sources for Case #114.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


