CRISNO 267

OPERATION THRASHER

Background:

The first of several international crises arising from the struggle for black majority rule in Rhodesia erupted on 22 February and ended in April 1976. Rhodesia and Mozambique were the crisis actors.

Background War between Rhodesia and Zambia, Mozambique, and Botswana had been raging since 1976 when Rhodesia set up a War Council to supervise the destruction of guerrilla bases in those countries. Beginning in February 1976 Rhodesian troops and aircraft repeatedly raided across the 1,200-kilometer border with Mozambique in order to harass Zimbabwean guerrillas before they could infiltrate into Rhodesia, and to strike at economic targets in a bid to drive home to the Maputo regime the high cost of its support for the Zimbabwean insurgents.

Pre-crisis Systematic guerrilla activity against Rhodesia's UDI had begun in December 1972 but was restricted to the northeast. When the campaign spread throughout the country in 1976 Rhodesia became involved in a full-scale war. The scale of operations also changed, as large groups of guerrillas entered Rhodesia, operating from Mozambique, Botswana, and Zambia.

The heads of state of the "Front-line States"--Botswana, Mozambique, Tanzania, and Zambia--met in Mozambique on 7 and 8 February 1976. There they reaffirmed the need for an armed struggle to achieve majority rule in Rhodesia. On the 8th Mozambique President Machel threatened to invade Rhodesia. Constitutional talks between Rhodesia's Prime Minister Smith and Nkomo, representing the African National Council, were resumed on 10 February.

Summary:

The first clash between Rhodesian security forces and unidentified guerrillas from across the Mozambique border, a three-hour battle on 22 February 1976, triggered a crisis for Rhodesia. Further guerrilla activity was reported in the Chipinga district, 180 miles south of the northeastern border, on the 24th. Rhodesia responded that day by launching Operation Thrasher, an attack on ZANLA bases near its southeastern border with Mozambique, causing the deaths of a number of people and extensive damage, which in turn triggered a crisis for Mozambique. Machel described the attack as an "act of war" and stated that Mozambique forces had shot down Rhodesian aircraft and helicopters, a claim that was not backed by other sources. The Mozambique response was to meet the Rhodesian forces with violence, an announcement on 3 March that all communications with Rhodesia had been banned, and the imposition of sanctions--including the confiscation of all Rhodesian property and assets in Mozambique in accordance with earlier UN and OAU resolutions. On the 8th Mozambique closed its border with Rhodesia, and the country was put on a war footing.

The crisis for Rhodesia faded in March 1976 with a temporary halt in guerrilla activities. The Smith-Nkomo talks ended in deadlock on 19 March with each side blaming the other. The crisis ended in April for Mozambique with a decision to set up a joint institute for the training of defense and police forces with Tanzania and Zambia.

The Security Council met in March and adopted a resolution on the 17th condemning Rhodesia. Mozambique's foreign minister appealed to the Council for $57 million in aid to cover the loss of revenue for Mozambique from the UN imposition of sanctions against Rhodesia. Another Security Council resolution on 6 April strengthened the sanctions. The OAU supported UN sanctions and granted military aid to the guerrillas.

The United States' involvement was limited to several statements by Secretary of State Kissinger favorable to Mozambique. The Soviet Union supplied weapons to both of Rhodesia's guerrilla organizations, ZIPRA and ZANLA.

References:

ACR 1976; AD 1976; ARec 1976; ARB 1976; Keesing's 1976.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


