CRISNO 43

JEHOL CAMPAIGN

Background:

China's crisis over the province of Jehol lasted from 23 February to 31 May 1933.

Pre-crisis The creation of the State of Manchukuo by Japan in 1932 (see Case #39--Mukden Incident) included the territory of China's three northeastern provinces, Jehol, and parts of Inner Mongolia. The Japanese-Manchukuon forces had been operating to clear the area of all anti-Japanese and anti-Manchukuo Chinese pockets in Jehol. In order to resist Japanese advances, China resolved to concentrate troops south of the Great Wall at various points in the province of Jehol in December 1932. Despite Japan's repeated warning, three Chinese brigades were moved to Jehol. Japanese forces occupied Shanhaikwan on 3 January 1933 to provide a preliminary base for the expected occupation of Jehol. A state of extreme tension prevailed in China, but the Chinese military remained confident of its ability to halt a Japanese advance in Jehol.

Summary:

On 23 February 1933 the Japanese issued an ultimatum calling for the evacuation of all Chinese troops from Jehol and warning that no guarantees could be given that military hostilities would not spread to North China. That day 30,000 Japanese and 1,000 Manchukuon troops launched an attack on Jehol. The ultimatum was rejected the next day by the Chinese, who moved more troops to the area. Jehol fell on 4 March to the Japanese, and by May they had advanced to within three kilometers of Beijing. On 31 May 1933 the Chinese government signed a truce at Taugku, in accordance with which Chinese forces withdrew west of Beijing and the Japanese undertook to stay north of the Great Wall. This ended the Jehol crisis.

During March 1933 the U.K., France, and the U.S. were informed that China would not negotiate with Japan and that resistance was its legitimate right as a member of the League of Nations. In February recommendations had been submitted by the League, but China felt that they did not go far enough in sanctioning Japan and withdrew its request. The British then refused to mediate. The U.S. was approached in May; President Roosevelt issued a noncommittal statement. Italy strongly condemned Japan. Plans for joint efforts by Italy, the U.S., and the U.K. to end the fighting in northern China never came to fruition.

References:

Borg 1964; MacNair and Lach 1955; Thorne 1972; Vinacke 1959.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


