CRISNO 30

RUHR II

Background:

Germany and France were the adversaries in another crisis over reparations from 29 April to 30 August 1924.

Pre-crisis Despite Germany's abandonment of passive resistance to demands for reparations payments, tensions between the West European victor and vanquished in World War I became more acute. The Dawes Plan of 9 April 1924, which specified a schedule of German payments for five years, was accepted by Germany a week later; but it insisted on immediate evacuation of the Ruhr. However, France (and Belgium) refused to withdraw from the Ruhr until 12 months of reparations payments were made. A standoff ensued, and tensions escalated.

Summary:

France's demand precipitated a crisis for Germany on 29 April: it feared that French Premier Poincaré's behavior was designed to foment a crisis thereby permitting France to use more coercive measures to achieve its aims--humiliation of Germany and weakening its economy. France's pressure on Germany to comply, and Germany's reluctance to pay further reparations without a guarantee of French withdrawal from the Ruhr and its demilitarization, maintained a high level of stress.

France perceived a crisis on 8 July, as evident in newly elected Premier Herriot's expression of concern for the military security of France: when Germany was "strong enough to refuse" to pay reparations, it would instigate a "new war." On 9 August the German delegation to a conference in London agreed to implement the Dawes Plan provisions on reparations. And on the 16th Germany signed a protocol with France and Belgium ending Germany's second Ruhr crisis: it was agreed that the occupation of the Ruhr would end by August 1925. For France, the second Ruhr crisis ended on 30 August, when the London Conference agreements were formally adopted, one day after the Reichstag ratified the protocol.

During the talks in London, British Prime Minister James Ramsay MacDonald shared mediation efforts with a group of Americans led by Frank B. Kellogg and Owen Young. The main source of disagreement between the German and French delegations at the London conference was over the timetable for French withdrawal. MacDonald bore much of the task of finding common ground between the two and sought face-saving tactics for both sides. He was also able to keep the agenda focused by avoiding discussion of disarmament issues. Japan and Italy were also highly involved in the negotiations that led to crisis resolution. Yugoslavia and to a lesser extent Greece, Romania, and Portugal were also involved in the negotiations. The League of Nations was not involved.

References:

DBFP (Medlicott et al.) 1976, 1978, 1985; Boulter 1928; Dexter 1967; Helmreich 1976; Rogers 1934; Sauvy 1972; Toynbee 1926.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


