CRISNO 162

FORMATION OF UAR

Background:

The two crisis actors were Iraq and Jordan. The crisis began on 1 February and ended on 14 February 1958.

Background An announcement by King Hussein of Jordan in April 1957 of the discovery of a Syrian-Egyptian plot against him led to the dismissal of the entire Jordanian cabinet and a political swing to the Right (see Case #157--Jordan Regime). As a result Jordan's relations with Syria and Egypt worsened, and a violent anti-Jordan campaign of defamation ensued in those countries.

In Iraq, since Nuri Al-Sa'id's return to power in 1954, close collaboration with the West existed simultaneously with a repressive domestic regime. Discontent among the politically articulate elements of the population grew--Arab nationalists, liberals, communists, traditionalists, and army officers. And as the popularity of Egypt's Nasir increased, the Iraqi regime looked for ways to counter Egyptian influence on its citizens.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for Iraq and Jordan when the merger of Egypt and Syria into the United Arab Republic (UAR) was proclaimed on 1 February 1958. This was perceived by the Hashemite rulers, King Hussein of Jordan and King Feisal of Iraq, as an act to incite the revolutionary pan-Arab movement and the Arab peoples to rise against existing Arab governments in order to join the UAR. The merger changed the Middle East subsystem: the Syrian Republic ceased to exist, and the new UAR was controlled by Nasir, giving it a population larger than all other Arab states combined. Hussein suggested a meeting with Feisal, which would include King Ibn Sa'ud of Sa'udi Arabia, to discuss the possibility of a similar union. On 11 February an Iraqi delegation arrived in Amman. Their response was a joint Proclamation on 14 February 1958 establishing the Arab Federation. This marked the end of the crisis for both Iraq and Jordan. Sa'udi Arabia sent a representative to the talks but did not sign the Proclamation. At first Nasir accepted the formation of the Federation, but two weeks later he attacked it as an arrangement between reactionaries who lacked the support of their subjects.

There was no violence during this Middle East crisis.

Neither the U.S. or the USSR, nor the UN, was involved in this crisis.

References:

Cremeans 1963; Hussein 1962; Kerr 1970; Lenczowski 1962; MEJ Chronology 1958; St. John 1960; Shimoni 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


