CRISNO 296

FALL OF AMIN

Background:

Tanzania, Uganda, and Libya were the actors in a crisis from 30 October 1978 to 10 April 1979 leading to the fall of Uganda's President Idi Amin.

Background In 1971 General Idi Amin seized power in Uganda in a coup that overthrew the regime of President Milton Obote, who then took refuge in Tanzania. From that time onward relations between the two countries were hostile as Amin perceived President Nyerere of Tanzania as supporting a military overthrow of his regime. Crises between the two countries occurred in 1971 and 1972 (see Cases #245, #247). During the years that followed no overt clashes occurred, but there were mutual accusations of troop movements. In October 1978 serious mutinies erupted in various Ugandan army barracks near the Tanzanian border. The mutineers were reported to have fled into Tanzania.

Summary:

On 30 October Ugandan troops invaded Tanzania and occupied the Kagera Salient, triggering a crisis for Tanzania. Idi Amin announced that he had annexed the area north of the Kagera River. A large Ugandan force followed the invading troops. Tanzania's resistance in the Salient on 31 October triggered a crisis for Uganda, but the Tanzanian major response was a counteroffensive launched on 11 November. Uganda responded on the 13th by withdrawing its forces from the Kagera Salient. By late November President Nyerere made it known that Tanzania would not be satisfied until Amin was overthrown. Sporadic fighting continued until the end of January 1979 as Tanzanian forces pushed across the Ugandan border. As they began to advance northward into Uganda, the tense border situation exploded in a series of violent exchanges.

By mid-February the Tanzanian advance had come within 150 kilometers of Kampala. At that stage, Libya, an ally of Amin's Uganda, renewed its mediatory efforts, with little success. As Amin's position became more vulnerable, the Ugandan leader appealed to "all friendly countries" to come to his rescue with troops and military equipment. On 25 February the government of Libya perceived the possible downfall of Amin as a threat to its influence in the region. It responded to this crisis on 4 March by sending troops to Kampala to join an earlier contingent that had arrived in Entebbe, together with supplies, in mid-February.

Despite the new equipment and foreign reinforcements, Uganda suffered defeat after defeat until, by 25 March, Tanzanian artillery was firing on Kampala and Entebbe. On 6 April Tanzanian and anti-Amin Ugandan forces moved to the outskirts of Kampala; and, on the following day, they captured Entebbe. On 9 April it was reported that Libya paid the Ugandan National Liberation Forces (UNLF, the combined exiled anti-Amin forces) the equivalent of $20 million to allow Libya's expeditionary force to pull out of Uganda without being attacked.

The crisis ended for Libya in defeat. The following day Amin fled from the capital, and the crisis ended for Uganda and Tanzania.

Amin's appeals to the OAU, the Arab League, and the UN, on 4 November 1978, to force the Tanzanians to stop fighting had failed, as did the mediation attempts by Kenya, Nigeria, and Zambia. Discussions in an OAU ad hoc committee on interstate conflicts were also fruitless. On 25 February envoys from the committee visited the presidents in their capitals in hopes of resolving the crisis. Tanzania had demanded that the OAU condemn Ugandan aggression, but a seven-point plan that the committee presented did not contain such a resolution, and Tanzania summarily rejected it. On 2 March 1979 the OAU admitted that its efforts to reach a cease-fire had failed. UN Secretary-General Waldheim appealed to Tanzania and Uganda to stop fighting and offered his good offices to seek a solution.

United States involvement was political: on 6 March 1979 the State Department accused Libya of direct military involvement; this followed a statement by Secretary of State Vance calling for the withdrawal of Ugandan troops from the Kagera Salient at the onset of the crisis. A Pravda statement on 12 November 1978 accused Tanzania of aggression: the USSR had been a supplier of weapons and advisors to Amin's Uganda prior to the crisis, but there was no increase in this activity during the crisis. In March 1979 the Soviet Union reportedly withdrew advisors and military supplies from Uganda.

References:

ACR 1978, 1979; Amer 1992; AR 1978-79; ARec 1978-79; Avirgan and Honey 1982; Brzoska and Pearson 1994; Omara-Otunnu 1987; Smith 1980; Twaddle 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


