CRISNO 27

RUHR I

Background:

Poland, Germany, and the Netherlands experienced a crisis arising from the reparations issue from 22 January to 27 September 1923.

Pre-crisis The conflict over German reparations continued to create tension after the crisis of 1921. By December 1922 Germany was declared to be in default regarding deliveries of lumber. And in early January 1923 it was declared in default of coal deliveries. On 10 January France and Belgium informed Germany that a commission of engineers, including Italians, would enter the Ruhr escorted by French and Belgian troops to facilitate the delivery of coal. The next day the Ruhr was occupied, an act that brought a strong protest from the German government. It also prompted Bolshevik Russia to make Poland aware that any Polish designs on German territory, notably Upper Silesia, would not be tolerated. The Soviets were trying to neutralize Poland and to improve Russo-German relations, in the hope that this would pave the way for the spread of communism in Germany.

Summary:

Threats from Moscow generated a Polish perception of threat, time pressure, and higher probability of hostilities with Russia, on 22 January 1923. This concern was evident in the remark by a Polish minister to the German foreign office the same day, that Russian military moves made his government "very nervous." There was no clear termination date for Poland; rather, it faded in late July 1923.

Germany, the principal actor in this international crisis, did not perceive a crisis until 28 February, when its government expressed concern about civilian disturbances precipitated by the occupation of the Ruhr. The major German response was to approve a series of economic ordinances beginning on 16 March in support of passive opposition to the occupation; but Germany also negotiated with its adversaries.

The Netherlands entered the crisis on 9 March as a result of fear of the prospects for a new European war generated by information communicated to one of its ministers by French officials. It responded four days later by seeking--and getting--British assurances about the occupation of the Ruhr.

The German government fell in August. And its successor began to reassess the tactic of passive resistance. On 27 September Germany capitulated by calling off passive resistance, terminating the crisis for Germany and the Netherlands and the larger international crisis over the Ruhr.

There were many involved actors in Ruhr I: the three crisis actors; Belgium and France, Italy, Japan, the U.K., the U.S., and the USSR, along with the Vatican. Belgium expressed concern over the occupation; while the U.K. reassured Belgium by terming the occupation illegal. The League of Nations was not involved.

References:

See sources for Case #30; and Korbel 1963; Kossmann 1978; Polonsky 1972; von Riekhoff 1971.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


