CRISNO 26

CHANAK

Background:

Turkey and the U.K. experienced a crisis over the Neutral Zone of Chanak (Canakkale) from 23 September to 11 October 1922.

Pre-crisis The ignominious Greek withdrawal from Anatolia on 15 September 1922 marked the end of the Greece/Turkey War (see Case #25--Greece/Turkey War III). An important spillover effect was the removal of the buffer between Turkish and British troops stationed on both sides of the Dardanelles. Public opinion in the U.K. and the West generally seemed strongly opposed to the resumption of hostilities in Anatolia. Moreover, the British media were adamant about the need to withdraw from Asia Minor. And Prime Minister Lloyd George's urgent request for military support from the British Dominions, on 18 September, met with an unmistakably negative response.

Summary:

The continuing risk of war prompted London to offer an armistice to Kemal Atatürk on 23 September triggering a crisis for the nationalist regime: an armistice was perceived as a cover for continued British occupation of Turkish territory. Kemal Atatürk responded the same day by dispatching troops into the Neutral Zone drawn around the city of Chanak on the Anatolian bank of the Dardanelles. This catalyzed a crisis for the U.K. There was no violence; in fact, Turkish forces halted their advance before reaching U.K. military installations.

British troops were put on a state of alert but were ordered not to fire first. Three days later the U.K. sent an ultimatum to Kemal Atatürk via its ambassador to Turkey demanding evacuation of the Neutral Zone by Turkish forces. However, Lord Harrington believed that the Turks did not want war and did not deliver the ultimatum! He so informed London on 1 October. The same day, following French pressure and a meeting between the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Curzon, and Turkey's deputy foreign minister, Mustafa Kemal accepted the earlier offer of an armistice thus removing the need for a renewed British ultimatum. With war still lurking in the background, a conference began on the 3rd at Mudanya on the Anatolian side of the Sea of Marmara. After an initial deadlock on the 5th an armistice was signed on 11 October ending the Chanak crisis.

The agreement was a compromise for the U.K., a notable victory for Turkey. The former averted an undesirable war and succeeded in persuading Kemal Atatürk to remove his forces from the Neutral Zone around Chanak. Turkey obtained British recognition of its sovereignty over Istanbul, the Straits, and Eastern Thrace, the last at the expense of the Greeks. Moreover, the Mudanya armistice created the basis for a peace conference, which produced the much less punitive Treaty of Lausanne on 24 July 1923, replacing what for Turkey was the odious Treaty of Sèvres on 10 August 1920, a triumph for Kemal Atatürk.

The League of Nations was not involved in this case.

References:

See sources for Case #25.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


