CRISNO 148

BAGHDAD PACT

Background:

Egypt's crisis over the Baghdad Pact began on 24 February and ended in mid-October 1955.

Background and Pre-crisis In February 1954 a Syrian army coup, with Iraqi involvement, ousted a pro-Egyptian regime in Damascus headed by Adib Shishakli. However, Iraqi hopes for a pro-Western Syria were not realized. An agreement between Turkey and Pakistan and bilateral military aid agreements between the U.S., Turkey, and Iraq were signed in April 1954. The United States and Pakistan signed a similar agreement the following month. Iraq announced its intention to join a pro-Western alliance and endeavored to prevent possible isolation in the Arab world by attempting to persuade other Arab states to join as well. On 16 January 1955 Egypt called for an emergency meeting of the Arab League, claiming that no member should become party to an agreement with the Western powers and that such a pact would likely undermine Arab sovereignty and independence. Cairo was unsuccessful in its efforts to have Iraq expelled from the Arab League.

Summary:

On 24 February 1955 Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Turkey, and the U.K. created a regional anti-Soviet defense arrangement known as the Baghdad Pact, triggering a crisis for Egypt: Nasir viewed the Pact as a challenge to his leadership in the Arab world and a direct threat from the U.S. and the U.K. to overthrow his regime. At the end of February Egypt and Syria announced their intention to exclude Iraq from a new Arab alliance with Sa'udi Arabia and Yemen. Egypt's response, on 15 March, was a denunciation of the Pact and an accusation that the West was introducing great power rivalry and the Cold War into the Middle East, thus dividing the Arab world and threatening Egypt with encirclement. Egypt began to forge counteralliances with Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria; and the division of the Arab states into rival camps hardened.

The crisis ended in mid-October 1955 when Egypt and Syria concluded a Mutual Defense Pact. The United States participated in the negotiations and provided economic assistance but never formally joined the Pact. The Soviet Union provided arms and weapons to Egypt and Syria.

The UN was not involved in this crisis.

(In July 1958 a coup in Iraq overthrew the monarchy and established a military dictatorship [see Case #165--Iraq-Lebanon Upheaval]. Iraq subsequently left the Baghdad Pact.)

References:

Bowie 1974; Dekmejian 1971; Finer 1964; Hofstadter 1973; Lacouture 1973; Love 1969; Nutting 1967; Robertson 1964; Thomas 1970.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


