CRISNO 407

GEORGIA-ABKHAZIA

Background:

The newly independent state of Georgia experienced a crisis with Russia from 25 September 1992 to 8 October 1993 during its prolonged civil war against a separatist movement in Abkhazia.

Background The origins of Georgia can be traced to the first millennium b.c.e. However, its modern history began in 1800 when, in response to an appeal by the last king of Georgia for support against Persia, it was annexed by Russia. It was ruled until the end of World War I as an outlying province of the empire.

The collapse of czarist Russia and the turmoil accompanying the Bolshevik Revolution provided Georgia--and its Caucasian neighbors, Armenia and Azerbaijan--a "window of opportunity." The result was a short-lived independence, from April 1918 to February 1921, until the armies of the new Bolshevik regime established control over Transcaucasia. In March 1922 Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan were merged into the Transcaucasian Soviet Socialist Republic (TSSR) and became a part of the USSR. In 1936, under the "Stalin Constitution," they became "independent" republics of the Soviet Union.

Pre-crisis With the dissolution of the USSR at the end of 1991, Georgia, along with Armenia and Azerbaijan, became an independent state.

Abkhazia was an autonomous province in the northern part of Georgia near the border with the post-Soviet Russian Republic. The democratically elected first president of Georgia, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, a Georgian nationalist, was forced into exile in January 1992 by a rebellion led by former communists. Eduard Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Foreign Minister--and a former colonel in the KGB--became president.

Abkhazians, a distinctive ethnic group within Georgia, live mainly in the autonomous republics of Abkhazia and Adzarya, in which the port cities of Sukhumi and Batumi, Georgia's largest Black Sea harbors, are located. Abkhazian leaders demanded secession--the anti-Georgia movement in Abkhazia began its campaign against Georgia as early as 1977 but was suppressed by Soviet power. After the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the emergence of Georgia as a sovereign state, the long-standing low-intensity conflict within Georgia burst into a full-scale civil war, in which Russia supported the Abkhazians.

Fighting began in August 1992 between Georgian troops and Abkhaz separatists. Gamsakhurdia saw the eruption of war as an opportunity to return to power. The civil war threatened to draw Russia into conflict with Georgia, which accused Russia of actively supporting the rebels in order to protect its interests in the North Caucasus and the Black Sea region in general. Russia had a clear and stated goal of maintaining a strategic presence along Georgia's Black Sea coast, that is, a conception of Russia's "rights" in its neighboring "new states" as similar to those encompassed in the Brezhnev Doctrine (see Case #227--Prague Spring, in 1968, in Europe: Non-PCs). To Russia's nationalists and military, who were thought to be behind the Russian involvement in Georgia's civil strife, the secession of Abkhazia was viewed as both an opportunity to regain access to Black Sea resorts and "revenge" for Shevardnadze's role in the dissolution of the USSR.

Summary:

On 25 September 1992 Russia's Supreme Soviet (later, Duma) denounced Georgia's resort to violence in the interethnic conflict with the separatists of Abkhazia. It also passed a resolution suspending the delivery of Russian arms and equipment to Georgia. This triggered a crisis for Georgia, reinforcing its image of Russia as the patron of the Abkhaz separatists. Georgia accused Russia of interference in its domestic affairs.

After a lull in the fighting, serious clashes between Georgia's forces and the Abkhazian rebels resumed on 2 October. President Shevardnadze of Georgia blamed Russia for supplying arms to the separatists. Russia denied any involvement. But the next day President Boris Yeltsin warned that Russia would take "appropriate measures" if the lives of Russians in the conflict areas were threatened.

Relations with Russia worsened when the Georgian State Council announced that Georgia would take control of all Russian weapons and military equipment on its territory. The Russian Defense Minister, Marshal Pavel Grachev, warned that such an act would lead to "armed clashes." Georgia actually seized a Russian arms depot in southern Georgia on 2 November; and Marshal Grachev warned that Russia was prepared to use force in order to regain control of the depot.

Tension between Tbilisi and Moscow increased when, on 6 November, Georgia accused Russia of bombing Georgian positions in Sukhumi, the Abkhaz capital, and on the 8th, when Russia accused Georgia of involvement in the murder of three Russian soldiers in Abkhazia. In December 1992, after a Russian helicopter was shot down--it was delivering humanitarian aid to an Abkhazian town--Russia issued a protest and Defense Minister Grachev threatened again to take "measures of a military nature."

The Georgian Prime Minister, Tengiz Signa, said on 17 December that there was a crisis in relations between Georgia and Russia, but not a state of war. Georgia's parliament demanded the withdrawal of Russian troops from Abkhazia: despite the Russian denials of involvement in the civil war, 46 Russian servicemen had been killed in Georgia in 1992.

On 5 January 1993, Shevardnadze asked UN Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali to deploy a UN peacekeeping force to Abkhazia. Shevardnadze also urged the UN to call on Georgia's neighbors to remain neutral in the conflict. The next day a UN spokesperson said that time for UN intervention was not yet ripe. However, a UN mission arrived in Tbilisi on 20 January to ascertain the need for emergency aid for victims of ethnic conflict in the republic.

While fighting between Georgian forces and separatists continued, talks between Russia and Georgia were resumed in Tbilisi in January, with the goal of signing a friendship and cooperation accord between the two countries and to discuss the status of Russian troops in Georgia.

A major attack by separatists on Sukhumi, then held by Georgian forces, on 14-17 March, was materially aided by Russia. Georgia's parliament declared that the attack proved that Russia was escalating its undeclared war against Georgia. Russia again denied any involvement in the conflict. Yet, the bilateral talks continued, and a trade agreement was reached in March.

In April, Eduard Brunner was appointed by the UN Secretary-General as his Special Representative to assist in efforts to solve the Abkhazia conflict. Shevardnadze called for more active involvement by international organizations.

Violence continued in Georgia throughout June. On 16-22 June the Russian foreign minister held talks in Moscow with Georgian and Abkhaz delegations, in search of a cease-fire. As violence continued, Kozyrev threatened that "all necessary measures" would be taken against those responsible.

Georgian Prime Minister Tengiz Segna demanded on 7 July that Russia end its undeclared war against Georgia and called for the severance of diplomatic relations with Russia; the call was rejected by Shevardnadze.

Finally, on 27 July 1993 a peace agreement, mediated by Russia, was signed by Georgia and the Abkhaz separatists. Russia agreed to send troops as neutral peacekeepers, and the parties agreed on the need for UN observers to monitor the cease-fire. This agreement led to a sharp decline in tension between Georgia and Russia.

Shevardnadze and Yeltsin met in August and said that they were satisfied with the first steps toward a final settlement of the conflict over the future of Abkhazia.

On 25 August the UN Security Council approved the proposal to send 88 military observers to Georgia. The next day Georgia's army reported that all of its heavy military equipment and some troops had been withdrawn from the front line, as agreed in July. However, a surprise attack was launched on 16 September by Abkhaz separatists, and Sukhumi fell to the rebels after the major withdrawal of Georgian forces. On the 27th Shevardnadze accused Russia of "betrayal" and, specifically, of refusal to honor its obligations under the July cease-fire agreement, to enforce peace by military force if necessary.

In a letter to the UN Secretary-General, Shevardnadze wrote: "the world community should become aware that the evil empire is still thriving, still sowing seeds of death." Russia imposed sanctions on Abkhazia on 19-20 September but rejected Shevardnadze's call for the imposition of peace by the threat of force.

On 8 October, after a meeting with Yeltsin, Shevardnadze said that the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) was "the last chance to save the country" and agreed to join the loose successor to the USSR. (Georgia formally became a member of the CIS on 22 October.) Tension was defused, and the crisis ended.

(A peacekeeping force of 500 Russian marines arrived in Georgia on 4 November and was sent to western Georgia to protect main roads and railway lines. On 18 November the leader of Abkhazia's separatists, Vladislav Ardzinba, said that a referendum would be held to decide on unification with Russia.)

(The Georgia-Abkhaz agreement, mediated by the UN, was signed on 1 December in Geneva. The two sides agreed on a cease-fire and pledged to continue negotiations. They also agreed on the deployment of more international observers.)

References:

Keesing's 1992, 1993; New York Times 1992, 1993.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


