CRISNO 344

ABLE ARCHER 83

Background:

The Soviet Union experienced a mini-nuclear crisis with the United States from 2 to 11 November 1983.

Background Throughout the East/West protracted conflict one of the most important tasks of the intelligence services of the two superpowers was to monitor military exercises and alert procedures of the adversary. The most crucial were war games involving the planned use of nuclear weapons in both "first-strike" and retaliation scenarios.

Like the Warsaw Pact, NATO had conducted war games before, but its 1983 nuclear exercise, Able Archer, was more extensive than ever before. The Soviet misperception of the U.S.'s and NATO's intentions was influenced by its image of the Reagan administration as unpredictable, with a president who was willing to use force to protect and enhance U.S. "national interests." In the 18 months before Exercise Able Archer the U.S. had dispatched forces to Lebanon (see Case #337--War in Lebanon, in 1982-83, in the Arab/Israel PC) and to Honduras to weaken the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua. It also engaged in a show of force against Libya (see Case #330--Gulf of Syrte I, in 1981, in Africa: Non-PCs). And on 25 October 1983, a week before Able Archer began, the Reagan administration launched its Invasion of Grenada (see Case #343, in Americas: Non-PCs).

Soviet mistrust and concern were also reinforced by an incident on 1 September 1983, when a Soviet fighter plane shot down a Korean airliner, KAL-007, which penetrated deep into Soviet airspace while on a flight from Alaska to Seoul; all passengers and crew were killed, including 60 Americans. This incident caused deep concern in the U.S. Reagan later wrote in his memoirs: "If anything, the KAL incident demonstrated how close the world had come to the precipice and how much we needed nuclear arms control." Given this series of events, all of which were perceived in the Soviet prism as hostile and threatening, the sudden discovery of Exercise Able Archer was interpreted as ominous by Soviet decision makers.

Summary:

On 2 November 1983 NATO began a military exercise code-named Able Archer. The large-scale war game embraced all NATO territory from Norway to Turkey between 2 and 11 November and included large amounts of arms and combat equipment. Its aim was to test nuclear release mechanisms in case of a nuclear first strike against the Soviet bloc.

Able Archer was misperceived by the USSR as preparation for, not a simulation of, a nuclear attack by the West. It therefore triggered a grave crisis for the USSR--the closest the two superpowers came to a direct nuclear confrontation since the Cuban Missile crisis in 1962 (see Case #196). During the exercise, U.S. intelligence, monitoring Soviet communications, was alarmed to hear that the USSR was expecting--and preparing for--a nuclear war in a short time. The Soviet misperception was profoundly influenced by NATO's use of new communications procedures in Able Archer, which went through all alert stages, from normal to general alert.

The USSR first responded on 5 November, sending messages to the KGB residencies in Europe to warn of a Western surprise attack and ordering them to increase their vigilance. The same day a Politburo member, Romanov, in a public speech, described the international situation as "thoroughly white hot," a rarely used expression that indicated acute stress.

KGB agents in Germany reported on the 5th that U.S. bases had been placed on alert and that there were irregular troop movements. Moscow then sent urgent telegrams on the 8th-9th to its agents across Western Europe, warning of the U.S.'s nuclear alert. The Soviet major response came on the 9th, when it placed its nuclear fighters on higher alert.

The U.S. was astounded by the Soviet perception and by its profound concern about an imminent nuclear threat. Nonetheless, the very high tension generated by Exercise Able Archer, a mini-Cuban Missile crisis, ended without violence or incidents between the two superpowers: with the end of NATO's nuclear exercise on 11 November, the USSR's crisis terminated abruptly.

Although the incident was concealed by both sides, and little has been published since then, Able Archer seems to have had a profound effect on the East/West conflict. The day the crisis ended Reagan publicly called for the elimination of nuclear armaments in the world. The crisis also seems to have transformed Reagan's image of the "evil empire."

There was no UN involvement in this crisis.

References:

Andrew and Gordievsky 1990; Brook-Shepherd 1988; Fischer 1995; Oberdorfer 1991.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


