CRISNO 419

DESERT STRIKE

Background:

Between 31 August and 14 September 1996, the US and Iraq engaged in an international crisis, with significant involvement of Iran and Turkey.

Background and Pre-Crisis

Following the Gulf War and failed Kurdish uprising in 1991, substantial parts of northern and southern Iraq became UN-protected zones, in an effort to inhibit the Iraqi government from violently suppressing minority groups. One of the groups that the exclusion zones intended to protect were the Kurdish people in the north, who were divided amongst themselves, most notably between the Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK). In this rivalry, the KDP sought Iraqi support, while the PUK sought the support of Iran.

In July and August 1996, the Kurdish conflict escalated, and the PUK made considerable military advances, with the apparent direct support of Iran. In late August, the KDP formally requested the assistance of Iraqi forces to repel the PUK positions.

Summary:

On 31 August 1996, an estimated 40,000 Iraqi troops intervened in the Kurdish civil war, on the side of the KDP. Iraq's forces quickly advanced and gained control of Arbil, which had recently fallen under PUK control. The Iraqi advances took place north of the 36th parallel, which had been explicitly protected under the 1991 agreements. This triggered a crisis for the US, which had been the leader of the coalition that implemented the restrictions on Iraqi military activity.

The US immediately increased air sorties over Iraq, and on 1 September 1996 President Clinton announced that the US would aggressively respond to Iraq's breach of the agreements. From 3-4 September, the US conducted Operation Desert Strike, unilaterally bombing Iraqi military positions and air defense systems with apparent success. A reported 6 Iraqi's died in the attacks, with dozens of injuries. The US also extended the "air exclusion zone" in southern Iraq from the 32nd to the 33rd parallel. Over the next week, the US attempted to gain support from its previous Gulf War allies and also pressured the UN Security Council to adopt a resolution condemning the Iraqi incursion. However, the US was unable to gain sufficient support from its allies, and, partly as a consequence, it was unwilling to escalate the conflict any further.

After the US bombardment, Iraq initially sought international support for the ability to intervene in conflicts within its own territory, especially when the involvement is at the request of one of the disputing parties. Iraqi President Saddam Hussein also lamented the extension of the exclusion zones, calling them "null and void." Moreover, Iraqi officials decried Turkey's creation of a "buffer" zone - in an attempt to prevent harmful spillovers from the Kurdish conflict - in northern Iraq. There was widespread condemnation for the Turkish action, many Arab nations condemned the US action, and Russia subverted a UN resolution to be adopted against Iraq by threatening a veto. However, no prohibitive action was taken against the US, and Iraq was left to fend for itself.

On 11 September 1996, Iraqi forces fired upon US fighter planes patrolling the exclusion zones. In response, the US destroyed the air-defense systems involved. On 14 September, Iraq declared that it would not fire upon anymore US patrols and that it would observe the exclusion zones. This declaration came after the US threatened to implement new air strikes and after Russia helped convince Iraq to comply. This ended the crisis for both actors, even though there was widespread distrust from the US and elsewhere that Hussein would actually comply.

It should be noted that while both Iran and Turkey were involved actors, they were not crisis actors. Even though both Iranian and Turkish forces were active on the Iraqi border and apparently conducted operations on the Iraqi side of the border, they never threatened to engage with Iraqi forces. The Iranian and Turkish activities were ostensibly solely related to the Kurdish factional fighting and not associated with acts of aggression against Hussein's regime.

(This crisis is distinguished from other frequent incidents that are not considered crises, in which the US has used military force against Iraqi air defense systems to police the exclusion zones. These incidents, which have occurred sporadically since the end of the Gulf War, do not constitute international crises because there have not been threats of escalation or tenable time constraints on action. However, such criteria were present in this Desert Strike crisis.)

References:

Keesings Online; Agence France Presse; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


