CRISNO 383

CONTRAS III

Background:

Honduras and Nicaragua were enmeshed in another crisis generated by the contra rebellion from 6 to 28 March 1988.

Pre-crisis Peace talks between the Nicaraguan regime and the contra rebels, initiated by President Arias of Costa Rica, led to a cease-fire agreement in March 1987. However, the U.S. Congress's approval of $48 million of nonmilitary aid to the contras on 30-31 March led to a contra violation of the cease-fire.

In August 1987, as a conciliatory gesture, Nicaragua withdrew the complaint it had submitted to the World Court in July 1986 against Honduras and Costa Rica, charging that they were providing the contras with sanctuaries for raids into its territory. The pattern of cross-border raids by the contras, retaliation by Nicaragua, cease-fire agreements, and violations by one or both of the parties continued through the autumn of 1987. Another cease-fire agreement in October broke down amid renewed Nicaraguan charges of CIA-organized air drops of military supplies to the contras in November. And in December the contras intensified their cross-border attacks into Nicaragua.

Summary:

This phase of low-intensity violence culminated in a major Nicaraguan offensive against contra camps in Honduras on 6 March 1988, triggering a crisis for Honduras. President Azcona del Hoyo responded on 15 March with an appeal for U.S. assistance. The next day Nicaragua's President Daniel Ortega denied that an incursion had occurred and invited observers from the UN and the OAS. On the 16th, too, the U.S., patron of the contras and of Honduras, replied to the latter's appeal by ordering the immediate dispatch of 3,200 U.S. troops to Honduras, triggering a crisis for Nicaragua. On the 17th U.S.-supplied Honduran fighter planes bombed Nicaraguan troops operating in the border zone. And Honduras's president threatened further land attacks if Nicaragua's troops were not withdrawn across the border.

The crisis began to wind down on 17 March, when Nicaragua ended its military incursion. On the 19th Nicaragua renewed its case before the World Court, accusing Honduras of "complicity and active participation ... in the bombings and acts of aggression, promoted by the U.S. government, against Nicaragua." Crisis termination was signaled on 28 March by the beginning of the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Honduras.

(Three days later, as a quid pro quo, Nicaragua once more suspended its suit against Honduras before the World Court.)

Although the UN and the OAS were approached by Nicaragua for observers, none was dispatched. In general, these two international organizations, along with the USSR, were not involved in this Central American crisis.

References:

Keesing's 1988; New York Times 1988.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


