CRISNO 384

SPRATLY ISLANDS

Background:

Vietnam and China were embroiled in a crisis over the Spratly Islands from 14 March until late April 1988.

Background The Spratlys and the South China Sea generally had long been part of the territorial domain of imperial China. Control by the "Middle Kingdom," however, eroded along with its decline as the regional hegemon during the penetration of European powers into Southeast Asia in the sixteenth century. But the issue of sovereignty over the Spratlys remained dormant until the late nineteenth century.

France emerged as the dominant power in Indochina and the islands of the South China Sea, a status formalized in the France/Annam treaty of 1874. China was compelled to accept France's primacy following the defeat of its navy in the Sino/French war of 1884-85. Extending its influence southward from its Indochina colony, France sent a survey mission to the Spratlys in 1927 and formally annexed the islands in April 1930.

Japan emerged as the next claimant: with most of coastal China under Japan's control early in the Sino/Japanese war (see Case #56--Marco Polo Bridge, in 1937-38, in China/Japan PC), the Japanese navy occupied the Spratlys in March 1939. The Itu Aba Island within the Spratly archipelago became a submarine base for Japan's invasion of the Philippines in December 1941. And the Spratlys assisted the Japanese conquest of Southeast Asia.

At the end of World War II, (Republican) China reasserted its claim to the Spratlys. So too did France, now restored to control over Indochina. China established a military post on Itu Aba. In October 1950 the newly (formally) independent Vietnam proclaimed possession of France's maritime boundaries in the South China Sea, including the Spratlys. And with the end of French rule in 1956, following its dramatic defeat at Dien Bien Phu two years earlier (see Case #145, in Indochina PC), South Vietnam dispatched a military unit to the islands.

The legal status of the Spratlys remains uncertain. The San Francisco Peace Treaty of 1951 ending the Pacific War failed to resolve the dispute. It remained dormant for the next two decades because the two major contenders were preoccupied: mainland China, with the consolidation of communist power; Vietnam, with the long war against the United States.

Competing claims became more visible in the early 1970s. In July 1971, following the firing on a Filipino ship by a Taiwan navy patrol in the waters of the Spratlys, the Philippines claimed ownership of 53 islets in the eastern part of the far-flung Spratly archipelago. The PRC occupied the Paracel Islands in 1974, signaling its intent to reassert China's historic claim to the Spratlys. North Vietnam declared its sovereignty over the Spratlys in April 1975, following its victory in the Vietnam War and the unification of the two Vietnams. Then, in 1978, Malaysia asserted its claim to 10 atolls in the southern part of the Spratlys. In short, by that time there were five claimants to sovereignty over all or part of the Spratlys: China, Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, and Malaysia. The Sultan of Brunei put forward a claim to part of the islands in 1988, adding Indonesia to the disputants.

China served notice of its intent in December 1984 when the PRC's State Council announced the integration of the Paracel and Spratly Islands into the Hainan administrative zone. With the legitimacy of a UNESCO decision in March 1987, assigning it the task of setting up observation posts in the Spratlys, Beijing reportedly established 167 posts by the end of that year. On 16 April 1987 the PRC made its intent unequivocal, with a statement that China "reserved the right to recover [the Spratlys] at an appropriate time." And in May-June 1987 it conducted naval exercises near the Spratlys.

Not by accident, China selected Vietnam as the focus of an even more tangible expression of its claim to the Spratlys. Vietnam was an historic enemy-rival of China. It was still a pariah state, the only state in the region that was not a member of ASEAN with which China had carefully nurtured an image of a friendly great power and increasingly important trading partner. Vietnam was further weakened by the decline of the Soviet Union, its military and economic patron through the Vietnam War and beyond. And the U.S. had not yet embarked on a policy of reconciliation with Vietnam.

Pre-crisis PRC forces took possession of two reefs in the Spratlys on 31 January 1988. Near clashes between the navies of China and Vietnam were frequent in January and February. On 24 February Vietnam accused China of violating its sovereignty over the Spratlys and warned of "disastrous consequences." China responded on the 26th, repeating its claims and warning that Vietnam "must take full responsibility for all the consequences" if it "obstructs China's legitimate activities" in the Spratlys.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for Vietnam and, almost simultaneously, for China on 14 March 1988: a brief (half-hour) naval battle left two Vietnamese ships destroyed, with three Vietnamese soldiers killed and 74 missing. A defeated Vietnam's proposal on the 24th for negotiations was rejected. Both sides upgraded their forces and deployed troops to several contested islands and reefs during the ensuing weeks. Nonetheless, the crisis began to wind down in April and faded by the end of that month.

Several of the other parties to the dispute over the Spratly Islands were involved actors. The Philippines warned both Vietnam and China on 17 March not to intrude into the area it claimed. An agreement was signed by a Philippines congressional delegation and Vietnam at the beginning of April committing both to non-violent means of settling the dispute. Similarly, China and the visiting president of the Philippines agreed in late April to set their dispute aside. Malaysia and Taiwan adopted a more bellicose response: the former increased its patrols around the islets it claimed and, in August 1988, announced its intention of building a naval base on the north coast of Sabah; the latter reinforced its garrison on Itu Aba Island in March. But all this was posturing designed to buttress claims to part of the Spratlys.

The U.S., the USSR, the UN, and ASEAN were not involved in this crisis.

(Physical and verbal expressions of hostility continued through June. Vietnam conducted a large military exercise in May clearly designed to cope with an anticipated battle against the Chinese in the Spratlys. China deployed additional units to Spratly reefs in May; and they held a military exercise in June, reportedly simulating a tactical nuclear attack. Moreover, there were exchanges of undisguised threats by both sides. But, while the conflict continued--and the dispute remains unresolved in the late 1990s--the crisis triggered by the naval battle of 14 March had passed.)

References:

Chang 1990; Chen Jie 1994; Varon 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


