CRISNO 221

CHE GUEVARA-BOLIVIA

Background:

Guerrilla activity, led by Cuban revolutionary Ché Guevara, caused a crisis for Bolivia from 23 March to 10 October 1967.

Pre-crisis In October 1966 Ché Guevara left Cuba on a secret mission--to establish a guerrilla training camp in Bolivia to bring about the overthrow of the Bolivian government. La Paz newspapers began reporting the presence of guerrilla forces in the Santa Cruz region in early March 1967. There was no comment on these reports by Bolivian authorities.

Summary:

An ambush by guerrillas of a large Bolivian army patrol in the Santa Cruz region on 23 March 1967 triggered a crisis for Bolivia. The incident was reported by Bolivian President Barrientos in a broadcast to the nation on the 27th. Bolivia feared that the pro-Cuban guerrilla movement might serve as a catalyst to revolt and would spread antigovernment sentiment in the country.

On 30 March Bolivian troops were moved to the southeast region, more forces were mobilized, and clashes with the guerrillas ensued. Bolivia's major response, the next day, was a request to the United States for arms and aid. A policy of containment was decided upon, and on 1 April Barrientos flew to the area in which 3,000 Bolivian soldiers had encircled the guerrillas until an effective fighting force could be trained. On 11 April the U.S. sent 40 advisors to train antiguerrilla forces, in addition to modern weapons, including helicopters.

Bolivia decreed a state of siege on 2 June, suspending constitutional guarantees, after Bolivian students and miners staged demonstrations in support of the guerrillas. Toward the end of June the Bolivian government confirmed officially that Ché Guevara was in command of a force of well-trained Cubans in southeast Bolivia. Bolivia appealed to Argentina to send troops to assist in the counterinsurgency operation but received only supplies and arms.

The OAS Foreign Ministers Conference met in Washington on 21 September, at Venezuela's request. At the meeting Bolivian representatives made public captured guerrilla documents, diaries, and photographs. U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk urged the OAS to tighten the diplomatic, economic, and political isolation of Cuba. The OAS passed a resolution condemning Cuban subversive activities in the Western Hemisphere.

On 10 October Barrientos announced that Ché Guevara had been killed by government troops on the 8th and that his death had ended the guerrilla movement in Bolivia.

The UN and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

(Twenty-eight years later, in October 1995, a retired Bolivian army general revealed that he had been an eyewitness to the hitherto-unconfirmed killing of the legendary revolutionary figure.)

References:

See general list.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


