CRISNO 334

COUP ATTEMPT IN BAHRAIN

Background:

Bahrain and Sa'udi Arabia experienced a crisis with Iran from 13 December 1981 to 8 January 1982.

Background Bahrain is a tiny oil-rich Gulf sheikhdom, comprising 33 islands between the Qatar Peninsula and the Sa'udi Arabian coast. It has an area of 230 square miles and a population of less than half a million, half of whom are foreigners.

Bahrain was a U.K. protectorate from 1861, formally since 1880, to 1971. London's announcement in 1968 that it would end the protectorate and withdraw British forces from the Gulf in 1971 led Iran to revive its long-standing claim to sovereignty over Bahrain, as part of its goal of hegemony in the Gulf. Iran also had a territorial claim, having ruled the island from 1753 to 1783.

Like all the small Gulf sheikhdoms, which became independent following the U.K.'s further retreat from empire, Bahrain was vulnerable to encroachments from the three competing major powers in the region, Iran, Iraq, and Sa'udi Arabia. Two upheavals nearby heightened Bahrain's sense of insecurity from external and (foreign-supported or foreign-inspired) internal sources: the fall of the shah and the emergence of an Islamic revolutionary regime under the leadership of Ayatullah Khomeini in 1979; and the outbreak of a war between Iran and Iraq in September 1980. As that war dragged on, the increasingly audible messianic fervor of Iran's fundamentalist regime generated more intense fear among the Gulf sheikhdoms.

Summary:

On 13 December 1981 Bahrain's Interior Ministry announced the arrest of a group of Bahrainis and other Gulf nationals accused of trying to overthrow the regime: their attempted coup triggered a crisis for the island-state. Iran was accused of inspiring, directing, and financing the plot.

Prince Na'if of Sa'udi Arabia, too, accused Iran and termed the coup attempt a threat to Sa'udi Arabia and all Gulf states: the course of the Iran/Iraq War and the danger of an Iranian victory raised serious Sa'udi concerns about Iraq's ability to withstand the onslaught and the consequences of an Iranian triumph for the Sa'udi regime. Although there was some confusion about the source of the coup--some of its participants blamed Sa'udi Arabia at their trial--the context, the revolutionary zeal of Iran under Khomeini, and Sa'udi Arabia's fear that Iran aimed at undermining its own regime strongly point to Iran as the prime external source.

Bahrain responded with an official protest to Iran and declared its chargé d'affaires persona non grata. Sa'udi Arabia signaled its concern and protector role by signing a mutual security pact with Bahrain on 19 December; this response also marked the end of the Sa'udi crisis. Two months later, Sa'udi Arabia strengthened its hegemony among the Gulf states by signing similar agreements with three other members of the Gulf Cooperation Council, which was established that year--Oman, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates.

Crisis termination for Bahrain can be dated as 8 January 1982: that day, bolstered by the security agreement with Sa'udi Arabia and implied support from Iran's most powerful foe, the United States, to which Bahrain had granted a de facto naval base in the 1970s, Bahrain banned Iranians from the sheikhdom, suspended economic relations with Iran, and declared martial law. (In May 1982 Bahrain's prime minister tried to denigrate the coup attempt by terming it an affair that "did not represent anything dangerous to us"; but by then the crisis was over and the danger from Iran had receded.)

The USSR and the UN were not active in this crisis.

References:

MECS 1981-82; MEJ Chronology 1981, 1982.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


