CRISNO 167

CAMBODIA-THAILAND

Background:

A crisis for Thailand and Cambodia took place from 24 July 1958 to 6 February 1959.

Background Relations between these two Southeast Asian states had been tense for centuries; for long periods Thailand occupied Cambodian territory. Ideological differences, mixed border populations, and extreme suspicion on both sides persisted. The temple of Khao Phra Viharrn, a place of worship for the Cambodian Khmer, was accessible only through Thai-held territory, and even then with much difficulty. Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia claimed that the territory surrounding the temple was part of Cambodia, according to a Franco-Siamese (Thai) treaty of 1907, while the Thai foreign minister claimed it belonged to Thailand, according to the geographic principle of "natural watershed."

Summary:

A crisis for Thailand was triggered on 24 July 1958 when diplomatic relations were established between Cambodia and the PRC. Thailand, fearing communist infiltration, declared a state of emergency on the Cambodian border on 8 August. Negotiations followed, with a final Thai offer to allow Cambodian visitors to the site of the temple. Cambodia rejected the offer. When the negotiations broke down, Thailand's response took a military form: on 1 September 10 bridges on the Thai-Cambodian border were blown up in order to prevent infiltration. This triggered a crisis for Cambodia, which feared Thai involvement in its internal affairs and perceived Thai ambitions to rule all Buddhist countries in Indochina once more. On 7 September several thousand Thais marched to the Cambodian embassy in Bangkok. Cambodia's response was a de facto suspension of diplomatic relations on 24 November 1958. The following day Thailand closed the border between the two countries, withdrew its ambassador from Phnom Penh, and suspended air service between the capitals. The United Nations was introduced into the crisis when Cambodians asked Secretary-General Hammarskjöld to appoint a UN mediator. Baron Johan Beck-Friis, a retired Swiss diplomat, mediated between the adversaries, providing fact-finding and formulaic assistance to the two conflicting parties. On 6 February 1959, a joint communiqué announced the reopening of the frontier and the return of the respective ambassadors to each other's capital.

References:

Armstrong 1964; Ayal 1961; Blanchard 1958; Darling 1960; Insor 1963; Leifer 1961-62, 1962; Silcock 1967; Vella 1955.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


