CRISNO 252

IRAQ INVASION-KUWAIT

Background:

A crisis for Kuwait began on 20 March and ended on 8 June 1973.

Pre-crisis By 1973 Iraq's pressure on Kuwait to make territorial concessions that would enable an Iraqi creation of a new base for petroleum and military operations in the Persian Gulf had increased. A year earlier Kuwait had refused a large loan to Iraq. The USSR supported Iraqi claims to two Kuwaiti islands, Bubiyan and Warba, as it was expected that Iraq would permit the USSR to establish a naval facility there. Soviet support of Iraq was perceived by Kuwait, Iran, and other Western-aligned states in the Middle East as threatening. And Kuwait's growing rapprochement with Iran and Sa'udi Arabia disturbed Iraqi decision makers.

Summary:

On 20 March 1973 Iraqi troops crossed the border into Kuwait, with a view to annexing part of the disputed territory along their 99-mile border. Kuwait immediately sent troops, but they were defeated by the superior Iraqi forces, who then occupied the Kuwaiti outpost of Sametah where a number of huts were established. When Kuwait surrounded these huts with mosques the Iraqi forces were contained. The next day, at an emergency session of the Kuwaiti cabinet and parliament, a decision was taken to negotiate rather than fight.

On 21 March, Arab League Secretary-General Riad began mediation efforts to reduce hostilities in the crisis. Kuwait's insistence on Iraq's withdrawal, and the latter's refusal to do so, brought Riad’s efforts to a standstill. On 6 April the two foreign ministers met, after which Iraqi forces were withdrawn and an announcement was made by both parties that they accepted the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leader, Yasser Arafat, as mediator. The debate centered around Kuwait's refusal to concede or to lease the islands to Iraq. The following day Kuwait offered a substantial investment in Iraqi development projects and special treatment for Iraqis residing in Kuwait.

The crisis ended on 8 June 1973 when an agreement was reached between the two states that included an Iraqi increase of freshwater supplies to Kuwait from the Shatt-al-Arab, but there were no Kuwaiti concessions on the islands. Following the agreement both Kuwait and Sa'udi Arabia completed substantial arms deals with the U.S. and the U.K., respectively, while Iraq obtained increased arms supplies from the USSR.

Mediation attempts were made by Egypt, Lebanon, and Syria, but these were secondary to the role of Arafat; and Iran and Sa'udi Arabia offered military support to Kuwait. There were reports of 15,000 Sa'udi troops in Kuwait shortly after the beginning of the crisis.

The U.S., the USSR, and the UN were not involved in this crisis.

References:

MEJ Chronology 1973; Keesing's 1973; New York Times 1973.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


