CRISNO 361

CAPTURE OF AL-FAW

Background:

Iraq, Iran, and, briefly, Kuwait and Sa'udi Arabia were the actors in this intra-war crisis from 9 February until early April 1986.

Background and Pre-crisis The Iran/Iraq War, which erupted in mid-September 1980 (see Case #317), showed no signs of winding down after more than four years of costly campaigns--heavy casualties on both sides--and periods of stalemate (see Cases #335 and #348).

There were no less than nine land attacks by Iran and three Iraqi counterattacks in 1985. Notable was an Iranian attack in March in the area of the al-Huwayza marshes of southern Iraq that, for a time, closed the main road between Basra and Baghdad. An Iraqi counteroffensive repelled the Iranian penetration, with heavy casualties on both sides. During March there was also an exchange of air and missile raids on Teheran and Baghdad and other major cities, the first in four years. A visit by the UN Secretary-General to both states in April, in quest of a basis for peace talks, came to naught. After a long lull in the war of attrition against each other's oil installations, Iraq launched a series of air attacks against Kharg Island in August and September 1985, which succeeded, temporarily, in disrupting Iranian oil exports. In an attempt to diversify its facilities, Iran developed a floating terminal at Sirri Island. Both parties also continued to attack merchant ships in the Gulf, the "tanker war": from March to September more than 130 ships had been hit. All this was a prelude to a fresh intra-war crisis.

Summary:

A crisis for Iraq was triggered on 9 February 1986, when Iranian forces began a series of offensives in the south. Those aimed at Qurna and Majnoon failed to achieve their objective. However, on 10-11 February Iranian troops took Umm al-Rassas, lost it the next day, but advanced on the al-Faw Peninsula near Siba, and very near to Kuwait's island of Bubiyan, which was long coveted by Iraq (see Case #252--Iraq Invasion of Kuwait, in 1973, in Iraq/Kuwait PC). Iranian forces also began operations along the al-Faw-Basra road in order to divert Iraqi forces. Iran now threatened Iraq's only access to the Gulf and, potentially, its Umm Qasr naval base.

It was Iran's dramatic advance, notably the capture of al-Faw, and the fear of Iraq's defeat that triggered a brief crisis (11-13 February) for Kuwait and Sa'udi Arabia, key financial backers for Iraq's enormously expensive war effort. Their response was to take the lead in an Arab démarche to the UN: on 13 February the foreign ministers of Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Morocco, North Yemen, Sa'udi Arabia, and Tunisia requested a meeting of the UN Security Council and a condemnation of Iran's "aggression."

The UN Secretary-General was also active at this time,to try to avoid a spillover of the Iran/Iraq War to Kuwait. Iran was cooperative: on 13 February President Khamenei assured Kuwait that Iran would respect its neutrality, provided it did not allow Iraq to use its territory for military operations against Iran. This eased the tension and ended the crisis for Kuwait and Sa'udi Arabia. At the end of February the Security Council again called for a cease-fire, which was not heeded.

By mid-February Iran controlled the strategically and symbolically important port and town of al-Faw but at an estimated cost of 8,000-10,000 casualties in five days of intense fighting; Iraq's losses were 3,000-5,000. On 14 February 1986 Iraq launched a counteroffensive aimed at regaining control of al-Faw. This catalyzed an intra-war crisis for Iran. Iraq also announced the expansion of its naval exclusion zone to include the coast of Kuwait. By 20 March another stalemate set in, with Iran still in control of al-Faw. Iran's casualties for the entire campaign were 27,000-30,000, Iraq's losses, 5,000-8,000. Iran also created a second front in Iraqi Kurdistan: its Wal Fajr IX offensive drove Iraqis and Kurds from 40 villages near Suleimaniya.

The al-Faw crisis faded in early April. Iran retained control of the town of al-Faw, including 200 square kilometers of the Faw Peninsula. But Iraq was able to prevent further Iranian advances in the south. So the situation remained until the last major battle of the Iran/Iraq War in the spring of 1988 (see Case #385).

References:

See sources for Case #317 (Chubin and Tripp, Cordesman and Wagner, Karsh, O'Ballance); and Keesing's 1986; MECS 1986.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


