CRISNO 335

KHORRAMSHAHR

Background:

In the second phase of their long war (1980-88) Iraq experienced an intra-war crisis (IWC) with Iran from 22 March to 30 July 1982.

Pre-crisis The front line created by Iraq's initial advance into Iranian territory in September 1980 (see Case #317) had been pushed back by Iran up to 25 miles by September 1981. That month Iran's forces lifted the siege of Abadan, site of its principal oil refinery, and launched a new offensive capturing the town of Bustaneh in November 1981. By early 1982, although the war seemed to have reached a stalemate, the military initiative had passed to Iran, which repulsed several Iraqi counterattacks in February.

Iran launched another major offensive against Iraq in mid-March. This succession of Iranian military successes led to an increase of tension among the Arab Gulf states, which had supported Iraq both verbally and financially, mainly because they feared that Iran, if victorious, would be in a position to "export" its revolution to nearby neighbors.

Early efforts by regional organizations and the UN to mediate an end to the conflict were unsuccessful. The war became a protracted armed conflict, with the primary objective of both parties changing from the capture of new territory to the overthrow of the enemy's political regime.

Summary:

Iraq's IWC began on 22 March 1982, when Iran launched an offensive against Iraqi forces in the border region west of Dezful. During the next six days Iran scored its greatest victory in the war so far: Iraq was forced to withdraw from 350 square kilometers of Iran's territory.

Iraq's major response was to fortify the Iranian city of Khorramshahr, occupied in the first phase of the war, to ensure that it would not be outflanked from the west: the city became a strategic objective with high political symbolic value.

On 30 April Iran launched "Operation Jerusalem" to expel Iraqi forces from their last major stronghold in Iran--areas of southern Khuzestan and Khorramshahr. The city was recaptured on 23-24 May 1982.

In the face of defeat, Iraq initiated a unilateral cease-fire on 9 June and a unilateral withdrawal from 5,500 square kilometers of Iranian-occupied territory the next day. However, the intra-war crisis had not yet run its course. Iran was adamant about its conditions for peace, notably the overthrow of Saddam Hussein and the Ba'ath regime in Iraq.

Iran's military advance once more generated fear in the Arab Gulf states and Sa'udi Arabia, along with concern in the U.S. and the U.K. about a possible Iranian invasion of Iraq. That concern materialized with Iran's "Operation Ramadan" on 13 July, designed to cut the main roads linking Basra to the north and thereby to isolate Iraq's major southern port. By the 30th, however, Iran's attempts to achieve a strategic breakthrough in southern Iraq lost momentum ending the IWC over Khorramshahr.

Many states and international organizations were involved actors in the second (Khorramshahr) phase of the Iran/Iraq War (Gulf War I). The USSR, for many years Iraq's patron and principal arms supplier, continued to deliver advanced weapons including aircraft--as much as Iraq could pay for in hard currency. So too did France. The U.S. sold Iraq a small number of civilian transport planes, easily converted into military aircraft. Regional actors were also involved, as Sudan sent a small number of volunteers to fight alongside the Iraqisand Algeria unsuccessfully tried to mediate the conflict.

On 28 May 1982 the UN Secretary-General renewed his call for an end to the war, along with an offer to mediate. The Security Council adopted another--of many--cease-fire resolutions. And the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on 22 October calling for a cease-fire and a peaceful resolution of the conflict. So too did the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO). In July 1982 the Arab League condemned Iran's invasion of Iraq.

The Swedish political leader, Olaf Palme, served as a UN envoy in March 1982. The Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) attempted the most substantial mediation of the crisis in June but strongly favored Iraq with large-scale financial support. Quiet diplomacy was attempted by the Soviets and by Egypt. All efforts at third party intervention, in this phase as throughout the Iran/Iraq War, came to naught.

(The long war continued unabated. In late September 1982 Iranian forces attacked Iraqi positions near Abadan. And on 1 November Iran launched another attack on Basra, aimed once more at cutting the road to Baghdad between Kut and the area northeast of Al-Aamorah and at the recapture of territory still held by Iraqi forces on the southern front. An Iranian attack to the north near Mandali occurred on 7 November with limited gains. By late November a stalemate was evident, with the opposing armies dug in for the winter.

From mid-August 1982 to January 1983 Iraq launched frequent air strikes, mainly against economic targets--Kharg Island and shipping in Iranian waters; but it, too, failed to achieve a strategic breakthrough or to recapture Iraqi territory lost to Iran in 1982. The long war had become a stalemate.

References:

See sources for Case #317; and Keesing's 1982; MECS 1981-82; New York Times 1982.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


