CRISNO 354

NICARAGUA MIG-21S

Background:

The United States and Nicaragua were engaged in a brief crisis (6-12 November 1984) over the reported dispatch of advanced fighter planes by the USSR to the pro-Soviet regime in Managua.

Background After years of struggle against the Somoza dictatorship the left-wing Sandinista movement achieved power in 1979. Tension and mistrust between the U.S. and the Sandinista government, evident in the last year of the Carter administration, became acute when Reagan entered the White House at the beginning of 1981. By then Nicaragua had become informally aligned with the Soviet Union. The Reagan administration made it clear that it regarded the marxist regime "in America's backyard" as a threat to U.S. national security; and that it perceived the bilateral conflict with Managua as part of the Cold War with the USSR. It was in this hostile global context and an intense U.S. domestic political setting--the presidential election was due on 6 November 1984--that the MIG-21 crisis erupted.

Summary:

Reports surfaced in Washington on election day that a Soviet cargo ship, the Bakuriani, was en route to Nicaragua carrying MIG-21s for the Sandinista regime. To some in the newly reelected Reagan administration with a disposition to historical analogies, this was perceived as a minireplay of another, grave, superpower crisis in the Americas 22 years earlier, when Soviet ships were reported carrying offensive missiles to a nuclear weapons base in Castro's Cuba (see Case #196--Cuban Missiles).

The U.S. response, on the 7th, was to increase the number and visibility of military exercises the Pentagon was conducting in Nicaragua's neighbor, Honduras, and in general to "flex its muscles" on land and at sea in and near Central America. This show of strength and the accompanying hard-line rhetoric in Washington were perceived in Managua as signals of an imminent U.S. invasion. The specific act that triggered a crisis for Nicaragua was the pursuit by two U.S. frigates of a merchant vessel flying the Soviet flag--when the ship was already in Nicaraguan territorial waters and was about to enter the port of Corinto. Reports of violations of Nicaragua's airspace reinforced this image of hostile U.S. intent.

Nicaragua responded on the 9th by requesting an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council. Its fears and complaints of an imminent U.S. invasion were discussed, but the Council did not pass a resolution.

The crisis began to wind down the same day. Moscow announced that the Bukuriani was not carrying MIG-21s. U.S. officials quickly confirmed the Soviet statement. On the 12th the U.S. State Department issued a categorical statement that no preparations were being made to invade Nicaragua. This terminated the crisis for Nicaragua and the U.S., even though the Sandinista government issued an emergency communiqué the same day putting its people on "maximum alert" for a possible invasion. There was no violence in this crisis.

As noted, both superpowers were involved, the U.S. as a direct participant, the USSR passively. The UN Security Council provided a forum for debate, but no more. And the OAS, the regional organization of the Americas, was aloof.

(It was later reported by Jane's Defense Weekly that the Soviet vessel en route to Nicaragua had been carrying MIG-21s but had unloaded them in Libya before crossing the Atlantic. Still later, the International Court of Justice ruled that it did have jurisdiction in this case, and it "slapped the United States on the wrist" for its hostile acts against Nicaragua.)

References:

Clement 1985; Dobrynin 1995; Guttman 1984; Hopkins 1984, 1985; Keesing's 1984; New York Times 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


