CRISNO 452

ETHIOPIA INVASION SOMALIA

Background:

Ethiopia experienced a foreign policy crisis from 9 October 2006 to 2 January 2007.

Background and Pre-crisis: Ethiopia's foreign policy crisis was caused by the jihad threat of Islamic Courts in neighboring Somalia. The transitional federal government (TFG) of Somalia was formed in 2004 with the support of the United Nations to help the country emerge from anarchy. However, in early June 2006, the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) took over Mogadishu and consolidated control over most of southern Somalia. Ethiopia was deeply concerned about the rise of Islamists on its eastern border and pledged to defend itself and the Somali administration from any Islamist threat. As Somalia came to the brink of civil war in late summer, Ethiopian troops entered the country to support the weak transitional government. The UIC warned Ethiopia of full-scale war unless it withdrew troops but Addis Ababa denied any incursion of Ethiopian troops into Somalia. At the beginning of October, UIC forces captured several villages in northern Somalia bordering Ethiopia. As the military threat of UIC intensified, Ethiopia and Somali troops carried out an offensive operation for the first time in October.

Summary:

On 9 October 2006, Somali soldiers backed by Ethiopian forces briefly seized control of a strategic town in southern Somalia. The UIC declared "holy war" on Ethiopia, accusing the country of launching a full-scale invasion after its troops attacked and briefly held the town. The declaration of jihad on Ethiopia by the Executive Council of the UIC triggered a foreign policy crisis for Ethiopia on October 9. The following day, Ethiopian Prime Minister Zenawi vowed to resist if Somalia's Islamic militia attacked his country. He also called for the deployment of a regional peacekeeping force by the AU and IGAD in Somalia. A week later, Zenawi claimed that jihadists had amassed troops along Somalia's common border with Ethiopia and urged his military to "monitor the issue closely".

The situation deteriorated as fighting between the UIC and TFG forces continued in October. At the end of the month, the UIC captured an Ethiopian officer which prompted Ethiopian Prime Minister Zenawi to acknowledge for the first time that he had sent several hundred armed military advisers across the border. Zenawi also stated that his country was "technically" at war with Somalia's Islamists due to their jihad declaration.

Sudan tried to mediate between the UIC and Ethiopia on October 30, right before the scheduled third round of talks between the transitional government and Islamic Courts in Khartoum. A high-level Sudanese delegation went to Addis Ababa to convince Ethiopia's Prime Minister Zenawi to hold talks with the UIC. The following day, the UIC refused to speak with Somalia's transitional government in Khartoum unless all Ethiopian troops were out of Somalia. After the collapse of Khartoum peace talks on Somalia, both sides warned that war was imminent.

In early November, heavy fighting erupted in northern Somalia as Islamic forces clashed with militia backed by Ethiopian troops. Towards the end of the month, the Ethiopian Prime Minister told parliament that his government had completed gearing up for war with Somalia's Islamists, arguing that Ethiopia had the right to defend itself. The Ethiopian parliament, including the opposition, backed Zenawi and approved military action against Somalia's UIC. Over 100 trucks carrying Ethiopian troops arrived in Baidoa, base of the transitional government, on November 24 and more amassed on the border.

At the beginning of December, Somalia's Islamic group held informal talks with Ethiopia on the sidelines of the IGAD meeting. Top Islamic leader Sheik Sharif Ahmed led the delegation, which met with Ethiopia's State Minister for Foreign Affairs in Djibouti. Officials of Somalia's Islamic movement stressed in the meeting that the group would only hold substantive talks with Ethiopia after it withdrew troops from Somalia.

On 6 December 2006, the U.S.-backed draft resolution which would let regional peacekeeping forces be deployed in Somalia was unanimously endorsed by UN Security Council member states. The UNSC resolution authorized member states of IGAD and AU to deploy a peacekeeping mission in Somalia. The U.S.-backed resolution, co-sponsored by the council's African members, partially lifted an arms embargo on Somalia so that regional forces could be supplied with weapons and military equipment. The resolution also urged Somalia's Union of Islamic Courts to halt military expansion and negotiate with the transitional government to achieve a political settlement in the country. While Somalia's transitional government supported the UNSC resolution, the UIC chairman argued that it was biased. He warned that Islamic Courts would fight any foreign troops deployed in the country.

Meanwhile fighting between UIC and the Ethiopia-backed TFG continued in December. On December 12, the Islamic Courts gave Ethiopia a seven-day ultimatum to withdraw its troops. Thousands of Islamic militants surrounded the only town Somalia's government controled, Baidoa, and a top Islamic official said his forces would attack within a week unless troops from Ethiopia left the country. As the situation deteriorated, Yemen mediated between Islamists and the Ethiopian government in mid-December. The mediation occurred after the UN reportedly sent a letter to Yemeni President Salah to intervene in Somalia to prevent a war. President Salah contacted both sides separately and explained the Yemeni proposal, which urged Ethiopia to endorse peace talks and Islamists not to attack any particular area in Somalia or the government based in Baidoa. The mediation by Yemen ended on December 18, one day before the UIC deadline.

Heavy fighting erupted around southern Daynuunay region on December 19 after Ethiopia rejected to withdraw troops from Somalia. Islamist advances against TFG positions around Baidoa were met by an Ethiopian ground and air offensive. Ethiopia admitted launching self-defensive measures against UIC, while the U.S. government supported Ethiopia's right to self-defense. The fighting escalated on December 25 as Ethiopia launched fighter jets across the border and made a direct attack on Mogadishu, which served as the headquarters of UIC. TFG and Ethiopian forces made a rapid advance through UIC-held territory due to Ethiopia's military superiority. Ethiopian troops fought their way closer to Mogadishu towards the end of December, pushing back militias loyal to the Islamic Courts. On December 28, the UIC forces abandoned Mogadishu ahead of advancing Ethiopian forces. A few days later, thousands of Somali and Ethiopian troops advanced to Kismayo, the last remaining stronghold of the UIC. Following a night of intense Ethiopian artillery bombardment near Kismayo, Somalia's interim government also captured Kismayo on January 1. Somalia's prime minister announced that Islamic fighters were scattered and that he did not expect any more major fighting as UIC forces retreated towards Kenyan border.

The crisis ended for Ethiopia after the defeat of the UIC. On January 2, the Ethiopian Prime Minister Zenawi told parliament that Ethiopia had accomplished its mission in Somalia and would withdraw troops as soon as possible. Zenawi also called on the international community to quickly send in peacekeepers to avoid a vacuum.

The U.S. was involved in the crisis both politically and militarily. From the beginning of the crisis, the U.S. approved Ethiopia's actions politically and gave tacit support for Ethiopian intervention in Somalia, arguing that Ethiopia had legitimate security concerns. The U.S. also provided military aid and equipment to Ethiopia throughout the crisis.

The most active regional organization in the crisis was the African Union. On December 27, the AU met at its headquarters in Addis Ababa to try to end the fighting and resume dialogue between Somalia's warring parties. Although the AU declared that Ethiopia had the right to defend itself from the extremist leadership of the Islamic Courts, the AU Commission still called for the withdrawal of Ethiopian troops without delay. The AU also urged Somalia's rival factions to stop fighting and resume peace talks sponsored by the Arab League. After the UN Security Council authorized IGAD and AU to establish a "protection and training mission" in Somalia on December 6, the AU approved a plan to send about 8,000 peacekeepers for a six-month mission. Towards the end of December, diplomats from the region started to arrange the deployment of African peacekeepers to help the transitional government establish its authority in Somalia.

References:

Uppsala Conflict Database, Keesing's Record of World Events, Lexis-Nexis Academic, Minorities at Risk

Last Updated: 2/6/2009


