CRISNO 101

IWO JIMA

Background:

The Battle of Iwo Jima generated an intrawar crisis for Japan from 19 February to 16 March 1945.

Background and Pre-crisis Iwo Jima, located among a group of volcanic islands midway between the Marianas and Japan, was of high strategic salience to the armies of both adversaries. Japan used it as a staging base for damaging raids on U.S. B-29s in the Marianas; and the U.S. found it imperative to capture the island, destroy the air base, and establish a position 750 miles from Yokahama. Iwo Jima received the longest and most intensive U.S. preinvasion bombardment of any objective in the Pacific war. Regular air raids had begun in August 1944; and soon thereafter they were a daily occurrence. Nevertheless, Japanese defenses were not destroyed. After the Fall of Saipan (see Case #95), the Japanese resolved to convert Iwo Jima into an impregnable fortress. As the bombs fell, they dug deeper underground.

Summary:

An IWC for Japan was triggered on 19 February 1945 when the U.S. launched a massive invasion of Iwo Jima. Firing from concealed points, the Japanese resisted the U.S. advance yard by yard in a stubborn and protracted battle that cost the U.S. 19,938 casualties, including 4,198 dead. On 8 March the Japanese began one of their most concerted counterattacks. It caught the U.S. marines off guard. They, in turn, rallied for a great flanking movement that pressed the Japanese back toward the sea. Japanese losses were very high.

The last phase of the battle began on 11 March with a more rapid U.S. advance. On 16 March one of the last segments of opposition was pushed into a small region on the northern end of the island where the Japanese fought defiantly until the end. Other pockets were eliminated, with difficulty. The crisis for Japan ended in defeat on the 16th.

The following day the Americans raised the U.S. flag on the island of Iwo Jima.

References:

See sources for Case #88.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


