CRISNO 444

DRC-RWANDA

Background:

From 1 June 2004 until 20 December 2004, Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) engaged in a crisis stoked by the activity of insurgents in the eastern part of the DRC.

Background and Pre-crisis The five-year DRC civil war, which also involved six other African nations - Rwanda, Uganda, Angola, Chad, Zimbabwe and Namibia - terminated in 2002. Rwanda had intervened in that conflict primarily to defend itself against attack by Hutu militias in the DRC. The Tutsi-led government in Rwanda also held these militias accountable for the 1994 genocide in Rwanda. Despite withdrawing from the DRC, Rwanda still felt vulnerable to attacks by the militia groups and demanded that the perpetrators of the genocide be brought to justice. To stabilize the 2002 ceasefire, a UN monitoring group (MONUC) had been responsible for patrolling the border areas and facilitating disarmament.

In addition to Hutu militias, an opposition group, the Congolese Rally for Democracy (RCD) vied for power in the eastern part of the DRC. The RCD had been supported by Rwanda and was represented in the Kinshasha transitional government. It comprised and defended the Banyamulenge people, who are Congolese Tutsis.

Summary:

On 1 June 2004, a group of renegade troops drawn from the RCD captured the Congolese town of Bukavu. Laurent Nkunda, one of the RCD generals, claimed that the action was taken to protect the Banyamulenge population and that they would withdraw if new military authorities were appointed. Despite Nkunda's denials, DRC president Joseph Kabila immediately accused Rwandan troops of being responsible for the fall of Bukavu. He also lambasted the MONUC troops -– authorized to only use force in self defense -- for allowing Bukavu to fall. The fall of Bukavu triggered a crisis for the DRC, which felt threatened both internally and externally. Kabila's accusations against Rwanda and call for "general mobilization" triggered a crisis for Rwanda. As a response to these accusations, Rwanda closed her border with the DRC. On 22 June, Kabila followed through and sent an estimated 10,000 troops to reinforce the eastern frontier.

Fearing the outbreak of full-scale war that could again drastically destabilize the region, the international community immediately expressed concern. Diplomats from the UN, African Union (AU), European Union (EU) and US called for both sides to show restraint. In an early effort to reduce the tensions, Nigerian president Olusegun Obasanjo, chairman of the AU, held talks in Abuja between Kabila and Rwandan president Paul Kagame. Both sides agreed to adhere in the Pretoria agreement of July 2002 and to set up a verification team that would ensure the disarmament of Hutu militia groups and the absence of Rwandan troops on DRC soil.

While the June summit in Abuja pulled both sides back from the brink of war, both Rwanda and the DRC remained wary of the security situation. On 1 October, the UN Security Council voted to extend the mandate of MONUC and to increase the size of the force from 10,800 to 16,700 in response to continued concerns about hostilities in the DRC's eastern provinces.

Hostilities again escalated after Rwanda claimed that Hutu rebels in the DRC launched rocket attacks into Rwanda on 15 November. Kagame threatened to fully defend Rwanda and to send troops into the DRC if necessary. At the end of the month, the DRC accused Rwandan troops of entering into its territory and on 1 December asked the UN Security Council to impose sanctions on Rwanda after UN observers confirmed the presence of Rwandan troops. Fighting continued in the eastern part of the DRC through mid-December.

Throughout December the international community, particularly the EU, urged Rwanda not to undertake unilateral military action and send its troops into the DRC in pursuit of Hutu militias. In response to the warnings of the international community, Rwanda called for both AU and EU intervention in the crisis and asked for their help to disarm the Hutu militias in the DRC. Finally, in mid-December the EU cooperation and development commissioner Louis Michael arranged a regional tour in Africa to calm the situation and to mediate between the DRC and Rwanda.

EU commissioner Louis Michel visited the DRC on 18 December and promised greater EU assistance in the DRC transition process. On 19 December, he visited Rwanda and urged Kagame to show restraint in the DRC crisis. On 20 December, Rwanda withdrew its threat to invade the DRC, asserting that the international community has assured that the militia groups in the DRC would be disarmed. The unilateral withdraw terminated the crisis for both countries.

Although the crisis was over by December 20 with the cessation of military threat, the international community continued to mediate between Rwanda and the DRC to resolve the conflict permanently by disarming Hutu militias. At the two-day AU summit in January 2005, AU's Peace and Security Council discussed the conflict between Rwanda and the DRC and urged for the disarmament of Hutu militias. The AU also decided to send troops to the region in order to help the DRC disarm the Hutu rebels. At the end of January, the US also intervened in the conflict and invited the foreign ministers of Rwanda, Uganda and the DRC to Washington. The negotiations that took place in Washington were also helpful in increasing the cooperation and trust among the parties. As a result of these mediations and negotiations, the Rwanda-DRC Joint Border Verification Mechanisms was launched on 8 February 2005. The joint efforts of Rwanda and the DRC to monitor the border and to disarm rebels proved effective. On 31 March 2005, DRC-based rebel Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda comprised of extremist Hutu militias announced that they was disarming and abandoning their armed struggle against Rwanda.

References:

Keesing's, Agence France Presse, BBC, Africa News.

Last Updated: 4/27/2007


