CRISNO 453

CHAD-SUDAN III

Background:

A crisis occurred between Chad and Sudan from 31 March 2007 to 17 April 2007. Since 2004, tensions have been high between Chad and Sudan. Chad accuses Sudan of supporting Chadian rebels and Sudan accuses Chad of supporting Sudanese rebels. Crises erupted between the two states in 2005 and 2006. The crisis in 2005 ended with the signing of the Tripoli agreement in February 2006 and the crisis in 2006 ended with an agreement in August 2006. During a summit organized by Libya in February 2007, Chad and Sudan signed an agreement where they pledged not to interfere in each other's territory and to avoid military hostilities. It was the third agreement of the sort in a 12-month period. In the weeks leading up to the crisis, Chad accused Sudanese warplanes of bombing towns in its territory.

Summary:

Sudanese-backed Janjaweed militia began attacks on towns in eastern Chad on 31 March 2007. These attacks, which lasted the weekend, destroyed two villages, and killed more than 100 civilians, sparked a foreign policy crisis for Chad. Chadian security forces managed to push back the attackers, killing an estimated 25 of them. Sudan denied any role in the incident. Chad's major response occurred on 4 April 2007, when Chadian forces launched a retaliatory attack on rebels near the Sudanese border.

On 9 April 2007, rebels from Sudan clashed with Chadian security forces in eastern Chad. As Chadian security forces pursued the 200-vehichle strong rebel column across the Sudanese border, Chadian forces exchanged gunfire with Sudanese military and police forces, killing 17 Sudanese troops. This event caused a foreign policy crisis for Sudan. Sudan's major response occurred on 10 April 2007, when Sudan vowed that it would respond firmly to Chad's aggression and that military action remained a possibility.

A war of words ensued as both countries exchanged threats and accusations. On 10 April 2007, Chad apologized for the clash, but maintained that its forces had the right to pursue rebels across the border.

These events led to a flurry of diplomatic activity, as representatives from China, US, South Africa, Libya, Egypt, and elsewhere met with Sudanese and Chadian leaders. After a brief war of words, both sides sought to avoid escalation of the conflict. There was a general fear among world leaders that the conflict may spill over into Darfur or escalate tensions with rebels fighting the Chad's government. At the same time that they sought rapprochement, both sides held firm on their key positions—Chad maintained that it has the right pursue rebels into Sudanese territory and Sudan maintained that action is needed to back up the apology.

On 12 April 2007, Libyan mediators reached an agreement with Chad and Sudan to allow Eritrean and Libyan military observers to monitor the border region. Both sides resisted calls for a UN peacekeeping force. The crisis ended on 17 April 2007 when mediation by Libya, Eritrea, and the Community of Sahel and Saharan States led to the creation of a joint military and high security committee. On 3 May 2007, another conference was held in Saudi Arabia to further decrease tensions. Both leaders agreed to cooperate with the African Union and United Nations to end the conflict in Darfur and eastern Chad.

For both crisis actors, the main value threat was of limited military damage. Multiple crisis management techniques were used, including violence and mediation. However, violence was only a minor tool in achieving desired goals—Chad's violence against Sudanese forces was an unintended consequence of its retaliation against rebels.

Beyond the two crisis actors, five other states were involved: US, China, and South Africa sent representatives to meet with Sudanese and Chadian leaders (South Africa was also a mediator early in the crisis); and Eritrea and Libya were the principal mediators and participants in the military observer force. While the US was involved diplomatically, its participation did not contribute to crisis abatement. Its participation was viewed favourably by both sides. Russia was not involved in the crisis. The UN's involvement was minor. The Security Council called on both sides to end hostilities and to accept peacekeepers. However, this action had no effect on crisis abatement. The African Union already had a peacekeeping force active in the region. However, this force did not contribute to crisis abatement. Both parties were satisfied with the crisis outcome.

Mediation: On April 10, 2007, Libyan leader President Muammar al-Gaddafi dispatched Abdel Salem Triki, his personal envoy, as part of a mediation effort between Chad and Sudan. Eritrea joined the effort as well, and the two sides met with both mediators that same day. This activity was situated within a larger mediation effort that began on February 21, 2007, when a series of regular meetings involving ministers from Chad, Sudan, Libya, and Eritrea were initiated. These meetings were aimed at defusing border tensions between Chad and Sudan and getting them to both normalize relations and implement the February 2006 Tripoli Agreement that ended the Chad-Sudan I crisis. As part of this effort, a contingency of Libyan, Eritrean, Sudanese, and Chadian military and security observers was deployed in the border region between Chad and Sudan in March 2007 in order to report on and ultimately prevent border incursions and other incidents. The observer mission was part of the Tripoli Agreement signed the previous year but had only recently been deployed as the two sides had come under increasingly intense pressure to implement the agreement and accept UN peacekeepers in the border region. Libya had been putting pressure on both sides to resist the international efforts to get UN peacekeepers on the ground, preferring instead a regional alternative to lessen the need for UN troops.

Triki delivered a plan drafted by al-Gaddafi that was intended to get the two sides to return to the negotiating table, resolve the situation peacefully, ease their tensions, and implement the Tripoli Agreement. On April 10, Chad apologizes for the previous day's border incident. The following day, both sides began toning down their threats and said they were looking to resolve the situation peacefully and improve relations with each other. However, Sudan said that the Chadian apology is not sufficient and that it required more guarantees from Chad that future aggression would not occur. On April 12, Libya and Eritrea dispatched additional military and security observers to the border region between Chad and Sudan in response to the recent hostilities. Two days later, Chad said it would continue to use military force if Chadian rebels and pro-Sudanese militias cross into Chadian territory, and that it hoped Sudan would allow it the right of pursuit in the event that said actors crossed back into Sudanese territory after attacking. On April 16 and 17, Libya, Eritrea, and the Community of Sahel and Saharan States (CEN-SAD, aka COMESSA) met with Chad and Sudan and get them to agree to form a joint military committee and aim toward normalizing relations with each other. Libyan mediator Abdel Salem Triki noted that this agreement would allow the Libyan and Eritrean border observers to "get the means to carry out their mission"(Triki as quoted in Reuters, 04/17/2007). A joint statement was released outlining the agreement, and this terminated the crisis for both Chad and Sudan. The semi-regular ministerial meetings that comprised this mediation effort continued after the crisis terminated, with the last one being held on December 10-11, 2007. In addition to the primary mediation effort by Libya, Eritrea, and CEN-SAD, South Africa also mediated between Chad and Sudan on Apr. 10-11 in an attempt to ease tensions between the two sides and to expand the scope (by adding the UN as a joint partner) and size and of the AU peacekeeping force deployed to deal with the conflict in Darfur, Sudan.

References:

Lexis-Nexis Online, Dow Jones Factiva Online, CIA World Fact Book Online, World Bank World Development Indicators Online, International Crisis Group.

Last Updated: 7/26/2010


