CRISNO 423

CYPRUS-TURKEY MISSILE CRISIS

Background:

A crisis between Cyprus and Turkey began on 24 January 1998 and was terminated on 29 December 1998.

Background and Pre-Crisis

In January 1997, the Cypriot government placed an order for the purchase of Russian made S-300 surface to air missiles. The S-300 has a range of about 140 kms, and would reportedly overturn the air superiority of the Turkish forces in the island. Several European governments, the US and the UN urged the Cypriot government to cancel the purchase to avoid further tensions with Turkey. While refusing to cancel the order, the Greek Cypriot government stated that there was no fixed date for the missile deployment. It added that the purchase was partly intended to focus international attention on the need for a solution to the wider Cyprus problem.

Summary:

The trigger to the crisis was the completion of a military airfield base alongside the civil airport in Paphos on 24 January 1998. The site was to be protected by the S-300 missiles. The completion of the airbase triggered a crisis for Turkey, which perceived it as a potential military threat to its airspace. The Turkish government warned that it may use force to prevent the deployment of the missiles. The threat of military action by Turkey triggered a crisis for Cyprus in late January 1998. Greece, although not an actor in this crisis, said that it would regard such an attack as cause for war with Turkey.

Concerned with the volatile situation, the EU threatened to suspend its accession talks with Cyprus if the weapons deployment were to occur. Following intense pressure from the EU, the US and the UN, and detailed discussions with Greece, Cyprus announced on 29 December 1998 that it was canceling its plans. The missiles would now be deployed on the Greek island of Crete, which meant that the Turkish airspace would no longer be threatened by the weapons. This was the end of the crisis. However, the Turkish government claimed that the deployment of the missiles in Crete would aggravate relations between NATO allies, Turkey and Greece.

The United Nations, the European Union and the United States expressed concern over the situation. The UN called for a cancellation of the missile order. There was no mediation in the case.

References:

Kessing's Record of World Events Online; Lexis Nexis Online and CIA World Fact Book Online.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


