CRISNO 70

DANZIG

Background:

A crisis for Poland over Danzig took place between 21 March and 6 April 1939.

Background The Treaty of Versailles declared Danzig, predominantly German-speaking, a free city. Poland was allowed to use the port, its only access to the sea. A strip of land lying east of Danzig and the local Polish provinces linked Germany with East Prussia. In 1934 Poland signed a Non-Aggression Pact with Germany, and in November 1937 Hitler officially disavowed his aim of incorporating Danzig into Germany.

On 4 October 1938 the Polish ambassador in Berlin met with Foreign Minister Ribbentrop. The latter proposed incorporating Danzig into the Reich, granting an extraterritorial railroad and road into Germany, while leaving Poland to maintain a road, railway, and free port in Danzig, and guaranteed markets, a recognition of boundaries, and an extension of the Polish-German Pact. Poland would also join the Anti-Comintern Pact. Polish Foreign Minister Beck declined and insisted on retaining Polish rights to Danzig while proposing a joint Polish-German guarantee to replace League of Nations protection. On 21 October Hitler began to plan for military action over Danzig. Beck met with Hitler and Ribbentrop in Germany in early January 1939. After the final German takeover in Czechoslovakia (see Case #68--Czech. Annexation, in Czech./Germany PC) and Hitler's demand to Lithuania for Memel, both in mid-March 1939 (see Case #69), the issue of Danzig flared up once again.

Summary:

Poland's crisis was triggered on 21 March 1939 when Ribbentrop placed Germany's demand for Danzig before Polish Ambassador Lipski. The Polish foreign minister sought support against German aggression, especially from Britain, which was at that time trying to establish joint guarantees with France and the Soviet Union. On 21-22 March Anglo-French conversations took place in London. The addition of an economic threat to Romania by Germany induced the U.K. to try to reach an agreement with France for the support of the whole of Eastern Europe, including Polish aid to Romania, if necessary. On 26 March Poland responded to German demands by offering to consider simplifying road and rail communications to East Prussia and by rejecting any extraterritorial highway, as well as the annexation of Danzig to the Reich.

Ribbentrop, mentioning Polish interests in the Ukraine and hinting that Hitler might conclude that there could be no understanding with Poland, asked for further Polish consideration, to which Lipski agreed. Meanwhile, the U.K. continued to maneuver for a Four-Power declaration, while dropping the Soviet Union from the list, at Poland's request. Britain finally agreed upon a declaration of support for Poland while, at the same time, soliciting Polish support for Romania and Yugoslavia. On 31 March Chamberlain announced in the House of Commons that the U.K. would offer support to Poland if there was any threat to its independence, and that France had agreed to do likewise. On 3 April Beck journeyed to London for further talks, receiving an official guarantee on 6 April that the U.K. "would feel themselves bound at once to lend the Polish Government all support in their power." This terminated the crisis for Poland in victory; but the ultimate outcome of the conflict over Danzig remained uncertain--until it was overrun by German forces five months later.

(The Danzig crisis of March-April 1939, like those over the German annexations of Czechoslovakia [Case #68] and Memel [Case #69] and the Invasion of Albania [Case #71, in Italy/Albania/Yugoslovia PC], was an integral part of the intense conflict throughout 1939 that was to culminate in the outbreak of World War II [Case #74, in World War II PC]. Danzig remained an important issue throughout the summer of 1939 as the city became semisecretly militarized and war approached. On 1 September Germany invaded Poland.)

The Soviet Union negotiated with Britain and France on forging a bloc against Germany but backed away when other demands were not met by the Western powers. This encouraged Polish suspicions of Moscow's motives and potential actions in support of Germany. The League of Nations was not active in this crisis.

References:

Bullock 1962; Carr 1945; Cienciala 1968; Debicki 1962; Polonsky 1972; Pounds 1964; Schuman 1941; Shirer 1964; Thorne 1967; Toynbee 1953a; Walters 1952; Weinberg 1980.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


