CRISNO 342

CHAD-LIBYA VI

Background:

Chad, France, and Libya were embroiled in another international crisis from 24 June 1983 to 11 December 1984.

Pre-crisis After a lull in Qaddhafi's involvement in Chad--because of his (failed) attempt to become chairman of the OAU--he became more active from late October 1982 onward. He recognized Goukouni's transitional government and supported his forces with arms and equipment in the prolonged civil war for mastery of Chad. He also resumed reconnaissance flights over Chad. Habré accused Qaddhafi of planning to attack the Aozou Strip; the Libyan leader denied the accusation.

In February 1983 talks between Habré and Qaddhafi broke down. In March Habré accused Libya of being directly involved in the Chadian internal struggle for power, following Goukouni's capture of a strategic outpost on the road to Chad's capital. On 17 March Chad asked for an urgent meeting of the UN Security Council to consider Libya's "aggression and occupation" of Chadian territory. On 17 May Chad (Habré) claimed to have repulsed a rebel (Goukouni) attack against the strategic oasis, Faya-Largeau, gateway to control over the northern part of Chad.

Summary:

The persistent low-intensity conflict, interstate (Chad/Libya) and intrastate (Habré/Goukouni), generated another full-scale crisis for Chad on 24 June 1983, when Libya-supported Goukouni forces occupied Faya-Largeau. The same day French Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson warned Libya that France would "not remain indifferent" to Libya's intervention in Chad. Moreover, France (and Zaire) decided to dispatch military aid to the Habré regime, in response to its appeal on 5 July for direct military support. On the 11th Chad accused Libya once more of direct involvement in its internal crisis. The OAU discussed the matter on the 15th and called for an immediate cease-fire, the withdrawal of foreign forces from Chad, and the resumption of negotiations between the contending parties within Chad.

Along with its diplomatic efforts to oust Libya, Chad's (Habré's) forces, assisted by weapons from France, Zaire, and the U.S., began a counteroffensive on 9 July. Faya-Largeau was recaptured on 30 July. The next day Libyan MIG fighter-bombers attacked Faya-Largeau, the first undisguised and direct Libyan intervention in Chad's civil war. This act triggered a crisis for France. French President Mitterand responded on 6 August with an order to activate "Operation Manta," designed to oust Libya from Faya-Largeau and, more generally, to weaken its influence in the internal affairs of Chad. Three days later, several hundred French troops were dispatched to Chad's capital from the Central African Republic, triggering a crisis for Libya. Although France--and Libya--wanted to avoid a confrontation between their forces, France threatened Libya on 25 August that it would not accept Libya's control over Faya-Largeau.

Peace talks among all the rival Chad factions, sponsored by the OAU, were held in November 1983, but deadlock ensued. An OAU reconciliation conference in Addis Ababa also failed in mid-January. In January 1984 the smoldering crisis became more acute when a French plane was shot down by Chad rebel forces. France responded by strengthening its military presence in Chad. On 10 March an Air France plane was damaged at N'Djamena airport.

The "winding down" of Chad/Libya VI was slow to crystallize. On 30 April Qaddhafi presented a mutual withdrawal proposal, which was accepted by France. However, it took five months to implement this de facto agreement. On 17 September 1984 Qaddhafi and French President Mitterand met and announced that mutual withdrawal of all their forces in Chad would begin on 25 September and be completed by 10 November, the termination date for Chad's and Libya's crisis. France met the withdrawal deadline. However, Qaddhafi did not adhere to the agreement fully: France accused him on 5 December of leaving 3,000 troops in northern Chad. By the 11th tension had eased sufficiently so that France's crisis over Chad--and the international crisis of which it was a part--came to an end. Mitterand renewed France's commitment to Chad's independence, while recognizing the de facto partition of Chad at the 16th Parallel into Libyan and French spheres of influence.

The USSR, as usual, provided political support for Libya. The UN role was limited to discussion. Mediation efforts, primarily facilitative mediation on the part of the OAU and Congo, seemed to have little effect on crisis abatement.

(In addition to its persistent involvement in crises with Chad, Libya was also enmeshed in crises with other African neighbors [see Cases #311--Raid on Gafsa, in 1980; #314--Libyan Threat-Sadat, in 1980; #318--Libyan Intervention in The Gambia, in 1980; and #340--Libyan Threat to Sudan, in 1983, in Africa: Non-PCs].)

References:

ACR 1983-84, 1984-85; AR 1983, 1984; ARec 1983, 1984; ARB 1983, 1984; Keesing's 1983, 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


