CRISNO 61

POLISH ULTIMATUM

Background:

A Polish ultimatum created a crisis for Lithuania from 13 to 19 March 1938.

Background and Pre-crisis After Vilna was annexed to Poland in 1922, an intense campaign was carried out by Lithuania to retrieve its capital in medieval times, including a refusal to conduct diplomatic or commercial relations with Poland. In 1936 the Polish foreign minister failed in his attempt to restore relations with Lithuania through the League of Nations. Lithuania refused to have its Vilna claim set aside and was willing to open only river traffic and communications, as well as consular facilities. Minority and frontier incidents contributed to the animosity between the two states. In February 1937 the visit of the Soviet chief of staff to Lithuania was followed by rumors of Soviet support for Lithuania's position, but these were denied. The incidents on the border were dealt with by local authorities within the framework of the 1928 Lithuanian-Polish agreement on frontier traffic. On the night of 10-11 March 1938 a Polish soldier was killed by Lithuanian frontier guards. Lithuania proposed solving the incident by a mixed commission of local authorities.

Summary:

A crisis for Lithuania was triggered on 13 March when the Polish government rejected its proposal and issued an official communiqué referring to a pending decision on steps for dealing with the situation existing between Poland and Lithuania. Rumors of Polish military action began to spread through Europe, which indeed had been Poland's initial intention. When Polish Foreign Minister Beck returned to the cabinet the following day, the military option was postponed. On 17 March Poland handed an ultimatum to the Lithuanian minister to Estonia. It demanded the restoration of normal relations by 31 March and gave the Lithuanian government 48 hours to reply. Vilna was not mentioned. The Lithuanian cabinet met all night, and parliament was summoned. German advice was sought. Having an interest in Memel, Germany counseled Lithuania to accept the Polish demands. German forces moved to the border. The U.K. and France also advocated Lithuanian compliance. The Lithuanian response on 19 March, to accept the ultimatum, also marked the termination of its crisis.

The League of Nations was minimally involved in this crisis, advising Poland to be reasonable and Lithuania to accept Polish terms. The Soviet Union, while refusing to supply military aid, supported Lithuania by informing Poland that Moscow reserved the right to take action in the event of a Polish attack on Lithuania.

(In subsequent months diplomatic relations and road and rail communications were reestablished. This was followed by a period of relative harmony between the two states. Vilna remained under Polish control until early in World War II.

In September 1939 the city was occupied by Soviet troops, as part of the USSR's share in the fourth [German-Soviet] partition of Poland. Then, on 10 October, under the terms of a mutual assistance pact, the USSR ceded Vilna and its hinterland to Lithuania in return for military bases. [See Case #75--Soviet Occupation--Baltic, in Europe: Non-PCs.]

On 21 July 1940 Lithuania, including Vilna, along with Latvia and Estonia, was formally incorporated into the USSR. The Baltic states regained their independence in 1991.)

References:

Cienciala 1968; Gerutis 1969; Toynbee 1953b; Walters 1952.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


