CRISNO 4

BALTIC INDEPENDENCE

Background:

An international crisis between Russia and the Baltic states over the latter's assertion of independence occurred from 18 November 1918 to 11 August 1920.

BACKGROUND Of the three Baltic states Lithuania has a long history of independence and substantial power dating to its founding in 1316. At different times its territory included parts of Russia, Ukraine, and Poland, with suzerainty over Moldavia, Wallachia, and Bessarabia in southeastern Europe. Estonia, by contrast, was for most of its history under foreign control--by Denmark, the Teutonic Knights, and Sweden. Latvia, too, had never been independent before the twentieth century.

During World War I the Balts asserted their claim to independence on several occasions; but the tide of battle prevented its realization. From mid-July to mid-September 1915 the Central Powers stormed through Eastern Europe: czarist Russia suffered a series of severe military defeats leading to the loss of all of Lithuania (and Poland) and a million men.

PRE-CRISIS On 28 November 1917, taking advantage of the turmoil accompanying the Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia three weeks earlier, the local Diet (legislature) in Tallinn proclaimed Estonia's independence. The new Soviet regime tried to reconquer a strategically important area but was blocked by the Germans. On 24 February 1918 Estonia again declared its independence--under German protection. Lithuania did the same on 16 February with the same outcome--an attempted Russian conquest and German occupation. Under the terms of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918 Russia was compelled to recognize the independence of its three Baltic provinces, along with Finland, Poland, the Ukraine, and Transcaucasia. In reality, they were under German occupation until the end of World War I.

Summary:

With the defeat of Germany and rampant civil war in Russia, the Balts pressed their claim to independence: Latvia on 18 November 1918; and Estonia the next day by reaffirming the authority of the Provisional Government initially formed in February 1918 under German tutelage. Lithuania, too, challenged Soviet power by forming the first of many short-lived national governments on 11 November. Those challenges to Russia's territorial integrity created a crisis for the new Soviet regime. It responded almost at once, invading Estonia on 22 November, Lithuania and Latvia in December, creating an existence crisis for all three newly established Baltic states.

Russia's initial advances were impressive: its forces occupied three-fourths of Estonia; almost all of Latvia including the capital, Riga, on 4 January; and half of Lithuania including the capital, Vilna (Vilnius), on the 5th. But its success was short-lived. Estonian resistance, supported by British naval and air power, drove the Russians out by February 1919 leaving the Estonian government in effective control of most of its territory. The Russians were compelled to withdraw from Latvia by a German-Latvian force in March with the approval of the Allies. And in Lithuania Vilna was lost to Poland in April; it was restored to Lithuania by the Allies in December 1919. The severity of violence did not exceed serious clashes.

High tension persisted until December 1919, when bilateral peace talks began between the adversaries. Separate peace treaties were concluded incorporating formal Russian recognition of independence for each Baltic state: the Treaty of Tartu (Dorpat) with Estonia on 2 February 1920; the Treaty of Moscow with Lithuania on 12 July 1920; and the Treaty of Riga with Latvia on 11 August 1920. Each marked the end of the foreign policy crisis for the concerned Baltic state. The last agreement ended Russia's crisis and the international crisis over Baltic independence as a whole.

The League of Nations, which came into existence seven months before the end of this crisis, was not involved.

(The three Baltic states were occupied by Soviet forces in September-October 1939 [see Case #75--Soviet Occupation: Baltic]. They were forcibly incorporated into the USSR on 21 July 1940. Soviet military bases were established in September and October 1940. Soviet control over the Baltic states was lost to Germany in 1941-42 and reacquired in September-October 1944. They reemerged as independent states with the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991.)

References:

Bradley 1975; Jackson 1972; Page 1970; Tarulis 1959; Ullman 1968.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


