CRISNO 66

ITALY THREAT-FRANCE

Background:

A crisis for France over this issue began on 30 November 1938 and ended on 31 March 1939.

Background Differences between France and Italy were of long standing. France possessed an important trade route in East Africa through the railroad from Djibouti in Somaliland, where Italy's colonies of Eritrea and Italian Somaliland were located. Corsica, though Italian speaking, was under French control. Rivalries existed as well over satellites in the post-Hapsburg Empire states of eastern Europe. Italy's use of the Suez Canal in order to maintain contact with its East African colonies became a source of tension as its objections to the high French-imposed tolls increased. As for the balance of power in Europe, France looked to Italy as a potential ally against Hitler.

On 14 April 1935 representatives from France, Italy, and Great Britain met at Stresa and aligned themselves formally against Germany. Soon after the Wal-wal incident (see Case #47), France signed an agreement with Italy in which small areas were ceded and a settlement of the Italian minority problem in Tunisia was reached. During the Italian war with Ethiopia (see Case #47), France exerted considerable effort not to alienate Italy. When the League Council condemned Italy as the aggressor in Ethiopia in October 1935 French Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Laval was able to prevent the adoption of any substantive sanctions, specifically oil sanctions and the closure of the Suez Canal to Italian shipping. In the period after Italy's annexation of Ethiopia, France made further efforts to improve relations with Italy: it recognized the annexation, signed a commercial agreement on 7 November 1938 and accredited a new French ambassador to the king of Italy--emperor of Ethiopia.

Summary:

A parliamentary upheaval during Foreign Minister Ciano's speech in Rome on 30 November 1938, which called for retribution over French control of Tunisia, Corsica, Nice, Savoy, and Djibouti, turned into a street demonstration that Mussolini addressed from his balcony in the Palazzo Venezia, and triggered a crisis for France. To French protests in Paris and Rome, the reply was that the Italian government could not be responsible for spontaneous demonstrations that did not reflect its views. An anti-French campaign was begun by the Italian press and, by 5 December, demonstrations and telegrams of support for France had come from Corsica and Tunisia. On 17 December the Italian government informed France that their bilateral agreement of January 1935 was now void and that France was obliged to produce new proposals. This was not divulged in Paris until five days later. France sent copies of the Italian Note to Germany and Britain and replied on 26 December that, as far as it was concerned, the 1935 agreement was still intact but that there was a need for new proposals on French and Italian interests in Africa.

France's major response, on 2 January 1939, was Prime Minister Daladier's departure for a visit to Corsica, Algeria, and Tunisia, where he stated before cheering crowds that France would stand firm in all its territories in the face of any Italian demands or threats. France also reinforced its forces in Africa and in the Mediterranean. On 14 January Chamberlain and Halifax arrived in Rome for Anglo-Italian negotiations. Despite the request of the French government for no intercession on the Franco-Italian dispute, some British intervention was attempted, but without success--France and Italy continued to exchange demands and France repeated its intention to defend its territory. The crisis continued until 31 March, a week before Italy's Invasion of Albania (see Case #71, in Italy/Albania/Yugoslavia PC), when Mussolini stated that he would not press demands on France.

The United States cabled its support to France, while Great Britain and Germany supported Italy. The League of Nations was not involved.

(The issue did not die down, and throughout the war against Albania the Italian demands remained a source of dispute.)

References:

Adamthwaite 1977; Bonnefous 1967; Carr 1945; Ciano 1947; Clough 1970; Ebenstein 1973; Nere 1975; Smith 1982; Werth 1966.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


