CRISNO 315

SOLIDARITY

Background:

Poland, the USSR, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany were enmeshed in another major intra-Soviet-bloc upheaval from 14 August 1980 to 13 December 1981 (see Cases #141--East German Uprising, in 1953; #155--Hungarian Uprising, in 1956; and #227--Prague Spring, in 1968, in Europe: Non-PCs).

Background Since the formation of Poland's Communist regime in 1944 there had been several violent outbursts of internal discontent, notably in 1970 and 1976, which led to major changes in both the party and state leadership. In the summer of 1980, too, a wave of industrial unrest gripped Poland in response to marked increases in food prices. However, violence was conspicuously absent from strikes and demonstrations led by Solidarity, an independent trade union headed by Lech Walesa, later the first President of Poland in the post-communist era. Yet for the Soviet Union, as for the U.S. in the Americas, unrest anywhere in Eastern Europe was perceived as a risk to Moscow's hegemony. This concern had already given rise to the Brezhnev Doctrine, during the Prague Spring crisis in 1968 (see Case #227, in Europe: Non-PCs): this asserted the concept of limited sovereignty among members of the bloc and the Soviet Union's right to intervene in the domestic affairs of any member when bloc interests--as defined by Moscow--were threatened by internal events.

Summary:

On 14 August 1980, 17,000 Polish workers at the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk went on strike and occupied the huge industrial complex. They also presented a series of demands, some of which were perceived as political in nature by the Communist leaders of Poland. These events triggered a crisis for Poland and the USSR.

Warsaw's initial reaction was a government statement the next day criticizing the strikers' demands and noting the expectation of bloc allies that Poland's Communist regime would resolve its problems. Moscow's response was slow in coming--and indirect. The defense ministers and, separately, the foreign ministers of the Warsaw Treaty Organization (WTO or Warsaw Pact) met on 15-17 and 19-20 October to consider the challenge, more than two months after the initial strike by Solidarity. Prime Minister Pinkowski and the First Secretary of the Polish United Workers Party (PUWP) Kania, were frequently summoned to Moscow for talks with Brezhnev.

A crisis for two other bloc members, East Germany (the DDR) and Czechoslovakia, was triggered on 30 August by a 21-point agreement between a Polish government commission and a delegation from the "Inter-Factory Strike Committee": the Gdansk Accords seemed to include political concessions to the strikers. East Germany initially responded on 28 October by promulgating "temporary" measures restricting visits by Polish citizens to the DDR. And Czechoslovakia reacted on 11 November with a set of rules restricting the purchase of Czechoslovak currency by Polish citizens.

Contingency plans for a large-scale WTO military intervention envisaged 15 Soviet tank and motorized divisions, drawn from the DDR, Czechoslovakia, and several military districts of the USSR, reinforced by three Czechoslovak and East German divisions and another dozen Soviet divisions--a formidable force. In late November 1980 the WTO concentrated troops on the Polish border, the major response of the three bloc members. And the USSR's defense ministry postponed the regular half-yearly rotation of one quarter of all Soviet conscripts.

Pressure from the USSR, East Germany, and Czechoslovakia for greater resolve by Poland's Communist rulers continued. The buildup of WTO forces near the Polish border led to a report by the Intelligence Oversight Committee of the U.S. House of Representatives in January 1981 asserting that the prospect of a Soviet invasion remained "very high." On 4 March Moscow demanded from the PUWP leaders that the course of events in Poland be reversed. On 18 March WTO forces held maneuvers. Tension increased at the end of March and persisted through the spring.

On 5 June the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) sent a strongly worded letter to its Polish counterpart, expressing disappointment at the lack of leadership under Kania. On 10 September Moscow demanded "radical measures" from the Polish Communist leadership. These were taken on the night of 12-13 December 1981. Almost the entire leadership of Solidarity, including Walesa, was arrested. Martial law was declared. And a "Military Council for National Salvation," led by General Jaruzelski, was created. These acts ended the crisis for all four actors.

Western reaction was muted. U.S. Secretary of State Haig declared on 13 December that the U.S. was "seriously concerned" by Poland's declaration of martial law and by the arrests. Several members of NATO adopted symbolic diplomatic and economic steps to indicate their displeasure. The UN was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Keesing's 1980, 1981; Kramer 1995a, 1995b; New York Times 1980, 1981.

Last Updated: 6/22/2020


