CRISNO 74

ENTRY INTO WWII

Background:

The crisis immediately preceding--and following the onset of--World War II began on 20 August 1939 and ended on 28 September of that year. The following 21 countries were crisis actors: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., and the USSR.

Pre-crisis The Czech. Annexation crisis of March 1939 (see Case #68, in Czech./Germany PC) confronted the small states of Europe, especially Poland and Romania, with forebodings of a similar fate. In an effort to build an effective European coalition of anti-German forces, negotiations were initiated between the Western powers and the Soviet Union. The failure of these negotiations, to a large extent, was due to Poland's and Romania's refusal to allow the entry of Russian troops into their territories, even for the purpose of assisting resistance to a possible German attack.

German-Soviet negotiations had been taking place since June, and on 15 August German Ambassador Schulenberg delivered a message to Soviet Foreign Minister Molotov stating that Ribbentrop was prepared to visit Moscow in order to bring about a permanent change in German-Soviet relations. Hitler wished Ribbentrop to be received at once, for his plans to invade Poland on 26 August were contingent upon the Soviet response. On 19 August the Soviets indicated their agreement to a meeting on the 26th.

Summary:

Triggers and Responses

The first state to perceive a crisis was Latvia. On 20 August Latvian Foreign Minister Munters received reports of plans for the partition of Eastern Europe between Germany and the Soviet Union. Latvia's representative in Berlin was instructed to obtain a formal statement from the German government that the security, integrity, and independence of the Baltic states would be maintained. Its major response, on 30 August, was a decision at a special meeting of the Latvian cabinet to introduce a number of defense measures, including mobilization.

On 21 August a crisis was triggered for the Soviet Union when Stalin received a personal message from Hitler accepting the Soviet draft for a Non-Aggression Pact and urging an earlier date for the Ribbentrop visit. Stalin interpreted this message as an ultimatum. If the German plan to invade Poland on the 26th was not met by strong action on the part of France and the U.K., Germany would be free to impose its views on the USSR. After short deliberations, Stalin agreed to Ribbentrop's arrival on 23 August. The signing of a Non-Aggression Treaty with Germany on 23 August was the USSR's major response.

On the evening of 21 August word was received in the capitals of Japan, Poland, and the U.K. that negotiations between Germany and the USSR for a Non-Aggression Pact were about to be concluded. Japan's Ambassador to Berlin, Oshima, protested to Germany that it would be an act of bad faith and a contravention of the Anti-Comintern Pact. At that time, a full-scale war was raging between Japan and the Soviet Union at Nomonhan (see Case #72, in Asia: Non-PCs), and the Japanese feared that the USSR would take advantage of their strengthened international position to exert added pressure on Japan in Asia. The Hiranuma cabinet responded by instructing Oshima to make a formal protest to the German government, which was delivered on 26 August.

In the U.K., news of the Pact was accompanied by reports of German troop movements toward the Polish frontier. At a cabinet meeting the following day, members decided on partial mobilization and a call to convene parliament on the 24th. The British were faced with a fait accompli, their inability to reach an agreement with Moscow; and the existence of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact did not alter the U.K.'s obligations to Poland. On 22 and 23 August Notes were exchanged between Chamberlain and Hitler, and on 25 August Hitler demanded that a Polish emissary arrive in Berlin within 24 hours. The British cabinet considered this unreasonable and refused to recommend to Poland that it comply with this demand. Diplomatic efforts continued until 1 September when German forces crossed the Polish frontier and began their invasion. On the 2nd the U.K. sent an ultimatum to Hitler, after no reply had been received to its Note of the previous day, offering to negotiate if German forces were withdrawn from Poland. And on the 3rd the U.K. declared war on Germany.

The impending Ribbentrop journey to Moscow was broadcast by Moscow Radio on 22 August. This news triggered a crisis for Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Romania, Sweden, and Switzerland.

In Australia, Prime Minister Menzies stated on the 23rd that, if Britain were forced to go to war, it would not be alone. The following day Menzies issued a declaration confirming the unity in the ranks of the British Empire. The Australian response was Menzies's declaration of war on 3 September.

Belgium's King Leopold, addressing the Oslo powers (Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden) on 23 August, appealed to the major powers to maintain peace. On the 25th, at a meeting of Belgium's Council of Ministers, it was decided to place the Belgian forces at home on a war footing: active divisions and first reserves were mobilized, automobiles and horses were requisitioned, and frontier patrols were posted. That day the prime minister gave the German chargé d'affaires assurances that the actions of the Belgian government constituted an affirmation of its independence and its wish to stay out of any conflict.

On 23 August Canada's Prime Minister, Mackenzie King, declared that parliament would be summoned the moment the situation required it, stating that the powers of the War Reserve Act would be utilized to place Canada on a war footing. On the 26th Canada's foreign minister sent identical appeals to Germany, Poland, and Italy urging the avoidance of war and the solving of issues through conference and negotiation. The Canadian major response to the crisis was at an emergency cabinet meeting on 1 September. Canada vowed to stand by Britain. The mobilization of army and navy forces was to be completed, and measures were taken for Canada's defense and the granting of aid to Britain. On the 10th Canada declared war on Germany.

Despite a Non-Aggression Pact signed with Germany in May 1939, the 22 August announcement triggered a crisis for Denmark, which sought assurances from both Germany and the U.K. that its neutrality would be respected. On the 28th these assurances were given by Germany, and on the 30th by the U.K. Denmark's major response came on 1 September when the Rigodag met to ensure that Danish forces were adequate to carry out the task of protecting the country's neutrality.

A large concentration of Soviet troops stationed along the Estonian/USSR border posed a serious threat to Estonia. In the hope of maintaining German guarantees, Foreign Minister Selter responded to the German-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact by offering congratulations to the German government and stating his conviction that Germany, according to its Non-Aggression Treaties with Estonia and the Soviet Union, had prepared the ground for ensuring Estonian security.

For Finland, the assumption that permanent hostility between Germany and the Soviet Union would maintain a balance of power in the Baltic region was shattered on 22 August. Foreign Minister Errko feared that the signatories of the Pact would turn against neighboring Baltic states at a later date. The German ambassador to Helsinki was called in on 1 September with a request for assurances that Germany would respect Finland's neutrality; these were given.

In France, word of the Pact on 22 August produced a response of partial mobilization. All frontier troops were put on alert on the 23rd, and full mobilization of reserves began on the 24th. Hitler and Prime Minister Daladier exchanged letters on 25 and 27 August. France agreed to come to Poland's aid if it were attacked by Germany. After the attack on 1 September, the French Council of Ministers ordered a general mobilization for the following day. France, like Britain, sent an ultimatum to Hitler on the 2nd, to expire the next day. And on the 3rd France, too, declared war on Germany.

Lithuania viewed the Pact as a threat to its existence, despite the Non-Aggression Pacts that Lithuania, together with Latvia and Estonia, had signed with Germany and with the Soviet Union. Lithuania's response was a declaration of neutrality on 2 September.

Luxembourg attended the Oslo Powers Conference on 23 August, which called for peace. Its major response was an appeal on 31 August for the observance of Luxembourg's neutrality.

The response of the Netherlands was a cabinet decision on 25 August to maintain neutrality. The following day the German minister met with Queen Wilhelmina and conveyed German expectations that the Netherlands would not swerve from the neutrality decision. On the 28th a mobilization order was proclaimed, along with other measures for Holland's security. On 30 August assurances were also received from the U.K.

New Zealand, like other members of the British Commonwealth, perceived a crisis on 22 August when the grave threat facing the U.K. as a result of the Pact became known. The following day, with cabinet approval, Acting Premier Frazer declared that New Zealand would remain solidly behind Britain should war come. A state of emergency was proclaimed on 1 September; and war declared on the 3rd.

Ribbentrop's proposed journey to Moscow also became known in Norway on the 22nd. Norway responded on the 30th with an order for partial mobilization. Assurances of Germany's respect for Norway's neutrality were sought and received on 1 September.

After reports of extensive German military preparations on the 23rd, Poland mobilized one-third of its army. On 24 August, Foreign Minister Beck told the British ambassador that he considered the situation most grave. The following day the Anglo-Polish Agreement was signed. As further German troop concentrations were reported on the border, and German troops in Slovakia called upon the population to collaborate against Poland, the Polish government decided upon general mobilization on 29 August. It was announced on the 30th, despite the advice of the French and British ambassadors, whose countries were still negotiating with Germany. When the invasion took place, Poland's major response, on 1 September, was to fight the invaders while appealing to Britain and France to implement their guarantees.

Romania, caught between the two strongest powers in Europe, viewed the Pact as a grave threat to its sovereignty. Romania particularly feared Russian designs on Bessarabia and the implications for Romania's freedom of movement on behalf of Poland in the event of war. On 27 August Foreign Minister Gafencu told the German ambassador that Romania was determined to remain neutral even if France and Britain became involved in a war with Germany. On the 28th Romania began to fortify its frontier with the USSR along the valley of the Dniester River.

On 27th August Sweden responded to the crisis with a decision to maintain strict neutrality. A partial mobilization had been called on the previous day. On 1 September the king declared that all defense positions would be strengthened.

Switzerland's geographic position, bordering Germany, France, Austria, and Italy, placed it in an especially vulnerable position on 22 August. On the 28th the Bundesrat ordered the mobilization of frontier forces and all defense troops. Parliament was summoned the following day for a special session. On 30 August the United Federal Assembly appointed General Henri Guisan as Commander in Chief of the Swiss army. And the following day Switzerland reaffirmed its neutrality.

The German invasion of Poland on 1 September triggered a crisis for South Africa. The Hertzog-Smuts coalition was split over the question of South Africa's response to the crisis. Hertzog advocated neutrality, maintaining that the dispute was among the European powers and did not affect South Africa. General Smuts believed that South Africa should enter the war on the side of the U.K. The issue was placed before the House of Assembly. When no solution was forthcoming Prime Minister Hertzog requested the governor-general to dissolve parliament and call an election. The request was refused, the prime minister resigned, and the governor-general asked Smuts to form a cabinet. South Africa's major response was to declare war against Germany on 6 September.

Terminations Japan's crisis ended on 28 August with the resignation of the Hiranuma cabinet.

On 31 August the crisis for Switzerland terminated when the Federal Council issued a declaration of neutrality after assurances had been received from Germany and Italy. On that day as well, Luxembourg's crisis ended when it, too, received assurances of German observance of its strict neutrality.

On 1 September there were official declarations of neutrality by the Scandinavian countries--Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden; Romania, too, declared neutrality that day, as did Estonia and Latvia.

Lithuania proclaimed neutrality the next day. Neutrality was declared by Belgium and the Netherlands on 3 September.

Australia, Britain, France, and New Zealand declared war against Germany on 3 September.

South Africa joined the war on the 6th, and Canada on the 10th.

Germany fought in Poland for 17 days. The conquest was completed on 17 September. That day the Soviet Union invaded Poland from the east, meeting the advancing German troops near Brest-Litovsk two days later.

The last actor to perceive crisis termination was the Soviet Union, on 28 September 1939. Despite the signing of the Pact, bad faith continued to exist between Germany and the USSR until additional agreements were signed on the 28th when the German and Soviet governments divided Poland.

By the end of this crisis, Australia, Canada, France, New Zealand, South Africa, and the U.K. were at war with Germany. Poland had been conquered. The Scandinavian countries, the Baltic states, and Belgium, Luxembourg, Romania, Switzerland, and Holland had declared neutrality. Japan was at war in Asia with China. And Moscow was serene in the misconception that Germany would not attack the USSR.

The League of Nations, although formally still in existence until 1946, had become moribund by 1939 and was not involved in any crisis during the long-war World War II PC.

References:

See sources for Cases #64, #68, #69, #70, #75; and Baldwin 1966; Grattan 1963; Hull 1948, vol. I; von Rauch 1970; Snell 1963; Weinberg 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


