CRISNO 83

BALKAN INVASION

Background:

The Italian and German invasions of the Balkans created a crisis for Greece, Yugoslavia, the U.K., Turkey, Italy, and Germany. The duration of the crisis was from 28 October 1940 until 1 June 1941.

Background and Pre-crisis The high geostrategic importance of the Balkans for Germany, the USSR, and the West stems from the fact that they guarded one access to the Mediterranean close to vital areas of the British Empire, namely, the Suez Canal and the Middle East. Together with Turkey and Romania, the Balkans dominate the Dardanelles, the access to the USSR and the Black Sea, and the mouth of the Danube River. They are also rich in natural resources, especially oil. In the summer of 1940, when three countries claimed Romanian territories, Hitler imposed a solution on Romania and Hungary in order to avoid war (see Case #80, in Europe: Non-PCs). On 8 October German troops entered Romania to "protect" the oil fields. Italy had long been interested in Yugoslavia and Greece as guardians of the opposite shore of the Adriatic, and Hitler had cautiously granted Mussolini a free hand in the area. When Italy attacked and occupied Albania in early 1939 (see Case #71--Invasion of Albania, in Italy/Albania/Yugoslavia PC), the balance in the area was altered. Mussolini, after a poor showing on the French front and ignorant of Hitler's plan vis-à-vis Romania, wished to present Hitler with a fait accompli by occupying Greece.

Summary:

On 28 October 1940 Italy's ambassador to Greece presented Premier Metaxas with an ultimatum to relinquish Greek bases for use by the Italian government. One-half hour before the ultimatum expired, Italy attacked Greece from Albania. Greece responded that day by mobilizing its forces and appealing to the U.K. for help under its guarantee, triggering a crisis for the U.K. Britain perceived a threat to the strategic balance in the area and therefore to its entire Middle East empire. Crises were also triggered for Yugoslavia, which feared for its own security should the port of Thessaloniki, Greece be occupied by the Italians, and for Turkey, which viewed Bulgaria as capable of seizing the military opportunity to take control of Greek areas of strategic importance to Turkey, as well as fearing a spillover that would endanger Turkey's neutral status.

Yugoslavia and Turkey both responded on 1 November. Yugoslavia held a meeting of its Crown Council and ordered partial mobilization. Turkey's President Inönü announced that his country would stand by its allies and not tolerate a threat to its security. To back this up some Turkish troops were moved to the Bulgarian border--which ultimately freed Greek soldiers, fighting in the vicinity, for campaigns elsewhere in Greece. The U.K., which had sent reinforcements to Crete and other Greek islands on 30 October, decided at a cabinet meeting on 3 November to increase its military and economic aid to Greece so as to enable that country to resist the Italian offensive.

The attack itself did not go well for Italy. Severe winter conditions and the fierce determination of the Greek forces ground the Italian offensive to a standstill. By the middle of November the Greeks were able to reorganize for an offensive, which, by 21 November, had forced the Italians back. The first crisis for Greece and Yugoslavia ended that day. The U.K.'s first crisis ended the following day, with the news of Greek successes on the battlefield.

The Greek offensive, which resulted, inter alia, in the capture of the strategic town of Koritsa, triggered a crisis for Italy and Germany. Hitler viewed Italian losses as detrimental to his strategy in the area, for Western victories would allow the British access to the Balkans and the Romanian oil fields. Italy responded on 5 December by sending its ambassador in Berlin to Hitler to request aid in Greece. Although the request was later withdrawn, Hitler had been convinced of the need to salvage the situation there. Accordingly, on 13 December, Germany began to plan for an invasion of Greece in February. It was eventually delayed until April. Germany's Soviet campaign was thus also delayed.

By the beginning of 1941 the military situation had stabilized somewhat. Hitler spent the winter in political maneuvering, easing the tension between Bulgaria and Turkey and countering strong British pressure on Turkey to support Greece. Hitler was instrumental in bringing about the signing of a Bulgaria-Turkey Friendship Pact on 17 February 1941, which terminated Turkey's crisis vis-à-vis Bulgaria. On 29 February Bulgaria adhered to the Tripartite Pact (Germany, Italy, Japan) and therewith allowed German troops to assemble on its territory to await the invasion of Greece.

In Yugoslavia the same German pressure was being applied, and there also was popular unrest and some civil violence as rival groups maneuvered for dominance in that multinational state. The Regent, Prince Paul, though willing in principle to join the Axis powers, did not wish it to become public knowledge. Nevertheless, he obligated Yugoslavia to provide forces, if necessary, and allowed the passage of German troops. On 4 March 1941 Prince Paul visited Hitler where he experienced strong pressure to adhere to the Tripartite Pact. This triggered a second crisis for Yugoslavia, as Germany threatened to occupy Thessaloniki, Greece and hand it over to Bulgaria or Italy. On 24 March 1941 Yugoslavia responded by agreeing to join the Pact, which was done the following day. On the night of the 26th a coup d'état took place in Yugoslavia. The new rulers were quick to state that they would adhere to previous policy, but the signs were unclear. Hitler, in fury, decided to invade Yugoslavia as well as Greece and did so on 6 April 1941, triggering a second crisis for Greece and the U.K. Efforts to coordinate military plans between the U.K. and Greece had met with difficulties. Greece feared that too much British aid would bring Germany into the battle. The U.K. felt that what was acceptable to Greece was insufficient. Poor coordination and misunderstanding led to poor performance.

On 7 April the British pledged military support to Yugoslavia, and on the 8th the U.S. cabled Belgrade that it would provide material aid. Two days later, with a preliminary U.K. withdrawal in Greece, Hungary invaded Yugoslavia. The Greek response to the second crisis was a major withdrawal on 12 April. On 17 April Yugoslavia signed an armistice with Germany, which terminated its second crisis. And on the 23rd Greece surrendered, ending its crisis and that of Italy as well. The next day the Greek government requested that the British withdraw, and Bulgaria invaded Greece. The major U.K. response was a decision on 27 April to withdraw its forces to Crete.

Fighting continued as German forces attacked Crete, which had never been properly fortified. Nonetheless, it took over a month to force a final U.K. withdrawal from Crete, on 1 June, terminating the crisis for the U.K. and for Germany--and this IWC as a whole. In the final analysis the Balkan campaign delayed "Operation Barbarossa" by at least four weeks, more likely several months (see Case #85).

The U.S. sent a delegation to the Balkans in the spring and invoked the Neutrality Act in the fall of 1940. Australian and New Zealand troops fought alongside the British.

References:

Barker 1976; Cervi 1971; Churchill 1949, 1950a; Ciano 1947; van Creveld 1973; Cruickshank 1976; Kirkpatrick 1964; Ristic 1961; Smith 1982; Weinberg 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


