CRISNO 314

LIBYA THREAT-SADAT

Background:

Egypt and Libya were embroiled in a personalized crisis from the 11th to the end of June 1980.

Background and Pre-crisis Almost from the moment they came to power--Muammar Qaddhafi in Libya through a military coup in 1969, Anwar al-Sadat, who succeeded Nasir as President of Egypt in 1970--their relations were marked by acute hostility. There were several sources of this animus. One was personal rivalry for Nasir's mantle of leadership in the Arab world. Another was Sadat's marked shift to a pro-U.S. policy during and after the October-Yom Kippur War of 1973-74 (see Case #255, in the Arab/Israel PC). Hostility was accentuated by a violent border dispute in 1977 (see Case #281--Egypt/Libya Clashes).

Another source was Egypt's peace agreement with Israel in 1979, which Qaddhafi attacked virulently; in fact, Libya took the lead in the group of "resistance" or "steadfastness" Arab states in pressing, successfully, for the expulsion of Egypt from the Arab League. And finally they disagreed over Chad, with Libya supporting Goukouni Oueddi, Egypt backing Hissene Habré (see Case #304--Chad/Libya IV, in 1979--in the Chad/Libya PC). During the late 1970s Qaddhafi and Sadat engaged in frequent verbal attacks and some attempts at sabotage and assassination.

Summary:

A crisis for Egypt was triggered by Qaddhafi's blunt and provocative speech on 11 June 1980, marking the tenth anniversary of the evacuation of U.S. bases in Tripoli. Not only did Libya's leader declare that the freedom of the Libyan people was threatened so long as U.S. forces remained on Egyptian territory, he also unequivocally proclaimed Libya's "alliance with the Egyptian people and army in order to topple treason in Egypt" and urged a jihad (holy war) by all Muslims against the Egyptian regime.

Egypt responded on the 16th by declaring a state of emergency in the western part of Egypt, deploying troops to the region bordering Libya, and reimposing martial law regulations in force for 70 years that Sadat had lifted a month earlier. These measures triggered a crisis for Libya: Libya's Foreign Secretariat termed them equivalent to "a declaration of a state of war"; and it affirmed Libya's "legitimate right to self-defense." Libya added insult to the threat by holding the U.S. responsible for Egypt's "aggression," because "al-Sadat is not the master of his decisions."

Libya followed this up with a vigorous diplomatic campaign on 18 June, conveying its view of the crisis--as an Egyptian "threat to the stability of the region"--to the UN Secretary-General, the President of the UN Security Council, the Secretary-General of the Arab League, the OAU, the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO), and the Non-Aligned Conference. The same day the Arab League Secretary-General concurred, terming Egypt's state of emergency and its massing of troops on Libya's border "a threat to Arab security and general security in the region."

At an African ministerial council meeting on 21 June the Arab rejectionist states led by Libya failed to expel Egypt from meetings of the OAU and the Arab-African Cooperation Organization, despite support from the Arab League. The strongest condemnation of Egypt from within the Arab world came from the Political Committee of the "National Front for Steadfastness and Confrontation," comprising Algeria, Libya, Syria, and the PLO. Tension continued to increase, with Libya accusing Egypt of making war preparations along its border.

On 26 June the commander of Libya's forces on the front with Egypt said that Libya would not be the first to launch a war but warned that Libya had enough power to repel any Egyptian attack. The next day Libya's Foreign Secretariat repeated its call to overthrow the Egyptian regime. On the 27th, too, Egypt's defense minister de-escalated the tension by denying any intention to attack Libya and explaining the arrival of U.S. planes--for a 90-day joint U.S.-Egyptian training exercise. The crisis faded rapidly after that statement. In sum, it was intense in hostile rhetoric but without violence.

The U.S. and the USSR were not involved, though both Libya and Egypt expressed concern during the crisis about active support to their adversary. The UN was only marginally involved.

References:

Foreign Broadcast Information Service--Daily Report/Middle East and Africa (FBIS-DR/MEA) 1980; ACR 1980; AR 1980; ARB 1980; MECS 1980-81.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


