CRISNO 116

INDONESIA INDEPENDENCE II

Background:

The second crisis over the Netherlands' opposition to Indonesia's declaration of independence occurred between 21 July 1947 and 17 January 1948.

Pre-crisis The Linggadjati Agreement of 25 March 1947, which called for the transfer of power by the Netherlands to Indonesia on 1 January 1949, was regarded by many Dutch colonials as inadequate in its provisions for the protection of Dutch interests. Indonesians, on the other hand, felt that Prime Minister Sjahrir had gone too far in conceding to Dutch demands; he resigned on 3 July 1947 as internal pressure mounted.

Summary:

Indonesia's second crisis was triggered on 21 July 1947 when the Netherlands, dissatisfied with the deteriorating relations between the two countries, authorized the launching of military action. Indonesia's response, on 22 July, was an appeal to India for aid and foreign intervention. India, and later Australia, brought the issue to the Security Council. Its discussion on 31 July, with the implied danger of international intervention, was the crisis trigger for the Netherlands. That day, the Dutch representative to the Security Council denied UN jurisdiction over what he termed a police action in an internal Dutch matter. He set forth the Netherlands' conditions for reopening talks.

The UN formed a Good Offices Committee (GOC), which served as an instrument of mediation in the crisis beginning in August of 1947. On 8 December, the first meeting of the GOC with the belligerents was held on the USS Renville. The GOC proposed terms of agreement on 25 December, but neither party found the proposal satisfactory. On 2 January 1948, the Dutch formulated a counterproposal that gave the individual Indonesian territories greater discretion over whether and how sovereignty was to be transferred from the Netherlands to the United States of Indonesia, and the GOC added six additional principles. Under the new plan, either party could request the continuation of the Good Offices Committee’s services, and a referendum would be held in six to twelve months to let the individual territories decide who would be in control. A constitutional convention would then be held in which any state could decide to ratify the constitution or create a special relationship with either the Netherlands or the United States of Indonesia.

The crisis ended on 17 January 1948 when the parties agreed to the Dutch and GOC principles while gathered on the USS Renville. U.S. activity helped to bring about the Renville Agreement, calling for a truce and adopting the UN Good Offices Committee's recommendation for a plebiscite.

References:

See sources for Case #109; and Miller 1967.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


