CRISNO 414

SPRATLY ISLANDS

Background:

China and the Philippines were involved in a crisis over a chain of islands in the South of China Sea from 2 to 15 February 1995.

Background and Pre-Crisis

The potentially oil-rich Spratly islands are claimed, fully or partly by China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia and Brunei. China has often fought in the South China Sea with its traditional rival in the area, Vietnam, most recently in a naval battle in 1986, when China captured six tiny islands. Formerly, China seized the Paracel Islands from Vietnam in 1974 and it virtually has claimed sovereignty over all of the South China Sea, including the Spratly Islands, which contain vital shipping lanes.

This specific crisis between China and the Philippines erupted over Mischief Reef, a territory claimed by the Philippines and located 200 km from the Philippine island of Palawan. Following reports by a fisherman of Chinese activity in the reef, the Philippines sent a patrol boat to the area.

Summary:

A crisis for the Philippines began on 2 February 1995 when a patrol boat found that Chinese forces, including eight ships, had occupied Mischief Reef and established several permanent structures. The action was perceived as another stage of the advancement of Chinese territorial claims into the region, and raised fears that the Chinese were prepared to use force in posting claims to shipping lanes there.

President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines denounced the Chinese action as "inconsistent with international law," and on 8 February the Philippines issued a formal diplomatic protest to the Chinese government. The Chinese responded that the compound at Mischief Reef was built for use as a shelter by Chinese fishermen, not for any military purpose.

Although the Philippines government ruled out the use of force, its major response was to send warships and fighter planes to the area on 15 February, and to order a strengthening of the military forces on the islands currently under Philippine control. Since there were no further changes in the control of the reef, this terminated the crisis without resolving the Philippines claim to the reef.

The other countries concerned by the Spratly Islands - Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia and Brunei - were not actively involved in the crisis. Nor were the US, Russia and the UN.

References:

Keesing's Record of World Events, Vol. 41, 1995, pp. 40412; 40458. New York Times, 19 Feb. 1995, p. A9

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


