CRISNO 438

PARSLEY ISLAND

Background:

From 11-21 July 2002, Spain and Morocco engaged in a crisis about which has sovereignty over a small islet in the Mediterranean Sea.

Background and pre-crisis

Parsley Island (Isla del Perejil according to the Spanish, and Leila or “Night” according to the Moroccans) is a small, uninhabited island in the Mediterranean Sea about 200 meters off of the coast of Ceut, a Spanish North African enclave claimed by Morocco. Ever since Morocco achieved its independence in 1956, the authority of the islet remained in dispute. In addition to the claim to sovereignty over the disputed piece of land, Morocco wanted to set up an observation post on Parsley Island to monitor potential security threats and illegal immigration across the Strait of Gibralter.

In the preceding years and months, relations between Spain and Morocco had plummeted, as Morocco was concerned with Spain’s support for the Polisario Front in Western Sahara (see Western Sahara protracted conflict), and Spain was concerned with the influx of illegal immigration and drugs from Morocco. In October 2001, Morocco withdrew its ambassador to Spain, and in July 2002, Spanish officials and members of the royal family declined to attend the wedding celebrations of Morocco’s King Mohammed VI. It was during this time of celebration that the crisis between Spain and Morocco emerged.

Summary:

On 11 July 2002, a dozen Moroccan soldiers landed on the island and hoisted a Moroccan flag. This triggered a crisis for Spain, as concerns grew that Morocco would try to similarly invade other, more important islands and enclaves in the region. The next day, Spain sent three navy ships to the area to monitor the situation, which triggered a crisis for Morocco. The troops on the island were poorly armed and were not prepared for a fight.

On 17 July, elite Spanish forces invaded the island, took control and raised two Spanish flags without any shots fired. The Moroccan troops were briefly detained and then released back to Morocco. Spain soon after promised to vacate the island if given assurances from Morocco that they would not try to retake it. After there were reports from Morocco that they had no intention to retake the island, U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell helped solidify an agreement through a series of telephone conversations with King Mohammed of Morocco and Anna Palacia, the foreign minister of Spain. On 20 July, the foreign ministers of both Spain and Morocco announced that they had reached an agreement to return to the status quo and abide by the terms of agreement that Powell had proposed. On the next day, the Spanish troops withdrew, which terminated the crisis. (The respective foreign ministers signed a formal agreement in Rabat on 22 July, declaring their intentions to abide by Powell’s terms and to engage in future dialogue to improve relations.)

References:

Keesing's Record of World Events; Lexis Nexis Online (The Guardian, Financial Times, Associated Press, Panafrican News Agency, BBC Monitoring International Reports)

Last Updated: 1/18/2005


