CRISNO 264

EAST TIMOR I

Background:

The disputed territory of East Timor generated a crisis for Indonesia from 28 November 1975 to 17 July 1976.

Background and Pre-crisis The three most important political parties in Portuguese East Timor were Fretilin, which demanded immediate independence, UDT, which favored eventual independence with the continuation of ties to Portugal, and Apodeti, which wanted integration into Indonesia. After the Portuguese government announced in June 1975 its intention to relinquish control over all overseas territories, the UDT held high-level talks with Indonesian officials and announced, on 6 August 1975, that the party had decided to follow a political line acceptable to Indonesia. On 11 August the UDT carried out a coup in East Timor and demanded immediate independence from Portugal. Fighting between Fretilin and UDT factions broke out immediately. On 27 August the governor of East Timor admitted that the Portuguese authorities had lost control of the situation. The Portuguese administration then abandoned East Timor and retreated to the offshore island of Atauro. Portugal rejected Indonesia's offer to move in and restore order. As fighting intensified in September, an announcement was made by the defense ministry in Jakarta, on 9 September, that Indonesia would refuse to accept any Portuguese move to hand over East Timor to a government dominated by Fretilin, which at that time controlled a major part of the East Timor territory. This was followed by an announcement by the foreign minister that Indonesia had the right to intervene in East Timor if war endangered its territory. Border clashes increased in October and, on the 11th, Fretilin announced that a transitional administration had been established.

Summary:

The crisis trigger for Indonesia was the Fretilin declaration of East Timor's independence on 28 November 1975. Indonesia feared that an independent East Timor would encourage internal secessionist movements in Sumatra, West Irian, and the South Moluccas, as well as aid communist infiltration and influence in the area. On 29 November the pro-Indonesian political parties in East Timor declared it to be a part of Indonesia. That day, too, Portugal rejected all declarations of independence and, on 30 November, formally requested help from the UN to settle the problem. The major Indonesian response, on 7 December, was a large-scale invasion of East Timor. Portugal severed relations with Indonesia and requested a meeting of the Security Council. A second invasion was launched on 25 December, with heavy fighting between Fretilin and Indonesian forces continuing throughout December.

In March 1976 the East Timor Provisional Government announced its intention to integrate the island with Indonesia. This was followed by an Indonesian declaration that its troops would be withdrawn. The integration was approved by the East Timor People's Assembly on 31 May. On 17 July 1976 the crisis for Indonesia ended when President Suharto signed a bill formally incorporating East Timor into Indonesia. At that time the Indonesian forces had achieved control of the entire coastal area but not much of the interior.

The UN General Assembly passed a resolution on 12 December 1975 condemning Indonesian military intervention and calling for the withdrawal of Indonesian forces. The UN Security Council met five times between 15 and 22 December 1975. On the 22nd it passed a resolution calling on Indonesia to withdraw its forces from East Timor without delay and urged that a special representative of the Secretary-General be sent to assess the situation. This was done in late January 1976, but he was unable to establish contact with the Fretilin. On 22 April another resolution with the same content was adopted by the Security Council. None of these resolutions helped to abate the crisis.

The U.S. and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

Kamm 1981; Lawless 1976; Leifer 1976; Nichterlein 1977; Viviani 1976.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


