CRISNO 9

FINNISH-RUSSIAN BORDER

Background:

The first of several international crises between Russia and Finland since the end of World War I lasted from 20 April 1919 to 14 October 1920.

Summary:

On 20 April 1919 a "volunteer" force of Finnish soldiers, backed by the Finnish government, crossed into East Karelia and seized Olonets, triggering a crisis for Russia. Foreign Affairs Commissar Chicherin demanded an explanation. And several members of the Finnish Economic Commission in Petrograd (St. Petersburg) were arrested. Both Prime Minister Castren and Foreign Minister Enrooth denied any Finnish territorial designs on Olonets but reaffirmed Finland's military support for the "volunteers."

On 6 May Finland's independence was recognized by the U.K. and the U.S. Finnish and Russian batteries exchanged fire on 17 and 18 May. (It is unclear who fired the first shot.) This triggered a crisis for Finland and escalated Russia's crisis. Sporadic fighting continued through May. Chicherin sent several protest notes to Helsinki, notably a letter to his Finnish counterpart on 6 June declaring that Russia considered itself free to take "all necessary steps" to eliminate "Finnish aggression," further escalating Finland's crisis. In the fighting that followed, Finnish forces experienced several setbacks.

Peace talks began in September 1919; but Finland renewed its offensive into East Karelia in October. After months of hostilities, negotiations resumed in June 1920. And a peace agreement, the Treaty of Tartu (Dorpat), was signed on 14 October 1920 marking an end to this crisis over territory.

Four major powers were involved in this crisis. Germany was involved diplomatically. Activity by France and the U.S. was confined to statements in support of Finland. And the U.K., in addition to supportive statements, dispatched naval vessels to the Baltic at Finland's request in order to enhance its bargaining position in the negotiations.

Although the League of Nations Council first met nine months before the end of this crisis, the global organization was not involved.

References:

Documents on British Foreign Policy (DBFP) 1949a (Woodward and Butler); Boulter 1928; Butler 1961; Degras 1953; Hovi 1980; Kirby 1975; Smith 1958.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


