CRISNO 379

MECCA PILGRIMAGE

Background:

Sa'udi Arabia and Iran were embroiled in a crisis over Iranian pilgrims from 31 July to October 1987.

Background and Pre-crisis No pilgrimage by Iranians to Islam's Holy Places since 1981 had passed without incident. Their annual demonstrations in the streets of Mecca and Medina challenged the Sa'udi concept of pilgrimage, the Sa'udi interpretation of Islam, Sa'udi control of the Holy Places, and the legitimacy of Sa'udi rule.

The first catalyst to tension between Iran and Sa'udi Arabia in 1987 was a statement by Iran's former pilgrimage representative, Musavi Khoiniha, a powerful hard-line figure in Iran. In a speech early in July Khoiniha reportedly said that a mere march or demonstration by Iranians would not suffice. He demanded that the Sa'udi regime allow Iranian pilgrims to enter the Great Mosque in Mecca at the end of their demonstration, where their representative would explain Iran's case regarding the Iran/Iraq War. That demand put the Sa'udi security forces on a high state of alert.

After difficult negotiations Iranian and Sa'udi officials reached an agreement that the demonstration would end half a kilometer before the Great Mosque. But tension remained high, so Sa'udi Arabia tried to persuade the Iranian pilgrimage representative, Hojjatolislam Mehdi Karrubi, to cancel the demonstration lest violence break out. Karrubi refused and declared that the Sa'udi government would be responsible for any disorder.

On 28 July Ayatullah Khomeini called on all Iranian pilgrims to take part in a "disavowal march" to "echo the crushing slogan of the disavowal of pagans and apostates of world arrogance, headed by the criminal USA," adding that "it is most disgraceful for Islamic countries and for heads of states that foreigners should penetrate the secret military centers of the Moslems." At the same time Iran's ruler called on the pilgrims "to avoid clashes, insults and disputes" and warned against those "intent on disruption."

Summary:

On 31 July 1987, during the annual Haj (pilgrimage) to Mecca, several hundred people were killed and many wounded in violent clashes between Sa'udi security forces and Iranian pilgrims. The clashes began during the demonstration of Iran's pilgrims: toward its end the march approached Sa'udi security guards, who refused to allow the demonstrators to move closer to the Great Mosque.

The Iranian demonstrators were invoking death threats against the U.S., Israel, and the Soviet Union. A confrontation began between the pilgrims and the Sa'udi security forces: the Sa'udis opened fire on the demonstrators. This incident triggered a crisis for Sa'udi Arabia and Iran that day.

Sa'udi Arabia denied firing on the pilgrims, claiming that those who were killed were crushed in a trample. Iran gave another version of the events, claiming that "Sa'udi police, in a pre-arranged joint Sa'udi-U.S. conspiracy ... opened fire on Iranian pilgrims who were peacefully marching."

Iran's initial response, on 1 August, was to call for the overthrow of the Sa'udi regime. And 2 August was declared an official "Day of Hate" in Iran. The Iranian parliamentary Speaker (later, President of Iran), Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, called for revenge, by "freeing the holy shrines from the mischievous and wicked Wahabis" and stated that "the Imam (Khomeini) dictates, [Sa'udi King] Fahd will not remain alive." The Iranian media accused the U.S. of responsibility for the "massacre."

Sa'udi spokesmen responded by accusing the Iranians of deliberate provocation. The Sa'udis refused to allow an Iranian delegation to enter Sa'udi Arabia on 2 August to investigate the deaths and to interview security officials.

On 25 August, for the first time, a senior Sa'udi official, Prince Na'if, sharply attacked Iran and publicly called for the overthrow of the regime in Teheran. The two sides continued to exchange accusations and insults throughout September. Late that month, Sa'udi Arabia denied Iran's accusation that it was unwilling to return 54 corpses of Iranian pilgrims who died in the clashes in Mecca. And at a UN General Assembly meeting on 22 September Iran's President Khamenei uttered threats against Sa'udi Arabia, which the Sa'udi delegate described as "meaningless" and totally unjustified.

The crisis faded in October 1987, with a Sa'udi victory and Iranian defeat.

The Arab states supported the Sa'udis, except for Libya, which advocated placing the Mecca and Medina mosques under international Islamic control.

The U.S., the USSR, the UN, and the Arab League were not involved in this crisis.

References:

Foreign Broadcast Information Service, Daily Report; Near East/South Asia (FBIS--DR/NESA), August, September 1987; Keesing's 1987; Kramer 1988; New York Times 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


