CRISNO 76

FINNISH WAR

Background:

A crisis for Finland, Sweden, France, and the U.K., centering on the Finnish/Russian War, began on 6 October 1939 and ended on 13 March 1940.

Background The city of St. Petersburg is 32 kilometers from the Finnish border, south of the Karelian Peninsula. Treaties signed by the Soviet Union with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania in September and October 1939 granted Moscow the right to build bases in the three Baltic states (see Case #75--Soviet Occupation--Baltic, in Europe: Non-PCs). In addition to a base in Estonia at the southwestern edge of the Gulf of Finland, the Soviets wanted a base at the northern end, along with territorial changes that would protect it from future attack, either by the U.K. or Germany. From early 1938 until mid-1939 requests for such border changes had been discussed by Soviet diplomats in Helsinki with the Finnish foreign minister. Pressure on Finland began once the treaties with the Baltic states had been signed. On 5 October Molotov requested the Finnish ambassador to the Soviet Union to inform his government that the USSR wished the Finnish foreign minister or some high-ranking delegate to come to Moscow to discuss concrete political questions in view of the altered international situation--the outbreak of World War II and the German-Soviet partition of Poland.

Summary:

In the absence of a reply by 6 October strong pressure was applied to the ambassador of Finland. A crisis was triggered for Finland when its ambassador in Moscow related the Soviet demands the same day. A negotiator was selected by Finland with clear instructions to convey its determination to stand firm. And Moscow was so informed on the 10th. The same day Finland called for partial mobilization and evacuation of some cities, along with a practice air raid and blackout in Helsinki.

Negotiations took place between 12 and 14 October. The Soviets presented their "minimum demands," which included the transfer of islands close to the USSR shore and the port of Itanko, moving the border 35 kilometers farther away from St. Petersburg; and concessions in the northern peninsula of Rybachi, including the port of Petsamo. The Finnish mission returned to Helsinki for further instructions. On 27 October Finland appealed to Sweden for military aid in case of war. The following day the appeal was rejected by the prime minister of Sweden. The last round of negotiations produced lesser Soviet demands, but Helsinki refused to consider them. The negotiators returned to Finland on 14 November.

An incident involving the firing of seven shots occurred in a town on the Soviet side of the Karelian border on 26 November. Moscow accused Finland of violating their Non-Aggression Pact; and a vehement press campaign was launched against Finland. The Soviets refused Finland's request to investigate the incident and withdrew its diplomats on 29 November, denouncing the Pact. On the 30th the USSR attacked Finland. The Finnish cabinet declared a state of war that day and appointed Marshal Mannerheim Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces. The government resigned on 1 December and was reorganized under a new Prime Minister, Ryti. On the 2nd the Soviet Union set up and recognized a Finnish Democratic Government in captured territory. The same day Finland appealed to the League of Nations, which invited the Soviet Union to attend an Assembly session. Moscow refused on 4 December; and on the 14th the League Assembly condemned the Soviet Union as an aggressor and requested that members give Finland material and humanitarian aid. The Soviet Union was expelled from the League, by then an empty shell.

During December France and the U.K. began to consider sending forces to aid Finland, with a view to stopping the flow of Swedish iron shipments through Narvik to Germany. In order to do this troops had to cross neutral Norway and Sweden. Sweden, physically closer to Finland and politically friendly, saw the situation as dangerous and feared being drawn into the conflict, particularly with Germany. When the first official offer by Britain and France to send troops to Finland via Sweden was made on 27 December 1939, a crisis was triggered for Sweden which, together with Norway, insisted that no troops pass through its territories. On 4 January the German ambassador to Finland made it clear that Germany would view Allied troops in northern Sweden and Norway as a casus belli. The Soviets, who had been surprised at Finnish perseverance and success, finally broke Finland's line on 14 January 1940, triggering a crisis for France and the U.K.: they were suddenly faced with the real prospect of a Soviet victory in a strategic area and a need to send aid to Finland before the spring thaw shifted the military conditions once more. They responded on 5 February with a finalized plan for action in Finland which was accepted by the Joint Allied Supreme War Council.

Sweden, which had been brokering negotiations between the Finnish foreign minister and the Soviet ambassador to Sweden, became more alarmed over the Allied plans. A press-leaked story about the negotiations and appeals from Finland for aid determined the Swedish major response to the crisis: on 19 February the king of Sweden officially refused to aid Finland. Throughout February and March, Britain and France continued to ignore Sweden's and Norway's refusals to grant passage for their troops and pressed Finland to accept Allied armies on its soil. Finland preferred to continue negotiations for an armistice with the Soviet Union via Sweden.

Moscow, which had originally expected little resistance and popular support for a communist government in Finland, finally agreed to an armistice while demanding stiffer conditions. The armistice was signed on 13 March 1940, terminating the crisis for all four actors.

Offers to mediate were made by the United States, Italy, and Germany.

References:

DGFP 1940 (1949); Beloff 1949; Bullock 1962; Calvocoressi and Wint 1972; Carlgren 1977; Churchill 1948; Dallin 1942; Degras 1953; Finnish Blue Book 1940; Jakobson 1961; Maude 1976; Nevakivi 1976; RIIA 1947; Schuman 1941; Snell 1963; Tanner 1957; Ulam 1974; Upton 1964; Walters 1952; Weinberg 1954, 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


