CRISNO 416

RED SEA ISLANDS

Background:

Yemen and Eritrea experienced a crisis over three Red Sea islands from 15 to 31 December 1995.

Background and Pre-Crisis

A dispute between Yemen and Eritrea broke out in November 1995 over three Red Sea islands, in which a small Yemeni fishing community lived. Greater Hanish, the main island in a chain between the two states, is nearby one of the world's major shipping lanes, 100 miles north of the southern entrance to the Red Sea. Eritrea had laid claim to the islands on what it described as historical grounds, as it acknowledged that its forces had been based on the Red Sea islands since its 30-year war against Ethiopia, after which Eritrea won independence in 1993. The two states were concerned with establishing rights over fishing, tourism and mineral exploitation.

Eritrea claimed that Yemen first put troops on the Hanish islands in early November. Yemen contended that tension was raised after Eritrea ordered all Yemenis off the islands on 11 November. Eritrean naval patrols tried to land on the islands and Yemen increased its military presence there.

A senior delegation, including Eritrea's Foreign Minister Petros Solomon, and Resources Minister Saleh Meki, visited Yemen on 22 November in an attempt to resolve the dispute peacefully. A Yemeni delegation headed by Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime-Minister Abdul ali al-Karim al-Iryani held talks with Eritrean officials in Asmara on 7 December. The two countries agreed to resolve the dispute through diplomacy in a further round in Yemen.

Summary:

Eritrean forces attacked the Hanish islands on 15 December 1995 and captured the largest -- Hanish al kabir (Greater Hanish) -- after three days of fighting, involving warships and aircraft from both sides. That triggered a crisis for both states. The next day Yemen accused Eritrea of invading the islands in a "treacherous act of aggression."

In a telephone conversation between President Ali Abdullah Salih of Yemen, and Eritrea's President Isseyas Aferworki on 17 December, the two leaders reached a truce in the fighting. However, the next day Yemen claimed that Greater Hanish had been completely occupied by Eritrean forces, which had broken the truce. Eritrea claimed that the island was captured before the truce. The cease-fire between Yemen and Eritrea took effect on 18 December, and they agreed to have it monitored by a committee of four, comprised of a Yemeni and an Eritrean representative, and officials from the US embassies in the two states. The UN Secretary-General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, arrived in Sana'a on 29 December to mediate the dispute. After meeting with representatives from both sides and facilitating discussions on the matter on the 31st, he announced that Yemen was ready to withdraw its forces from the islands and to accept international arbitration. This terminated the international crisis.

(An agreement between Yemen and Eritrea was signed in Paris on 21 May 1996 to settle their dispute over the Hanish islands by arbitration. The two sides agreed not to use of force and to accept the verdict of a special arbitration tribunal. )

References:

Keesing's Record of World Events, vol 41 1995, pp. 40812, 40858. New York Times, December 18, 1995 p. A11 New York Times, December 19, 1995 p. A7

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


