CRISNO 441

NORTH KOREA NUCLEAR II

Background:

The North Korean Nuclear Crisis II began on 3 October 2002 and lasted till 6 January 2004. North Korea and the United States were the two main crisis actors. China, Japan, South Korea and Russia were also involved in the crisis. See also crisis #408.

Background and Pre-Crisis

In 1994, United States confronted North Korea about its development of weapons grade plutonium as part of a previous crisis in the Korean peninsula protracted conflict (see case # 408). As part of the "Agreed Framework" finalized on 21 October 1994, the U.S. was to supply North Korea with light-water nuclear reactors (LWRs) (that could not be used to develop nuclear weapons) and ample heavy fuel oil for its energy requirements in the meantime. The Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization (KEDO), a consortium of the U.S., South Korea, Japan and the EU, became principally responsible for providing the heavy oil and constructing the light-water reactors. In exchange, the North Korean government vowed to freeze its nuclear weapons program and halt the use of reactors that could produce weapons-grade material.

Eight years after the agreement, relations remained precarious between the U.S. and North Korea. A crisis erupted in 1996 (see case #420), diplomatic relations continued to be non-existent, the U.S. continued to refuse granting North Korea a non-aggression guarantee, the Bush administration labeled the North Koreans as part of an "axis of evil" in January 2002, and North Korea was included on a U.S. list of states that sponsor terrorism. However, relations had gradually improved between DPRK and South Korea, with more and more support for normalization and reunification.

Over the course of the eight years following the 1994 agreement, KEDO also failed to expedite the construction of the promised light water nuclear reactors. The U.S. was also suspicious that the North Korean government would not uphold its end of the bargain, and intelligence revealed that the North Koreans had indeed resumed pursuit of nuclear weapons. At this time, the U.S. had begun mobilizing troops in the Middle East in anticipation of what would become in March 2003 a war for regime change in Iraq. This would severely limit the military options available to the U.S. vis-a-vis North Korea.

In a June 2002 assessment of the North Korean nuclear program, U.S. intelligence concluded that Pyongyang had begun a secret enrichment program. The CIA also publicly stated that North Korea was in the process of constructing a nuclear plant. The United States, however, did not react to this intelligence assessment immediately. It was only after the successful summit between then Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi and the North Korean leader Kim Jong Il in September 2002 that the U.S. decided to intervene.

The North Korean situation came to a head on 3 October 2002, when U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs James Kelly led a delegation to Pyongyang with the intention of confronting the North Korean government with information that the DPRK had obtained technology for the manufacture of nuclear weapons.

Summary:

When James Kelly confronted DPRK Vice Foreign Minister Kang Sok Ju, the verbal act triggered a crisis for North Korea. Although the DPRK is said to have initially denied the U.S. accusations, its admission the following day triggered a crisis for the United States. It justified its action in light of being branded as part of an "axis of evil" by the Bush administration although its secret weapons program was traced back to before 2001.

The crisis began to unfold soon after the October meeting. On 16 October, the United States made public that North Korea had "acknowledged" a secret enrichment program, a clear violation of the Agreed Framework. In response, Pyongyang accused the U.S. of breaching the Agreed Framework by not delivering the LWRs and failing to guarantee non-aggression. The United States lobbied for support for its stance from South Korea and Japan and soon after, managed to get KEDO to suspend further oil shipments to North Korea.

Pyongyang's response was initially verbal statements but the crisis escalated on 12 December. The DPRK publicly announced the end of the Agreed Framework and revealed that it intended to restart its nuclear program. Soon after, it wanted IAEA to remove its seals and cameras from all nuclear facilities. From 22 December, it restarted its plutonium production facilities and 5 days later it expelled the IAEA inspectors. After warning that that it would withdraw from the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in late December, North Korea made good on its threat on 10 January 2003.

The United States initially refused to engage directly with North Korea. President Bush wanted a "complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement" of DPRK's nuclear weapons program before negotiating with Pyongyang. It decided to put more pressure on DPRK by convening an IAEA meeting in mid-February that was expected to formally find North Korea in violation of the NPT treaty. As there was likelihood that this violation could be refereed to the U.N. Security Council (UNSC), North Korea asserted that that any UNSC sanctions would be considered an act of war.

In the following months, the U.S. realized that this approach would only lead to further escalation of the situation and adopted a more nuanced stance and pursued multilateral negotiations (that came to be called the Six-Party Talks) with North Korea by involving China, Japan and South Korea. At DPRK's request, Russia was also included in these talks. The first round of the six-party talks took place in late August 2003. Although there were no substantive concessions made by either side, they made headway on procedural issues. They agreed to find a resolution without resorting to violence and take North Korea security concerns into account, especially the final objective of having a nuclear-free Korean peninsula. They also agreed that dialogue should continue and avoid actions that may exacerbate the crisis. Given the antagonistic nature of the crisis actors, this "common understanding" was seen as a step in the right direction.

After the first round of the six-party talks, both North Korea and the United States adopted a relatively more conciliatory stance towards each other. The U.S. did not explicitly insist that North Korea dismantle its nuclear facilities before any substantive negotiations. It agreed to address some of North Korea's demands in what the State Department labeled a step-by-step approach. On its part, North Korea also softened its stance and publicly stated its intention to resolve the crisis through dialogue.

The crisis concluded when North Korea offered not to test or produce nuclear weapons on 6 January 2004, a statement that led to relatively calmer discussions in next few rounds of the six party talks. The immediate threat of war and time pressure to deal with the crisis decreased. By the time the second round of talks scheduled for February 2004 began, it seemed that both United States and North Korea were sincerely engaged to resolve the nuclear issue through negotiations.

References:

Keesings Online; New York Times; Economist; Lexis-Nexis Academic. International Crisis Group, 2003, 2004; Samore 2003; McCormack 2004; Triplett 2004; Cotton 2003; Kang 2003

Last Updated: 6/22/2020


