CRISNO 409

OPERATION ACCOUNTABILITY

Background:

Israel and Lebanon were embroiled in a crisis from 10 to 31 July 1993.

Background Low-intensity violence has been the norm in Israel/Lebanon relations since the failed "Litani Operation" by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in March 1978. During its 1982 "Peace for Galilee" campaign, that is, the Lebanon War, Israel created a "security zone" in south Lebanon to protect its northern towns and settlements from frequent shelling by hostile forces, notably from several factions within the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) or the Iranian-backed Hizbullah ("Party of God"). These raids intensified during the Intifada (the Uprising) by Palestinians against Israel's continued occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip from December 1987 until the signing of the Israel/PLO Oslo Accord in August 1993. There were frequent raids and retaliations across the Israel/Lebanon border--by both sides. One of these escalated to a full-scale crisis in 1993.

Summary:

A crisis for Israel was triggered on 10 July by a Hizbullah attack in the security zone that killed five IDF soldiers and wounded many others. Israel's initial response was a public demand by Prime Minister Rabin the same day that Syria curb the activities of the Hizbullah, whose headquarters were located in the Biqa Valley of Lebanon, where Syria held sway. Simultaneously Israel deployed more troops and firepower to its border with Lebanon.

On 19 July, after another Hizbullah attack in which several Israeli soldiers were wounded, the IDF was authorized to take whatever steps were necessary to protect the northern border. Rabin, who also held the Defense portfolio, issued another warning to both Syria and the Hizbullah. Another Israeli soldier was killed on the 23rd. Two days later came Israel's major response, the launching of "Operation Accountability." Heavy air raids and intense artillery attacks on south Lebanon villages, as well as Hizbullah bases all over Lebanon, triggered a crisis for Lebanon.

The aim of Israel's massive retaliation was to catalyze a flight of large numbers of people in south Lebanon to Beirut in an attempt to compel the government of Lebanon to stop Hizbullah's attacks on Israeli soldiers in the security zone and Israeli civilians in towns and villages near the northern border. Operation Accountability was dramatically successful at one level--half a million Lebanese refugees fled north to the capital. But even this was at a high cost in terms of external images of Israel: their flight was vividly portrayed by TV cameras for tens of millions of viewers around the world. As for the aim of curbing the Hizbullah via pressure from Lebanon, this was politically unrealistic: since the beginning of its civil war in 1975, and even after that war ended in 1991, Lebanon was incapable of protecting its territory or people from any invader, Israel or Syria, PLO or Hizbullah; it had become a client state, totally dependent on Syria.

UN Secretary-General Boutros-Ghali publicly condemned Israel on 28 July for creating a massive refugee problem. The government of Lebanon complained to the UN Security Council on the 30th, its major response to the crisis. The Council passed a resolution critical of Israel and called for its withdrawal from all Lebanese territory. On the 31st a cease-fire between the IDF and Hizbullah was arranged through U.S. mediation: the IDF agreed to desist from military operations north of the security zone, that is, against villages in south Lebanon; and Hizbullah pledged to stop firing missiles into northern Israel. Thus ended the crisis over Operation Accountability. However, tension and low-intensity violence continued intermittently in the Israel/Lebanon border area.

The U.S. criticized the scope of Operation Accountability and its humanitarian costs. More importantly, the U.S. contributed to crisis abatement by serving as a mediator between Syria and Israel, applying diplomatic pressure, and, as noted above, brokering a cease-fire. Russia remained aloof.

(There was an exact replay of Operation Accountability in April 1996. Hizbullah fired Katyusha rockets into towns and villages of northern Israel, triggering a crisis for Israel. The IDF's massive response, "Operation Grapes of Wrath," catalyzed a large-scale migration from south to north Lebanon, triggering a crisis for Lebanon. Once more, the U.S. brokered an agreement, restoring the "rules of the game," namely, no military acts against civilians in the border area.)

(Israel withdrew its forces from Lebanon in May 2000.)

References:

Jerusalem Post 1993, 1996; Keesing's 1993, 1996; New York Times 1993, 1996.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


