CRISNO 380

SOUTH AFRICA INTERVENTION IN ANGOLA

Background:

Angola and South Africa were embroiled in another of their many cross-border crises from 3 October 1987 to 22 August 1988.

Summary:

A crisis for Angola was triggered by a South Africa Defence Forces attack on SWAPO bases in Angolan territory on 3 October 1987. This was one of a number of such intrusions by the SADF since 1978, noted above, part of Pretoria's continuing struggle to thwart SWAPO's attempt to create an independent state of Namibia in South African-controlled South-West Africa. For Angola the incursion posed a threat of grave damage. For South Africa, Angola's provision of sanctuary to SWAPO forces threatened its control over South-West Africa and, generally, its primacy in the southern African region.

Angola's initial response followed its behavior in earlier intrusions of this kind: it appealed to the UN Security Council. As in the past, the Council unanimously passed a resolution condemning South Africa's "continued and intensified acts of aggression" against Angola and called for the immediate, unconditional withdrawal of its forces from Angola's territory. However, it did not impose economic sanctions on Pretoria.

This routinized Security Council behavior did not, per se, catalyze a crisis for South Africa. The trigger occurred on 10 December, when Angola launched a counterattack against SADF units.

Serious clashes between the SADF and Angolan forces continued intermittently for months, intertwined with the ongoing civil war in Angola between the MPLA-led government and UNITA. The latter's leader, Jonas Savimbi, claimed on 12 November that his forces had repulsed a three-month offensive by government forces. In mid-December, the Head of the SADF, General Johan Geldenhuys, admitted for the first time that his troops were fighting alongside UNITA inside Angola. Government forces had the active backing of 2,000 Soviet military advisors and of a large Cuban contingent in reserve, estimated as 30,000-35,000 troops.

The winding down of this cross-border crisis was a slow process that involved multiple mediation efforts. The first of twelve rounds of mediation among Angola, Cuba and South Africa began under the chairmanship of U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Chester Crocker, from 2-4 May 1988 in London. Also notable, a later round of mediated negotiations in New York during July produced a 14-point agreement entitled “Principles for a Peaceful Settlement in Southwestern Africa,” which served as a roadmap for further negotiations. Moreover, from 2-5 August the parties met in Geneva, where the U.S. delegation worked out the details for the Geneva Protocol, which recommended 1 November 1988 to the UN Secretary-General as the date for the implementation of Resolution 435, set 1 September as the date to resolve any other underlying issues and the date by which South Africa must be fully out of Angola, prepared text for a trilateral treaty that would make the New York “Principles” binding, and created an effective end to the Angolan border war. Angola and South Africa signed a cease-fire agreement on 22 August 1988, the Ruacana Accord, with a mutual commitment to continue talks on the issue of a complete SADF withdrawal. This ended the crisis--but not the protracted conflict between Angola and South Africa. (A substantive agreement on withdrawal and disengagement of forces was signed by Angola, Cuba, and South Africa on 22 December 1988.)

The UN role was limited to its routinized condemnation of South Africa's military incursion into Angola. More forceful Security Council action, notably economic sanctions, was prevented by the threat of a U.S. veto. For years the Reagan administration had provided South Africa and UNITA with covert aid.

Moreover, its policy of "constructive engagement" with Pretoria included preventing any sanctions by the global organization. Complementing this policy, U.S. relations with Angola had steadily deteriorated after July 1985, when the U.S. Congress repealed the Clark Amendment, which had imposed legal restrictions on U.S. assistance to UNITA. Export credit funds to Angola were cut off. And pressure was put on U.S. oil firms to cease their operations in oil-rich Angola, so as to deny funds to the pro-Soviet MPLA-led Angolan government. Both the USSR and Cuba, as noted, provided substantial military aid to government forces.

(South Africa Intervention in Angola was the last international crisis of the Angola protracted conflict: the December 1988 accord was fully implemented by Angola, Cuba, and South Africa. And with the active involvement of the U.S., Russia, and South Africa, Namibia's independence became a reality in 1990.

There were several abortive peace agreements over the years, notably the Angola Peace Accords (Bicesse Accords) on 31 May 1991, and the UN-supervised elections in September 1992. The electoral outcome, a decisive MPLA victory, was rejected by UNITA, and large-scale violence was renewed. However, the 20-year-old civil war, the primary source of the Angola PC and its international crises, appeared to be winding down.

A peace agreement, the Lusaka Protocol, was signed in November 1994 between the MPLA-dominated government of Angola and the UNITA movement. Their leaders, dos Santos and Savimbi, had a public reconciliation in Lusaka in early May 1995, their first meeting since the ill-fated UN-organized Angola elections in 1992. After further negotiations, Angola's president announced in August 1995 that they had agreed to a merger--and large-scale demobilization--of their armed forces, as well as the formation of a coalition government in which Savimbi would serve as Vice President. But the deadline for the UN-sponsored demobilization, 8 February 1996, passed with little progress in this crucial domain of the Lusaka peace process. Still another agreement between dos Santos and Savimbi was reported at a meeting in Libreville, the capital of Gabon, on 1 March 1996. They reaffirmed their commitment to the Lusaka Accord. The UNITA leader pledged the completion of the demobilization of his forces and the creation of an integrated national army, along with the assumption of ministerial posts by UNITA, including the vice presidency by Savimbi--as provided in the Accord. However, the internal Angola conflict was not yet fully resolved).

References:

ACR 1987, 1988; AR 1987, 1988; ARB 1987, 1988; Crocker 1992; Keesing's 1987, 1988; Papp 1993.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


