CRISNO 345

MAITENGWE CLASHES

Background:

Botswana experienced a crisis with Zimbabwe (the successor to Rhodesia) from 8 November to 21 December 1983.

Background Two Zimbabwean political forces competed for power in the struggle against the white colonial regime in Rhodesia: the Zimbabwe African National Union (ZANU), under the leadership of Robert Mugabe; and the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU), led by Joshua Nkomo. The former won a decisive majority in the February 1980 elections preparatory to independence.

Authority was transferred to ZANU on 18 April 1980, with Mugabe as Prime Minister, later as President of the new state (see Case #307--Rhodesia Settlement, in Rhodesia PC). However, rivalry, including frequent clashes, continued during the early years of independence, largely due to the ZANU-led government's attempt to extend central authority to the ZAPU's territorial base, Metabeleland. Some of the latter's forces sought--and received--sanctuary in neighboring Botswana, notably at the Dukwe refugee camp.

Summary:

In a "hot pursuit" operation against the alleged dissident training camp, a small contingent of Zimbabwean forces penetrated four kilometers into Botswana near Maitengwe on 8 November 1983. Minor clashes with Botswana border guards triggered a foreign policy crisis for Zimbabwe's much weaker neighbor. Botswana responded by strengthening several border posts and by requesting an urgent meeting of their Joint Defense and Security Commission. The Zimbabwe minister of state tried to reassure Botswana of its peaceful intentions at the commission's meeting on 10 November.

A second incident occurred on 20 December, with Zimbabwe acknowledging for the first time that its forces had intruded into Botswana. The crisis was defused as a result of a meeting between senior officials of the two states on the 21st.

There was no involvement by the U.S., the USSR, the UN, or the OAU. Maitengwe was a low-intensity crisis, with minor violence, a spillover from the internal politics of Zimbabwe in the pre- and early post-independence years.

References:

ACR 1983-84; AR 1984; ARec 1983; ARB 1983; Keesing's 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


