CRISNO 31

MOSUL LAND DISPUTE

Background:

Turkey and the U.K. were enmeshed in a crisis over the Iraqi/Turkish borderland from 29 September to 15 November 1924.

Background Mosul is an oil-rich area straddling the borders of northwestern Iraq, eastern Turkey, and northern Syria. Like the rest of the Arab Near East, Mosul was a province (vilayet) of the Ottoman Empire for four centuries, from 1517 until World War I.

Under the terms of the (secret) Sykes-Picot Agreement of 1916 Mosul was assigned to a postwar French zone of influence in the Middle East including Syria and Lebanon. However, in December 1918 French Premier Clemenceau agreed to British Prime Minister Lloyd George's request to transfer Mosul to what was anticipated to be the British zone of influence including Mesopotamia (Iraq), in exchange for British concessions on the Rhine. Nationalist Turkey, however, persisted in its claim to Mosul on ethnic and realpolitik grounds: its population was Kurdish--non-Arab, though Muslim; and the vilayet was not under British control at the time of the Mudrost Armistice in October 1918.

The Treaty of Sèvres in 1920, the initial, abortive peace agreement between the victorious Allies and Turkey, awarded Mosul to Iraq. The 1923 Treaty of Lausanne, the counterpart of the Versailles Treaty vis-à-vis Turkey, provided a procedure for resolving the territorial dispute but not its content: the U.K., by then the Mandatory Power in Iraq, and the Republic of Turkey, the successor to the Ottoman Empire, were to attempt to reach agreement by direct negotiations; if that failed the dispute was to be referred to the League of Nations Council. The U.K. did so in August 1924.

Pre-crisis The Council requested--and received--from the disputants a commitment to accept its decision as binding. It then decided to dispatch a commission of inquiry to the contested area. In the meantime both claimants were taking measures to consolidate what each perceived to be its part of Mosul. This led to minor frontier skirmishes. The U.K. accused Turkey of crossing into Iraqi territory under British Mandate. Turkey responded with the charge that Royal Air Force sorties over Turkish territory violated the Treaty of Lausanne.

Summary:

A serious clash occurred in mid-September 1924. On the 29th the British chargé d'affaires in Constantinople called for the withdrawal of Turkish forces from the disputed zone within 48 hours, triggering a crisis for Turkey. Turkey replied in kind on 3 October catalyzing a crisis for the U.K. The League Council called on the two parties to respect the status quo.

On 9 October the U.K. escalated the crisis by issuing an ultimatum to Turkey to evacuate its forces by the 11th, with a threat to take "all necessary military measures" to restore the status quo ante if necessary. Turkey responded the next day with a Note to the Secretary-General of the League acknowledging the high probability of a violent confrontation and requesting the League to fix the boundary. The U.K. accepted the proposal on the 14th, in effect withdrawing its ultimatum of the 9th.

At Turkey's insistence--it challenged the Council's competence to set the boundary since the dispute concerned provisions of the Treaty of Lausanne--the League Council sought an advisory opinion from the World Court. The Court ruled that the Council had jurisdiction under Article 15 of the Covenant but that its decision required unanimity excluding the votes of the disputants; and its decision had to be accepted as binding.

A League-appointed commission investigated the competing claims. It reported that the majority population of Mosul, the Kurds, preferred independence to Turkish or Iraqi rule; if the options excluded independence they preferred being part of Iraq--on condition that Iraq remained a British Mandate for another 25 years. The commission recommended in favor of Iraq, contingent upon that condition or the return of most of Mosul to Turkey. Iraq--and the U.K.--accepted the condition. On that basis the Council defined an interim boundary, the "Brussels Line," and requested both parties to withdraw from the disputed zone by 15 November. The U.K. and Turkey accepted the ruling and the boundary, ending the crisis that day.

(The Mosul Land Dispute was formally resolved on 5 June 1926 with the signing of a tripartite agreement--the U.K., Turkey, Iraq--incorporating an agreed boundary between Turkey and Iraq.)

(In the context of this dispute the U.K. attempted to secure for Iraq control over a small piece of Turkish territory inhabited by the Christian Assyrian community--but failed.)

References:

Documents on British Foreign Policy (DBFP) (Medlicott et al. 1966); Boulter 1928; Dexter 1967; Edmunds 1957; Kinross 1965; Shimoni 1987; Toynbee 1926, 1927b; Walters 1952.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


