CRISNO 171

CHINA-INDIA BORDER I

Background:

A border crisis for the PRC and India began on 25 August 1959 and ended on 19 April 1960.

Background The basis of India's claim to the North East Frontier Agency (NEFA) was the Simla Agreement of 1914 between British India and the semiautonomous Tibet government, and the accompanying McMahon Line. Although initialed by the representative of the central Chinese government, this agreement was not formally ratified by China then or later. The border issue was accentuated in 1958 when the Chinese Communist regime completed the construction of the Aksai Chin road in the state of Jammu and Kashmir in the west, linking Tibet to China's province of Sinkiang.

Summary:

On 25 August 1959 Indian patrols in the region of Longju, NEFA, were perceived by the PRC as challenging its version of where that border village lay--on the Indian or Chinese side. The PRC, perceiving a threat, responded that day by attacking Indian positions at Longju. This attack triggered a crisis for India. On the 28th Prime Minister Nehru informed the Lok Sabha, the lower house of India's parliament, that a Chinese detachment of 200-300 men had crossed into Indian territory at Longju three days earlier. At the same time he revealed correspondence between the two governments since 1954 on alleged Chinese border violations and other issues in Sino/Indian relations. On 20 October 1959 another incident occurred at the Kongka Pass in the Ladakh area of northeast Kashmir. In addition, China's Premier Zhou Enlai explicitly refused to recognize the existing McMahon Line and claimed large tracts of NEFA's territory.

India's response, on 1 November 1959, was an announcement by Nehru that the Indian army would assume control of the border posts in Ladakh, Kashmir, from police detachments. Nehru described those border incidents as challenges by China to India's territorial integrity. PRC suggestions for negotiations were followed by a series of letters between Nehru and Zhou Enlai. A meeting between the two leaders, convened on 19 April 1960, ended this initial crisis. The meetings led to the creation of a Joint Officials Committee to examine relevant documents and to report points of disagreement and agreement.

Superpower involvement was limited to diplomatic activity. The United States expressed strong sympathy for India's attempts to resolve the issue peacefully. The Soviets adopted a neutral position, which was viewed unfavorably by the PRC. (See Case #194--China/India Border II.)

The UN was not involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #194; and Liu 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


