CRISNO 154

POLAND LIBERALIZATION

Background:

The USSR and Poland were enmeshed in a crisis from 15 to 22 October 1956.

Pre-crisis During the summer and autumn of 1956 the Soviet Union faced threats to its hegemonial position in Eastern Europe, particularly in Hungary and Poland: economic stagnation was accompanied by increasing demands for greater political freedom internally, as well as more independence from Soviet dictation in foreign policy. On 28 June a demonstration of Polish workers in Poznan turned into a riot that was brutally suppressed by the Polish government, with hundreds killed or wounded. The Polish leadership eventually took decisions that gradually led to the rehabilitation of Wladsylaw Gomulka, a member of the Politburo purged in 1948 for Titoism. Politically, he was one of the few Communist leaders acceptable to the Polish masses.

Summary:

The trigger to the Soviet Union's crisis was Gomulka's return to power on 15 October 1956: he and three allies were invited to rejoin the Politburo of the Polish United Workers Party. The Soviets perceived this dramatic internal shift in power in Poland as a threat to their hegemony. Moscow's response, after the Polish Communist leadership rejected a Khrushchev "invitation" to go to Moscow for a discussion, was a decision on 17 October to send a delegation of Soviet leaders, Khrushchev, Molotov, etc., to attend the PUWP Plenum. When this decision became known in Poland on the 18th, a reciprocal crisis was triggered. Poland's response, the next day, took the form of a threat by Gomulka to broadcast the news that Soviet troops were marching on Warsaw, a fact confirmed by Khrushchev. Such a broadcast could have led to widespread demonstrations. Seven Soviet divisions were put on alert; and patrols along the East German border with Poland were increased. Khrushchev finally relented and ordered a halt to Soviet troop movements when he perceived that the PUWP was in control of the situation and would not allow anti-Soviet demonstrations. Moreover, the veiled threat of the USSR was determined sufficient to keep the Polish leadership within acceptable boundaries.

The crisis over Poland's liberalization ended on 22 October 1956 with the close of the meetings of the Polish Plenum. Khrushchev, now back in Moscow, telephoned his best wishes to Gomulka. The crisis outcome was a compromise. While Gomulka remained in power, the Soviets retained effective control over Poland.

The U.S. was marginally involved in this crisis. The UN was not involved.

References:

Bethell 1969; Crankshaw 1966; Gibney 1959; Gluchowski 1995; Lewis 1959; Tatu 1981; Ulam 1971, 1974.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


