CRISNO 307

RHODESIA SETTLEMENT

Background:

Rhodesia, Botswana, Mozambique, and Zambia were enmeshed in the decisive crisis of the protracted conflict over black majority rule in Rhodesia from 15 July 1979 to 4 March 1980.

Background and Pre-crisis Guerrilla warfare against Rhodesia, as noted, began in 1972 and expanded in scope and intensity in 1976. Operations were carried out from bases in Botswana, Mozambique, and Zambia. On 13 April 1979 Rhodesian forces captured 14 people in Francistown, Botswana, which had been occupied by ZAPU, destroying the ferry between Botswana and Zambia, allegedly used for supplies to ZIPRA. Clashes between Rhodesian and Mozambiquean forces, the latter better equipped than those of Botswana, were frequent in 1979. The attacks were primarily on economic targets. Some of the more serious recorded attacks took place on 9-10 February, on the Mapai-Pafuri road; on 20 February, on the Chimoio guerrilla base; the 14 March bombing of Chokene; and the 18-21 April bombings of Mozambique army positions in the Gaza Province. In Zambia, as well, raids were numerous. Zambia was the target several times in 1979, on 26 June, 1 and 20 July, 23 August, and throughout the month of October.

After the elections in Rhodesia in April 1979 a new government led by Bishop Abel Muzorewa took office on 31 May. Muzorewa quickly made it clear that his government intended to continue the policy of preemptive attacks on guerrilla bases and economic targets in Botswana, Mozambique, and Zambia. The war inside Rhodesia-Zimbabwe escalated quite rapidly, with reports of about 1,000 people being killed each month. The number of guerrillas operating within Rhodesia during July was estimated at about 12,000. Early in July Muzorewa visited the U.S. and U.K. in order to seek recognition for Zimbabwe and to get economic sanctions lifted.

Summary:

A crisis for Rhodesia was triggered internally on 15 July 1979 when a large number of security forces loyal to Ndabaningi Sithole, the leader of the opposition ZANU Party (Zimbabwe African National Union), were killed--apparently by regular Rhodesian forces. Internal events, peaking with the massacre, made it clear to Bishop Muzorewa that his regime did not have the ability to cope with the issues at hand. Further, on 18 July the High Court ruled that seven MPs of the Zimbabwe Democratic Party could take their seats in Parliament, thereby causing Muzorewa to lose parliamentary control. On 25 July U.K. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher announced that recognition of independence and sovereignty would not be forthcoming as long as the government and constitutional structure of Muzorewa's Zimbabwe-Rhodesia remained unchanged.

From 1-8 August the Commonwealth heads of government met in Lusaka, Zambia, and decided on an all-party conference to end the Rhodesian conflict. The conference would be held in London in September. Invitations were sent to the Zimbabwe-Rhodesia government and to members of the Patriotic Front, along with a draft outline for a new constitution for Zimbabwe.

The trigger to Botswana's crisis was an attack by Rhodesian troops and helicopters on ZIPRA bases at Francistown on 8 August. The response was immediate--an air attack on the helicopters returning to Rhodesia.

On 15 August Rhodesia responded to its crisis by accepting the invitation issued at the end of the Lusaka Commonwealth Conference: Prime Minister Muzorewa's decision was based upon the need to stop the internal challenges to his regime and to achieve some political stability.

A crisis for Mozambique was triggered on 5 September when important economic targets in the Limpopo Valley were attacked by Rhodesian forces. Severe damage caused a reduction in the country's capacity to wage war. Mozambique responded the same day with strong resistance by its army. Fighting in the valley continued until 10 September, and attacks on other targets were reported on the 13th, as well as on 27 September to 1 October and on 11-13 and 18-20 October.

During October Muzorewa sent a message to Zambia's president threatening to take nonmilitary measures if Kaunda did nothing to stop ZIPRA infiltration into Rhodesia-Zimbabwe. Indeed, this threat was realized on 5 November when trains carrying maize shipments to Zambia were prevented from passing through Rhodesia.

British Foreign Secretary Lord Carrington opened the constitutional conference on Rhodesia at Lancaster House on 10 September. Lord Carrington played a very strong role in the negotiation process, often dictating the pace and substance of the talks. Specifically, he used the possibility of recognition and an end of sanctions as an incentive to Muzorewa and as a threat to the PF. By 15 November some progress had been made at Lancaster House: agreement on transitional arrangements for Rhodesia had been reached; and the British government had proposed the establishment of a Cease-Fire Commission on which military commanders of both sides would be represented.

Despite apparent political progress, Rhodesia expanded its economic pressure on Zambia with a series of major military attacks. A crisis for Zambia was triggered on 17 November when Rhodesian forces attacked a bridge on the main road to Tanzania; Zambian villagers were killed, and another vital bridge linking Zambia to Malawi and Mozambique was blown up. On the 20th Kaunda responded by declaring a full alert, canceling all military leaves, and announcing a call-up of reserves. On 12 December Lord Soames, newly appointed Governor of Rhodesia for the interim period, arrived in Salisbury to oversee the cease-fire, elections, and the transfer of government.

The crises for Botswana and Mozambique ended with a cease-fire on 21 December. The cease-fire culminated after months of mediation efforts on the part of Lord Carrington, in which he made proposals, issued ultimatums, and tried to allow the parties to save face. While Lord Carrington’s strong mediation role sometimes angered the negotiating parties, his efforts did help lead to the Lancaster House accords on 21 December. Zambia's crisis ended on 31 January 1980 when its border with Zimbabwe was reopened, once the situation had stabilized. And on 4 March 1980, with the election of Robert Mugabe, former leader of the Mozambique-based ZANU, as Prime Minister of the new state of Zimbabwe, the crisis terminated for Rhodesia as well.

United Nations activity consisted of a Security Council resolution, passed on 23 November 1979, condemning Rhodesia for its raids into Zambia and calling for full compensation. A condemnation of Rhodesia was also issued by the OAU. The United States supported the Lancaster House discussions. The Soviet Union provided military aid and advisors to ZIPRA.

(Following the elections in Zimbabwe, internal unrest persisted, especially in Matabeleland--where Joshua Nkomo, former leader of ZAPU/ZIPRA, enjoyed the total support of his fellow Ndebele tribespeople.)

References:

ACR 1979, 1980; AD 1979, 1980; ARec 1979, 1980; ARB 1979, 1980; Keesing's 1979, 1980; Parsons 1988; Stedman 1991; Wiseman and Taylor 1981.

Last Updated: 6/22/2020


