CRISNO 351

VIETNAM INCURSION INTO THAILAND

Background:

Thailand alone experienced a crisis from 25 March to 17 April 1984 arising from a Vietnamese incursion into its territory.

Background Relations between Vietnam and Cambodia (Kampuchea) have always been characterized by hostility and rivalry. Vietnam has long perceived itself as the rightful hegemonial power in Indochina and viewed its neighbors, Cambodia and Laos, as tributaries (or client states). During the era of French domination, through protectorates over Cambodia (1863), Vietnam (1874), and Laos (1893), overt conflict among the three colonial peoples was prevented by external domination. The members of France's Indochina Union became independent following its defeat in the first stage of the long Vietnam War (1946-1954)--Laos, Cambodia, and the two Vietnams, the communist North Vietnam, with its capital in Hanoi, and the anti-communist South, centered in Saigon. During the second stage of the Vietnam War (1964-75), Kampuchea was at times a junior ally of Hanoi, at other times a U.S. base for operations against Vietnam.

Their traditional conflict erupted into a lengthy crisis in September 1977, culminating in full-scale war from 15 December 1978 to 7 January 1979, when Vietnam installed a puppet regime in Kampuchea's capital, Phnom Penh (see Case #284--Vietnam Invasion of Cambodia, in Indochina PC). In that case Thailand was a secondary crisis actor. Thus the crisis generated by Vietnam's incursion into Thailand in March 1984 was an extension of the protracted conflict between Vietnam and Cambodia.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for Thailand on 25 March 1984 by the intrusion of Vietnamese troops into its territory in pursuit of Khmer Rouge Cambodian rebels: Vietnam's cross-border raid, along with Thai military and civilian casualties, was perceived as seriously undermining Thailand's security.

Bangkok responded quickly along two paths: a military effort to force the Vietnamese back into Kampuchea; and a diplomatic offensive in both Washington and the UN. The first included minor clashes in the area of the Khmer Rouge camp, the Chong Phra Palai Pass linking Kampuchea and Thailand. The second led to tangible U.S. support.

Initially Washington announced an offer of military aid to Thailand on 15 April. Two days later, following a meeting with the Thai Premier, General Prem Tinsulanonda, President Reagan reaffirmed the sale of 40 M-48 tanks to "bolster the nation's defenses," along with an assurance of further military sales, as needed. That visible expression of support from a superpower terminated Thailand's crisis.

Unlike the U.S., which took an active role, the USSR, an ally of North Vietnam, remained aloof. The UN, though approached by Thailand and notwithstanding its earlier resolution calling for the withdrawal of Vietnam from Kampuchea, played a minor role in this crisis. One regional organization, the six-state Association of South East Asia Nations (ASEAN), supported Thailand, a member, by writing a letter to the UN condemning Vietnam's unprovoked violation of Thailand's border.

References:

Hinton 1987; Keesing's 1984; New York Times 1984; Vichit-Vadakan 1985.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


