CRISNO 22

AUSTRIAN SEPARATISTS

Background:

Yugoslavia and Austria experienced a crisis from 11 May to 21 June 1921 over the threat of secession by several Austrian provinces and their merger with Germany.

Background The Republic of Austria was proclaimed on 13 November 1918, the day after the abdication of Karl IV, the last emperor of Austria-Hungary. Under the terms of the Treaty of Saint-Germain, signed by Austria on 10 September 1919, the union of Austria with Germany (anschluss) was forbidden except with the League of Nations's consent. Almost at once and continuing through 1920 and 1921 some Austrian provinces attempted to secede and to join the new German Republic, despite statements by the Allied Powers from as early as December 1919 that they would use all means available to prevent the anschluss of Austria or any Austrian province with Germany.

Pre-crisis Despite France's warning that it would withhold aid to Austria if a plebiscite in Tyrol called for 24 April 1921 was held, the people of Tyrol voted in favor of union with Germany. The Tyrol precedent led Salzburg to announce its own plebiscite on 29 May. This generated anxiety among Austria's neighbors and the major powers.

Summary:

Salzburg's announcement, especially the possibility of its merger with Germany, triggered a crisis for Yugoslavia on 11 May 1921. It responded with an implied threat to occupy the Austrian province of Carinthia if the Salzburg plebiscite were held. The rumor reached Vienna on 12 May, triggering a crisis for Austria. The Mayr government could not prevent the plebiscite on 29 May which, like Tyrol, also strongly supported union with Germany. France and Italy intimated to Austria's ministers in Paris and Rome that they might occupy Austria to prevent an anschluss.

Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Romania protested against the plebiscites. The attitude of Germany and the U.K. was more muted, the former favoring, the latter opposing, the Austrian separatists. Tension rose when the province of Styria called its own plebiscite for 3 June.

The Mayr cabinet resigned on 1 June. A new Austrian cabinet was formed on 21 June under Schöber. The crisis was resolved by assurances from the other Austrian provinces that plebiscites would not be held for at least six months and by the suspension of the Tyrol and Salzburg thrust to separation and union with Germany.

Many states, as noted, exhibited varying degrees of involvement: Yugoslavia and Austria as the crisis actors; France and Italy, with a threat to occupy Austria; and a lower political profile by Germany, Poland, Romania, and the U.K.

The League of Nations was not involved.

(The crisis over Austrian separatists was gestating at the same time as the first stage of the crisis arising from the deposed Emperor Karl's attempts to regain the Hungarian throne [see Case #21--Karl's Return to Hungary]. Integration into Germany was to occur in March 1938 under the threat of imminent invasion by Nazi Germany [see Case #60--Anschluss].)

References:

Ball 1937; Bauer [1925] 1970; Langer 1972; Taylor 1963.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


