CRISNO 108

AZERBAIJAN

Background:

There were four direct participants in the first major post-World War II international crisis--Iran, the U.K., the U.S., and the USSR. The Azerbaijan crisis lasted from 23 August 1945 to 9 May 1946.

Summary:

Another crisis for Iran vis-à-vis the USSR erupted on 23 August 1945 when the Tudeh Party attempted to take over the city of Tabriz, the Azerbaijani capital and the headquarters of Soviet occupation forces. Supported and protected by Soviet troops, the Tudeh occupied several government buildings and issued a manifesto demanding administrative and cultural autonomy for Azerbaijan. The following day the Iranian government sent a gendarme force to reassert central authority over the insurgents. The gendarmes, however, were denied entry to the Soviet zone of occupation. Tension eased toward the end of September when the Tudeh Party withdrew from government buildings, the Iranian governor regained his authority, and communications with Teheran were restored.

Iran's crisis escalated on 16 November 1945 with a Soviet-supported rebellion by Iran's Democratic Party for the autonomy of Azerbaijan. The Iranian government responded by sending an armed force to Tabriz on the 17th; they were, however, stopped near Qasvin by a Soviet military force.

The 16 November rebellion also triggered a crisis for the U.K., which perceived a threat to its influence in the Middle East. Britain delivered a Note to the Soviet Union on the 26th asking it to withdraw its troops from Iran by 2 March 1946. A similar Note had been sent two days earlier by the U.S. setting 1 January 1946 as the date for Soviet withdrawal. During the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers, on 19 December 1945, Foreign Secretary Bevin and Secretary of State Byrnes tried to settle the Iranian problem with Stalin. Bevin proposed that a joint commission of the Big Three be sent to Iran to investigate the Azerbaijan problem, but the proposal was rejected by the USSR.

Disenchanted by the outcome of the Moscow Conference and unable to do anything within northern Iran because of Soviet interference, the Iranian government, on 19 January 1946, requested a meeting of the newly created UN Security Council, alleging that Soviet interference in Iran's internal affairs would likely cause international friction. The U.K.'s major response was to introduce a resolution in the Security Council on 25 January calling for bilateral negotiations between Iran and the USSR. On the 30th the Council passed a modified resolution to that effect, which also requested the parties to inform the Council of the results. Moscow declared that direct negotiations were the best path to a settlement and rejected the Council's jurisdiction in the dispute. On 19 February Iranian Premier Qavam left for Moscow in an attempt to negotiate a solution.

During Qavam's negotiations in Moscow the deadline arrived for the evacuation of foreign troops from Iran (as stipulated in the January 1942 tripartite treaty). All U.S. troops had withdrawn by 1 January 1946; and Britain had declared that its troops would be out by the stipulated date of 2 March. By contrast, Radio Moscow announced on 1 March that, except for the northern provinces, Soviet forces would remain in other parts of Iran pending clarification of the situation. In fact, the USSR began to pour new forces into Iran: on 4 and 5 March Soviet troops and armored columns moved outward from Tabriz in three directions--toward the Turkish and Iraqi frontiers and toward Teheran.

The movement of Soviet troops in Iran, combined with an intensive Soviet diplomatic and propaganda offensive against Turkey, the main bastion against the USSR's advance into the Middle East, triggered a crisis for the United States on 4 March 1946: its global and regional influence was threatened. The U.S. responded on the 7th with a decision by Byrnes to send a sharply worded protest to Moscow and to instruct the U.S. delegation to the Security Council to take a firm position on the Iranian case. The Note, which was far stronger than any previous U.S. communication to the Soviet Union, was delivered in Moscow on 9 March and catalyzed a crisis for the USSR. It called on Moscow to explain Soviet troop movements and the continued presence of Soviet troops in Iran. The Soviet government, in a Tass news agency broadcast on 14 March, stated that Washington's report of troop movements was incorrect.

The State Department followed up its Note by declaring the same day that the U.S. would bring the dispute to the Security Council if the differences between the Soviet Union and Iran were not settled before the forthcoming Council meeting on 25 March, and if Iran itself did not raise the issue at the UN forum. In fact, on 18 March Iran did request the Security Council to place the Azerbaijan issue on its agenda. When the Soviets failed to keep the Iranian case off the Council's agenda, they attempted to postpone debate until 1 April. When this too was defeated, the Soviet delegate, Gromyko, left the Council chamber.

The strong position adopted by the U.S., the resistance of Iran, world public opinion, and the publicity of the Security Council meetings led the Soviet leadership to decide on 24 March to announce to the Council, two days later, that an agreement between the USSR and Iran had been reached and that Soviet troops would be withdrawn from Iran within 5-6 weeks if no unforeseen circumstances occurred. After that announcement the Iranian case was temporarily removed from the Security Council agenda. On 4 April 1946 Prime Minister Qavam concluded an agreement with the Soviets that declared that Iranian territory would be evacuated within six weeks of 24 March, that a joint Soviet-Iranian oil company would be established (to be ratified by the Majlis within seven months after 24 March), and that Moscow recognized Azerbaijan as an internal problem of Iran. Finally, on 9 May 1946, Soviet troops left Iran, terminating the Azerbaijan crisis for Iran, the U.K., the U.S., and the USSR.

References:

Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) 1946; Acheson 1969; Bullock 1983; Byrnes 1947; Campbell and Herring 1975; Chubin and Zabih 1974; Cottam 1988; Donovan 1977a; Eagleton 1957; Goodspeed 1967; Hamilton 1962; Hess 1974; Kuniholm 1980; Lenczowski 1949, 1962, 1978; Lie 1954; Lytle 1987; Ramazani 1964, 1975; Rossow 1956; Shwadran 1973; Truman 1956; Werth 1964; Zabih 1966.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


