CRISNO 248

NORTH-SOUTH YEMEN I

Background:

A major battle between (North) Yemen and South Yemen triggered a crisis for the two states from 26 September to 28 November 1972.

Pre-crisis The U.K.'s withdrawal from Aden (South Yemen) in August 1967 led to the creation of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (hereafter, the PDRY or South Yemen). Relations between the two Yemens deteriorated in 1971 as the PDRY adopted a more radical pro-Soviet policy while the YAR established increasingly friendly relations with Sa'udi Arabia. The situation in the YAR was further complicated by rivalry between the traditionalist Fadi tribes of the northern provinces and the more progressive people of the southern provinces who looked for support to South Yemen. Irregular forces operating from Sa'udi Arabia made a series of unsuccessful raids into South Yemen between October 1970 and June 1971. A series of clashes on the border of the two Yemeni states occurred between February and May 1972. The USSR provided military aid and advisors to both sides. Each country accused the other of troop buildups along the border. During the summer of 1972 the long-standing border dispute resulted in a series of armed clashes.

Summary:

A major battle on 26 September 1972 over the border town of Qa'taba spread over a 45-75 mile front and triggered a crisis for both North and South Yemen. Fighting continued until 13 October when a cease-fire was concluded by an Arab League mission that was to provide military observers to monitor the cessation of hostilities. Nevertheless, fighting continued until 19 October when a new cease-fire agreement was reached.

A peace agreement and an agreement on unification were initialed in Cairo on 28 October by representatives of the two Yemens. Their presidents signed an agreement on unification on 28 November 1972 in Tripoli, Libya, terminating the crisis for both Yemens. Air services were resumed between North and South Yemen two days later.

Colonel Qaddhafi of Libya had an active part in mediating the discussions, and it was reported that he had threatened to imprison the leaders of both countries until they signed a unification agreement and then agreed to give them $46 million per year if they did so. There was Kuwaiti mediation as well, which occurred prior to the onset of crisis, and the Arab League persuaded the two sides to agree to the cease-fire on 13 October. Finally, President Boumediene of Algeria met with the leaders of both countries in late October to discuss unification.

The UN, the U.S., and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

Abir 1974; Hassouna 1975; MEJ Chronology 1972.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


