CRISNO 14

PERSIAN BORDER

Background:

Russia and Persia (Iran) experienced a crisis--the "Enzeli Affair"--from early May 1920 until 26 February 1921.

Background After the collapse of the czarist empire in November 1917 the Bolshevik regime repudiated the 1907 Convention and related notes. Several efforts by Moscow to encourage Persia to establish diplomatic relations in 1918-19 failed. Britain's policy too underwent review: the foreign office favored continued British occupation of southern Persia as a bulwark against communist expansion toward the Persian Gulf; the War Office and the India Office disagreed. Lloyd George's cabinet decided in favor of withdrawal from Persia. As a result the Persian government faced an insoluble dilemma: it wished to curtail foreign, mainly British, influence but recognized that it lacked the military power to protect itself from Russian-controlled communist forces operating in Transcaucasia.

Summary:

The Bolshevik regime perceived the "White" Russian-controlled fleet in the Caspian Sea as a persistent threat to its fragile control of Transcaucasia. When in May 1920 elements of the White Russian navy withdrew to, and anchored in, Persia's Caspian port of Enzeli, Moscow perceived a graver threat, namely, secure sanctuary for a powerful force under the control of its enemy in the prolonged Russian civil war, a threat accentuated by the presence of hostile British troops in Enzeli. Thus on 18 May 1920 Russian naval and land forces, intent on seizing the anchored White Russian fleet, attacked and captured the Caspian seaport triggering a crisis for Persia. The British garrison in Enzeli complied with the demands of the Bolshevik commander and immediately withdrew from the town.

Persia reacted on the 19th by sending a protest note to the Secretary-General of the League of Nations claiming violation of Article 11 of the Covenant. (In fact, the Enzeli Affair was the first case submitted to the League Council by a member, as was another [Persia] Iran/USSR dispute to the UN Security Council, over Azerbaijan in January 1946 [see Case #108--Azerbaijan].) Persia also asked the British government to send its troops back to Enzeli. And it attempted to respond to feelers from Moscow about diplomatic relations with the new regime in Russia.

After months of low-level talks, formal negotiations to resolve the dispute opened on 25 October 1920. The League Council discussed the matter in June 1920 but did not intervene: it informed the Persian foreign minister that it would take no action until the results of Persian/Russian negotiations were known. London refused to commit more troops to Persia. And Foreign Affairs Commissar Chicherin informed his Persian counterpart, Prince Firuz, that Soviet forces had been ordered to withdraw from Persia and that Russia wanted friendly relations with the Teheran regime.

Persian mistrust of Soviet intentions was fueled by the continued control of the northern Persian provinces of Gilan and Mazaneran on the part of communist forces in collusion with Jangali rebels, despite assurances that they had been withdrawn. Nonetheless, after lengthy negotiations Persia and Russia signed a Treaty of Friendship on 26 February 1921 terminating the Persian Border crisis: the Soviets pledged not to intervene in Persia's affairs unless a third party did so.

The U.K., the other occupying power, was militarily involved in this international crisis but passively, as noted. So too was France, whose troops aided the British contingent in Persia in 1920. The German consul in Tabriz supported a plan to oust Persia's Prime Minister, Mushir al-Dawlah. And the U.S. Minister to Persia, Caldwell, issued statements praising the Anglo-French action in Persia.

(Soviet forces remained in control of northern Persia until late October 1921. Only after their withdrawal on 15 December did the Iranian Majlis [national assembly] ratify the treaty.)

References:

Boulter 1928; Dexter 1967; Eudin and North 1957; Lenczowski 1949; Ramazani 1975; Rezun 1981; Sykes 1922; Temperley 1969; Ullman 1972; Walters 1952.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


