CRISNO 363

GULF OF SYRTE II

Background:

Libya and the United States were embroiled in a second crisis over the Gulf of Syrte (Sidra) from 24 March until 21 April 1986.

Background and Pre-crisis Like the Mediterranean Sea, into which it flowed, the Gulf of Syrte was traditionally viewed as international waters. Since October 1973, however, Qaddhafi's Libya had claimed the entire Gulf as its territorial waters. This was first challenged in 1981 soon after Reagan entered the White House: U.S. naval exercises in the Gulf sparked a confrontation and crisis with Libya (see Case #330).

This process was replicated in the second crisis. In January 1986 Washington announced its intent to hold two naval exercises in the Gulf, on 23-30 January and 11-14 February. U.S. naval aircraft intercepted Libyan planes during those maneuvers; but there was no violence. On 20 March the Pentagon announced that several ships of the U.S.'s Sixth Fleet would cross into the Gulf south of latitude 32' 30". On the 23rd U.S. naval aircraft flew south of that designated line; but that act was almost routine by then.

Summary:

A full-scale foreign policy crisis for Libya was triggered by the implementation of the 20 March announcement, that is, the entry into the Gulf of Syrte of three U.S. naval vessels on 24 March. Libya, perceiving this act as a grave threat to its territorial integrity, fired two Soviet-made SAM-5 missiles on U.S. carrier-based planes, causing no damage. U.S. planes then attacked a Libyan missile ship and a corvette, as well as mounting raids on the radar installations of Libyan batteries at Syrte. Another clash occurred on the 25th, with conflicting and disputed claims of casualties from another U.S. air attack. President Qaddhafi's initial verbal reaction, the same day, took the form of tit-for-tat: "this is not a time for speaking … it is a time for war."

U.S. naval maneuvers ended on 27 March, four days ahead of schedule. On the 28th Secretary of State Shultz warned that U.S. forces would take further action against Libya if necessary. Tension increased on 2 April when a bomb exploded on a TWA plane flying from Rome to Athens: four passengers were killed. The U.S. accused Libya of being involved; Libya denied any responsibility; and Shultz later acknowledged this.

While the U.S. was deeply involved from the outset, triggering Libya's crisis, it experienced all three conditions of a foreign policy crisis only on 5 April, when a bomb exploded in a discotheque frequented by U.S. soldiers in West Berlin: one U.S. soldier and a Turkish woman were killed, with 155 persons injured. On the 7th the U.S. Ambassador to West Germany, Richard Burt, linked this terrorist act to Libya. On the 9th Libya denied any involvement. The same day, Reagan referred to Qaddhafi as a "mad dog" and warned of U.S. retaliation.

On the 9th, too, the U.S. president approved a proposal for air strikes against Libya; among his security advisors, only Defense Secretary Weinberger dissented. The major response to the crisis was implemented on 15 April, in the form of air raids on Tripoli and Benghazi: the attack was described by Reagan as "a single engagement in a long battle against terrorism." The U.S. neither affirmed nor denied that the primary goal of the raids was to kill Qaddhafi; but one of his children was among the reported 100 civilian casualties in Tripoli (and 30 in Benghazi).

The successful air strikes on Libya's two largest cities drastically reduced stress for the U.S., terminating its crisis. But it was not until a draft resolution sympathetic to Libya was debated in the UN Security Council on 21 April that Libya's crisis--and the second international crisis over the Gulf of Syrte--came to an end: although the resolution was vetoed by the U.S. and the U.K., its condemnation of U.S. actions ensured that another U.S. air raid on Libya would not occur, at least in the near future.

Many international organizations and states were involved in this interstate crisis. The UN Security Council debated the issue from 26 to 31 March and, as noted, voted overwhelmingly in favor of a resolution critical of U.S. air raids on Libya: despite the U.S.-U.K. veto, it effectively terminated the crisis. The USSR and several Arab states--Algeria, Morocco, and Sa'udi Arabia, along with the PLO and Iran--criticized the U.S. naval exercises and strongly condemned the U.S. air raids. So too did the Arab League; but it rejected Libya's demand that member-states sever diplomatic and economic relations with Washington.

Europe, too, was involved. Foreign ministers of the European Community met on 14 April: they urged restraint by both adversaries, criticized Libya as the source of terrorism, but did not accede to the U.S. request to impose economic sanctions on Libya. Earlier, France and West Germany expelled some Libyan diplomats.

(During the next decade Libya was treated as a pariah state by the U.S.--and the UN--over its refusal to hand over two Libyans suspected of causing the bombing of a Pan American flight over Lockerbie in Scotland in 1988, with hundreds of casualties, mostly U.S. citizens. UN sanctions were imposed; but there was no further full-scale crisis between Libya and the U.S.)

References:

ACR 1986; AR 1986; ARB 1986; Keesing's 1986; New York Times 1986; Reagan 1990; Shultz 1993.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


