CRISNO 180

PATHET LAO OFFENSIVE

Background:

The first Pathet Lao crisis for the United States and Thailand began on 9 March and ended on 16 May 1961.

Pre-crisis From December 1960 supplies and equipment from the Soviet Union had been airlifted to the Pathet Lao. This aid included heavy weapons and combat specialists.

Summary:

A crisis for the United States was triggered on 9 March 1961 when Pathet Lao troops, with Vietminh support, launched a major offensive breaking through the Laotian government defenses in central Laos, severing the key road junction between Vientiane and Luang Prabang. The Laotian troops retreated and, within days, the two cities were threatened by communist and neutralist troops.

President Kennedy felt that, if Laos were to be abandoned, the communists would hold the north-south road along the Mekong lowlands from which stronger pressure would be mounted against South Vietnam, Cambodia, and Thailand. U.S. troops were ordered to be ready to move into Laos. A helicopter air base was established in Thailand. Supplies and ammunition were stocked at forward bases along the Mekong River. And the task force on Okinawa, specially trained for combat in Southeast Asia, was put on alert. In addition, the Seventh Fleet was sent to the Gulf of Siam. On 23 March Kennedy held a televised news conference in which he warned that USSR and North Vietnam support of the Pathet Lao increased the probability of war, and that the shape of the necessary response would be carefully considered by the U.S. and its SEATO allies. At the same time Kennedy supported U.K. proposals for a joint U.S.-USSR appeal for a cease-fire followed by an international conference on Laos.

The situation in Laos deteriorated during April. On the l0th the advance of Pathet Lao forces toward the Mekong River threatened to divide Laos, triggering a crisis for Thailand. Thai troops were sent to the areas bordering Laos. On the 20th, when communist forces advanced to within 10 miles of Takhek, the Thai prime minister declared that the Thai army was ready to go into action immediately if Takhek were attacked. On 28 April some token U.S. forces were ordered into Laos, and the (military) advisors serving in Laos were ordered into uniform and sent into battle with the Laotians. Impressed by the persistence of U.S. resolve, the USSR agreed to cosponsor the U.K. proposal on 24 April. The U.K. served as an important intermediary between the U.S. and the USSR in the crisis, a role which was influential in re-instituting the International Control Commission (ICC) and bringing about a negotiated cease-fire. On 3 May a cease-fire between the Laotian government and the Pathet Lao went into effect. And on 16 May the Geneva Conference on Laos opened, terminating the crisis for both the U.S. and Thailand. The ICC would monitor the cease-fire.

The SEATO Council met on 27 March at the request of the U.S. A communiqué was issued stating that, if peaceful efforts failed, SEATO would take appropriate action. Another session was held on 29 April, and a resolution was passed supporting U.S.-USSR proposals for a cease-fire.

The UN was not involved.

References:

See sources for Case #193.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


