CRISNO 417

AEGEAN SEA IV

Background:

Greece and Turkey experienced another crisis in the Aegean Sea from 26 to 31 January 1996.

Background and Pre-Crisis

Several mini-crises over territory and resources in the Aegean Sea erupted between Greece and Turkey from 1976 onward (sea Cases #272, #349, #376 - Aegean Sea I, II, III). The two neighboring states failed to find a legal framework for regulating their disputes in shared waters, including the demarcation of the continental shelf and the extension of Greek territorial waters.

The uninhabited 10-acre island of Imia is located in the Dodecanese chain in the eastern Aegean, between the Greek island of Kalimos and the Turkish coast. Imia was used as a fishing station and a navigation guide. The most recent crisis between Greece and Turkey was over the sovereignty of Imia, recognized as Greek territory under the Paris 1947 convention, in which the Dodecanese islands were ceded to Greece by Italy after World War II in reward for Greece fighting against the Nazis. Italy had taken these islands from Turkey in 1932, but Turkey claimed the protocol that transferred sovereignty of the Dodecanes islands from Turkey to Italy was invalid because it had not been submitted to the League of Nations for registration.

Tension between Greece and Turkey was renewed on 26 December 1995, as a Turkish cargo boat, "Figen Akat," ran aground on Imia in Greek territorial waters close to the Turkish coast. The ship's crew refused help from Greek officials, claiming that they were on Turkish soil, called "The Kardak Rocks." However, on 28 December the ship left with the help of the Greek authorities, and Turkey issued a letter of protest, contesting Greek jurisdiction over the island. The next day, Turkey's Ministry of Foreign Affairs also addressed a verbal note to the Embassy of Greece, asserting that the island constituted part of Turkish territory. On 10 January, Greece responded by claiming that its "national sovereignty" was "indisputable."

Summary:

On 26 January 1996, a month after the Turkish ship ran aground on the Greek island of Imia, the Turkish newspaper, Huriet, raised again the issue of the sovereignty of the Kardak Rocks. The same day, the mayor of the nearest Greek island raised the Greek flag on Imia. That triggered a crisis for Turkey, which sent naval forces to the area, triggering a crisis for Greece. On the 28th a group of Turkish journalists flew by helicopter to Imia, took down and tore the Greek flag and raised the Turkish flag, which was then proudly displayed over Turkish media. Greece responded the same day by deploying Greek marines to the island to restore the Greek flag, and nine remained on the island to guard it. Greece also took up the issue with the Turkish government and with the ambassadors of the Western European states, the US and Russia. Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller declared that her country could not tolerate a Greek flag on a Turkish island, and soon several warships from both sides were arming their missiles around Imia as tensions escalated over the next few days.

On 29 January, Greece rejected a Turkish proposal for a bilateral dialogue to resolve the long-standing dispute between them. The same day, the Greek Ministry of Defense stated that Turkish and Greek fighter jets chased each other in the sky over the islet.

On 30-31 January the US envoy, Richard Holbrooke, mediated indirect negotiations between Greece and Turkey, and the US urged the two sides to return to the status quo before the crisis. Holbrooke’s mediation helped to decrease the tensions in the crisis, though it is unclear if it directly led to the termination of the crisis. On 30 January Turkish Prime Minister Tansu Ciller declared that the Greek flag would come down, and that no foreign flag would fly on Turkish soil. The same day, Turkish marines occupied the nearby Greek uninhabited islet of Akroyialia, and a Greek helicopter that was sent to examine the situation fell into the sea, in an accident apparently due to bad weather.

However, the crisis ended the next day after the Greek flag was removed and troops from both states left the area. Greek Prime Minister Constantine Simitis declared that the crisis over Imia was resolved without any negotiation with Turkey on Greece's sovereign rights. Turkish Prime Minister Ciller announced that it was a victory for Turkey because they forced Greek soldiers off Imia and removed its flag from the island.

The EU Council of Ministers did not adopt a common position in the crisis. The European Parliament passed a resolution blaming Turkey for the crisis and supporting the previous status quo. Neither Russia nor the UN was involved in the crisis over Imia.

References:

TBA

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


