CRISNO 241

INVASION OF LAOS II

Background:

This intrawar crisis lasted from 8 February until 25 March 1971. The two crisis actors were Laos and North Vietnam.

Pre-crisis A major North Vietnamese offensive was expected in 1972. U.S. and South Vietnamese military planners therefore scheduled an invasion of Laos, in order to cut off the Ho Chi Minh Trail, through which the North Vietnamese transported supplies to their strongholds in South Vietnam and Cambodia. The invasion was to be carried out by South Vietnamese troops with U.S. air support. Although Laos had been neutralized by the Geneva Protocols of 1954 and 1962, there were thousands of North Vietnamese troops operating there, along with the Pathet Lao communist guerrillas. During the crisis Nixon announced that action to cut off the Ho Chi Minh Trail had been under consideration since 1965.

Summary:

The South Vietnam-U.S. invasion of Laos began on 8 February 1971. This triggered a crisis for Laos, whose borders and neutrality had been violated, and for North Vietnam, against which the invasion was directed. The major response by Laos was a declaration of a state of emergency on 12 February. North Vietnam, too, responded that day by beginning the first wave of a counteroffensive. A day earlier the International Control Commission (ICC) had convened at the urgent request of Canada in order to initiate an investigation into the violation of Laotian neutrality by foreign forces. The ICC reached no conclusion.

At that time Paris was hosting talks among the U.S., South Vietnam, and North Vietnam. South Vietnam stated that there could be no negotiations while North Vietnamese troops remained in Laos.

From the beginning to the middle of March South Vietnamese forces launched a drive to move further into Laos. On 7 March Tchepone, a key town in the Trail network, was captured. It was recaptured after a second major counteroffensive was launched by North Vietnamese troops on 12 March. The U.S. began to airlift South Vietnamese troops out of Laos by mid-March. This was completed by 25 March, the termination date for both crisis actors.

Soviet activity was limited to declarations against the U.S. and South Vietnam. The United States gave South Vietnam air support but announced that it would not use any ground forces. It repeatedly denied support to a possible South Vietnam invasion of the North. The only UN activity was an appeal by Secretary-General U Thant for Laos/Pathet Lao negotiations.

References:

Goldstein 1973; Kissinger 1979; Nixon 1978; Stevenson 1972.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


