CRISNO 436

KALUCHAK

Background:

Between 14 May and 17 October 2002, India and Pakistan experienced another crisis in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir after terrorists, who were suspected to be from Pakistan, carried out an attack on an Indian army base in Kaluchak.

Background and Pre-crisis

The state of Jammu and Kashmir has been disputed between India and Pakistan since 1947. Militant activity in Indian-controlled Jammu and Kashmir had escalated in recent years. The Indian government alleged that Kashmiri separatists were actively supported, funded and trained by Pakistan. Since 11 September 2001, the United States government, as part of its war on terrorism, put increasing pressure on the Pakistani government to stem the flow of Kashmiri militants into India. While Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf gave his verbal assurances to this effect, violence in the troubled region continued.

Summary:

On 14 May 2002 Kashmir militants attacked the Indian army base in Kaluchak, in the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir. Thirty-four people, including civilians and the attackers, were killed in the ensuing gunfight. The attack, the bloodiest in the region since October 2001, triggered a crisis for India, and there were calls for the Indian government to retaliate against Pakistan. Though no group claimed responsibility, Indian officials suspected Pakistan-based groups such as Lashkar-e-Toiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed. On 18 May India announced the expulsion of the Pakistani High Commissioner to India. India subsequently undertook a massive mobilization of troops along the Line of Control (the de facto border between the Indian and Pakistani controlled parts of Kashmir). The massive mobilization of troops by India following the attack and an escalating war of words between the two countries triggered a crisis for Pakistan on 19 May 2002.

Pakistan appealed for talks with India to defuse the situation and asked for foreign intervention. India retaliated by saying that it would not negotiate with Pakistan until the latter took concrete steps to crack down on militants. During this period, cross border firing – a routine event – escalated, and several civilian deaths were reported. On 27 May 2002, Musharraf made a defiant nationwide address where he said that Pakistan did not want war with India but would respond with full force if attacked.

The escalating tension between the two countries led to increasing worries in the international community. The United Nations General Assembly held discussions on the issue, but without resolution. UN Secretary General Kofi Annan also expressed concern. Russia offered to host face-to-face talks between Musharraf and Indian Prime Minister Vajpayee at an Asian conference in June, but India declined.

Both the United States and the United Kingdom were active in mediation efforts, with the U.S. playing the lead role. While the there were no direct negotiations between the two countries, the U.S. and UK engaged in a great deal of shuttle diplomacy. On 15 May, Assistant Secretary of State Christina Rocca made a trip to India and Pakistan on a peace mission. UK Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell and U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage also visited the area in the ensuing months. On 25 May 2002 U.S. President George Bush made his first public intervention by publicly urging Musharraf to prevent incursions of militants into Indian-administered Kashmir.

Pressure from the U.S. had an important effect in reducing tensions. The crisis ended on 17 October 2002, when both sides announced a mutual demobilization of troops and a thawing of relations. This signaled the end of the crisis for both countries, as well as the end of mediation efforts. The stalemate over Kashmir, and Pakistan's support to militants, remained unresolved.

References:

BBC World New Service; Keesing’s; Lexis-Nexis.

Last Updated: 1/23/2006


