CRISNO 434

AFGHANISTAN-USA

Background:

A crisis involving US and UK forces against Afghanistan's Taliban regime, with Pakistan as a fourth crisis actor, began on 11 September 2001 and ended on 7 December 2001.

Background and Pre-Crisis

The al-Qaeda network, a militant Islamic organization headed by Osama bin Laden, had been held responsible for numerous attacks against US interests, including the bombing of the USS Cole in 2000, the bombings of the US embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, and the attack against US forces in Somalia in 1993. The network was based primarily in Afghanistan, although it had cells all over the world. Osama bin Laden's network helped bring the Taliban to power in Afghanistan, and the Taliban, in turn, allowed al-Qaeda to use Afghan territory for training and building its network. Although the Taliban maintained control of Kabul and most of the country at the time of the attacks, it did not enjoy complete control. A number of tribal groups had considerable autonomy in the south, and the Northern Alliance, a rebel group fighting against the Taliban, maintained some control in the north.

Summary:

On 11 September 2001, terrorist attacks were conducted against the United States, the most destructive such attacks in history. This triggered a crisis for the United States and its ally, the United Kingdom, which immediately pledged support in finding the perpetrators of the attack. It also triggered a crisis for Afghanistan, since the US blamed the country's Taliban regime for aiding and harboring al-Qaeda, the group held responsible for the attacks. Pakistan, Afghanistan's neighbor and one of only three countries with diplomatic ties to the Taliban, was also a crisis actor because it played a crucial role in facilitating the attacks against Afghanistan and bore many of the conflict's externalities.

The terrorist attacks on 11 September involved 19 men in coordinated suicide hijackings of four commercial jet airplanes, two of which destroyed the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City and one which severely damaged the Pentagon in Washington, DC. The attacks left over 3,000 people dead in the United States, the largest peacetime losses suffered by the US since Pearl Harbor. The attacks shocked the international community, who denounced the attacks and largely pledged support for the US.

Soon after the attacks, US President George W. Bush pledged to take action against all states harboring or supporting terrorist activities. This was echoed by British Prime Minister Tony Blair. The Taliban regime quickly became the focus of attention in their role of supporting the al-Qaeda network. In the weeks after 11 September, the Taliban regime continued to deny support for the network and refused to assist in apprehending bin Laden and the other leaders believed to be responsible.

After significant military buildup in the region, US and UK forces commenced military operations on 7 October, consisting of cruise missile attacks and bombing sorties. Throughout the crisis, US and UK forces were primarily involved in using air attacks; however, there was also substantial effort of special forces operations on the ground. Moreover, the US and the UK coordinated their attacks with the infantry units of the Northern Alliance, which was successful in making gains against Taliban forces. They captured the capital city, Kabul, on 23 November 2001. In an unexpected development, about 90 Russian troops were deployed to Kabul after it had been conquered, but this did not affect the dynamics of the crisis.

Per other international influences in the crisis, another crisis actor was Pakistan, headed by President Pervez Musharraf. Pakistan's government was active in communicating with the Taliban regime during this period, in efforts to persuade Taliban leaders to hand over bin Laden. While many Taliban members had been educated and trained in Pakistan, Mr. Musharraf pledged support to the US government in its efforts to destroy the al-Qaeda base and capture Osama bin Laden. His support came despite widespread domestic unrest against US action in Afghanistan.

On 5 December 2001, an interim government to replace the Taliban was formed, headed by Hamid Karzai. The interim government emerged after efforts by the UN to mediate between the interested parties, including the ethnic and tribal factions within Afghanistan, as well as neighbors Pakistan, Iran, and Tajikistan. UN special envoy Lakhdar Brahimi began shuttle diplomacy on 27 October 2001 in an attempt to gain consensus for the formation of a provisional government. Deputy UN special envoy Francesc Vendrell facilitated discussions as well. These efforts culminated in the so-called “Bonn Meeting,” which took place from 27 November to 5 December. This meeting was brokered by the UN and included donor countries that pledged support for the transition process. During this meeting, the parties agreed to a two-step solution in which an interim government would be replaced after three months by an elected government with provisions for representation of the major factions and a two-year term. While the UN’s mediation efforts did not directly address the conflict between the Taliban and the U.S., these efforts played a crucial role in attenuating the international crisis. By helping to establish the provisional government, the UN helped to speed up the termination of the crisis and reduce the threat that the situation in Afghanistan posed to the U.S., UK and Pakistan. Pakistan indicated its unhappiness over the resulting arrangement, as the Northern Alliance is a rival of Pakistan and now emerged as the most powerful entity in Afghanistan. Pakistan's efforts to create an alternative to a Northern Alliance regime failed.

With a government in place to begin rebuilding the country, the crisis ended on 7 December 2001, after the fall of the final Taliban stronghold in Kandahar. Although the crisis ended and the Taliban had been defeated, Osama bin Laden remained at large, as did Mullah Mohammed Omar, the leader of the Taliban regime, who escaped capture at Kandahar.

This crisis had substantial ramifications on the rules of the game in international politics. First, it demonstrated the unprecedented ability of a non-state entity to implement mass destruction, using dual-use weapons - technology that has a civilian purpose but can be used as a means of destruction. This marked a significant shift from the prevailing conceptualization of international conflict, which involves states using conventional weapons against other states. Second, the US and UK attack against Afghanistan was largely supported and sanctioned by the international community and the UN, whose central purpose is to stop sovereign states from attacking other sovereign states. The offensive against the Taliban was justified by redefining the concept of self-defense.

References:

Woodward, Bob. 2002. Bush at War. New York: Simon and Schuster. Keesings Online; The Washington Post; The New York Times

Last Updated: 3/17/2008


