CRISNO 104

TRIESTE I

Background:

The first international crisis over Trieste took place from 1 May to 11 June 1945. The U.K., the U.S., and Yugoslavia were the crisis actors.

Background The city of Trieste (and the "Julian region" of which it was the centerpiece) was contested by rival powers throughout history because of its commercial and geopolitical importance: it was the principal outlet to the Adriatic for central Europe. Trieste had long performed this valuable function for the Hapsburg empire, until its demise in 1918.

In the prevalent mood of intense nationalism accompanying its unification, Italy claimed Trieste as terra irredenta (unredeemed land) as soon as Venice and Rome had been incorporated into the Italian state in 1866 and 1870. It has been unremitting in this claim ever since. So too was the new Yugoslavia from the time it was formed in 1918.

Italy's claim was at the heart of the issue of its participation in World War I. Thus in the (secret) Treaty of London (26 April 1915) France, the U.K., and Russia agreed to give Italy the Julian region, including Trieste, along with Trentino (South Tyrol to Austria) and the Dalmatian coast as territorial compensation for its entry into the war on the side of the Triple Entente. Italian forces occupied Trieste on 3 November 1918 amid the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire.

Dissatisfied by President Wilson's attempt at compromise at the Versailles Conference, Italy achieved its goal in November 1920: the Treaty of Rapallo gave Italy the Julian region. The cost, in terms of relations with the new Yugoslavia, which claimed Trieste with the same tenacity, was high-- permanent tension and periodic crises during the inter-world war period. Then, in 1941, the U.K.'s Foreign Minister, Anthony Eden, promised Yugoslavia "favorable consideration" of its claim for territorial revision regarding the Julian region after the war--in return for Yugoslavia's support during the war: it was perceived in Belgrade--and Rome--as an implied reversal of the 1915 Treaty of London concession to Italy's territorial claim. And it sowed the seeds of subsequent conflict. That conflict emerged in the closing weeks of World War II.

With the crumbling of German resistance in 1945 military cooperation between the Soviet Union and the Western allies began to be eroded by political and ideological disputes related to the postwar settlement: the fundamental differences in their economic systems, political regimes, and ideological beliefs and their historically competing interests led to cracks in the Grand Alliance. It gave way to intense competition and potential conflict over spheres of influence in war-ravaged Europe.

Prime Minister Churchill urged the U.S. to seize as much territory in Europe as possible. Trieste was the first to reflect the emerging clash of interests between East and West. As German troops retreated from Italy, Anglo-American forces reached the northeast--to find that Tito had preceded them with his Yugoslav Partisans.

Summary:

On 1 May 1945 a crisis was perceived by the U.K. when Churchill received a cable from the Supreme Allied Commander in the Mediterranean reporting the presence of Tito's forces in Trieste. The following day the news reached the U.S. and triggered a crisis. That day, too, the Anglo-Americans occupied Trieste triggering a crisis for Yugoslavia.

Tension in the Trieste area mounted during the next week as the Yugoslavs began setting up a local administration and carrying out political purges while restricting the movements of Anglo-American forces. On 11 May President Truman cabled Churchill suggesting that Tito be informed, through their respective ambassadors in Belgrade, that the Yugoslav Government must immediately agree to the control of its forces by the Supreme Allied Commander in the Mediterranean. Churchill agreed, and a directive was issued to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Yugoslavia rejected the Allied demands on 17 May. The U.S. and U.K. response, on 21 May, was taken in conjunction with earlier inquiries by Truman to the Joint Chiefs of Staff regarding possible military measures should Tito refuse to yield. Field Marshal Alexander's troops, reinforced by American units, crossed into the Yugoslav-occupied zone of Trieste. Later that day Yugoslavia announced its willingness to negotiate: the Anglo-American forces were far too strong for Yugoslavia to consider military resistance, especially as the USSR remained aloof from the crisis.

Talks were held at Devon at the end of May between General Morgan of the Allies and Yugoslav army representatives, and later in Belgrade among representatives of the three governments. The crisis ended without violence, when Yugoslavia withdrew its troops on 11 June 1945, two days after it yielded to U.K.-U.S. demands.

The city was demilitarized and divided into two zones, one controlled by an Allied (U.K.-U.S.) military government, the other by Yugoslavia. In a Memorandum of Understanding among Italy, the U.K., and the U.S., Rome was given a larger share in the administration of the Allied-controlled zone.

Italy was an involved actor, with basic interests in the outcome. The crisis served to intensify the conflict over Trieste, for Yugoslavia was an aggrieved party and later became involved in a series of tense situations that eventually escalated to a renewed crisis in 1953 (see Case #142).

The League of Nations had virtually ceased to exist since the beginning of World War II.

References:

Auty 1970; Byrnes 1947; Churchill 1953; Duroselle 1966; Grew 1953; Novak 1970; Truman 1955.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


