CRISNO 402

EGYPT-SUDAN BORDER II

Background:

Egypt and Sudan experienced another crisis over a long-standing border dispute from late January to late June 1992.

Background The Hala'ib region of southeast Egypt along the Red Sea has long been a source of contention. The 1899 agreement between Egypt and the U.K., which established an Anglo-Egyptian condominium over Sudan, determined that the border between Egypt and Sudan was to run along a straight west-east line. However, for convenience, Sudan was given authority to administer the Hala'ib area, almost 20,000 square kilometers, north of the line, and Egypt, an area south of the line. Over time Sudan began to claim political and economic rights in the Hala'ib area, for example, the right of its residents to vote in Sudanese elections, and the right to exploit its economic resources. However, Sudan never openly challenged Egypt's sovereignty over this area. Until Sudan's independence in 1956 the issue never became a focus of conflict; and thereafter Egypt allowed Sudan to administer the area.

Overt conflict was rare. However, on one occasion, in February 1958, Egypt and Sudan were embroiled in a crisis over Cairo's attempt to take control of the area by force. Although it remained non-violent, troops were dispatched, and Sudan complained to the UN Secretary-General about Egypt's "aggression" (see Case #163--Egypt/Sudan Border I).

Summary:

A crisis for Egypt was triggered toward the end of January 1992 when Sudan granted a Canadian oil company a concession to explore for oil in Hala'ib. Egypt contested this right early in February by advising oil companies around the world that Sudan did not have the authority to sign exploration agreements on any land north of their political boundary as laid down in the 1899 condominium agreement. However, it expressed the hope to settle the dispute quietly and did not issue an official protest. Sudan, by contrast, argued that "administrative" rights included the right to utilize the area's potential economic resources.

This low-intensity crisis escalated on 4 April when armed clashes occurred between Egyptian and Sudanese forces in the disputed area. President Mubarak sent an apology to Sudan's ruler, General Hassan a-Bashir. Two joint commissions were created--to examine the clash and to seek a resolution of the dispute. They met from 22 April to 5 May, without result. Other attempts were made to settle the disagreement through quiet diplomacy; but they too were unsuccessful.

The crisis ended as a result of the external actor's behavior: the Canadian company stopped its exploration in the Hala'ib region at the end of June, thereby removing the object of contention.

There was no involvement by the U.S., Russia, the UN, the OAU, or the Arab League.

(Tension declined but did not entirely dissipate after the termination of oil exploration. In August 1992 Egypt placed all mosques in the Hala'ib region under its control. Roads were constructed to give Egypt readier access to the region. And in mid-December Egyptian troop reinforcements were reportedly dispatched to the area. In December, too, Sudan sent a memo to the UN Security Council explaining its position on the dispute; but it did not seek UN intervention. And in mid-December Egypt's foreign minister declared that any dispute with Sudan could be resolved peacefully.)

(In June 1995 the Hala'ib dispute was reactivated--in the aftermath of an attempted assassination of Mubarak upon his arrival in Addis Ababa for an OAU summit. Egypt's president explicitly charged Sudan with collusion in this act and called upon the Sudanese people to overthrow its fundamentalist Islamic government. Several soldiers on both sides were reportedly wounded and, according to Sudan, two policemen killed, in a border clash in the Hala'ib region on 27 June 1995. But this episode, too, faded without serious consequences. The dispute remains unresolved.)

References:

FBIS-DR/NESA 1992; AR 1992; ARB 1992; ARec 1992; MECS 1992-93; New York Times 1992, 1995.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


