CRISNO 186

VIETCONG ATTACK

Background:

A crisis for South Vietnam and the United States took place from 18 September to 15 November 1961.

Pre-crisis For several years prior to this crisis Vietcong groups, backed by the North Vietnam regime, had been brought together for attacks on civilian and military centers in South Vietnam. By September 1961 these attacks had trebled in number. Vietcong guerrilla forces were situated in the northern marshlands of South Vietnam. When approached by South Vietnam government forces, they disappeared across the border into North Vietnam making their capture extremely difficult.

Summary:

A crisis for South Vietnam and the United States was triggered on 18 September 1961 when Phuoc Vinh, the provincial capital of Phuoc Thanh, only 55 miles from Saigon, was captured and held for a day by the Vietcong. Before government troops arrived, the provincial governor was publicly beheaded, and arms and ammunition were captured and removed. This attack had a shattering effect on the South Vietnam regime, despite the quick success in forcing the Vietcong to retreat. The United States, whose influence in Southeast Asia had been threatened by North Vietnam and, therefore, Soviet gains, was reluctant to increase its commitment to the area.

In view of the dangerously deteriorating security situation South Vietnam President Diem responded on 29 September by requesting a bilateral defense treaty with the United States. On 11 October President Kennedy and his advisors decided to send National Security Advisor Walt Rostow and General Maxwell Taylor to Vietnam to assess the political and military feasibility of U.S. intervention. A state of emergency was proclaimed in South Vietnam on 19 October.

In a report to the U.S. president on 3 November Rostow and Taylor recommended a significant expansion of U.S. aid to South Vietnam, as well as the dispatch of an 8,000-person logistical task force. On 11 November a joint recommendation from the Secretaries of State and Defense (Rusk and McNamara) to the president stated that a decision to commit ground forces in South Vietnam could be deferred. The U.S. major response, on 15 November, was a National Security Council decision for a limited commitment of aid and advisors to South Vietnam--several hundred specialists in guerrilla warfare, logistics, communication, and engineering--to train South Vietnam forces. Aircraft and other special equipment would be sent as well. That decision ended the crisis for the U.S. and South Vietnam.

The Rostow-Taylor trip to South Vietnam was assailed by Moscow and North Vietnam as a prelude to U.S. military intervention in Southeast Asia. On the regional level, SEATO's military advisors met from 3-6 October and issued a communiqué on the 6th to the effect that practical measures were being taken to increase the effectiveness of SEATO defenses.

The UN was not involved.

References:

See sources for Case #193; and McNamara 1995.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


