CRISNO 381

THREE VILLAGE BORDER II

Background:

Laos and Thailand were enmeshed in another crisis over disputed territory from 3 November 1987 to 17 February 1988.

Pre-crisis In May 1987 Laos accused Thailand of massing troops close to the northern border, in order to protect illegal logging activities. Laos launched several attacks on Thai loggers, killing some of them.

Summary:

A crisis for Laos and Thailand was triggered simultaneously on 3 November 1987 when heavy fighting broke out in the disputed three village area (see Case #353--Three Village Border I). Laos claimed that the fighting began with Thai air and artillery attacks on Laotian soldiers in the Boten district of its Sayaboury Province. Thailand said it was attacking Laotian troops who had invaded the Chat Trakan district of its Phitsaulok Province.

Thailand's initial response was "Operation Soi Dao," designed to clear the disputed region of Laotian troops. Its major response occurred on 15 December when Thai F5 fighter planes bombed Laotian positions in the region. Laos appealed to the UN Secretary-General to intervene; Perez de Cuellar offered his good offices.

As heavy fighting continued, Laos agreed on 28 December to a third round of border talks with Thailand. However, by mid-January 1988 Thailand claimed that it had reasserted control over 70 percent of the area around Hill 1428. Fighting intensified on 1-2 February, as Thai planes launched heavy strikes against Laotian troop positions.

Talks between the two states, aimed at ending the armed border conflict, began on 16 February in Bangkok. Laos was represented by the Chief of the General Staff of the Laotian People's Army, General Sisavat Keobounphan. Thailand sent General Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, the commander of the Thai army.

The military leaders signed a cease-fire agreement on 17 February calling on their governments to begin negotiations to solve the dispute by the end of the month. That agreement terminated the crisis for both sides. (The cease-fire took effect two days later.)

References:

Asian Recorder 1988; Facts on File 1988; Keesing's 1988.

Last Updated: 1/21/2004


