CRISNO 59

PANAY INCIDENT

Background:

The sinking of the USS Panay near Nanjing (Nanking) caused a crisis for the United States from 12 to 26 December 1937.

Pre-crisis The Sino/Japanese conflict resulted in a mounting threat to the treaty rights and interests of Britain, France, and the United States in China. On 27 November 1937, as the fighting between the Chinese and Japanese armies drew close to the city of Nanking, U.S. Ambassador Johnson moved most of his staff to Hankow. The few U.S. officials remaining in the capital were to be evacuated by the U.S. gunboat Panay, which had been ordered to stand by. On 9 December embassy personnel boarded the USS Panay, and, three days later, it docked about 28 miles above Nanking, along with three Standard Oil Company tankers.

Summary:

A crisis for the United States was triggered on 12 December 1937 when Japanese planes bombed and sank the Panay, along with the three Standard Oil Company ships. Japan's Foreign Minister, Hirota, expressed his apologies to the U.S. ambassador in Tokyo. In Washington, Japan's Ambassador, Saito, did likewise to Secretary of State Hull. President Roosevelt responded the following day with a message to Tokyo via Secretary Hull, expressing shock at the indiscriminate bombings and requesting that the emperor be informed of the president's response. Hull urged that Tokyo extend a full expression of regret and compensation. Further, the U.S. demanded guarantees from Japan that such incidents would not occur again.

As reports from China indicated that the Japanese attacks had been deliberate, indignation grew in Washington. On 17 December the U.S. cabinet met, and strong action was proposed by several members, especially Secretary of the Navy Claude Swanson. Roosevelt expressed concern at Chinese reaction if the assault went unrebuked, and asserted that a stronger response was necessary in order to foil a Japanese plan to force all Westerners out of Japan. An economic blockade was suggested, but no decision was made.

On 23 December a U.S. Board of Inquiry reported that the shelling of the Panay seemed to have been deliberate and premeditated. The following day, Hirota handed U.S. Ambassador Grew a Note admitting responsibility, offering amends, and giving assurances against reoccurrence of such an incident. The crisis ended for the United States with its formal acceptance of the Japanese Note on 26 December. The Roosevelt administration expressed satisfaction with Japan's apology and the latter's acceptance of all U.S. demands.

Toward the end of the crisis a U.S. naval officer was sent to London for technical discussions that would apply in the event that both countries declared war on Japan.

This crisis did not come before the League of Nations.

References:

Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS), Japan 1931-1941, vol. I; Borg 1964; Craigie 1946; Grew 1953; Hull 1948, vol. I; Ickes 1974; Jones 1954; Lee 1973; MacNair and Lash 1955.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


