CRISNO 36

VILNA II

Background:

Lithuania and Poland experienced another crisis over the long-disputed city of Vilna from mid-October to 10 December 1927.

Background Poland's annexation of Vilna in 1922, following its self-supervised plebiscite, was rejected by Lithuania, which viewed itself in a state of war with Poland until 1927. Marshal Pilsudski returned to power in May 1926, first as Poland's Premier and Minister of War, later as President. He was a vocal advocate of a strong nationalist policy toward Vilna.

Summary:

A crisis for Lithuania was triggered in mid-October 1927 by the closure of Lithuanian schools and the arrest of Lithuanian teachers and priests in Poland, allegedly in retaliation for the persecution of Polish teachers in Lithuania. The renewed tension was accentuated by Poland's high-profile celebration in Vilna of the seventh anniversary of its occupation of the city, in the presence of General Zeligowski, who led the 1920 occupying army, and President Pilsudski.

Lithuania's response took the form of a Note to the League of Nations and a personal appearance by Premier Voldemaras before the League Council on 15 October, warning of the danger of war and the threat to Lithuania's independent existence. That dramatic act, in turn, created a crisis for Poland.

The great powers and the League Council did not take the threat to peace seriously: Lithuania's complaint was merely added to the agenda for the next regular Council session. France and the U.K. tried in vain to persuade Lithuania to withdraw its Note and to accept an offer of good offices. Poland declared that it would not use force to resolve the dispute over Vilna. The Soviet Union criticized Poland--and France--for seeking the former's annexation of Lithuania.

Pilsudski raised the tension level significantly just before the Council meeting in December by publicly criticizing Voldemaras and acknowledging that he had contemplated mobilizing Poland's armed forces with a view to invading Lithuania.

The crisis ended on 10 December, when the League Council, backed by the major powers, passed an omnibus resolution. Both parties were urged to declare an end to the state of war between them. Specifically, Dutch Foreign Minister Beelaerts van Blokland served as a mediator and induced both sides to an agreement that a state of war no longer existed. The Council called on Poland to recognize Lithuania's independence and territorial integrity. It established a committee to report on alleged mistreatment of Lithuanian nationals in Poland. And the two parties were requested to restore normal relations. The Soviet delegate, Litvinov, helped to persuade Lithuania's president to accept the package. And the leaders of Poland and Lithuania sealed the change in relations with a public handshake.

(Negotiations to resume normal relations began at the end of March 1928. Poland's continued occupation of Vilna remained a stumbling block. In March 1938 another crisis [see Case #61] led to Lithuania's acceptance of a Polish ultimatum to restore diplomatic relations or face an invasion.)

References:

Dziewanowski 1977; Roos 1966; Walters 1952.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


