CRISNO 420

NORTH KOREAN SUBMARINE

Background:

South and North Korea were enmeshed in another bilateral crisis from 18 September to 29 December 1996.

Background and Pre-Crisis

The Korean War ended on 27 July 1953 with an armistice (see Case #140 - Korean War III) but a formal peace agreement between the two Koreas remained elusive. Throughout the postwar period, both North and South Korea repeatedly affirmed their desire for reunification of the Korean peninsula. However, until 1972 there was no formal communication or contact between them. After several meetings that year, the two parties to this protracted conflict announced an agreement to work toward reunification and an end to hostilities. The process broke down a year later after South Korea's President Park Chung Hee announced Seoul would seek separate membership of the United Nations.

The Poplar Tree crisis (see Case #274) in 1976 accentuated the tension and mistrust between the two Koreas. In 1988, South Korean President Roh Tae Woo called for renewed efforts to promote exchanges, family reunification and inter-Korean trade. South Korean firms began to import North Korean goods soon afterward, and direct trade began in the autumn of 1990.

Roh's initiative renewed momentum for dialogue. In 1991, the two sides signed a joint declaration on denuclearization: it called for a bilateral nuclear inspection regime to verify denuclearization of the peninsula, but it was never implemented.

Hostilities continued to flare in the early1990s, culminating in the North Korea Nuclear Crisis of 1993-94 (see Case #408). An official from the North threatened to turn Seoul into a "sea of fire" after talks in 1994 collapsed. In early 1996, the US offered to arrange a meeting between North and South Korea in order to negotiate a formal peace agreement between the two. However, tension rose again as a result of the penetration of the South by a North Korean submarine.

Summary:

A crisis for South and North Korea began on 18 September 1996 when a North Korean submarine ran aground on a South Korean beach, about 100 km south of the border. The 'spy' submarine carried 26 armed commandos, who landed on the shore and raised tension between the two Koreas to the highest level in years. The South Korean armed forces launched a huge manhunt in which 24 North Koreans and 13 South Koreans were killed. During the operations the South Korean troops found a roll of film, containing detailed pictures of Kangnung Airport, Yongdong Power Plant and other facilities, which the infiltrators had taken after they penetrated the area. The primary mission of the infiltrators was believed to have been to assassinate South Korean VIPs who were scheduled to participate in a national athletic event that was about to take place in Chunchon.

South Korea denounced the incursion as an act of war. North Korea responded that the submarine was engaged in "routine training" and ran aground off the Korean coast due to engine trouble; and on 26 September it demanded the return of the submarine.

The crisis escalated on 1 October, when President Kim Young Sam of South Korea declared that his government would reconsider any further aid to North Korea and claimed that the submarine incident was proof of the North's plans "to communize the South with arms." He also warned Pyongyang that his armed forces were ready to respond to a military attack. South Korea also demanded an apology from the North before it would consider resuming peace talks between the two adversaries or providing further humanitarian aid to the North.

At this point, the U.S. intervened in the crisis as a mediator, through the efforts of President Clinton and a State Department negotiator, Mark Minton. Clinton met South Korea's president and urged him to resume talks with North Korea. After three weeks of intense negotiations in New York between Minton and a senior official of North Korea's Foreign Ministry, Li Hyong Chol, North Korea apologized on 29 December, expressing "deep regret" for the incursion and for "the tragic loss of human life." This terminated the North Korea submarine crisis.

(A day after the apology, the US administration announced that North Korea agreed, for the first time, to discuss with South Korea and the United States a formal end to the Korean War. That day, too, as a conciliatory gesture, South Korea returned to North Korea the remains of the 24 commandos who were killed during the crisis.)

References:

New York Times; Washington Post; Keesings Online

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


