CRISNO 249

CHRISTMAS BOMBING

Background:

This intrawar crisis for South Vietnam, the United States, and North Vietnam began on 23 October 1972 and ended on 27 January 1973.

Pre-crisis The peace talks at Paris broke down once more; and, when a deadlock could no longer be avoided, it was followed by an escalation in hostilities on the battlefield.

Summary:

The crisis trigger for South Vietnam occurred on 23 October 1972 when it learned of agreements reached between the delegates of the United States and North Vietnam at the Paris talks. The response, the next day, was a public refusal to comply with these agreements. Fighting in Vietnam and negotiations in Paris were carried on simultaneously. But on 4 December 1972 North Vietnam rejected all U.S. proposals and withdrew its acceptance of early changes already agreed upon while making new demands. This triggered a crisis for the U.S. Secretary of State Kissinger surmised that North Vietnam was now willing to risk a break in the talks. When additional meetings on 6, 11, and 13 December ended in stalemate, the U.S. concluded that Hanoi had in effect made a strategic decision to prolong the war, abort all negotiations, and seek an unconditional victory.

On 14 December the U.S. responded with an order by Nixon to renew the aerial bombing of the Hanoi-Haiphong military complex and the mining of North Vietnamese ports. Massive bombing began on 17 December and triggered a crisis for North Vietnam. It responded on the 26th by signaling a willingness to return to serious negotiations without preconditions. On the 26th the U.S. bombed the Hanoi railway station, killing 283 people and wounding 266. North Vietnam proposed 8 January 1973 for meetings in Paris. The crisis ended for all three actors on 27 January, with the formal signing of the Peace Accords in Paris.

As with so many crises during this protracted conflict, the USSR was marginally involved--politically. Neither the UN nor SEATO was involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Cases #225 and #246; and Isaacson 1992.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


