CRISNO 86

ECUADOR-PERU BORDER II

Background:

Ecuador and Peru experienced another crisis over the territory of Mara침칩n from 5 July 1941 to 29 January 1942.

Background The long-standing dispute between Peru and Ecuador remained unresolved after the crisis in 1935. Another border clash, which threatened to escalate to war, occurred in June 1938. Ecuador appealed to several Latin American presidents in October for mediation. In December 1938, at the Eighth Conference of American States, several unofficial attempts were made to achieve a settlement: none was successful. During 1939-40 there were numerous border incidents. Relations between Ecuador and Peru deteriorated, and, toward the end of 1940, there were rumors of Peruvian troop movements in two directions toward Ecuadorian positions in the east and west. Ecuador increased the number of military posts and built roads for greater maneuverability. By December 1940 the danger of war was fully recognized by Ecuador.

Summary:

On 5 July 1941, according to Ecuador's foreign minister, Peruvian agricultural workers, accompanied by civil guards, entered Ecuador and opened fire on an Ecuadorian patrol, triggering a crisis for Ecuador. Fighting spread to several frontier posts and included Peruvian artillery and air attacks. Argentina, Brazil, and the United States proposed a joint effort by all American states to establish peace, but Chile refused to support it. Their plan for each side to withdraw its troops 15 kilometers from the recognized boundary was accepted by the adversaries, whose representatives arrived in Washington on 11 July for separate talks with Under-Secretary of State Sumner Welles--to no effect.

On 23 July, as hostilities were renewed along a 50-kilometer front, Argentina, with U.S. support, renewed its appeal to cease hostilities. Two days later Peru's foreign minister indicated a willingness to accept a cease-fire. Ecuador began to mobilize on the 24th but agreed to a cease-fire on the 26th. Peru demanded that Ecuador annul the mobilization decree as a condition for accepting a cease-fire. After much deliberation Ecuador complied on 31 July. On 2 August the mediating powers (U.S., Argentina, Brazil) proposed a 15-kilometer withdrawal of all troops behind the status quo boundaries of 1936 and the placing of international observers. Ecuador accepted, but Peru did not reply. A cease-fire was implemented in the western zone; but in the Oriente, where there were no observers, Ecuador reported continued Peruvian advances. On 2 October military commanders of Ecuador and Peru agreed to the "Talara Truce" in which a neutral zone was established between the two lines in the provinces of Guayas, El Oro, and Loja. The situation in the Oriente was not affected. And on 4 October the mediators rejected a boundary line that Lima proposed on 13 September, which corresponded to the most advanced Peruvian posts.

The third Conference of Foreign Ministers of the American States began on 15 January 1942 in Rio de Janeiro, where informal negotiations were carried out by the foreign ministers of Ecuador and Peru. Under strong pressure from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and the U.S., they signed a boundary protocol on 29 January 1942 ending the fighting between them: the agreement allocated 70,000 square miles of the disputed territory to Peru, granted Ecuador navigation rights on the Amazon River, and called for demarcation of the border. The second Mara침칩n crisis was over--but the border conflict continued.

The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #50.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


