CRISNO 216

KASHMIR II

Background:

The second India/Pakistan crisis over Kashmir--there had been many incidents--lasted from 5 August 1965 to 10 January 1966.

Pre-crisis In accordance with the Rann of Kutch agreement (see Case #214), Pakistan's President, Ayub Khan, ordered the withdrawal of all Pakistani troops from the frontiers with India on 2 July 1965. Shortly thereafter similar instructions were issued to Indian forces.

Summary:

Another 1965 crisis for India was triggered on 5 August when Pakistani "freedom fighters" began infiltrating into the Vale of Kashmir to create a large-scale uprising against Indian control over most of the former princely state. On 25 August India sent several thousand troops across the 1949 Kashmir Cease-fire Line, capturing most of the areas through which the infiltrators came and triggering a crisis for Pakistan. The latter responded on 1 September by dispatching an armored column across the cease-fire line in southern Kashmir and threatening the vital road linking the capital city of Srinagar with the plains of India. India's major response was to invade West Pakistan on 5 September. On 4 and 6 September, the UN Security Council called for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of armed forces. On the 7th China denounced Indian "aggression" against Pakistan and alleged Indian provocation on the border of Sikkim and Tibet.

An intrawar crisis was triggered for India on 16 September when China issued an ultimatum: unless the Indian government dismantled all military bases near the Chinese border and stopped all intrusions into China, it would have to bear full responsibility for the grave consequences. India responded on the 17th by rejecting Chinese allegations while hinting at a willingness to make minor concessions. Although India reported Chinese troop movements to within 500 meters of Indian positions on the 18th, by 21 September China had withdrawn its ultimatum by an announcement on Beijing Radio that India had complied with the Chinese demands. This diversionary crisis for India was thus resolved on 21 September 1965.

The threat of Chinese intervention stimulated the superpowers to seek a rapid termination of the war between India and Pakistan. New efforts were made through the Security Council. A resolution, to which both parties agreed, was drawn up on 17 September, and the UN Observer Mission, in Kashmir since 1949, was strengthened. Military hostilities subsided by 25 September. However, this did not mark the termination of the crisis, for both armies still faced each other across the Punjab border, each occupied one another's territory, and a series of violations of the cease-fire agreement occurred.

On 17 September Soviet Premier Kosygin proposed a conference in Tashkent between Pakistan's President Ayub Khan and India's Prime Minister Shastri. The conference, held between 4 and 10 January 1966, began with initial difficulties because India refused to discuss the Kashmir issue and Pakistan demanded that it would not concede anything unless there was discussion of Kashmir. Both parties threatened to leave but Kosygin insisted that they stay for a final session. In this session, Kosygin persuaded Pakistan to pull back its forces by threatening to aid India unless they did so. Through the mediation effort, the conference ended with a declaration affirming the intentions of both parties to restore diplomatic, economic, and trade relations, to withdraw troops to the internationally recognized borders, and to repatriate prisoners of war. The Tashkent Declaration ended the crisis on 10 January 1966.

On 8 September 1965 U.S. Secretary of State Rusk had informed the Senate that the U.S. had suspended military aid to both India and Pakistan and that no new commitments of economic assistance to either party had been made. Since the U.S. was the sole supplier of arms to Pakistan, while India received arms from several sources, notably the USSR, the embargo was especially effective against Pakistan.

UN Secretary-General U Thant visited the area but was unable to persuade either side to take a more flexible position. However, the Security Council resolution of 17 September was agreed to by India on the 20th and by Pakistan on the 22nd.

References:

Barnds 1972; Blinkenberg 1972; Brines 1968; Brzoska and Pearson 1994; Burke 1973; Choudhury 1968; Ganguly 1986; Gopal 1967; Kavic 1967; Korbel 1954; Lamb 1966; Thornton 1985.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


