CRISNO 276

OPERATION TANGENT

Background:

The extension of Rhodesia's military operations against African guerrillas to the border area with Botswana caused a crisis for Botswana from 20 December 1976 to 31 March 1977.

Pre-crisis In February 1976 Rhodesia had launched Operation Thrasher to deal with military incursions by Mozambique-based guerrillas into its territory (see Case #267). During that year a number of guerrilla operations were mounted from Botswana staging camps. Rhodesia's security forces dramatically increased their incursions into Botswana, which issued a public accusation on 12 August. In November a villager was killed and several bombs exploded in Francistown at the office of the African National Council (ANC). On 15 December Rhodesian forces raided a village on the border and kidnapped three Botswana citizens. Three days later fire was exchanged between Botswana police and Rhodesian troops. And on the 20th Botswana claimed that its territory had been violated by Rhodesian forces 31 times since the beginning of November 1976.

Summary:

On 20 December 1976 the Rhodesian government announced the creation of a new operational military zone--Operation Tangent--in the northwest and west covering the Botswana border area. This announcement triggered a crisis for Botswana, particularly because it had no army, only a police force. Botswana responded by declaring the 30-kilometer border with Rhodesia a protected area, imposing a curfew, and appealing to the UN Security Council on 21 December. It also set up a Police Mobile Unit to patrol the border and expanded it in January 1977. The Security Council met on 14 January and condemned Rhodesian incursions into Botswana, demanding the cessation of all hostile acts. The Council accepted a Botswana invitation to send a mission to assess its needs and requested the Secretary-General to organize immediately financial and other forms of assistance to Botswana and to report back to the Council not later than 31 March. The UN mission, which visited Botswana in February, reported that there was evidence of Rhodesian incursions and stated that Botswana's difficulties had been increased severely by the influx of refugees. The report recommended a $50 million grant over three years, half to reinforce the Police Mobile Unit and the rest for the care of refugees. The same day, 31 March 1977, Botswana decided to establish an army, terminating its crisis.

The USSR offered economic aid to Botswana. There was no U.S. involvement in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1977; AD 1977; ARec 1977; ARB 1977; Keesing's 1977.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


