CRISNO 448

IRAN NUCLEAR II

Background:

On 10 January 2006, Iran removed the UN seals from its nuclear reactors. This event marked the beginning of the second Iranian nuclear crisis. This event led to a foreign policy crisis for the U.S., the UK, and France. Between the end of the first Iranian nuclear crisis and the beginning of the second nuclear crisis, tensions and conflict continued. However, it was only with the removal of the seals that the threat of war rose sufficiently for the situation to be considered a crisis. On 11 January 2006, the U.S. issued a statement condemning Iran's actions and threatening UNSC action. This statement caused a foreign policy crisis for Iran. Throughout the crisis, there were no instances of violence. Instead, negotiations and sanctions were the primary crisis management techniques for the four crisis actors. Once again, the EU3 and Iran were the primary parties involved in negotiations. Multiple rounds of EU-Iran, Russian-Iran, and IAEA-Iran negotiations took place.

Summary:

Iran's major response came on 13 January 2006. Iran threatened to end cooperation with the IAEA if Iran was taken before the UNSC. For Iran, the gravest threat faced during the crisis was a threat to its influence. If its nuclear ambitions were stopped, it risked losing important influence among both allies and adversaries in the region. Moreover, the acquisition of nuclear weapons would have the opposite effect. Moreover, the presence of nuclear weapons in Iran would limit the United State's ability to interfere in Iranian affairs. Iran's negotiations with the IAEA and the EU3 were handled by the Secretary of the Supreme National Security Council. The Iranian President did issue statements throughout the crisis, but the primary communications were handled through negotiations. Iran's stance was much more hard-line early in this crisis. On 3 April 2006, Iran engaged in military manoeuvres. On 11 April 2006, Iran claims to have joined the nuclear club. As the crisis continued Iran relied more on negotiations. On 22 August 2007, Iran and the IAEA reached an agreement. However, this agreement did not significantly reduce tensions among the crisis actors.

On 12 Jan 2006, the EU3 called for UNSC action. This served as Britain's and France's major response. For Britain and France, the crisis was a threat to Europe's influence. Internally, they wanted to secure their influence within the EU. Externally, they wished to show that the EU is a relevant actor in foreign affairs. The foreign ministers of the UK, France, and Germany were primarily responsible for negotiations. As a regional organization, the EU's foreign policy chief was also involved in negotiations. During this crisis, Germany was only considered to be an involved actor. First, many important events in this crisis took place in the UNSC; a body in which Germany is not a permanent member. Second, German statements did not reflect the increased tensions to the same degree as those of the UK and France. At some point during the crisis, both Britain and France suggested that military force may be needed.

The U.S.'s statement of 11 January 2006 served as the American major response. For the U.S., the gravest threat faced was a threat to its superpower influence. If Iran acquired nuclear weapons, the U.S. would lose much of its ability to interfere in Iran. Moreover, it would also lose influence among allies, client states, and adversaries in the strategically important Middle East. Given that the U.S. did not participate in most of the direct negotiations with Iran, the U.S.'s representative to the UN was the primary actor with communication responsibilities. Of all of the Western crisis actors, the U.S. took the hardest line with Iran. While there was a consensus at the UN that sanctions were required, the U.S. pushed for harsher and more frequent sanctions.

In addition to the four crisis actors, Germany, Russia, China, and Israel were involved actors. Russian activity was generally viewed favourably by all actors. However, Russia also displeased all actors. The Americans and Europeans viewed Russian support for sanctions favourably. However, the U.S. was frustrated by Russia's refusal to end nuclear cooperation with Iran. For Iran, despite the fact that Russia's stance was much less favourable during this crisis, Russia was still a conciliatory force. However, Iran did not view Russian support for sanctions favourably. With the involvement of the UNSC, China became an involved actor. Much like Russia, China took a middle ground position. Finally, Israel's tone became much more threatening during this crisis. However, most of its threats and statements appear to have been aimed at influencing the U.S. instead of Iran.

The UNSC and IAEA were heavily involved in this crisis. The IAEA provided information, served as a negotiator, and condemned some Iranian actions. The UNSC's first statement on the issue occurred on 29 March 2006 when it gave Iran 30 days to suspend enrichment. On 31 July 2006, the UNSC passed a resolution that would allow for tough sanctions if nuclear activities were not stopped within a month. Finally, on 24 March 2007, the UNSC imposed sanctions on Iran.

The crisis ended on 4 December 2007 when the U.S. released an intelligence report that stated that Iran was not seeking to produce nuclear weapons. This report altered the governmental policies of the U.S., the UK, and France and removed a major threat to Iran. All parties were satisfied with the outcome of the crisis. For Iran, a major threat was removed. For the Americans and Europeans, the threat of an Iranian bomb was greatly decreased. The report caused a policy shift to occur in the U.S.

References:

n/a

Last Updated: 2/6/2009


