CRISNO 236

CAIRO AGREEMENT-PLO

Background:

Syria's acquiescence in Palestinian Arab guerrilla activity caused a crisis for Lebanon from 22 October to 3 November 1969.

Pre-crisis The political equilibrium within Lebanon was endangered when Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) guerrilla groups, based in Lebanon or infiltrating from across the Syrian border, stepped up their sabotage operations against Israel, bringing about retaliations in 1968. For some time clashes between forces of the Lebanon government and Palestinian guerrillas had been taking place. The clashes always centered around the issues that occupied Lebanon in the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s, namely, the PLO's right to maintain bases in Lebanon and its demands to be allowed to operate from Lebanese soil against targets in Israel. Following an Israeli raid on Beirut's International Airport (see Case #229, in Arab/Israel PC) political upheavals in April 1969 left Lebanon with a caretaker government for seven months. Syrian intervention posed an ever-present threat to its political regime.

Summary:

On 22 October 1969 the PLO announced that serious clashes had occurred with Lebanese government forces after an attack on its bases in the south along the Israel border. This triggered a crisis for Lebanon. While continuing its military response against the guerrillas, Beirut began meetings with representatives of Egypt and Jordan on the 24th. Syria, which closed its border with Lebanon on 22 October and concentrated military units there, was also approached by Lebanon for negotiation, in a telephone conversation between the two presidents a day earlier. Ultimately, Egypt served as the primary mediator in the crisis, and the Commander-in-Chief of the Lebanese army, Bustani, and the Secretary General of the Lebanese Foreign Ministry, Sadaka, flew to Cairo on 29 October to participate in negotiations. The crisis ended on 3 November when an agreement was reached between the Lebanese army and government and the PLO in Cairo, under the mediation of President Nasir.

The Cairo Agreement granted the PLO wide-ranging rights to operate as a "state within a state" in Lebanon. Formally, it contained a modus operandi for the guerrilla groups, limiting their bases to the southeastern corner of Lebanon, as well as their sabotage operations against Israel. However, the overall effect was to curtail the sovereignty of Lebanon and its government's control over its own territory.

References:

MEJ Chronology 1969; MER 1969-70.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


