CRISNO 349

AEGEAN SEA II

Background:

Greece experienced a two-day crisis with Turkey in the Aegean Sea from 8 to 10 March 1984.

Background Following the first Aegean Sea crisis in 1976, Greece and Turkey signed an agreement in Berne, Switzerland, undertaking not to search for oil outside their territorial waters. But the boundary dispute remained unresolved. In the context of their enduring rivalry both Greece and Turkey were predisposed to perceive any act by their long-time adversary as threatening.

Summary:

The catalyst to Greece's 1984 crisis was a report from Greek intelligence that one of its warships was fired on by five Turkish destroyers in the northeast Aegean Sea on 8 March 1984. Following an emergency meeting of the Greek cabinet, Prime Minister Papandreou declared that this was the worst Turkish provocation since the massive invasion of Cyprus in 1974 (see Case #257). Greece responded the following day by placing its armed forces on alert and by recalling its ambassador from Ankara.

In an attempt to reduce the tension Turkey's embassy in Washington asserted the same day that Turkish warships were engaged in artillery maneuvers when a Greek warship and civilian vessel entered the firing zone. Turkey's prime minister also reported that Greece had been informed 15 days earlier of Turkey's planned naval exercise. The next day, 10 March, the Turkish stand was endorsed by the NATO ambassadors meeting in emergency session.

The winding down of this crisis was swifter and much less painful than earlier eruptions in the Greece/Turkey protracted conflict. On 10 March Greece announced that it had concluded Turkish warships had not intentionally fired on the Greek destroyer in the Aegean. It canceled the recall of its ambassador to Turkey and its planned military alert, thereby terminating the crisis with Turkey.

There was no UN or USSR activity in this crisis. The U.S. was involved only indirectly, through NATO.

References:

Keesing's 1984; New York Times 1984.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


