CRISNO 261

MOROCCAN MARCH

Background:

Spain and Morocco, and later, Algeria and Mauritania were the direct participants in a two-stage crisis over Western Sahara that lasted from 16 October 1975 to 14 April 1976.

Pre-crisis Morocco, interested in its rich phosphate mines, renewed a long-standing claim to Western Sahara in 1974. In August 1974 Spain proclaimed its internal autonomy as the first step toward decolonization. Morocco objected and called for Spain's immediate withdrawal, UN supervision, and the repatriation of some 20,000 refugees then in southern Morocco. In early October Morocco and Mauritania took the question of sovereignty over Western Sahara to the International Court of Justice (ICJ, World Court), through the UN Committee on Non-Self-Governing Territories, to determine if Morocco or Mauritania had a legal claim to Western Sahara. Algeria, the most visible advocate of Western Sahara's independence, was concerned about Morocco's expansion, while Libya declared its willingness to fight Spain for the "liberation" of the disputed territory.

A secret agreement between Morocco and Mauritania to divide Western Sahara was reached on 1 October 1975, after a Spanish announcement that a referendum offering the people of that territory the choice between independence and association with Spain would be held during the first half of 1976. Morocco reaffirmed its categorical rejection of any referendum on independence for Western Sahara. On 15 October a UN mission reported sentiment for independence in Western Sahara. On the 16th the World Court ruled that, despite some historical links and legal ties, neither Morocco nor Mauritania had a valid claim to sovereignty over Western Sahara.

Summary:

The same day King Hassan of Morocco declared that he interpreted the ICJ's reference to Saharan "links" to Morocco as validating Moroccan claims to sovereignty over the area and that he intended to lead a march of 350,000 civilians into Western Sahara to hasten its integration into his kingdom. This triggered a crisis for Spain. Fearing a military clash it attempted to stop the proposed march by appealing to the UN Security Council. It also noted that force would be used only against an armed invasion. On 28 October Spain imposed emergency measures in order to prevent hostilities.

An announcement by Spain and Algeria on 2 November that the march would be countered by force triggered a crisis for Morocco. The same day Spain's Acting Head of State, Prince (later, King) Juan Carlos, flew to Sahara. He returned to Spain the next day to hold talks with the Moroccan prime minister. A Moroccan minister was sent to Algeria; and 20,000 Moroccan troops were moved to the Western Sahara border.

Spain's major response to the crisis was to withdraw its forces eight miles from the border on 5 November. The march began on the 6th but was halted by King Hassan on the 10th, a day after Spain agreed to exclude Algeria from negotiations over the future of Western Sahara. An agreement was signed on 14 November 1975 by Mauritania, Morocco, and Spain dividing Western Sahara between the two African claimants but leaving Spain a share in the valuable Bu Craa phosphate mines. It also provided for Spain's withdrawal from the territory on 28 February 1976. Until then Western Sahara was to be administered jointly by the three countries.

The 14 November agreement terminated Spain's crisis. It also generated a crisis for Algeria, where Polisario bases were located. Clashes between troops from Morocco and Mauritania, on the one hand, and Polisario guerrillas and regular Algerian troops, on the other, began in December.

A crisis for Mauritania was catalyzed by the first major Polisario offensive on 10 December 1975, allegedly aided by Cuban and North Vietnam "volunteers." Mauritania, surprised by the very strong resistance to its occupation of part of Western Sahara, confronted force with force.

A major Algerian attack on Moroccan forces on 27 January 1976 marked the beginning of the second stage of this crisis. Morocco responded with increased efforts to occupy more of the disputed territory. Spain withdrew from Western Sahara two days ahead of schedule, on 26 February. The following day Polisario declared the disputed territory's independence as the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic. The SADR, called SAHRAWI, was recognized on 6 March by Algeria, marking the end of its crisis. Other African states and North Korea, too, granted recognition to SAHRAWI. Morocco and Mauritania responded by severing relations with Algeria on the 7th. And on the 14th they signed a convention fixing the borders of the disputed territory between them: Morocco annexed the northern two-thirds of Western Sahara, Mauritania the other third. (Morocco annexed the rest of Western Sahara in 1980 when Mauritania renounced its claim.) This terminated the crisis for Morocco and Mauritania, and the Moroccan March crisis as a whole.

(Clashes continued to the end of April, particularly between Mauritanian and Polisario troops. New tensions were to break out once more in June [see Case #268--Nouakchott I].)

The UN played an active role in crisis management. The Security Council, responding to Spain's appeal, met on 20 October 1975 and passed a resolution on the 22nd calling for restraint by all parties. It also requested Secretary-General Waldheim to begin negotiations. Between 26 and 28 October Waldheim moderated between the sides and his envoy, André Lewin, followed-up immediately afterwards. The Council convened twice more, on 2 and 8 November. However, on the 8th, Morocco rejected the Waldheim Plan, which called for a six-month cooling-off period in which the UN would temporarily administer Western Sahara and send several hundred peacekeeping troops. Mediation was also attempted in March and April 1976 by the Secretary-General and his representative, Sweden's Ambassador to the UN, Olof Rydbeck; but the parties refused to compromise.

The United States supplied military aid to Morocco. A visit to the area by the U.S. assistant secretary of state for Africa in early November contributed to the winding down of the first stage of the crisis--the 14 November 1975 agreement. Mediation was also attempted by Egypt and Libya. The OAU debated the issue from 26 February to 1 March 1976 and passed a compromise resolution that left to individual members the decision whether or not to recognize the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic. The OAU also supported the Arab League's dispatch of its Secretary-General, Mahmoud Riad, to the area but without tangible effect. Evidence of covert Soviet aid to Algeria and Polisario came in the form of the shooting down of a Moroccan plane by a Soviet SAM-3 missile.

(Four years after this crisis, in July 1980, the SADR was admitted to OAU membership following recognition by 36 of the 49 member-states.)

References:

ACR 1975, 1976; ARB 1975, 1976; Brownlie 1979; Brzoska and Pearson 1994; Damis 1983; Day 1987; Fraenkel 1976; Franck 1976; Gretton 1980; Hodges 1983; Lewis 1985b; Marks 1976; Mercer 1976a, 1976b, 1976c; Moose 1985; Ramchadani 1977; Thompson and Adloff 1980; WA 1975, 1976; Zartman 1989.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


