CRISNO 253

ISRAEL MOBILIZATION

Background:

A crisis for Israel in its relations with Egypt began on 10 April 1973 and ended in late June of that year.

Background and Pre-crisis After the Arab defeat in the 1967 War (see Case #222), the Egyptians began to rebuild their armed forces, in conjunction with efforts to find a diplomatic solution to Arab (mainly Egypt's and Syria's) dissatisfaction over Israeli control of the Sinai Desert, the Golan Heights, the West Bank, and East Jerusalem. Anwar al-Sadat succeeded Nasir as President of Egypt in 1970 and persuaded Moscow to resupply weapons on a large scale. In early 1973 newly appointed Egyptian Chief of Staff Ahmed Ismail visited Moscow and conducted negotiations for additional Soviet arms. His visit to Washington, however, was less successful. In February President Nixon emphasized that the United States had no intention of putting pressure on Israel to withdraw from the Sinai Peninsula and all other territories captured during the Six Day War. Shortly thereafter news of U.S. agreement to supply Israel with 48 Phantoms and 36 Skyhawks was leaked to the press. Egyptian coordination with the Syrians began in February 1973, and a joint attack was scheduled for May of that year. At the beginning of April Sadat stated publicly that Egypt was preparing for war with Israel. He also announced a large Egyptian army exercise.

Summary:

On 10 April 1973 Israel's Chief of Staff, Lieutenant-General David Elazar, received intelligence reports of an intended Egyptian attack slated for 15 May: further, that Iraq and Libya had each sent 16 fighter planes to Egypt. Israeli intelligence maintained, however, that Sadat would back down before the actual launching of the war. This estimate was not accepted by Elazar. Israel responded by placing its army on alert on 13 April and by canceling all leaves. War preparations began, and reserve units were called into active service.

Toward the end of June, after the Nixon-Brezhnev talks on the 22nd, Israel became convinced that Egypt did not intend to go to war at that time, and the crisis came to an end. Sadat subsequently explained that the postponement of the war was due to a scheduling of a second summit conference in Washington for May. Elazar came under severe criticism by Israel's finance minister for the economic cost of the April mobilization, while the Israel intelligence estimates were vindicated. This proved to be a crucial factor in Elazar's reluctance to order general mobilization and misconceptions that characterized Israeli thinking just before the successful Egyptian attack on 6 October 1973 (see Case #255).

There was no superpower or UN involvement in this crisis.

References:

Bartov 1981; Black and Morris 1991; Herzog 1975; Insight Team of the Sunday Times 1974; Meir 1975; MEJ Chronology 1973.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


