CRISNO 454

ETHIOPIA-ERITREA III

Background:

A crisis occurred between Eritrea and Ethiopia from 8 September 2007 to 1 December 2007 as a result of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission's (EEBC) decision to cease attempts at making further progress on demarcating the border between the two countries. The crisis faded on 1 December 2007, the day after the EEBC finalized its 2002 border ruling and dissolved itself as it promised to do so a year earlier.

Background and Pre-crisis: Relations between Eritrea and Ethiopia have remained tense since their 1998-2000 border war (see Case #424). Many of the unresolved matters between the two countries that were present prior to a 2005-06 flare-up over the issue of UN peacekeepers (see Case #446) remained at the outbreak of this current crisis. Under the Algiers Agreement that ended the border war in 2000, the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission (EEBC) was appointed by the UN and OAU to decide the final boundary between the two countries. This arbitration commission was housed within the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague. The EEBC made its border ruling on 13 April 2002, and Eritrea was awarded the disputed town of Badme. At the outbreak of the current crisis, little progress had been made on implementing this border decision by the EEBC. Due to a stalemate in dialogue between Eritrea and Ethiopia, in November 2006 the EEBC gave the two countries until 30 November 2007 to reach agreement and demarcate the border or else its 2002 border ruling would become finalized. Ethiopia was still dissatisfied with the border ruling and blocked its implementation by demanding further negotiation on the issue. Eritrea was still restricting the movement of UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) peacekeepers that were monitoring the Temporary Security Zone (TSZ), arguing that these peacekeepers were operating on internationally-recognized Eritrean territory contrary to the 2002 EEBC ruling. In addition, Eritrea and Ethiopia had further increased their military presence in the border region during 2006 and the first half of 2007, leading to several UN resolutions rebuking them for these actions. Each side intermittently accused the other of preparing a military invasion. Furthermore, the two countries were conducting a proxy war of sorts in neighboring Somalia and had long been accusing each other of supporting the other's anti-state or secessionist rebel opponents. Eritrea was also highly critical of the UN and the United States: the former for exhibiting perceived bias by allowing Ethiopia to disregard the EEBC's ruling, the latter for supporting Ethiopia militarily in its fight against Somalian Islamist rebels and al-Qaeda, and both for not facilitating the implementation of the Algiers Agreement.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for Eritrea and Ethiopia on 8 September 2007, the day after a meeting of the EEBC ended with the commission saying it could not move forward with trying to resolve the border impasse due to intransigence on both sides. Both sides accused the other of causing the EEBC meeting to fail. Within two days, Eritrea sent a significant number of troops to the TSZ buffer zone, and Ethiopia shifted its troop positions in response. On September 25, Ethiopia sent a formal letter to Eritrea threatening to terminate the Algiers Agreement unless Eritrea began complying with said agreement. Copies of the letter were also sent to the UN Security Council and Secretary General, as well as to the other witnesses of the Algiers Agreement: the African Union, the European Union, Algeria, and the United States. In response to this, three days later Eritrea sent a letter to the same group of states and organizations, arguing that Ethiopian threats to scrap the Algiers Agreement were intended as a precursor for renewing hostilities and urging the UN to urgently implement the EEBC's border ruling. On October 11, the UN Secretary General expressed concern about rising tensions between the two sides and called on them to exercise restraint and implement the Algiers Agreement.

Throughout October, several small skirmishes occurred between Ethiopia and Eritrea. On October 26, Eritrea said it had intelligence that Ethiopia was planning to invade Eritrea during the first week of November, and it accused the United States -- a close Ethiopian ally -- of supporting this plan. Following this, tensions between the two countries reached their highest point in years leading up to the November 30 deadline for the EEBC's border ruling to become finalized and codified into law. Each side sent roughly 100,000 new troop reinforcements to the buffer zone, and reports emerged that Ethiopia was conducting military exercises in the area. Eritrea continued to accuse Ethiopia of planning to launch an offensive and warned of a possible return to full-scale war. In response, Ethiopia increased its defense budget and also launched a massive offensive against Eritrean-backed Somalian rebels, claiming that Eritrea had planned to use these rebels as a distraction so it could invade from the north.

On November 7, the UN Secretary General reported to the Security Council on recent troop movements from both sides and demanded that Eritrea withdraw its troops from the buffer zone. Two days later, the head of UNMEE met with Eritrea and discussed tensions between the two sides. On November 13, the Security Council issued a non-binding statement urging both sides to resolve the border dispute. On November 29, the Secretary General sent letters to both sides indicating its desire to launch a new mediation initiative in mid-December. The effort never came to fruition and was postponed indefinitely, with many analysts suspecting that Eritrea would not accept the mediation offer.

The crisis faded for both Eritrea and Ethiopia on December 1, one day after the EEBC's imposed deadline for the two countries to resolve the border demarcation issue. The EEBC dissolved itself on November 30 and released a statement classifying the border delimitation stipulated in its 2002 ruling as the legal boundary between the two states “until such time as the boundary is finally demarcated” (quoted in Reuters, 30 November 2005). Ethiopia dismissed the deadline and refused to accept the 2002 delimitation ruling, although some sources indicated that Ethiopia was simultaneously happy with the dissolution of the EEBC since it regarded it as an obstacle. At crisis termination, Eritrea was dissatisfied with the continued presence of Ethiopian troops in the border region and UNMEE peacekeepers in the buffer zone. There were also reports of Eritrea registering unhappiness with the coordinates laid out in the 2002 ruling, despite having reiterated consistently since that it accepted the specifics of the delimitation decision. Nevertheless, on December 27, Eritrea said it was satisfied with the final maps of the border presented to it by the EEBC.

References:

Lexis-Nexis Online, Dow Jones Factiva Online, CIA World Fact Book Online, World Bank World Development Indicators Online, International Crisis Group.

Last Updated: 7/26/2010


