CRISNO 177

MALI FEDERATION

Background:

A crisis for Mali and Senegal occurred from 20 August to 22 September 1960.

Background The Mali Federation, consisting of Senegal, the Soudan (later, Mali), Upper Volta, and Dahomey, was created in June 1959 and became independent one year later. Upper Volta and Dahomey left the Federation immediately thereafter, and the two remaining countries decided to appoint a federal president with wide authority. This appointment was the cause of a bitter dispute between Senegal and the Soudan over control of the presidency. Elections never took place because the Federation ended one week before the scheduled elections. Senegal, whose political system tolerated open opposition, among them Soudan supporters, perceived itself to be in danger of being placed in a permanent minority despite the constitutional balance built into the Federation. It warned the Soudan to stop intervention into Senegal's internal affairs.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for Mali, then known as the Soudan, on 20 August 1960 when Senegal President Senghor declared its independence from the Federation. Mali's President, Modibo Keita, proclaimed a state of emergency and called upon France to intervene. The Mali response, the same day, triggered a crisis for Senegal, whose president, on 20 August, broadcast an impassioned speech accusing Mali of desiring the colonization and enslavement of the Senegalese people. A state of emergency was declared in Senegal; the army took control of the capital, Dakar, and all Mali ministers, as well as soldiers who had been stationed in Senegal, were returned to Bamako, the capital of Mali, the following day. France, which had ignored Keita's call for intervention, recognized Senegal's independence on 11 September 1960.

On 22 September the Soudan ended the Federation and proclaimed its independence, adopting the name of Mali. When the Federation ceased to exist, the crisis ended for both actors.

Discussions were held in the Security Council, but no resolution was passed. The USSR gave political support to Mali. The U.S. was not involved.

References:

AR 1960; Carter 1962; Crowder 1962; Foltz 1965; Keesing's 1972; Snyder 1965; WA 1960; Zartman 1966.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


