CRISNO 56

MARCO POLO BRIDGE

Background:

The crisis for China and Japan arising from the Marco Polo Bridge incident began on 8 July 1937 and terminated on 16 January 1938.

Background and Pre-crisis A civil-military conflict in Japan throughout the 1930s was reflected in its foreign policy behavior. The lines between official government policy and policy emanating from field commanders or other military decision makers were often blurred. Five different Japanese decision-making groups operated simultaneously on matters related to China: the emperor; the civil government; the general staff in Tokyo; the Kwantung Army headquarters in Manchuria; and the local field commanders. Since the Mukden Incident of 1931 (see Case #39), Japanese forces had strengthened their grip over Manchuria/Manchukuo and over areas in North China. Japanese garrisons, with China's agreement, had been positioned near Beijing and were carrying out maneuvers. The Marco Polo Bridge, near Lukouchiao, served two important railways. On the evening of 7 July 1937 the Japanese were attacked by Chinese troops. The Japanese commander immediately demanded entry into the neighboring town of Wanping to search for one of his soldiers allegedly captured by the Chinese forces. He was refused entry.

Summary:

The trigger for China occurred on 8 July 1937, when a reinforced Japanese army unit attacked Chinese forces. China's response, the next day, was to send additional troops to the area to assist the 29th and 37th Chinese divisions stationed there. When the Japanese authorities received reports of heavy reinforcements moving into the area on 9 July, a crisis was triggered for Japan. Heavy bombardment of Chinese forces ensued. Japan's major response, on the 11th, was to dispatch units of the Kwantung Army, as well as forces stationed in Korea, to the Honan-Hopei border region, into which hostilities had already spread.

Soon after the initial clashes at Lukouchiao in July 1937, China and Japan were fighting a full-scale war. Points of escalation in the crisis coincide with the military campaigns in the Sino/Japanese War. On 13 December 1937 Nanking fell, ending China's crisis but not the prolonged Sino/Japanese conflict; and it was only the first stage of their long war. The crisis ended for Japan on 16 January 1938, when Japan's prime minister stated that Japan would no longer recognize the Chinese government and would now attempt to set up Japanese regimes in different areas of China.

China appealed to the League of Nations on 12 September 1937. There were two Assembly resolutions, on 28 September and 6 October 1937, which condemned Japanese bombing of several cities in China. Unsuccessful attempts to find a solution were made by the following: mediation by the the U.K., at the Brussels Conference of November 1937; France, with a 14 July 1937 statement in favor of peaceful resolution; Italy, with a similar statement on 21 July; and Germany, through the Trautmann Mission, which began mediation on 28 October 1937. The U.S. was politically involved through the Roosevelt Quarantine Speech on 5 October. The USSR, which had signed a Treaty of Non-Aggression with China, supplied it with military equipment.

(The Sino/Japanese war, enlarged by the participation of the U.S., the U.K., and many other states after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 [see Case #88, in Multiregional PCs: World War II], raged on until the Japanese surrender in 1945.)

References:

See sources for Case #39.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


