CRISNO 16

GREECE-TURKEY WAR I

Background:

The first of three interrelated post-World War I crises between these historic enemies in the eastern Mediterranean lasted from 22 June until 9 July 1920. Turkey was the sole crisis actor, with Greece as the triggering entity.

Pre-crisis British forces occupied Constantinople (Istanbul) in March 1920 symbolizing the demise of the Ottoman Empire. On 18 April the main provisions of a draconian peace treaty were agreed upon by Allied leaders at the San Remo Conference. The Treaty of Sèvres was presented to the Sublime Porte (the government of the Ottoman Empire in Constantinople) on 10 June. The sultan's government was to renounce all claims to non-Turkish territory. Hijaz, which later became part of Sa'udi Arabia, was to be recognized as an independent state (see Case #29--Hijaz/Najd War, in 1924-25, in Middle East: Non-PCs). Syria and Lebanon were to become French protectorates (formally mandates under the aegis of the League of Nations in 1922), Palestine, including Trans-Jordan (and Iraq soon after), British Mandates. Smyrna was allocated to Greece for an interim period of five years prior to a plebiscite (see Case #7--Smyrna, in 1919, in Middle East: Non-PCs). The Dodecanese islands and Rhodes were given to Italy. And Thrace and the remaining Aegean islands were assigned to Greece. The Straits and Constantinople were to be internationalized, with the adjacent territory demilitarized. It was a "Carthaginian" peace.

Summary:

Concerned about the growing influence of Turkey's nationalists under Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, the U.K. provided Greece with a green light to launch an attack in Anatolia. Thus on 22 June 1920 Greek troops in Smyrna began a move to the east triggering a crisis for Turkey: it was a major operation, as the Greeks crossed four points of the Milne Line, laid down in Paris as the demarcation between Greece and Turkey. The Turks, with few and ill-equipped troops in western Anatolia, offered little resistance and, on Kemal's orders, retreated to the city of Eskisehir. The Greeks were thus able to capture Bursa. They also landed another force, which pushed south along the Sea of Marmara and recaptured Izmit. At the same time, another Greek force occupied the major center of Adrianople (Edirne) in Eastern Thrace.

The first Anatolian campaign was halted by Greece on 9 July 1920 in order to prevent a dangerous dispersal of troops in the newly acquired territory over which Greek control had not yet been consolidated. That unilateral act ended Turkey's first crisis in the Greece/Turkey War of 1920-22.

Kemal Atatürk's nationalist forces suffered a defeat; but they scored military successes elsewhere. They also enhanced their claim to the succession to the defunct Ottoman Empire, now a hollow shell of authority. And soon after they achieved an important rapprochement with the Soviet regime: in a treaty of 16 March 1921 Batum was returned to Russia, with Kars and Ardahan recognized by Moscow as part of Turkey. The latter became the focus of a crisis between them soon after World War II (see Case #106--Kars-Ardahan, in the East/ West PC).

The U.K., as noted, was the most highly involved major power providing military aid to the Greek advance. France was initially reticent but eventually provided political support to Greece as well.

There was no involvement in this crisis by the newly established League of Nations.

(The Treaty of Sèvres was imposed on the feeble Ottoman government in Constantinople on 10 August 1920. Turkish nationalists led by Kemal Atatürk vehemently opposed the draft, formed an alternative government, and secured mass support for their attempt to create a new, modern, Western-type political regime [see also Case #11--Cilician War, in 1919-21 in Middle East: Non-PCs]. They rejected the treaty. And after a marked change in the balance of forces in Anatolia in 1922 in favor of Turkey [see Case #25--Greece/Turkey War III], it was replaced by the less draconian Treaty of Lausanne on 24 July 1923. Turkey was still obliged to renounce all claims to the non-Turkish territories of the Ottoman Empire; but it recovered Eastern Thrace to the Maritza River, as well as some of the Aegean islands. The capitulations were abolished. Turkey was freed from reparations payments. The Straits were demilitarized; but if Turkey was at war enemy ships might be excluded. And a separate Greek/ Turkish agreement provided for compulsory exchange of populations.)

References:

See sources for Case #7; and Anderson 1966; Emin 1930; Kinross 1964; Langer 1972; Smith 1973; Sonvel 1975.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


