CRISNO 439

PANKISI GORGE

Background:

From 27 July 2002 to 7 October 2002, Georgia and Russia experienced a crisis along their common border.

Background

Tensions between Georgia and Russia are long-standing (see Case #407). Georgia had pushed hard for independence from the Soviet Union, and saw itself under threat from Moscow when a civil war broke out in the Georgian coastal region of Abkhazia in August 1999. Russia, in turn, has accused Georgia of allowing Chechen rebels to use the Pankisi gorge as a base for their fight against Russian forces. Russia had long sought permission to conduct military operations in the gorge, but Georgia rejected this. In February 2002, US military advisers arrived in Georgia as part of cooperative anti-terrorism efforts between the two countries. Russia expressed unhappiness over this and viewed such cooperation as an attempt to reduce its own influence in region.

Summary:

On 27 July 2002 Russia alleged that up to 200 rebels began crossing the border from Georgia and attacking Russian border guards, killing seven. This triggered a crisis for Russia. On 30 July 2002, Georgia accused Russia of conducting air raids into Georgian territory, triggering a crisis. Russia, however, denied the charges.

The following months saw an escalating war of words. Russia said that Georgia had rejected offers of Russian help to wipe out the rebels in Pankisi, while being unable to achieve any tangible results through its own military operations. Georgia retorted by accusing Russia of violating its territorial sovereignty. On 2 August, Georgia accused Russian troops of crossing into the disputed Kodori gorge in Eastern Georgia with troops from the breakaway regions of Abkhazia, a charge denied by both Russia and Abkhazia. Russia also accused Georgia of going back on a 1999 agreement that gave permission to Russian troops to pass through Georgia to reinforce their common border in Chechnya.

In August 2002, Georgia sent over 1000 troops into the region to flush out the insurgents. However, this did not pacify the Russians. In September 2002, the Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov accused Georgia of aiding and abetting international terrorism and warned that Russia was ready to strike at Georgia in self-defense. In the same month, Russian President Vladimir Putin alarmed both Georgia and the U.S. by announcing that he had told his armed forces to draw up their own plans to deal with the rebels. The United States declared that it was strongly against any Russian military intervention in Georgia. It was widely reported that Russia’s threat to go into Pankisi was partially a warning to the U.S. to not invade Iraq, where tensions were mounting.

By October, tensions began to de-escalate. During this month, Russian and Georgian officials met during a Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) conference. On 4 October 2002, Georgia extradited several suspected Chechen rebels who had been captured in the Pankisi Gorge in august. On 7 October 2002, Russia and Georgia agreed to set up joint patrols on their common border. This announcement came after Russian President Putin met his Georgian counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze, in Moldova, where both attended a summit of former Soviet countries. This action terminated the crisis, and was followed by a formally signed agreement on 17 October 2002. There was no mediation provided by CIS.

References:

"Development in Abkhazia and South Ossetia," Keesing's Record of World Events, March 2002; "Deployment of US forces,' Keesing's Record of World Events, March 2002; "Continuation of tensions over Abkhazia," Keesing's Record of World Events, April 2002; "Deterioration in relations with Russia," Keesing's Record of World Events, August 2002; "Improvement in relations with Russia," Keesing's Record of World Events, October 2002; Lexis Nexis Online (Agence France Presse).

Last Updated: 1/18/2005


