CRISNO 290

CHAD-LIBYA III

Background:

France, Libya, and Chad were the crisis actors in the third eruption during the protracted Chad/Libya conflict from 15 April to 29 August 1978.

Pre-crisis The Benghazi Accords of 27 March 1978 provided a brief respite in the ongoing struggle between President Malloum's regime and the Libya-backed rebels led by Goukouni Oueddei for control over the territory and government of Chad. The cease-fire, authorized by the Benghazi Accords to take effect on 10 April, broke down almost at once.

Summary:

On 15 April FROLINAT forces, led by Goukouni Oueddei, seized Salal and advanced south to within 100 miles of Chad's capital, N'Djamena. This created a crisis for France by threatening its continued influence in equatorial Africa generally and, in particular, its secure access to the uranium resources of neighboring Niger, vital for France's force de frappe. France, which, since 1960, had assumed a proprietary right to protect former French colonies--and French interests--in Africa against external threats, responded on the 26th to an appeal by Malloum with an airlift of 1,700 troops, a heavy bombardment of rebel convoys, and the creation of a defense perimeter around the capital, thereby preventing the fall of Malloum's regime.

French intervention in April-May 1978 and its success in halting Goukouni's advance was perceived by Libya in mid-May as a serious threat to its hegemony in Chad. Qaddhafi responded on 22 June with an invasion by 800 Libyan troops, who overran several provinces in northern and central Chad. Libya's escalation of hostilities, in turn, created a crisis for Chad. President Malloum responded on 20 July with an appeal to the OAU to denounce Libya's intervention and to press for the withdrawal of Libya's forces from Chad's territory.

While an OAU commission was investigating Chad's charges, France and Libya concluded a secret agreement in late July 1978 providing for a de facto partition of Chad at the 16th Parallel into two spheres of influence. The formation of a virtual condominium over Chad ended the crisis for these two actors. Chad's crisis ended on 29 August, when an agreement was reached in Khartoum creating a National Unity Government, with Habré as Prime Minister and Malloum continuing as President and their military forces formally integrated.

The UN, the U.S., and the USSR remained aloof from this crisis.

References:

See sources for Cases #243 and #288, and Lellouche and Moisi 1979.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


