CRISNO 40

SHANGHAI

Background:

A Sino/Japanese crisis over Shanghai occurred from 24 January to 5 May 1932.

Pre-crisis At the beginning of the 1930s relations between foreigners and local Chinese authorities were fairly amicable in the "treaty port" of Shanghai. When news of the Japanese takeover in Manchuria reached Shanghai, anti-Japanese sentiment increased markedly. The Chinese, in retaliation, had staged a boycott of Japanese goods, and some Japanese residents in Shanghai were molested. During the first three weeks of January 1932 a number of violent incidents took place.

On 18 January some Japanese residents of Shanghai were attacked by Chinese. Five Japanese demands were presented to the Chinese mayor of Greater Shanghai, who claimed he was ready to comply with three of these, dealing directly with the incident, but not with the two involving the anti-Japanese movement. The commander of the Japanese fleet in Chinese waters threatened to take direct action; Japanese naval reinforcements were ordered to Shanghai. Twenty thousand Japanese troops arrived on 24 January 1932.

Summary:

A crisis for China was triggered on 24 January, when the Japanese notified Mayor Wu T'ieh-ch'eng that, if no reply was forthcoming within a reasonable time or if the reply was unsatisfactory, the Japanese government reserved the right to take action by 28 January. The Municipal Council of the International Settlement in Shanghai held a meeting on the 28th and declared a state of emergency. Despite the complete acceptance of all Japanese demands on the 28th, military operations began. This was met with Chinese armed resistance.

A crisis for Japan occurred on 29 January, when Admiral Shiuzawa concluded that the Japanese forces were inadequate to deal with the developing situation. An aerial bombardment of densely populated sections of the city was ordered, and additional troops were requested from Tokyo. This was approved by a cabinet decision on 4 February. Japan's major response, on 18 February, was an ultimatum requiring the Chinese to withdraw all their troops from Shanghai within two days. The Chinese refused. A Japanese attack followed.

Conditions for a cease-fire were initiated by the U.K. and were agreed to by the adversaries on 28 February, but fighting continued until 3 March, when the Chinese withdrew beyond the 20-kilometer limit upon which the Japanese had insisted.

At China's request, a special session of the League Assembly was held on 3 March to consider the Shanghai incident. On the 11th, a resolution was passed that reaffirmed the doctrine of nonrecognition of situations achieved in violation of treaty obligations. The U.S., too, condemned Japan.

It was largely through British mediation that an agreement between China and Japan was negotiated and an armistice signed on 5 May 1932, establishing a demilitarized zone around Shanghai and terminating the economic boycott. This ended the Shanghai crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #39.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


