CRISNO 418

OPERATION GRAPES OF WRATH

Background:

Israel and Lebanon experienced another violent crisis on both sides of their border from 9 to 27 April 1996.

Background and Pre-Crisis

From the beginning of 1996 Hizbullah increased its attacks against Israel's forces in its South Lebanon "Security Zone." US pressure led to Syria's criticism of Hizbullah attacks against Israeli civilians in the settlements near the northern border. Hizbullah then confined its operations to Israel's Defense Force (IDF), as agreed in July 1993, at the end of the "Operation Accountability" crisis (see Case #409). The IDF responded with retaliation raids into South Lebanon. The freezing of the Israel-Syria peace process at the beginning of 1996 and the anticipated elections in Israel later that year encouraged Iran, Syria and Hizbullah to escalate attacks against Israel (executed by Hizbullah, backed by Iran and Syria), in order to gain political leverage.

On 8 April 1996 Hizbullah announced that a Lebanese child was killed and three other persons were wounded in a bomb explosion in South Lebanon, for which the IDF and the South Lebanese Army (SLA) were blamed.

Summary:

A crisis for Israel was triggered on 9 April by a major Hizbullah attack against Kiryat Shmona in Israel's northern Galilee, in which 36 Israeli civilians were wounded by 30 "Katyusha" rockets. In the exchange of fire between the IDF and Hizbullah on the following day, four Israeli soldiers were killed. Israel's major response was an air attack against Hizbullah bases in South Lebanon and targets in Beirut on 11 April.

This retaliation, which catalyzed the flight of tens of thousands Lebanese from the south towards Beirut, triggered a crisis for Lebanon. In spite of Israel's declarations that it had no intention to confront Syrian forces or the Lebanese Army, two separate incidents occurred, in which one Lebanese soldier was killed and two were wounded. Israel demanded that Lebanon enforce its sovereignty and prevent Hizbullah attacks against Israel from Lebanon's territory. On 13 April one Syrian officer was killed following anti-aircraft firing by Syrian forces against Israeli planes.

Lebanon's major response was to call for an urgent UN Security Council meeting on 13 April, and a consultation in Damascus between Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik El-Hariri and President Asad of Syria. While Hizbullah continued its attacks against Israeli settlements in the Galilee and Israel continued its retaliation on targets in Lebanon, El-Hariri also sought support in visits to Cairo and Paris.

The European Community (EC) and French President Chirac expressed "deep concern" over the increased tension in Lebanon and the Galilee. The Arab League condemned Israel's air attacks on Lebanon and called on the international community to force Israel to respect Lebanon's sovereignty.

On 14 April, after a meeting between Lebanon's Prime Minister and Foreign Minister with President Asad, Lebanon's Foreign Minister announced that his government was willing to return to the tacit understandings at the end of the "Operation Accountability" crisis in 1993 (see Case #409) and for the first time, was also ready to guarantee that no Hizbullah attacks on Israel would be launched from Lebanon's territory.

The US attempted to mediate a cease-fire by proposing a tacit understanding, along with a formal agreement to terminate the crisis. The latter was to include a cessation of Hizbullah "Katyusha" attacks from South Lebanon, along with Israel's pledge not to harm any Lebanese within Lebanon. The tacit understanding was to include a mutual Hizbullah-Israel pledge of comprehensive calm in South Lebanon. On 16 April the UN Security Council called on the parties to the crisis to end the violence. Russia called upon Israel to end its attacks on Lebanon, claiming that Israel's retaliation was out of proportion; and the UK also called on Israel to restrain its response to Hizbullah attacks. The French Foreign Minister, Herve De-Share, traveled to the Middle East and proposed a secret plan for a cease-fire. While Israel accepted the US proposal, Syria and Lebanon preferred the French plan, and were ready to return to the understandings of 1993.

On 18 April more than a hundred Lebanese, who fled their homes in South Lebanon to a Hizbullah camp next to a UN post in the village of Qa'ana were killed by an Israeli attack. That escalated the crisis, leading to the condemnation of Israel in the Arab world and in Europe. On the 21st, the foreign ministers of France, Russia, Italy and Iran, and the Hizbullah leader held talks in Syria regarding the violence in Lebanon. France expressed its willingness to send troops as part of a multinational force, to replace Israeli forces in South Lebanon. Israel rejected the proposal.

Hizbullah continued to launch attacks against Israel during IDF operations in Lebanon. The US decided to increase arms shipment to the Government of Lebanon in order to strength Lebanon's army and its ability to restrain Hizbullah.

The UN called for restraint on 18 April in Security Council Resolution 1052, to little effect. On 27 April 1996 the parties accepted a cease-fire: they agreed to cease attacks on civilians in Israel and Lebanon. The same day, the parties accepted a cease-fire: they agreed to cease attacks on civilians in Israel and Lebanon. They also agreed to establish a follow-up committee, comprised of the US, Israel, Lebanon, Syria and France, to act as a mediation forum and deal with complaints of any cease-fire violations. The 1996 "understandings" agreement was presented as a US document, designed to mediate between Israel and Lebanon, in consultation with Syria. Syria gave the US an oral commitment to restrain Hizbullah. The cease-fire of 27 April 1996 terminated the crisis for both Israel and Lebanon.

References:

Ha'arets Keesing's Record of World Events

Last Updated: 3/17/2008


