CRISNO 330

GULF OF SYRTE I

Background:

Libya experienced two crises with the United States over the Gulf of Syrte (Sidra) in the 1980s. The first lasted from 12 August to 1 September 1981.

Background and Pre-crisis Relations between Libya and the U.S. were characterized by undisguised hostility since Colonel Muammar Qaddhafi overthrew the Libyan monarchy and seized power in 1969. His anti-U.S. policy and pronouncements, military alignment with the Soviet Union, and frequent interventions in the domestic affairs of neighbors and more distant African states generated a U.S. image of Libya as "public enemy no. 1" in Africa.

Libya had persistently claimed the Gulf of Syrte (Sidra) as an "internal sea"; and in 1973 it extended the 12-mile limit of its claimed territorial waters north of the Gulf into the contiguous Mediterranean Sea. The U.S., by contrast, adhered to international convention, which viewed the Gulf as part of international waters, that is, the global commons. Thus, when U.S. reconnaissance flights over the central Mediterranean-Gulf of Syrte area began in 1972, tension increased. Qaddhafi warned the U.S. of a possible military confrontation if it continued to intrude into Libya's maritime space and airspace. Libya's active intervention in Chad throughout 1981 (see Case #321--Chad/Libya V, in Chad/Libya PC) further exacerbated the difficulties in its relationship with the U.S. This deterioration was accentuated by the closure of Libya's embassy in Washington on 6 May 1981. The ongoing dispute over Libya's territorial waters erupted a few months later.

Summary:

A crisis for Libya was triggered by a U.S. announcement on 12 August 1981 that its Sixth Fleet would hold maneuvers in the Mediterranean. Libya responded with a full military alert the same day. And on the 18th it accused the U.S. of violating Libya's territorial waters by holding naval exercises within the Gulf of Syrte. The next day two U.S. F-14s shot down two Libyan SU-22 fighters 60 miles from Libya's coast, but within the Gulf of Syrte--the only act of violence in this crisis. The U.S. also warned Libya against retaliation, threatening to use military force if Libya attacked U.S. aircraft or ships involved in the Sixth Fleet exercise.

On the 20th Qaddhafi declared that Libya was ready to defend its territorial waters even if it led to war with the U.S. or a World War III. President Reagan responded the same day that he had deliberately ordered the maneuvers in order to challenge Libya's claim to the disputed waters.

The crisis ended abruptly on 1 September when Libya's ruler threatened to attack U.S. nuclear bases in the Mediterranean and cause "an international catastrophe" if the U.S. once more intruded into Libya's Gulf of Syrte.

The USSR offered only verbal support to its client: Tass accused the U.S. of "terrorism." Acting through the Arab League and the Gulf Cooperation Council, all Arab states except Egypt and the Sudan criticized U.S. behavior. Both protagonists informed the UN Security Council of this incident; but there was no UN--or OAU--involvement.

(In effect, the 1981 crisis was a prelude to a more severe confrontation between the U.S. and Libya over the Gulf of Syrte, including serious clashes, in 1986 [see Case #363].)

References:

ACR 1981-82; AR 1981; ARB 1981; Keesing's 1981; MECS 1981-82.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


