CRISNO 218

RHODESIA'S UDI

Background:

A proclamation of a state of emergency by the white minority regime in Southern Rhodesia precipitated a crisis for Zambia from 5 November 1965 to 27 April 1966.

Pre-crisis With the dissolution of the Federation on 1 January 1964, competing pressures mounted within Rhodesia. There was growing evidence in 1964 and 1965 that the white regime in Southern Rhodesia planned to issue a Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI). At the same time, the African National Council and its key members pressed for black majority rule.

In that atmosphere of increasing conflict, 18 Commonwealth heads of government, meeting in July 1964, unanimously pledged not to recognize a unilateral declaration of independence by Rhodesia. Tension increased when many African leaders were detained in late August. On 27 October British Prime Minister Wilson publicly warned against UDI and threatened sanctions.

In May 1965 Ian Smith's Rhodesian Front won an overwhelming victory in white-only elections. In early October Prime Minister Smith of Rhodesia, in London, demanded immediate independence.

Zambia, which itself had become independent on 24 October 1964, viewed the possible establishment of a hostile white-ruled state, independent of the U.K., as a threat to its existence: being landlocked, Zambia was totally dependent on Rhodesia for rail routes to ports, sources of coal and oil, and power from the jointly owned hydroelectric stations at the Kariba Dam on the Rhodesia-Zambia border.

Summary:

The trigger to Zambia's gravest foreign policy crisis was Rhodesia's proclamation of a state of emergency on 5 November 1965, granting the white regime in Salisbury sweeping powers. Zambia correctly perceived this to be a prelude to Rhodesia's declaration of independence. The next day, Zambia issued a final warning to Rhodesia of the consequences of such an act. Rhodesian troops were moved to the Zambian border on 9 November. And on the 11th independence was declared.

Zambia's response, the next day, combined the dispatch of troops to the Zambezi River, a promulgation of emergency regulations, and limited economic sanctions against Rhodesia: Rhodesia's currency and money orders would not be negotiable in Zambia as of 13 November. And on the 17th Zambia's President Kaunda began sustained pressure on the U.K. for an immediate military response or, at least, British guarantees for Zambia's supply of Kariba power. Zambia also pressed for an emergency meeting of the UN Security Council. Despite U.K. objections to intervention by the global organization, the Council did pass several resolutions--on 12 October and 5, 12, and 20 November. The most important, on 12 November, condemned UDI, urged nonrecognition by member-states, and appealed to them to refrain from rendering any assistance to Rhodesia.

On 20 November, at an OAU meeting in Dar es Salaam, representatives from Egypt, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Zambia debated the setting up of a multinational African army; but as a result of Zambia's opposition, no action was taken. After initial British refusal to exert military pressure on Rhodesia, the U.K. finally offered to send ground troops to Zambia for protection against invasion. Zambia, which viewed this suggestion as designed to prevent, rather than prepare for, military action against Rhodesia, refused. On 23 November discussions began on a proposal to station Royal Air Force (RAF) units at Zambia's three international airfields, in order to deter a Rhodesian air attack. The following day, Zambian troops were withdrawn from the border, and the U.K. Prime Minister, Harold Wilson, announced that Britain and Zambia had agreed on the provision of RAF planes and personnel for Zambia's air defense. By the time the Extraordinary Meeting of the OAU Council of Ministers convened, on 3 December, to consider the severance of diplomatic relations with the U.K. by several states, the RAF was being installed at Zambia's airfields. On the 28th Zambian ministerial missions visited Washington and Moscow with a view to securing superpower support for a more vigorous response to UDI and increased assistance to Zambia. A UN oil embargo on Rhodesia (and therefore, Zambia) led to the mounting of an Anglo-American-Canadian oil airlift to Zambia in early January 1966. The Commonwealth, too, acted in support of Zambia, at its Lagos summit meeting in January 1966: it established a committee to monitor the effect of sanctions; and it urged members to provide aid to Zambia in a Commonwealth-coordinated program.

The success of the Berlin-style (1948-49) airlift to Zambia, and the development of alternative surface supply routes, encouraged Wilson to believe that UDI could end "within weeks, not months," providing that Zambia imposed complete sanctions and broke entirely with Rhodesia. Wilson promised massive external support and a tougher British policy on Rhodesia, but these promises were adjusted during February and March 1966. And, finally, London reneged altogether on 27 April, following the British general elections, which returned a commanding majority for Labour. On that day the crisis ended for Zambia: although it felt betrayed by Wilson's announcement of the initiation of "talks about talks" with Rhodesia's Prime Minister Smith, Zambia's existence was no longer in peril.

(The completion of a pipeline from Dar es Salaam on the Indian Ocean, almost three years later, reduced Zambia's dependence on Rhodesia for oil, coal, and electricity.)

References:

AR 1965, 1966; ARB 1965, 1966; Anglin 1980, 1994; Good 1973; Hall 1973; Sklar 1974; Wilson 1971.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


