CRISNO 277

SHABA I

Background:

An invasion of Zaire by Katangan exiles based in Angola brought about a crisis for Zaire and Angola from 8 March to 26 May 1977.

Background Rebel forces in the Congo (later, Zaire) fled across the border to Angola and Zambia after Colonel Mobutu instigated a successful coup in Zaire in November 1965 (see Case #211--Congo II, in 1964, in Africa: Non-PCs). In Angola, members of the Congolese National Liberation Front (FLNC) were trained and aided by personnel and equipment from the Soviet Union and Cuba. During 1966 and 1967 armed rebels in Angola received assistance from Zaire, while Portugal supported separatist sentiments in Angola. Border incidents intensified as guerrilla movements became stronger. These conflicts continued throughout the Angolan civil war, with Zaire complaining to the UN Security Council on several occasions of rebel incursions from Angolan territory into its southern province of Shaba.

Summary:

On 8 March 1977 Katangan exiles residing in Angola invaded Shaba, triggering a crisis for Zaire. A crisis for Angola was triggered the same day when President Mobutu accused Angola, together with Cuba and the USSR, of being involved in an attempt to overthrow his regime. Angola feared an attack on its territory from Zaire and an internationalization of the conflict. Zaire responded with force on the day of the attack but, aware of its inability to repel the invaders alone, sent an appeal for help to African states, Belgium, and the United States. Morocco dispatched 1,500 troops in a French-supplied airlift. Pilots and mechanics were sent from Egypt. The U.S. supplied nonlethal aid. Angola responded on 11 March with a statement by the Defense Ministry disclaiming any responsibility for the invasion. On that day the FLNC announced in Paris that the goal of the invasion was to overthrow Mobutu's regime.

With the help of Moroccan troops and French advisors the Zairian army was able to stop the advance of the Katangan exiles and, subsequently, to reoccupy all the towns and villages. The Moroccans completed their mission on 22 May and withdrew, as did the Egyptians on the 25th. When the foreign troops left Zaire, Angola's fear of internationalization of the conflict subsided, and its crisis terminated on 25 May. The following day Zairian troops recaptured the last town held by the secessionist rebels in Shaba, ending Zaire's crisis and the Shaba crisis as a whole.

Nigeria provided a strong mediation role during the crisis, through the efforts of Foreign Minister Brigadier Joseph Garba. Prior to the onset of crisis, Garba met with Mobuto in Kinshasha on 3 March in a first attempt to help resolve the differences between Angola and Zaire. Throughout the crisis Garba provided good offices, actively pursued the normalization of relations, and urged both sides to control the insurgents taking refuge in their own borders. Although it seemed that a meeting between Garba and Mobutu on 26 April might lead to an agreement that would involve an inter-African observer group, the mediation ultimately failed to achieve a sustainable agreement between the two countries. The mediation efforts did not involve direct communication with the FLNC.

The UN was not involved in this crisis.

References:

ACR 1977; ARec 1977; ARB 1977; Bender 1978; Garthoff 1985; Hul 1977; Lellouche and Moisi 1979; LeoGrande 1980; Mangold 1979; Moose 1985; Schatzberg 1989; Vance 1983; Zartman 1989.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


