CRISNO 97

LEYTE CAMPAIGN

Background:

The U.S. invasion of Leyte in the Philippines created another IWC for Japan from 20 October to 26 December 1944.

Pre-crisis The Japanese anticipated an early U.S. attempt to retake the Philippines; and in the summer of 1944 they began developing defense plans that included air and navy support. By September 1944 Japan had suffered serious reverses on both military and diplomatic fronts.

Summary:

On 20 October 1944 the advance units of the largest amphibious operation of the Pacific war (four U.S. divisions, ultimately involving a quarter of a million troops) landed on the island of Leyte. This began the campaign for the reconquest of the Philippines, triggering a crisis for Japan: Tokyo perceived a strategic threat to the home islands if the Philippines fell to the Americans. In the last major naval battle of World War II, the Japanese navy suffered a loss of 40 ships sunk, 46 ships damaged, and 405 planes destroyed. On land the scope of the campaign is evident in the casualties on Leyte: more than 15,000 Americans and more than 50,000 Japanese. The Philippines had been earmarked by Japan as the first in a series of decisive battles that was slated to end in Japan's overwhelming triumph. When the army agreed to concentrate its forces in a bold effort to rout the Americans, Prime Minister Koiso and the Japanese people were led to believe that a Japanese victory in Leyte would turn the tide of the war. Japan's response, on 24 October, was to withdraw its fleet from Philippine waters once they had failed to halt the Leyte invasion.

After the defeat Japan no longer had a fleet or air force that could mount an offensive. Japan was losing planes and pilots faster than they could be replaced. On 24 November the first large-scale B-29 raid on Japan began. This destroyed major Japanese aircraft factories. On 26 December the U.S. announced the successful completion of the Leyte campaign, granting control of the Pacific to the Allies, and ending Japan's IWC in total defeat.

References:

See sources for Case #88.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


