CRISNO 238

BLACK SEPTEMBER

Background:

This Middle East crisis took place from 15 to 29 September 1970. There were four crisis actors: Syria, the United States, Israel, and Jordan.

Background and Pre-crisis Palestinian guerrilla forces, encamped in Jordan, were creating serious internal problems for King Hussein throughout 1970. In June major fighting occurred in Amman between the PLO and the Jordan Legion. The king was forced to agree to full freedom of movement for the guerrillas. During the summer of 1970 there were more sporadic clashes. On 1 September Palestinian guerrillas sought to assassinate King Hussein for a second time in a period of three months. Fighting broke out immediately between Palestinians and King Hussein's forces in Jordan. After an unsuccessful attempt to hijack an Israeli plane on 4 September, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) hijacked two civilian aircraft on the 6th, belonging to Switzerland and the U.S., and forced them to land on a desert strip outside Amman. Three days later a British (BOAC) plane was rerouted to join the other two. The PFLP hijackings were attempts to force the release of Palestinian prisoners held in Switzerland and the U.K.

Summary:

A crisis for Syria and the U.S. was triggered on 15 September 1970 by King Hussein's announcement of a drastic change in his cabinet, which would now include military personnel. His intention to confront the PLO challenge seemed clear. The U.S. feared the loss of an ally if Hussein were overthrown, and Syria perceived a decline in its influence in the region if the Palestinians were defeated. Syria responded on 19 September by invading Jordan, triggering a crisis for Jordan and Israel. Jordan's response was immediate; it engaged in battle with the Syrian forces the same day and appealed to the U.S. for aid. Israel, at a cabinet meeting on 20 September, decided upon military action, if necessary, in order to prevent a Palestinian victory in Jordan, which was perceived as a grave threat to Israel's influence and security. The United States response was a decision on 21 September to provide umbrella support to Israel if the USSR and Egypt became involved; and National Security Advisor Kissinger, together with Israel's Ambassador to the U.S. (and former Chief of Staff), Rabin, worked out a possible joint plan of military action. This plan was approved by President Nixon. For Syria and the U.S., the crisis escalated with the entry of the Jordanian air force against the Palestinians on the 22nd. All Syrian tanks were withdrawn from Jordanian territory that day. As a result the Palestinian guerrillas were forced to leave Jordan; and they subsequently built strongholds in southern Lebanon.

The League of Arab States met in Cairo at Nasir's initiative, and a Jordan/Syria cease-fire agreement was signed on 27 September. The mediation efforts at the Cairo summit were effective in leading to crisis abatement because they were able to bring about a more compromising Jordanian stance and avoided pushing King Hussein to a point in which he would align with the U.S. and Israel. While Hussein's victory was acknowledged, the agreement was a face-saving gesture for Syria because its forces had already been withdrawn, following a U.S.-backed Israeli threat to intervene militarily in support of Jordan. A declaration was issued supporting the rights of the Palestinians. The cease-fire was implemented on the 29th, which marked the termination date for all the crisis actors.

During the course of the crisis the U.S. placed airborne divisions in Germany and the U.S. on semi-alert status. Ships of the Sixth Fleet were reported to be heading toward Lebanese shores, and the aircraft carrier Saratoga was ordered to the eastern Mediterranean. USSR involvement in the crisis consisted of political statements calling for a cease-fire and warning against outside intervention while pressuring Syria to pull out of Jordan. The Soviets also monitored U.S. naval operations off the Syrian coast.

The UN was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Bar-Siman-Tov 1983; Brandon 1972; Cooley 1973; Dowty 1984; Garfinkle 1985; Isaacson 1992; Kalb and Kalb 1974; Kerr 1970; Kissinger 1979; MEJ Chronology 1970; MER 1969-70; Nixon 1978; O'Neill 1978; Quandt et al. 1973; Quandt 1977, 1978, 1993; Rabin 1979; Stein 1987.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


