CRISNO 212

YEMEN WAR III

Background:

This phase of the long war in Yemen, considered as crises for Egypt, Yemen, and Sa'udi Arabia, lasted from 3 December 1964 to 25 August 1965.

Pre-crisis The peace talks, which were held in Sudan, led to a cease-fire on 8 November 1964, as well as an agreement to set up a National Congress to deal with the fundamental differences between the Republicans and the Royalists. By 20 November an announcement was made postponing the Congress; and on 13 December it was postponed indefinitely. The Royalist Foreign Minister, Ahmed al-Shami, made it clear that, if Royalist demands were not accepted, they would renew the fighting. The political confusion in Yemen was further intensified in December by an open split among the Republicans.

Summary:

On 3 December 1964 a Royalist offensive, backed by Sa'udi Arabia, was launched. Eventually they occupied most of the territory captured by the Republicans. This triggered a crisis for Egypt and Yemen. Their major response, on 10 January 1965, was the resumption of fighting. There were heavy casualties on both sides. The information minister of the Royalist government alleged on 23 January that Egyptian aircraft had dropped gas bombs, the crisis trigger for Sa'udi Arabia.

A Royalist request to the International Red Cross to investigate the charges was refused on the grounds that the use of gas was not forbidden by any International Red Cross convention. Fighting continued in the southeastern region, as well as in northern Yemen. Egyptian attempts in March and May to cut the Royalists' supply routes from Sa'udi Arabia failed. A strong Royalist offensive near Haral (Sa'udi frontier) on 7 June was repulsed. Yemen's Republican government lodged a complaint with the UN on 26 July, accusing Sa'udi Arabia of aiding the Royalists and claiming that, without Sa'udi support, the Royalists would have been defeated long before. Reports of large-scale Sa'udi and Iranian support were frequent from February 1965 onward.

Negotiations for a peace settlement, mediated in part by King Hussein of Jordan, the Crown Prince of Kuwait, and President Ben Bella of Algeria, began in May 1965. Although both crisis actors viewed the mediation as irrelevant, there is evidence that the mediation did have an important effect on crisis abatement. After prolonged consultation in Cairo among the YAR leaders, President Sallal announced on 18 July a compromise agreement between the dissident Republicans and reaffirmed the proposals of the Khamner Conference. On 22 July President Nasir said that Egypt had reopened negotiations with Sa'udi Arabia concerning Egyptian troop withdrawal.

An agreement signed by President Nasir and King Faisal in Jiddah on 24 August provided for the following: an immediate cease-fire; the ending of Sa'udi aid to the Royalists; the withdrawal of Egyptian forces; the establishment of a provisional Yemen government; and the holding of a plebiscite in November 1966. The next day the Royalists stopped fighting; and the Egyptian forces began to withdraw from Yemen. This marked the end of the crisis--but not yet of the war or the protracted conflict.

The USSR continued to provide military aid to Egypt and the YAR. The UN and the U.S. were marginally involved in this crisis.

References:

See sources for Case #195.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


