CRISNO 58

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC-HAITI I

Background:

A crisis for Haiti began on 5 October 1937 and terminated on 31 January 1938.

Background The Haitian economy had been seriously affected by the Great Depression in the United States, and large numbers of Haitian cane cutters migrated to the neighboring Dominican Republic and to Cuba. During 1936 and 1937 a plot by Trujillo, the ruler of the Dominican Republic, to undermine the government of Haiti was uncovered. Both countries had signed the General Convention of Inter-American Conciliation in 1929. When most of the sugar mills in Trujillo's Dominican Republic and Batista's Cuba closed down, the Haitians sought work in other fields. On 2 October 1937 Trujillo declared that Haitian trespassers would no longer be tolerated, while indicating that the slaughter of Haitians that began the day before at Banica, with 300 victims, would continue. That evening Trujillo ordered a new massacre of Haitian nationals in the vicinity of the Dominican Republic/Haiti border, which continued until 4 October.

Summary:

Haiti's President Vincent received word of the massacres on 5 October 1937. On the l0th a Note was delivered to the Dominican Republic expressing his doubts that the government of the Dominican Republic could have associated itself with these events and requesting investigation and compensation. An official joint declaration by the two countries in Washington on 23 October stated that relations between them had not been impaired. Nevertheless, as domestic unrest grew and both began concentrating troops at the border, Haitian decision makers perceived a threat of a Dominican Republic invasion.

On 12 November Haiti's major response was to request U.S., Mexican, and Cuban mediation. The Dominican Republic at first refused to cooperate with the commission set up by the three mediating countries, claiming that the magnitude of the dispute did not warrant mediation. On 18 December, four days after Vincent invoked the 1928 Pact and the use of a mediating commission, Trujillo consented to mediation. Negotiations were carried on directly, as well as through meetings in Washington, diplomatic channels, and the good offices of the Pope. Trujillo agreed to the draft settlement with minor revisions; and it was accepted and signed by both countries on 31 January 1938, ending their crisis.

The Haiti government's request to invoke the Inter-American Convention for Conciliation was within the framework of the Pan American Union. The mediation undertaken by the regional organization's commission consisting of representatives from Argentina, Guatemala, and Peru was very effective in abating the crisis and contributed to more rapid termination. The League of Nations was not involved in this crisis.

References:

Crassweller 1966; Diedrich and Burt 1969; Hicks 1968; Mecham 1961.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


