CRISNO 5

TESCHEN

Background:

Czechoslovakia and Poland were enmeshed in a crisis over Teschen, also known as Austrian Silesia, from 15 January 1919 to 28 July 1920.

BACKGROUND The duchy of Teschen is a small territorial enclave between Poland and Czechoslovakia. Both newly independent states laid claim to it after World War I. Rich in coal and heavy industry, Teschen also possessed a railroad leading to Slovakia. Inhabited by a mixture of Czechs, Poles, and Germans, the duchy offered an ethnic basis for both claims.

PRE-CRISIS Polish and Czechoslovak national councils had been established in the disputed territory in October 1918. Warsaw had strengthened its influence by sending troops to the area. In November the two national councils agreed on their territorial jurisdiction, an agreement regarded as provisional by the Teschen Czechs. The Czechoslovak claim was supported by the U.K. and, especially, France. The U.S. and Italy backed Poland.

Summary:

In an attempt to present Prague with a fait accompli Warsaw announced on 15 January 1919 that elections would be held in Teschen later in the month for representatives to the Polish National Assembly. This triggered a crisis for Czechoslovakia, which feared that the election results would be interpreted by Warsaw as a popular wish to be part of Poland. Prague responded on 23 January, just three days before the elections, by dispatching troops to the district of Kewin, which was then administered by the Polish national council. That move triggered a crisis for Poland. A major battle was prevented only by the intervention of British and French officers.

Acting under the aegis of the victorious powers' Supreme Council (the Big Ten at the Paris Peace Conference), the Conference of Ambassadors produced a preliminary demarcation line in the duchy: Poland was to receive two-thirds of the territory including the principal town of Teschen, with the mining district, the railway station, and part of the railway allocated to Czechoslovakia. Warsaw accepted, but Prague refused. Serious clashes erupted in May 1919. The Supreme Council decided in favor of a plebiscite in September, but it was aborted. Clashes occurred again in March and May 1920. Finally, on 28 July, the Conference of Ambassadors secured the parties' agreement to a division of the disputed territory as set out above. This terminated the crisis over Teschen; but neither party was satisfied with the compromise then or later.

Although the League of Nations Council first met six months before the end of the Teschen crisis, the new global organization was not involved.

References:

Carr 1945; Perman 1962.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


