CRISNO 81

BATTLE OF BRITAIN

Background:

The battle, an intrawar crisis for the U.K., took place from 10 July to 15 September 1940.

Background and Pre-crisis A Naval Agreement between the U.K. and Germany in 1935 and British concessions at Munich in 1938 (see Case #64, in Czech./Germany PC) led Hitler to expect U.K. cooperation for a quiet Western flank which would enable him to carry out a massive attack on the USSR. After Britain's declaration of war and Churchill's announcement, following the fall of France (see Case #78), that Britain would continue to fight alone, Hitler began to formulate a plan to invade the U.K. He envisioned a long and costly campaign requiring at the outset the transport of around 30-40 divisions by sea across the Channel. Since Germany lacked sufficient naval power to compete with Britain, the prerequisite to a successful crossing was absolute air superiority. As German ships began to collect along the coast of France, the Luftwaffe initiated its efforts to gain control of the air. After the fall of France and the Dunkirk evacuation, the U.K. appealed to the U.S. for military supplies. By the end of June U.S. guns and ammunition had reached British shores. In early July the Germans occupied islands in the English Channel.

Summary:

On 10 July 1940 the Luftwaffe began "Operation Eagle" by attacking towns near the coast of Britain. The U.K.'s response to the crisis was immediate, through RAF counterattacks. The German assault continued during July and August with fierce RAF opposition. On 8 August German planes bombed airfields and vital industries. On the 15th 1,000 German planes ranged as far north as Scotland. The British retaliated with raids on Berlin, Dusseldorf, Essen, and other German cities. On 3 September a defense agreement was concluded between the U.K. and the U.S. The 7th marked the highest British casualty count. And on 11 September the U.K. began continuous bombing of continental ports to frustrate German invasion preparations, including the assembling of ships for the future crossing of the English Channel.

As time went on it became clear that the Luftwaffe would not be able to gain complete air superiority. And the original target date for the German invasion ("Operation Sea Lion") was postponed several times. The Luftwaffe's strategy had been to draw the U.K.'s Fighter Command into a major engagement, first over the English Channel and then, on 15 September 1940, in a mass raid on London in an effort to deliver a final assault. The British resisted, preserved the Fighter Command by meeting the German attacks with a minimum of force, and pushed the Luftwaffe back across the Channel. This victory of 15 September 1940, proving that the RAF was still master of the skies over Britain, marked the termination of Britain's crisis, though night bombing of London and other British cities continued far into the winter.

Once the conditions for a successful German landing had been denied, Germany canceled the invasion plans. Hitler decided to proceed with an attack in the east without the subjugation of Britain. Italy dispatched an air force division--after the crisis proper had ended.

References:

Baldwin 1966; Bryant 1957; Bullock 1962; Calvocoressi and Wint 1972; Churchill 1949; Schuman 1941; Shirer 1964; Weinberg 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


