CRISNO 224

PUEBLO

Background:

A crisis for South Korea, the U.S., and North Korea began on 21 January and ended on 23 December 1968.

Background The U.S. and North Korea were engaged in negotiations at Panmunjom since the end of the Korean War in 1953 but were unsuccessful in areas other than the exchange of prisoners (see Case #140--Korean War III). The U.S.S. Pueblo was an electronic surveillance intelligence ship that had been stationed off the coast of North Korea, purportedly on an oceanographic research mission, with orders to stay at least 14 miles off the coast of North Korea. Relations between North Korea and the USSR were strained; and the former wished to assert its influence in East Asia.

Summary:

The Pueblo crisis was closely linked to another intra-Korea crisis, which began on 21 January 1968 when a North Korea commando unit penetrated the Blue House in Seoul in a failed attempt to assassinate South Korea's President, Park Chung Hee. This triggered a security crisis for South Korea. In response to North Korea's commando raid, South Korea sought a security guarantee from the U.S. This was granted de facto in a joint communiqué by Presidents Johnson and Park on 17 April 1968, terminating South Korea's 21 January crisis.

A day after the commando raid, that is, 22 January, a crisis for the U.S. was triggered by seizure of the Pueblo by North Korean patrol and torpedo boats. The major response of the U.S. was to call up army and air force reservists on 25 January and to dispatch naval power to the North Korea coast: the U.S. aircraft carrier, Enterprise, and its task force were diverted from their course toward the North Vietnam coast and ordered into the Sea of Japan. This U.S. response triggered a crisis for North Korea.

At the Panmunjom Armistice Talks the U.S. demanded the return of the Pueblo and its crew. This demand was refused, with North Korea claiming that the Pueblo was spying in its territorial waters. The U.S. insisted that the Pueblo was 25 miles off the North Korean coast. The Soviets refused a request by the U.S. ambassador in Moscow to use their good offices to bring about the Pueblo's release. An appeal was also made to the Security Council by the U.S. The next day, 26 January, the Soviet Union, which supported North Korea's claim that the Pueblo was in its territorial waters, sent a trawler to shadow the Enterprise. A second request for USSR intervention to restrain North Korea, made by U.S. Ambassador Thompson, was rejected. Inter alia the incident provided the means for an improvement of relations between the Soviet Union and North Korea.

By 3 February North Korea and the U.S. reached agreement to continue to use the Panmunjom talks as a vehicle for negotiating the end of the Pueblo crisis. The U.S. then withdrew the Enterprise and its task force, and the military threat decreased. The admission of spying by the Pueblo commander was broadcast by North Korea on 16 February. It was rejected by the U.S. as fabricated.

Negotiations between North Korea and the U.S. over the Pueblo continued for 10 months until an imposed agreement was reached on 23 December 1968. The U.S. representative, Major-General Woodward, issued an apology stating that the Pueblo had been in North Korean waters and acknowledged that the confessions of its commander and, later, some crew members were genuine. Before signing it, however, Woodward read a public statement disavowing the apology. The crew was returned to South Korea, but the ship was never recovered by the U.S.

The UN was approached by the U.S. but only discussed the issue. The USSR continued to provide military aid to North Korea.

References:

Armbrister 1970; Brandt 1969; Bucher 1970; Chung 1978; Druks 1971; Duncan-Jones 1972; Gallery 1970; Johnson 1971; Kim Il-Sung 1976; Koh 1969a, 1969b; Lentner 1969; Murphy 1971; Rusk 1990; Simmons 1976; Zagoria and Zagoria 1981.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


