CRISNO 403

YUGOSLAVIA II: BOSNIA

Background:

Yugoslavia (Serbia), Bosnia, and Croatia (and powerful minorities, notably the Bosnian Serbs) were entangled in a lengthy crisis over the fate of Bosnia-Hercegovina as a political entity. It began on 3 March 1992 and ended on 21 November 1995.

Background and Pre-crisis The people of Bosnia-Hercegovina are, ethnically, part of the community of "South Slavs," including Serbs, Croats, Slovenes, and Montenegrins. By the end of the tenth century the people of eastern Bosnia, like those of modern Serbia, had accepted eastern Orthodox Christianity, while those of western Bosnia, like the Croats and Slovenes, had embraced Roman Catholicism.

The historical background, too, is complex. Bosnians and Serbs fought side by side in the decisive Battle of Kossovo in 1389; and like Serbia, Bosnia became part of the Ottoman Empire. There was one notable difference, with consequences for the crises of the 1990s. During the five centuries of Turkish rule the religious composition of Bosnia changed drastically, partly because of the immigration of Turks, partly because of the conversion of many Bosnians to Islam. The result was that, at the time of Yugoslavia's dissolution, Muslims formed the largest religious-ethnic community in Bosnia, slightly more than half, compared to 31 percent for the Orthodox Serbs and 17 percent for the Catholic Croats.

Austria was given the right to occupy--but not to annex--Bosnia and Hercegovina in 1878, at the same time the major powers granted Serbia independence: Serbia's long-standing aspiration to control these two areas was rebuffed. More significantly, Bosnia and Hercegovina were annexed by the Austro-Hungarian Empire in October 1908, generating undisguised anger in Russia, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece. That association lasted only a decade: with the dissolution of the Dual Empire at the end of World War I, Bosnia and Hercegovina became part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes, created in 1918. And after World War II they became, together, one of the six constituent republics of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia (FPRY). In the post-Tito era, from 1980 to 1991, Bosnia-Hercegovina shared in the governance of Yugoslavia as a member of the collective and rotating Federal Presidency.

Bosnia-Hercegovina (hereafter, Bosnia) was not involved in the first stage of Yugoslavia's prolonged crisis-war from June 1991 to early January 1992 (see Case #397--Yugoslavia I: Croatia, Slovenia); it remained a constituent republic of the Yugoslav federation. However, the reality of dissolution and the assertion of independence by two of Yugoslavia's republics penetrated Bosnia's political culture: a favorable attitude toward an independent Bosnia was already evident, especially among the Muslims, in 1991-92.

Summary:

Bosnia's Muslims and Croats voted strongly in favor of independence on 2 March 1992 and requested recognition by the European Union (EU) and its members (the European Community [EC] was renamed the European Union [EU] in February 1992, when the Maastricht Treaty came into effect). The Bosnian Serbs boycotted the referendum and warned of grave consequences. The next day Bosnia declared its independence. That act triggered a crisis for Yugoslavia, dominated more than ever by Serbia, and enraged the Bosnian Serbs. Fighting broke out at once between Bosnian Muslims and Croats on one side, the Yugoslav National Army (the JNA) and Bosnian Serbs on the other.

On 18 March, Bosnian Serb, Croat, and Muslim leaders signed an agreement in Lisbon to transform Bosnia-Hercegovina into three ethnic regions or cantons within a formally united independent state. However, on his return to Sarajevo, the (Muslim) President of Bosnia, Alija Izetbegovic, called on Bosnians to reject the division. He accused the governments of Serbia and Croatia of encouraging extreme Serb and Croat forces in Bosnia with the aim of partitioning Bosnia between them.

Largely at the urging of Germany, EU members recognized Bosnia's independence on 6 April. The U.S. did so on the 7th, recognizing Croatia and Slovenia as well. Other states recognized Bosnia's independence soon after, including Croatia, Czechoslovakia, Finland, Hungary, Poland, and Slovenia. In response to the EU's recognition, ethnic Serbs declared a Serbian Republic of Bosnia the same day; and Yugoslav planes attacked Croatian towns in western Bosnia, triggering a crisis for Croatia. Fighting worsened on 14 April, as Serbian forces tried to create a corridor from Krajina, a Serb enclave in western Croatia, to Serbia itself. Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital, was subjected to an artillery barrage on 21 April, the first of hundreds of such attacks during the next three years. In fact, the pattern of behavior by all the crisis actors and the key involved actors--the major powers, the EU, the UN, Bosnian Serbs, and Bosnian Croats--during the prolonged second Yugoslavia crisis was established in the early days, as follows.

Bosnia--the use of force and diplomacy, and appeals to world public opinion, to maintain its existence as an independent state

Yugoslavia (Serbia)--support to the Bosnian Serbs, both military equipment and economic aid, to assist them in achieving their shared goal of "Greater Serbia" by any means, including "ethnic cleansing," that is, incorporating as much of Bosnia's territory as possible into Serbia, with as few non-Serb inhabitants as necessary; this behavior was moderated occasionally in order to satisfy pressure from the West, including the EU and NATO, and the UN, and to ease the burden of economic sanctions on Serbia proper

Croatia--the least consistent of all the actors, shifting alignments with different goals, sometimes with Serbia, with the aim of eliminating Bosnia and partitioning its territory between them, at other times with Bosnia, designed to weaken the Bosnian Serbs and to compel them to disgorge a substantial part of the 70 percent of the territory of Bosnia acquired by force of arms and "ethnic cleansing"

Bosnian Serbs--primary reliance on force and the policy of "ethnic cleansing" to take irrevocable control of most of Bosnia's territory for the Serb Republic of Bosnia, to realize the ultimate goal of Greater Serbia, supplemented by diplomacy, including political concessions to the UN or the EU when necessary, in order to prevent military intervention by the major powers or the lifting of the arms embargo, which adversely affected the Bosnian army much more than the Bosnian Serbs' military capability

Bosnian Croats--the use of force and "nuisance" tactics, to assert control over territory with a large Croat population, to be integrated into Croatia, and to undermine efforts at military and political cooperation between Bosnia and Croatia

The UN--moderating the fighting in Bosnia through its United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) peacekeepers; reducing the suffering of civilians by designating exposed cities like Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital, "safe areas," and by as large and steady a supply of food and medicine to Bosnia's civilians as the Bosnian Serbs permitted; and seeking a peaceful solution of the conflict through economic sanctions--against the rump of Yugoslavia--and diplomacy, notably comprehensive peace plans by special representatives of the Secretary-General

NATO--providing limited military support for UNPROFOR peacekeepers when necessary, through symbolic air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs, and verbal threats of retaliation

The EU--reliance on diplomacy, complementing that of the UN, to bring the parties to the bargaining table, exercised through an EU mediator, endless visits by foreign ministers of major European powers and others to all the actors, and cooperation with the U.S. and Russia through the "Contact Group," comprising the five major powers

(Since this pattern of behavior is evident throughout the Yugoslavia II crisis, the rest of this case summary will concentrate on escalation points and crucial developments.)

On 28 April 1992 the UN decided to extend its peacekeeping operation in Yugoslavia (UNPROFOR) to Bosnia-Hercegovina.

On 22 May Bosnia, Croatia, and Slovenia were admitted to the UN. On the 30th the Security Council adopted Resolution 757, imposing comprehensive sanctions on the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY), comprising Serbia and Montenegro. These included the severance of sports, cultural, and air links with the rest of the world; freezing government assets abroad, and an oil embargo. On 20 June Bosnia declared a state of war and general mobilization--five days after Bosnian President Izetbegovic and Croatian President Tudjman signed an agreement of friendship and cooperation, including military cooperation, "against the common enemy." As the war continued Bosnia's government repeatedly requested foreign military aid--but the embargo on arms remains in force. The U.S. Congress favored lifting the embargo; the EU, notably the U.K. and France, was steadfastly opposed.

As violence continued, amid horrific reports in the summer of 1992 of grave human rights violations, the UN Security Council and the UN Human Rights Commission strongly condemned the policy of forced deportation. Under the impact of intense media coverage of Bosnian Serb "ethnic cleansing," France, the U.K., Italy, Spain, and Belgium committed troops to a UN peacekeeping force.

Representatives of 20 states, including the six former republics of Yugoslavia, EU members, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, and members of the CSCE met in London on 26-27 August 1992. The first of several futile efforts at "public crisis management," the conference condemned the expulsion of civilians. It also agreed on terms for a political settlement, including recognition of Bosnia by the other five Yugoslav republics, acceptance of present frontiers, guarantees for national minorities, and the right of return for those who were expelled from their homes. And it supported the idea of a UN peacekeeping force.

A follow-up "permanent" conference on Yugoslavia in Geneva began on 3 September. Following the Iraq precedent (see Case #406--Iraq No-Fly Zone, in Iraq/Kuwait PC), a UN Security Council resolution on 9 October 1992 banned military flights over Bosnia, to be enforced by UNPROFOR. Notwithstanding Croatia's military cooperation agreement with Bosnia, Croat forces in Bosnia took control of Mostar on 25 October and declared it the capital of the Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosnia.

In a seemingly endless quest for a viable diplomatic formula, the Geneva Conference, on 20 October, formally rejected the division of Bosnia into three ethnic republics. Instead it presented a plan for a decentralized republic, based on several regional governments and a central government in Sarajevo, responsible for foreign policy, defense, and trade.

Early in January 1993 the two principal mediators, Lord Owen (for the EU) and Cyrus Vance (for the UN), presented a comprehensive and complex three-part peace plan to the Geneva Conference on Yugoslavia: territorial provisions, calling for the reorganization of Bosnia into 10 provinces, with an attached map; constitutional principles, providing much autonomy to the provinces; and a military section, including a cease-fire and demilitarization. The Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, rejected the proposals, demanding the right of the Serbs to self-determination in a separate "state within a state." Bosnia's President Izetbegovic rejected the territorial section of the plan. And the Bosnian Croat leader, Boban, accepted the plan in full. Under strong pressure from Serbia's President Slobodan Milosevic, the Bosnian Serb Assembly voted in favor of the principles of the plan on 19-20 January. All three parties tried to increase their control over territory before a peace agreement was signed. Thus fighting escalated in the second half of January.

President Izetbegovic of Bosnia formally approved the military provisions of the Vance-Owen plan on 2 February and the all-important territorial section on the 25th. Only the Bosnian Serbs were adamant: on 25-26 April the Bosnian Serb Assembly rejected the proposed map. The FRY Foreign Minister, Vladislav Jovanovic, was sent to persuade the Serbs to accept the plan, in vain. The Bosnian Serbs were universally condemned. However, a cease-fire was accepted by all sides on 27 March 1993, allowing a relief convoy to enter Srebrenica.

On 27 April President Yeltsin warned the Bosnian Serbs that Russia would not protect them as long as they rejected the Vance-Owen plan. Croatia was warned by Western states in May that sanctions against Serbia would be lifted if it continued to support the Bosnian Croat forces. Meanwhile, Serb attacks continued against Bosnian Muslim areas.

The UN Security Council adopted Resolution 824 on 6 May 1993, declaring Sarajevo and five other towns "safe-areas," banning any armed attacks on them: Gorazde, Srebrenica, Tuzla, Zepa in the east, Bihac in the north. On 4 June the Security Council adopted Resolution 836, authorizing UNPROFOR to use force in cases of attacks against the six "safe areas" in Bosnia.

Typical of Croat maneuvering between the other two warring parties was an agreement by Presidents Milosevic (Serbia) and Tudjman (Croatia), announced to the Geneva Conference on 26 June 1993, to divide Bosnia into three ethnic states within a loose confederal Union of Republics of Bosnia-Hercegovina. Izetbegovic rejected the plan; but on 30 July he indicated acceptance, with reservations. Bosnian Muslims renewed their rejection of the Vance-Owen map at the end of August. And in September and October 1993 the Bosnian Assembly, the Bosnian Croat Assembly, and the Bosnian Serb Parliament all rejected the plan to partition Bosnia into three republics.

The impasse on the Vance-Owen peace plan continued. So too did the fighting, including the Bosnian Serb siege of Sarajevo and frequent attacks on "safe areas"; the impotence of UNPROFOR, based upon the extreme caution of all the major powers; their consensus against military intervention to end the fighting in Bosnia; U.S. verbal support of Bosnia; Russian attempts to shield Serbia and the Bosnian Serbs from more extreme UN-EU-NATO measures; the U.S.-EU disagreement on the arms embargo; UN resolutions, usually ignored; and cease-fire agreements, another in August 1993, violated sooner rather than later by one side or another. The plan for a "Union of Three Republics" was discussed at another international conference on Bosnia in Geneva at the end of November-early December 1993. Efforts were made to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to give up part of the land they controlled (approximately 70 percent of Bosnia's territory), in order to increase the size of the Muslim republic to about one-third of Bosnia's territory, mostly in central Bosnia, with several enclaves in the east. In return, the EC offered to lift the sanctions against Serbia gradually. Karadzic offered some territory--in exchange for the partition of Sarajevo into two cities, to be incorporated into the planned Muslim and Serb republics. Izetbegovic had two major concerns: the security of the new borders, for which he demanded a five-year NATO guarantee; and an outlet to the Adriatic Sea, at the port of Neum. In the absence of assurances on both points, he rejected the plan on 21 December.

One of the most shocking assaults on civilians occurred on 5 February 1994: a mortar bomb hit the main market of Sarajevo and killed dozens of civilians.

Outraged Western leaders called for "the immediate lifting of the siege of Sarajevo by all means necessary, including air power." The response was swift. On the 9th NATO declared that it would execute immediately any future UN request for air strikes in Bosnia. Moreover, NATO ambassadors gave the Bosnian Serbs an ultimatum: withdraw or hand over to UN control all heavy weapons in the "safe areas" by midnight, 20-21 February, or face air strikes.

The large-scale withdrawal of Serb heavy weapons began on 17 February, following an unexpected Russian intervention--an offer to replace the withdrawing Serb soldiers with 800 Russian troops; the first 400 Russians reached Sarajevo on the 20th. And on 28 February NATO aircraft first enforced the "no-fly zone" over Bosnia, shooting down four Soko G-4 aircraft.

Another shift in Croatia's zigzag policy and the convoluted diplomacy of the Bosnia crisis occurred on 8 March: agreements were signed in Washington to create a federation of Muslim- and Croat-controlled territory in Bosnia, to be divided into cantons on the Swiss model, and to form in the near future a Bosnia-Croatia confederation. A constitution for the Bosnia federation and plans for a unified Croat-Muslim army in Bosnia were approved at simultaneous conferences in Vienna and Split from 4-8 March. While the federation and confederation formally came into existence, none of these agreements altered the course of the crisis. The Bosnian Serb Assembly, invited to join the Bosnia federation, declined on 24 March. A cease-fire agreement in June 1994 between the new Bosnian Federation of Muslims and Croats, and the Bosnian Serbs, lasted a month.

Among the major powers there were profound disagreements on policy toward Bosnia. Both the U.S. and Russia steadfastly refused to contribute any ground forces to UNPROFOR; but they differed substantially on many issues. The U.S. favored lifting the arms embargo, in order to "level the fighting field" between Bosnia and the Bosnian Serbs. It urged the adoption of a policy of "preventive bombardment" of Serb positions (which the U.K. and France, as well as Russia, opposed). The U.S. argued that sanctions against Serbia should be tightened and that the no-fly zone should be enforced by a Security Council resolution. Russia, traditionally pro-Serb, supported the Vance-Owen peace plan and the international peacekeeping force. However, it opposed the imposition of more sanctions against Serbia.

The West, too, was split over policy toward the Bosnia crisis. The U.S. was the most militant--verbally; the Europeans were cautious in word and deed. The U.S. Congress persistently urged the lifting of the UN arms embargo (and voted in favor of a unilateral U.S. termination of the embargo in July 1995).

However, both presidents--Bush and Clinton--while favoring the policy, refused to act in direct conflict with the U.K. and France, NATO and the EU, especially since they bore the brunt of the peacekeeping operation on the ground, with thousands of troops, while the U.S. refused to participate in UNPROFOR. The Europeans, except for Germany, claimed that lifting the arms embargo would enlarge the scope and intensity of the war, with unpredictable and, almost certainly, dire consequences.

The U.S. was also much more activist on the issue of NATO air strikes against the Bosnian Serbs, designed to increase pressure on them to desist from more "ethnic cleansing," blocking food shipments to UN "safe areas," and attacks on UN peacekeepers. The air strikes almost always had momentary--or negative--results. (On one occasion, in June 1995, the Bosnian Serbs retaliated by taking several hundred UNPROFOR hostages in response to a U.S.-initiated NATO air strike.)

(In August 1995, the Yugoslavia II crisis escalated dramatically when the Croatian army, in a lightning three-day campaign, regained control of Krajina, the Serb majority area of Croatia, bordering on Serbia and Bosnia. Yugoslavia [Serbia] did not intervene, despite the forced exodus ["ethnic cleansing"] by Croatia of 150,000 Serb refugees to Serbia proper.)

(Another major escalation of the crisis-war over Bosnia was the Bosnian Serb capture of two UN "safe areas," Srebrenica and Zepa, on 11 and 25 July, followed by the massing of Bosnian Serb forces near Gorazde; the tightening of the Bosnian Serb siege of Sarajevo; and on 28 August, a shelling of a crowded market in the capital with 37 killed and 80 wounded, recalling a similar incident in February 1994, when 68 people were killed and more than 200 wounded. The effect of these escalation points was the first direct NATO military intervention, in the form of massive air attacks against Bosnian Serb positions at the beginning of September. That, in turn, was the catalyst to a renewed, intense, diplomatic process, leading to an agreed "Statement of

Basic Principles" by the three warring parties on 8 September and a 21-day conference (1-21 November) at Dayton, Ohio, among the presidents of Bosnia, Croatia, and Serbia under U.S. auspices.)

The Dayton Accord, signed by all the parties including the now fully involved United States, on 21 November 1995, was a complex agreement with the following main provisions: (1) a division of territory between the Bosnian-Croat Federation (51 percent) and the autonomous Serb entity, the republic of Srpska (49 percent); (2) a constitution comprising a central government for Bosnia as a whole with a three-person group presidency, a two-house legislature, a court, and a central bank; and separate presidencies, legislatures, and armies for each of the two entities within Bosnia; (3) the mutual withdrawal of forces by both entities behind agreed cease-fire lines; and (4) the dispatch of a peacekeeping NATO force of 60,000 under U.S. command to monitor the cease-fire and control the airspace over Bosnia. Despite strong Bosnian Serb opposition "on the ground"--President Milosevic of Serbia negotiated on their behalf--the Dayton Accord marked the end of Bosnia's crisis--on 21 November 1995.

(The formal peace agreement was signed in Paris on 14 December by the presidents of Bosnia-Hercegovina, Croatia, and Serbia, in the symbolically important presence of the leaders of the Contact Group--France, Germany, Russia, the U.K., the U.S.--and Spain's Premier, then head of the European Union. Almost immediately after, the UN Security Council terminated the peacekeeping role of its UNPROFOR and authorized the dispatch of a NATO force of 60,000 troops to implement the withdrawal provisions of the Dayton Accord and to maintain peace in Bosnia.

All of the military provisions, including withdrawal of troops, were implemented in 1996, meeting the stipulated deadlines. The record on the civilian aspects of the Dayton Accord was mixed; but the elections for the central government of Bosnia-Hercegovina and its two constituent autonomous units were held, as planned, on 14 September 1996.)

References:

See sources for Case #397; and: Keesing's 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995; Kelly 1995; New York Times 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996; Riga 1992.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


