CRISNO 84

MID-EAST CAMPAIGN

Background:

Military campaigns in the Middle East triggered crises for Iraq, the U.K., Germany, and Vichy France from 29 April to 14 July 1941.

Pre-crisis At the beginning of 1941 the Middle East comprised an area of great concern to both sides in the European war. With a German-Italian threat to the Suez Canal, the British began to consider the Basra-Baghdad-Palestine route. On 3 April 1941 pro-Axis Rashid Ali staged a coup and reassumed power in Iraq. U.K. losses in the Balkans and Libya had been reflected in the growth of anti-British sentiment in Iraq, heightened by the fact that Baghdad had become the center of pro-Axis intrigue, leading to British fears of German control over Iraq. The British decided that the situation could be restored only by force. Despite Rashid Ali's assurances that he would honor the 1930 Anglo-Iraqi Treaty, Britain was determined to restore the legitimate government to power in order to safeguard the Allies against Axis intervention in Iraq. On 17 April 1941 a British-Indian military contingent landed in Basra, in accordance with treaty provisions.

Summary:

A second British contingent landed on 29 April 1941, triggering a crisis for Iraq. That day Iraq responded by ordering its forces to Habbaniya, the principal British air base there. With Iraqi artillery surrounding the air base and other forces encircling the compound of the British embassy in Baghdad, on 29 April, a crisis was triggered for the U.K. The following day the Iraqi commander demanded the closure of the base. The British replied that any interference with flights would be treated as an act of war. The ambassador was given full authority to take any steps necessary, including air attacks, to assure the withdrawal of the Iraqis. While Iraq endeavored to take Habbaniya, the British responded with an attack on 1 May. Rashid Ali's early attempts to secure Axis military assistance had been unsuccessful, as Germany was occupied in Greece and in preparing for its attack on the USSR (see Case #85--Barbarossa). Despite German pressure, Turkey refused to allow a transit of arms and troops through its territory. The only open channel left was Vichy-controlled Syria.

On 6 May Iraqi forces retreated from the hills overlooking the Habbaniya base. Troops from Palestine relieved the hard-pressed British garrison. On 12 May Germany came to Iraq's assistance by sending its Syrian-based bombers to attack British airfields in the Mosul region of Iraq. By 30 May the British had succeeded in crushing the rebellion in Iraq. Rashid Ali and his associates fled to Iran, and Iraq sued for an armistice, terminating its crisis. The following day, Germany announced an agreement on military collaboration between the German and Vichy France governments--despite persistent French pressure for German withdrawal from Syrian territory. The crisis ended for Germany when the Luftwaffe detachment from Syria was recalled on 6 June 1941.

On the 8th the British government announced that it would not tolerate Vichy collaboration with the Germans. Free French troops, with support from Imperial forces, entered Syria and Lebanon that day from Palestine, Transjordan, and Iraq, and triggered a crisis for Vichy France. It responded on 17 June with an attack on Quneitra and Marjayun, in the Golan Heights and south Lebanon, respectively. As the Allies began closing in on Damascus on the 20th, Vichy France asked the U.S. to inquire on what terms an armistice might be arranged. On 8 July General Dentz, the Vichy High Commissioner in Syria, received authority to negotiate. An agreement was finally reached on 14 July 1941, terminating the crisis for the U.K. and Vichy France.

(The latter fell in November 1942, when Germany occupied the rest of France.)

References:

Churchill 1950b; Khadduri 1960; Lenczowski 1962; Nyrop 1971; Palmer 1973; Penrose 1978; Weinberg 1994.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


