CRISNO 343

INVASION OF GRENADA

Background:

The United States and Grenada were enmeshed in a brief military intervention crisis from 19 to 28 October 1983.

Background Grenada, a long-time British colony in the Caribbean, became a self-governing state, with full internal autonomy, in March 1967. The first general election, that year, brought the Grenada United Labor Party (GULP) to power, with its leader, Eric M. Gairy, as Prime Minister. Gairy ruled the island with an iron hand until 1979, opposed by two groups of young professionals and intellectuals: the Joint Endeavor for Welfare, Education, and Liberation (JEWEL); and the Movement for Assemblies of the People (MAP). These merged into the New Jewel Movement (NJM) in March 1973, the advocate of pragmatic nationalism and a radical populist alternative to Gairy and the GULP.

Grenada was granted independence on 7 February 1974. The widespread political unrest and civil disturbances of the preindependence period continued unabated. GULP won a bare majority in the 1976 general election; and Maurice Bishop, a founder of the MAP, became leader of the parliamentary opposition, now integrated into the United People's Party. A successful coup in March 1979 brought the marxist NJM to power, headed by Prime Minister Bishop and Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Bernard Coard. The new People's Revolutionary Government created a one-party system, suspended the constitution, and banned the opposition. It also rapidly expanded Grenada's diplomatic network beyond the Caribbean and its mentor, Castro's Cuba, to the Soviet Union and many socialist Third World states.

Washington had long regarded the Caribbean as a region of vital importance and an area of U.S. hegemony, in accordance with the Monroe Doctrine (1823) dictum against any European intervention in the Western Hemisphere. Thus the USSR's perceived influence on the left-wing regime in Grenada, via Cuba, was a source of concern. This was accentuated by the construction of a large airport on the island, capable of handling large civilian and military planes.

Pre-crisis U.S. perceptions of an increasingly hostile regime in the United States' "backyard" were further aggravated by a week-long tour of East European capitals by Prime Minister Bishop, followed by two days of talks in Havana in early October 1983. Soon after, factional disunity within the Grenada regime erupted. Prime Minister Bishop, a pragmatist, favored rapprochement with the U.S., while his hard-line deputy sought a close alignment with the Soviet bloc.

On 14 October Coard was forced to resign for an alleged plot to assassinate Bishop. However, three days later a coup in Grenada deposed the prime minister, and Coard took power. Bishop and five other ministers were placed under house arrest by General Hudson Austin, commander of the People's Revolutionary Army.

Long before the coup there had been speculation in Grenada that the U.S. was planning some form of military intervention, especially after President Reagan, on 23 March 1983, described the island's regime as a "threat to the security of the United States." Washington had expressed anxiety over Cuban participation in the construction of the Point Salinas international airport, viewing it as a potential military base for Soviet-bloc forces in the Americas. Relations between the U.S. and Grenada had been further strained by the growing tension between the Reagan administration and the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua, especially after joint U.S.-Honduras military maneuvers in August.

Summary:

On 19 October 1983 Bishop was freed by supporters but was quickly recaptured; in the firing that ensued, an estimated 200 persons were killed or wounded by Austin's troops. Soon after, Bishop and seven cabinet ministers and trade union leaders were executed. This act and a 96-hour curfew, imposed by Grenada's military authorities, triggered a crisis for the U.S.: Washington perceived a threat to its influence in the Caribbean and Central America, along with potential harm to U.S. citizens living in Grenada, about 1,000, mostly university students.

A Revolutionary Military Council (RMC), headed by General Austin, was formed on 20 October. The RMC gave repeated assurances for the safety of foreign nationals, opened the airport, and allowed them to leave. However, the dramatic and radical shift of power in Grenada triggered a sharp response. At an emergency session of the Organization of East Caribbean States (OECS) held on the 21st, a decision was made to impose immediate diplomatic and economic sanctions against Grenada's military regime and to "take appropriate action" to ensure the defense and security of the subregion. The OECS approached the U.S. for assistance. The same day a U.S. naval task force, including the assault ship Guam and led by the aircraft carrier Independence, was diverted to the Caribbean, ostensibly for the possible evacuation of U.S. citizens. This triggered a crisis for the new military regime in Grenada.

At an emergency meeting of the Caribbean Community and Common Market (CARICOM) heads of government on 22-23 October a decision was taken to impose economic and diplomatic sanctions against Grenada, similar to, but geographically more wide-ranging than, those agreed to at the subregional (OECS) level. On the 23rd, in another, distant, international crisis, the headquarters of U.S. marines in Lebanon was bombed, with more than 200 fatalities. That night, partly under the stress of the Lebanon crisis, Reagan decided to respond to the urgent request of the OECS: final military plans were made for an invasion. On the 24th the curfew imposed by Grenada's RMC was lifted, and the airport was opened for anyone who wanted to leave the island.

Early in the morning of 25 October 1,900 U.S. troops landed in Grenada, followed shortly after by a contingent of 300 soldiers from Jamaica, Barbados, Dominica, Antigua, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent, to serve as a Caribbean Peacekeeping Force. Resistance by troops loyal to Grenada's RMC, supported by some Cuban construction workers on the island, was more intense than had been anticipated. By the 28th all the major military objectives of the U.S.-led multinational force had been secured. This ended the crisis for both the U.S. and Grenada.

Nicaragua asked the UN Security Council on 25 October for an urgent meeting to consider "the invasion of the Republic of Grenada by United States troops." A draft resolution was vetoed by the U.S. in the Security Council on the 27th. The USSR condemned U.S. intervention in Grenada.

(Coard and Austin were captured on the 31st. Final pockets of RMC resistance were quelled by 3 November. The governor-general formed an interim administration on the 15th to pave the way for a return to democracy. U.S. forces handed the task of maintaining internal security to the Caribbean Peacekeeping Force on 22 November. And by mid-December all U.S. combat troops had been withdrawn.)

References:

Adkin 1989; Amer 1992; Beck 1993; Burrowes 1988; Dunn and Watson 1985; Gilmore 1984; Keesing's 1984; Lewis 1987; Payne et al. 1984; Reagan 1990; Shultz 1993; Thorndike 1983, 1985; Valenta and Valenta 1986; Vertzberger 1997.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


