CRISNO 134

HULA DRAINAGE

Background:

Syria and Israel were enmeshed in a crisis over the Hula Valley in the Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) between them from 12 February to 15 May 1951.

Background This was the first Arab/Israel interstate crisis since the end of the 1948-49 war. Its origins lay in a continuing dispute over control of the sources of the Jordan River and rights in the "No-Man's Land" on the Israel/Syrian border.

Summary:

A crisis for Syria was triggered on 12 February 1951, the day Israel's Palestine Land Development Company (PLDC) began work on the Hula drainage project in the DMZ north of Lake Tiberias (the Kinneret, Sea of Galilee). Its goals were to drain the lake and surrounding marshes, eliminate malaria in the area, reclaim 6,250 hectares (about 15,000 acres) of land for agriculture, and use the accumulated water to irrigate other parts of Israel.

Syria contended that Israel's project violated their 1949 Armistice Agreement, under which the DMZ was a no-man's land. It also perceived a threat from an adverse change in the balance of power with its enemy if the Hula Valley became an economically productive area under de facto Israeli control. On the 14th Damascus appealed to the UN Security Council to compel Israel to halt the project. Israel refused to do so, citing the concession granted to the PLDC by the British Mandatory Power in 1934 and claiming that the land fell under its jurisdiction according to Mandate maps. Syria countered with a claim to the town of al-Hamma and all territory in the DMZ east of the southern part of Lake Tiberias. On 15 March Arabs in civilian dress opened fire on a bulldozer of the Israeli company working in the Hula area. This triggered a crisis for Israel, which charged that they were Syrian soldiers, while Syria disclaimed responsibility for the acts of "Arab landowners." The next day Israel informed the UN Mixed Armistice Commission (MAC) that it would suspend operations in the Hula Valley for a week. Discussions in the MAC were deadlocked, with intermittent firing incidents.

Tension escalated dramatically on 4 April, when Syrian soldiers killed seven Israeli policemen near al-Hamma, in the southern part of the DMZ. Israel retaliated the next day with an air attack on the Syrian outpost and the police station of al-Hamma. Both sides appealed to the Security Council, blaming each other for a violation of their Armistice Agreement. Two Syrian planes were shot down on the 11th.

While Security Council deliberations were taking place, a further sharp escalation occurred early in May. On the 2nd Syrian forces overran the Israeli post at Tel al-Mutillah, just beyond the DMZ. After several counterattacks from 3 to 6 May and heavy casualties--40 Israelis and more Syrians--Israeli troops regained control of Tel al-Mutillah.

The Security Council passed a resolution on 8 May calling for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of military forces from the DMZ. Hostilities ended on the 11th, following an agreement mediated by the MAC that day. It was formalized on the 15th, terminating the Hula Drainage crisis.

The UN and its MAC played a crucial role in abating the crisis, as noted, through mediation and the Security Council resolution. MAC mediation began on 21 February and was met with initial difficulty because Israel refused to accept the legitimacy of MAC involvement. However, the 15 May agreement was ultimately a result of successful MAC mediation efforts. The Council did not assign responsibility for the incidents on the ground, including the killing of the Israeli policemen, but criticized Israel's use of air power in the DMZ. Both the U.S. and the USSR were politically involved but had only a marginal effect on crisis abatement.

(On the larger issue of the Hula Drainage dispute, another Security Council resolution, on 18 May, adopted a pro-Syria stance: it ordered the PLDC to cease operations in the DMZ until the chairman of the Israel/Syria MAC arranged an agreement to resume the project. Israel agreed on 30 May to stop work, except on Jewish-owned land in the area, a compromise approved by the MAC chairman, but not by Syria.)

References:

Bar-Yaacov 1967; Ben Gurion 1969; Goichon 1964; Rabinovich 1991; Seale 1965.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


