CRISNO 217

GUINEA REGIME

Background:

A crisis for Guinea began on 9 October 1965 and ended in mid-December that year.

Background and Pre-crisis Guinea's independence from France in October 1958 was followed by a severe curtailment of French aid and expertise. In the year prior to this crisis the political climate in Guinea was constantly troubled, the standard of living had dropped, and consumer goods were expensive and irregularly supplied. Many Guineans fled the country in search of more favorable economic conditions.

In July 1965 a meeting was held in Paris among the Presidents of the Ivory Coast (Houphouet-Boigny), Niger (Diori), and Upper Volta (Yameogo), with Tshombe from the Congo and two French ministers. According to Guinea's President, Sekou Touré, this group decided to provide funds and other aid to Guineans who wished to remove him from the presidency. Three attempts to overthrow the Guinean government between February and October 1965 were uncovered and halted.

Summary:

The crisis trigger for Guinea was internal: on 9 October 1965 the statutes of a new opposition party to the only authorized party in Guinea were deposited with the Guinean minister of the interior. On 12 October Mamadou Touré, leader of the Parti de l'Unité Nationale de Guinee, was arrested, and disorders in Guinea's second town, Kankan, were suppressed. Guinea's formal complaint to the OAU on 17 November alleged that subversive acts were being financed by the Ivory Coast, with a view to a coup d'état in Guinea. Houphouet-Boigny publicly refuted Sekou Touré's charges. On 7 December Guinea allegations against France were reiterated in the Political Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, which offered its good offices.

By mid-December Sekou Touré had succeeded in overcoming the threat to his regime, and the crisis ended through a tacit understanding by the parties.

The U.S. and the USSR were not involved in this crisis.

References:

AR 1965; ARB 1965; WA 1965.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


