CRISNO 230

VIETNAM SPRING OFFENSIVE

Background:

A North Vietnam countrywide offensive against the South led to a crisis for the United States and South Vietnam from 22 February until 8 June 1969.

Pre-crisis The 1968 Tet Offensive broke the stalemate that had existed in the Vietnam War since 1966. Thereafter U.S. policy underwent several changes. President Johnson restricted U.S. bombing to south of the 20th Parallel and offered to begin negotiations with North Vietnam, which responded favorably. Agreement was reached to begin talks in Paris. In October 1968 the U.S. announced that all air, naval, and artillery attacks against North Vietnam would be halted on 1 November. The U.S. also agreed to allow representatives of the (South Vietnam) Vietminh National Liberation Front to participate in the talks, despite South Vietnam objections. Nevertheless, while war raged, all parties maintained inflexible positions at the talks. On 20 January 1969 Richard Nixon was inaugurated as President of the United States.

Summary:

On 22 February 1969 Hanoi launched an offensive into South Vietnam, the day before a scheduled Nixon visit to Europe, triggering a crisis for the U.S. According to Nixon the offensive was a deliberate test, clearly designed to take the measure of the new Nixon administration. On 23 February Nixon ordered the bombing of sanctuaries in Cambodia but canceled the order two days later upon the recommendation of National Security Advisor Kissinger. On 4 March orders were once more given, only to be retracted on the 7th. Meanwhile U.S. casualties were mounting. Finally, as the North Vietnam attack continued, and U.S. casualties remained intolerably high, Nixon reverted to his earlier decisions; and on 15 March orders were given to bomb Cambodian sanctuaries ("Operation Menu"). These orders were carried out three days later, terminating the U.S. crisis. Thereafter there was a steady decline in U.S. casualties in Vietnam.

The secret bombing of Vietcong sanctuaries in Cambodia put military pressure on the North Vietnamese. Nevertheless, they were still able to launch a major attack throughout South Vietnam on 12 May 1969: it contained the largest number of strikes since the Tet Offensive. These attacks catalyzed a crisis for South Vietnam. The crisis was accentuated by Nixon's 14 May speech in which he elaborated an eight-point peace plan for Vietnam that included the setting of a precise timetable for withdrawal and a cease-fire under international supervision.

Saigon's fears about U.S. intentions and a possible change in the military balance, which would threaten South Vietnam's existence, caused President Thieu to object strongly to U.S. proposals for withdrawal from South Vietnam. On 17 May Thieu responded by calling for a meeting with Nixon in order to coordinate a common policy. Nixon and Thieu met on 8 June on Midway Island. Nixon's assurances that day of steadfast U.S. support terminated the crisis for South Vietnam. After the meeting Nixon announced the redeployment of 25,000 U.S. troops from Vietnam. Although Thieu was appeased by U.S. guarantees, he perceived the withdrawal as an irreversible process that would end with the departure of all American forces from Vietnam.

There was no UN or USSR activity, although Secretary-General U Thant issued a statement applauding the peace efforts of both sides.

SEATO and CENTO meetings were held in May at which the Vietnam War was reviewed.

References:

See sources for Case #237; and Facts on File 1973-74.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


