CRISNO 431

KASHMIR IV KARGIL

Background:

India and Pakistan, enmeshed in a decades-long, protracted conflict were actors in the Kargil crisis, lasting from 9 May 1999 through 4 July 1999.

Background

Following the India/Pakistan nuclear crisis of 1998, efforts were made to reduce tensions between India and Pakistan. In February 1999, Indian Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee and Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif met in the Pakistani city of Lahore for a two-day summit, which led to a Memorandum of Understanding that identified key measures both states could take to foster peace and stability between the countries. This spirit of cooperation appeared to be short-lived, however. In March, Pakistan unveiled a new missile capable of carrying a nuclear warhead; leaders noted that such technology was necessary because of the enemy on Pakistan's border - India. The prospects of a successful Lahore process were further reduced in April, when both India and Pakistan tested missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads. In late April and early May, skirmishes along the Line of Control (LOC) in Kashmir-which separates the Indian and Pakistani portions of Kashmir-grew more frequent and more intense.

Summary:

A crisis was triggered for India on 9 May 1999 when a rocket attack was launched on the Indian town of Kargil in northern Kashmir. India's leaders blamed Pakistan for the attacks, while Pakistan blamed the attacks on Kashmiri militants, not under the control of Pakistan. India's major response to the attacks occurred on 26 May 1999, when India attacked guerilla positions in Kashmir. The attack, conducted by jet fighters and helicopter gunships, represented India's first use of air power since 1971 and triggered a crisis for Pakistan. Pakistan responded to the attacks on the guerillas in Kashmir with a counterattack on 27-28 May, during which Pakistani forces shot down at least two Indian jets. Fighting continued and forces continued to mobilize through June as militants tried to re-occupy the mountains of Kashmir. Late in June, Pakistani military leader General Parvez Musharaf indirectly acknowledged that the Kashmiri guerillas consisted of a strong contingent of Pakistani forces. Indian leaders continued to demand that the guerillas withdraw to the Pakistani side of the LOC

On 2 July, Prime Minister Sharif requested assistance from the US to bring an end to the fighting in Kashmir. Sharif arrived in Washington on 4 July and, after a meeting with US President Bill Clinton, Sharif announced that Pakistan would withdraw all troops to its side of the LOC and that a cease-fire would be put in place following this withdrawal. Sharif also acknowledged that Pakistan would again recognize the sanctity of the LOC in Kashmir.

Throughout the crisis, the international community (including the US, Russia, China, and France) expressed grave concerns about the escalating violence in Kashmir, and UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan offered to help mediate the situation. India rejected the mediation offer, noting that it did not want to internationalize the Kashmir issue.

References:

Kessing's Record of World Events Online; Lexis Nexis Online, CIA World Fact Book Online. Bruce Riedel. 2002. American Diplomacy and the 1999 Kargil Summit at Blair House. Philadelphia: Center for the Advanced Study of India, University of Pennsylvania. http://www.sas.upenn.edu/casi

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


