CRISNO 159

SYRIA-TURKEY CONFRONTATION

Background:

The three actors in this Middle East Cold War crisis were Turkey, the United States, and Syria. It began on 18 August and ended on 29 October 1957.

Background and Pre-crisis Syria and the USSR signed a trade agreement in November 1955 and a cultural agreement in August 1956. The Syrian defense minister visited Moscow in July-early August 1957 with an extensive military shopping list, which had been accepted by the Soviets. Some armed clashes and border incidents took place between Syria and Turkey in the summer of 1957.

Summary:

On 18 August 1957 a number of changes in high-ranking positions were formalized in Syria, among them the appointment of pro-Soviet Colonel `Afif Bizri as Chief of Staff of Syria's armed forces. This triggered a crisis for Turkey and the U.S., which feared that Syria had now moved into the Soviet camp. Turkey responded on 21 August with a series of frantic meetings with its Arab neighbors--Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and Sa'udi Arabia--and the deployment of troops along its border with Syria. On 7 September Washington reaffirmed the Eisenhower Doctrine, whereby the U.S. would come to the assistance of any Middle East state threatened by "international communism."

This U.S. declaration triggered a crisis for Syria. Damascus responded the next day by announcing that it did not intend to attack any Arab state. Following Khrushchev's severe warning to Turkey, Premier Menderes replied on 21 September that Turkey had no aggressive intentions against Syria.

Two Soviet warships that had been visiting Latakia since 21 September left the Syrian port on 2 October. On the 7th Khrushchev once again accused Turkey of planning to attack Syria; 30,000 Turkish troops were taking part in NATO exercises. The USSR and Syria repeated their allegation at the UN General Assembly on 16 October, specifically, that Turkey, with the support of U.S. advisors, was planning to attack Syria after Turkey's general elections on 27 October. Turkey's UN representative denied the charge.

On 29 October 1957 Khrushchev unexpectedly appeared at a reception held at the Turkish embassy in Moscow, thereby signaling the end of Turkey's crisis and, with it, crisis termination for the other two actors as well. (This surprise move was apparently due to domestic considerations: Marshal Zhukov had been dismissed as Defense Minister, ostensibly as a consequence of his blunder in Syria, but in reality as a result of his challenge to Khrushchev's power.)

The U.S. shipped arms to Jordan. And its Sixth Fleet held maneuvers off Syria. However, its activity in the crisis was mainly political-diplomatic messages and speeches reaffirming commitments to Turkey. NATO's Supreme Commander warned the USSR not to attack Turkey.

(During the last ten days of October, at Syria's request, the crisis was debated by the UN General Assembly. Syria withdrew its complaint on 1 November, a few days after Khrushchev's appearance at the Turkish embassy. By mid-November Turkish forces withdrew from Syria's border.)

References:

Eisenhower 1965; Horne 1989b; Karpat 1975; Kerr 1971; Kushner 1986; Mackintosh 1962; Macmillan 1971; MEJ Chronology 1957; Seale 1965; Smolansky 1974; Torrey 1964.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


