CRISNO 433

CASPIAN SEA

Background:

A crisis for Azerbaijan, in confronting a threat from Iran, occurred from 24 July to 2 August 2001 in the Caspian Sea.

Background

The Caspian Sea, which is rich in petroleum fields, is shared by Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia and Turkmenistan. Subsequent to the collapse of the Soviet Union, the five states have failed to reach a new legal regime for the sea. While Iran favors an equal one-fifth share of the sea for each state, Azerbaijan prefers a demarcation which would reduce Iran's share to less than 20 percent. In July 2001, Iran warned oil companies about working with other states in areas of the Caspian Sea that it considers Iranian territory.

Summary:

On 24 July 2001, two geological survey ships from Azerbaijan, chartered by the British Petroleum Corporation to survey the Alov oil field, entered a disputed part of the Caspian Sea. The vessels were approached by an Iranian patrol boat and aircraft while surveying. The Iranian vessel maintained that the survey ships were in Iranian national waters and ordered them to withdraw. The vessels left, but this event triggered a crisis for Azerbaijan. The Azeri government filed a strong protest with the Iranian government over the incident. Iran, however, claimed that the vessels had trespassed into the Alborz oil field, which belongs to Iran.

The crisis terminated on 2 August 2001 when Azeri President Heidar Aliyev proposed mutual talks with the Iranian government. Although no agreement over Caspian Sea rights was established as a result of these proposed negotiations, a consensus was secured that hostilities would not escalate to violence.

Russia was involved in discussions with both the Azeri and the Iranian governments to help calm the situation. Russian President Vladimir Putin offered to mediate in the dispute; however, the offer was not accepted. The United Sates objected to the Iranian action and called it inconsistent with talks to resolve the dispute peacefully. There was no major UN involvement in the crisis.

References:

United Press International; Sunday Telegraph (London); Agence France Presse; British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC); Tehran Times.

Last Updated: 1/5/2004


